COMMENTS ON GENERAL OSBORN'S ADDRESS

By SIR CHARLES DARWIN, K.B.E., F.R.S.

IN his address to the Planned Parenthood
Federation General Osborn has criticized
rather strongly some of the views I have
expressed in my book, and I am glad of this opportunity for comment on his remarks, the more so as I have the warmest sympathy with much that he says. I wish that things might happen that way, and my disagreement
is not with his wishes but with the prospects for their accomplishment. In my book I was not concerned with what we should like in an ideal world but with what I believe will happen in the actual world during the long
ages to come. The difference between us arises mostly
from the fact that we are thinking about different things. Osborn is telling people what to do now, and I judge that he is giving good advice in the sense that it may make many people happier during the near future, perhaps even during the next century or so. I do not wish to dispute this, since it is not my concern; from my point of view a single century is unimportant. The policy he advocates would only become important to me if he could show that it would so change the biological forces governing humanity that a final position of stable equilibrium was reached that was radically different in all its qualities from anything that has been experienced hitherto. In putting it in this way I am of course including among the biological forces man's capacity for reasonableness and good sense, but that is only one of his qualities and it has to compete against selfishness, sentiment and unreasoning impulse. Osborn seems to expect that reason will inevitably triumph over these other qzualities, but I cannot persuade myself that there is any evidence for this.
The new thing that has recently arisen is the possibility of easy limitation of populations through birth control, which might at first

sight be expected to be capable of keeping
numbers down to a degree that would provide,
a secure living for everybody. That would be
good sense, but I cannot see any grounds for
expecting that man will show himself more amenable to good sense over this than he has
in the past over many other things recommen-
ded to him on the basis of reason. There is
nothing new about appeals to reason as the
best guides to human conduct, but how seldom have they been successful ? Thus for thousands of years all the religions and philosophies of the world have been steadily inculcating the importance of virtuous conduct, and yet we still require systems of criminal law, and police to enforce them. Even if the limitation of population is-as I believe it is-one of.the chief things that will make for the good or ill of the world, it is hardly the one that from day to day impresses mankind with its importance. If then man has failed to amend his conduct in the all-pervading things of life, is there much likelihood that he can be
persuaded to do any better over a matter that cannot appear to him of such cardinal importance ? It will not appear so because it will not be perpetually with him, but will only arise on a few occasions in his lifetime. Some people of a philosophic cast. of mind may recognize the importance of the matter, but not the majority whose conduct is. mainly dictated by habit and their day-to-day experiences.
The developments of birth control in recent years are facts of great importance, but I cannot believe they will make any permanent difference when viewed in the perspective of the long ages of world history. It is ratheF as though a new drug had been placed in the hands of a doctor who was responsible for the health of an elderly patient; the drug might ease the patient's declining years, and it might perhaps prolong his life a little, but he would

I6i

i62 2

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

die in the end all the same. It is to be regarded
as a palliative, not as a cure. In considering
the consequences of contraception in the long
run, it is quite irrelevant that at the present
time the available methods are neither
convenient nor very reliable. Even now much
work is being done to discover a contraceptive that it would be easy for everybody to use; call it a " pill." In view of the wonderful
developments of biochemistry it seems possible -I should say even probable-that at no
distant date the pill will be discovered in a cheap form that would make it available for the whole of mankind, no matter what their level of intelligence or culture. In considering
then the influence of contraceptives in the far
future, we may as well assume that this discovery has been made, since, if it never should be made, the results would be even
less important. The only difference that the
discovery would make is that we should
possess a rather more efficient palliative. What in fact will be the effect of the
pill? It may perhaps be accepted that
even in the free world there would be an enforced administration of it to the feebleminded and to hardened criminals. This would be a benefit to the quality of the race, but not a very great one, because the fraction concerned would not be very large; it is even possible that it would not be worth while to face the odium of the compulsion for such small results. It is the effect on the rest of the population that calls for consideration. Making due allowances for the operation of pure chance, it would be expected that those who used the pill would tend to have smaller families than those who refused to do so. There is thus, biologically regarded, a strong premium in favour of refusal. It is true that the children of the smaller families will have the advantage of better upbringing in times of general prosperity, but the very fact of that prosperity will tend to preserve the actual lives of the others as well, so that a larger proportion of population will come from the large families than from the small;. in times of misfortune there will surely be disorders, and the mere fact of greater numbers will give them the advantage. In view of this it would seem probable that the most con-

spicuous result of the pill would be a tre-
mendous reinforcement of any religious creed
that regarded its use as immoral, because the
faithful of such a creed would tend to have
the largest families, and most children adopt
their parents' creed and so would do the same
again. However, setting this point aside, it is
at least doubtful whether the universal use of
the pill would tend to remove disparities in
standards of life. Parents would use the pill
when they were dissatisfied with the standards
of life that they expected their children were
going to experience, but there is no absolute
standard to judge this by, and those accus-
tomed to a hard life, such as prevails in
backward countries, would regard as being
tolerable conditions that would be regarded as insupportable by the inhabitants of more fortunate countries. It would seem then that to achieve any sort of equality of standards a great deal of compulsion would have to be
used, and this raises the question of the contrast between a free world and one
composed of autocratic slave states; it is an interesting subject but I shall not go into it, beyond noting that autocracy seems to provide yet another biological mechanism which would be likely to work against the desired stability of population.
Osborn has an interesting discussion on the demography of France, but I am not very sure what conclusions he draws from it. As is well known, the leading French demographers maintain that the complete acceptance of voluntary family planning will lead to the extinction of the race, as it threatened to do in the past, 'and they therefore oppose the facilitation of contraceptive practices. However, the grant of family allowances by the state has recently overcome this tendency; it might reasonably be argued that this is only another form of family planning. The French experience does show the interesting fact that by a suitable taxation policy a country can do som'ething to control its numbers, at any rate for a time. Osborn seems to approve of all that has happened in France, both the earlier decreases and the present maintenance of numbers, but he quotes with equal satisfaction the rapid increases in the United States which are

COMMENTS ON GENERAL OSBORN'S ADDRESS

I63

happening now, and which are apparently argument falls to the ground, but if the

most marked among those who do practise French demographers are right, then it

contraception. If these two examples are becomes important. It is, anyhow, a long-range

adduced in evidence on the question of what forecast, applying only thousands of years

the general effects of the widespread use of ahead, and so it has a different quality from

contraceptives would be, they seem to cancel the more immediate questions that mostly

out and leave us much where we were before. concern Osborn. It has, so to speak, to

If they suggest anything, it is that in the long be a " thermodynamic " argument, based on

run it is not the use or the non-use of con- general principle rather than on immediate

traceptives that really determines population experience.

numbers. And when we look beyond these This is the argument. The higher animals

two examples, we must not forget that have been endowed by natural selection with

practically all the other countries of the world strong sexual and parental instincts for the

mark any increase in prosperity that they sole purpose of ensuring the perpetuation of

experience by a positively menacing increas& the race. Man has also got both these

in population.

instincts, and even if we are not ready to go

Osborn later claims that the whole business the whole way with the Freudian school of

of the regulation of populations will look after psychology, we have to admit the tremendous

itself on a purely voluntary basis by everyone potency of the sexual instinct in nearly all

planning his family just exactly as he pleases, the human race. The parental instinct is of

though he qualifies this by saying that " the course also strong; it is different in quality,

task will require all the brains, all the sincerity, and the two cannot be equated, but in its

all the sense of purpose which you can day-to-day emotional intensity it could hardly

muster." The two halves of his statement be disputed that the sexual instinct plays the

seem to me to contradict one another, in view stronger part for most people. The new

of the very mixed qualities of the human developments of contraception have now

character to which I referred earlier. The rather suddenly freed man from paying the

whole of the address leaves me with the price of his sexual instincts, so that Nature's

impression that among all the things of life chief mechanism for ensuring the perpetuation

Osborn gives very much the highest value to of the race has broken down. As witness of

individual liberty, and that everything else this, consider how many people there are who

has to be forced to fit in with this. I too put are now content to have one or two children

individual liberty among my highest values, only. The parental instinct of such people is

but in the past many things have happened satisfied by producing a family that is below

that go against this value, and I reckon it the replacement level. The ingenuity of man

certain that a great many more will happen has defeated the primary reproductive mech-

in the future. It is, therefore, surely best in anism of Nature, and it is to be considered

estimating the future as far as one may to what secondary mechanisms will arise to

forget one's preferences. So with regard to this replace it. Among these the most direct, and

part of the address I would say that I hope most so presumably the most effective, is the direct

warmly that he will succeed in doing all that instinctive wish for children. It is already held

he hopes to do, but that I can see hardly any by many people, but to very varying degrees,

reason to expect it.

and those having it most will presumably

In my book I referred to the probability of have most children, so that there will be a

a slow change in human instincts owing to the bias all the time increasing the proportion of

developments of contraception. With this the population that have it. Unlike many of

also Osbom disagrees, and I would like to the operations of natural selection which are

make some remarks on the subject. If it apt to be brutal and painful, this would be a

should prove that contraception does not have painless process, which would pass almost

the effect of limiting families-as apparently unnoticed. It would be a little like the

is the case just now in America-then my painless secondary sexual selection that has

i64 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
endowed so many of our birds with their should be quite enough to maintain the beautiful plumage. Such a development will race. only occur in so far as it is needed; if it It will I hope be seen from what I have should prove that, in spite of contraception, written here that I have the warmest Nature's old mechanism still works, then it sympathy with most of the things that Osborn will not occur at all. But if the contrary is wants to do. I would like him to succeed in found, then the instinct for having children them, but I am very unhopeful about it. will be reinforced, and it will probably be Man's whole manner of living has altered done in the untidy extravagant way that several times since he was first evolved, and Nature mostly uses-for example our sexual it will no doubt be altered again many times, instincts would seem to be quite unnecessarily but something very much deeper would be strong for the mere purpose of securing the needed to bring about the changes that perpetuation of the race. It is likely that the Osborn desires. It would call for the establishinstinct would take the form: " It is time for ment of a new mechanism of Nature, if the me to have another child," and not merely: result is to be a stable state of the world "I do not feel that two children are enough." radically different from the one produced by In so far as it is permitted to express wishes the crude but efficient mechanism used by in such a matter-and it is really quite Nature hitherto. None of the proposals put irrelevant to do so-I may say that I regard forward seem to me to have this tremendous as one of the deadliest menaces to the human quality. So I am only ready to regard the race the danger that such an instinct should things proposed by Osborn as palliatives, grow to an intensity something like the which may enable our present golden age to present intensity of the sexual instinct, for if last rather longer than it otherwise would. it should do so it would destroy all prospects I am afraid I do not think that will be very of general prosperity among the human race. long, but I am all in favour of palliatives, and However, it is unlikely that things will go as I hope that Osborn's efforts will be attended far as that, because a much smaller change with success.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 3

