REVIEWS OF BOOKS

CONTRACEPTION

felt that family limitation had any appeal to the poorer classes.

Fryer, Peter. The Birth Controllers. London, Another good point with this book is that the

1965. Secker and Warburg. Pp. 269+Pp. 115 author has not allowed the large amount of

Notes, Bibliography and Index. Price 42s.

research, which has clearly been necessary, to

dull his sense of humour-which indeed is

A BOOK SUCH AS this has been long awaited, almost Rabelaisian in places.

for it contains accurate and readily available Could such courageous and high-minded

information covering the whole of the history pioneers as Dr. Charles Knowlton, in America,

and development of conception control (in- and our own Francis Place, Dale Owen,

accurately dubbed "birth control" at a special Bradlaugh, Annie Besant and many others have

meeting convened to decide on a telling title for seen this book they would feel that their efforts

the movement) together with an extensive and sufferings have at last received honourable

bibliography, innumerable interesting notes and notice. Let us hope that it is not too late for

lively descriptions of the actors who have played Margaret Sanger-now in her ninth decade-to

their part in this most human of dramas. read of and recall her former tribulations and

Although perhaps "martyrs" would be a more her triumphs and reflect again on the told and

apt word than "actors". Too little do we appre- untold misery and suffering directly attributable

ciate the enormous benefits we all enjoy to-day to the life and work of the misguided and in-

as a result of their sacrifices. Moreover, the time famous Anthony Comstock.

has now come when the printed word need not

C. W. USHER

conform to extreme delicacy of expression, with

a result-particularly in a subject such as thiswhich is especially refreshing. In the past a considerable amount of personal research was needed even to discover, for instance, exactly

Draper, Elizabeth. Birth Control in the Modern World. A Pelican Original. Harmondsworth, 1965. Penguin. Pp. 332. Price 5s.

what it was that John Humphrey Noyes advo- IN THIS BOOK the author discusses all aspects of

cated and practised at his Oneida Community, birth control, stressing its essential and inter-

or just what it was that the Reverend Joseph related importance to society as the humane

Townsend recommended to Jeremy Bentham. solution to population pressures and to indi-

And it will be news to many to learn that Annie vidual happiness and well-being.

Besant ("rhymes with pleasant") gave birth There are four parts. The first, "Introducing

prematurely to her daughter Mabel as the result the Problem", poses the question why control?

of a blow from her clergyman husband while The second, "Reproduction and Control",

she was pleading with him to restrict their comprises three chapters-sex, sexuality and

family-and in this connection it is noteworthy eugenic selection, infertility and associated dis-

that it was the better-off and better educated orders, and, lastly, methods of control which are

classes which first adopted family restriction. categorized as "mystical" and "rational" and

The poorer classes regarded babies as "savings explained in detail and at some length.

banks" because of the fact that they became The book is sub-titled "The Role of the

breadwinners, working in the mills, from the Individual in Population Control" and this is

earliest possible age. Not until the Workshop emphasized in part three which, under the head-

Regulation Act of 1867 did it become illegal to ing "Society and the Individual" discusses inter-

employ a child below the age of eight, and from actions, education and attitudes both of religions

eight to thirteen they were only allowed to work and of states-"the two great authoritative in-

half time. Then the Education Acts of 1870 and fluences in birth control". The fourth part,

1876 compelled parents to send their children "Practice and Prospects", includes a description

to school between the ages of five and fourteen of the search for new methods and an assessment

and no employment was allowed under the age of the extent to which contraception is used.

of ten. It was not until these Acts began to be The population problem is discussed and the

35

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

final chapter deals with the future prospects for during the one year preceding the inquiry gave

effective control by which is implied "the con- a completed family size of seven children per

traction of differences, reconciliation of cultures, woman. The level of fertility has not shown any

and the satisfaction of personal needs and change during the life-time of these women; the

achievement of personal happiness with the aid number of children they actually had by various

of institutions and disciplines in a manner which durations of marriage tallied with the numbers

will further man's still unknown destiny".

they were expected to have according to the

The extent of the author's research is im- marriage duration-specific fertility rates based

pressive but her book would be easier to assimi- on the births during the year of the inquiry.

late, and its impact on the general reader might Moreover, no significant difference was found

be greater, if some of the chapters were shorter in the fertility of the various groups according

in content and all were more concisely expressed. to their occupation, religion, caste, education or

It contains, however, much information for the income. Indeed no differences could be expected

student and, as the author intends, may well owing to the complete absence of the practice of

stimulate further consideration of the many family limitation. Over 90 per cent of the males

studies and reports now available on aspects of and females interviewed in connection with the

population and birth control; no doubt with practice and attitude towards birth control were

this in mind she has appended a useful biblio- unaware of the methods of family planning and

graphy divided under chapter headings.

only 2 per cent had ever adopted any method

There is an adequate index.

F.B.S. of birth control. Further, about three-quarters of

the males and over four-fifths of the females

Pethe, Vasant P. Demographic Profiles of an Urban Population. Bombay, 1964. Popular Prakashan. Pp. xvi+144. Price Rs. 15.00.

interviewed showed no desire to get full information about family planning.
The attitude of the respondents towards the general notion offamily planning was favourable.

THIS IS A report on the results of a demographic- About half of them supported it. The support

economic survey of the city of Sholapur. A was greater among advanced communities and

random sample of 1,203 families was interviewed occupational grades of higher status, and in-

in 1955. Due to the expansion of the cotton creased with the increase in education. Nearly

textile industry, the city has grown rapidly half of the respondents considered a medium-

during the last two decades. Manufacturing sized family of four or five children as the

industry being the main source of employment, optimum size.

over half of the heads of the families interviewed With this situation in 1955, the reader is left

were manual workers. As about seven-tenths of wondering about the reactions of the people in

the families were employed in low-paid occupa- this urban-industrial population to the propa-

tions, their standard of living was found to be ganda for family planning that presumably was

very low. The dependency ratio was high; a undertaken during the Second and the Third

family on an average had 1-6 earners and 4-1 Five Year Plans between 1955 and 1964. The

dependents. The level of literacy, especially for author points out that in the two family

the women, was low, and about one-third of the planning clinics which, till 1955, were the only

adult males and over four-fifths of the adult ones to operate in this city of about 300,000

females were found to be illiterate.

population, only 56 persons took advice on an

The urban-industrial character of the city average in a year, but gives no indication of any

made it an especially interesting area for the increase in the number of clinics or in their

study of patterns of fertility and reproduction. attendance since then.

A total of 1,337 women, who were currently This book is another addition to the large

married, and were between thirteen and fifty amount of literature showing the puzzle that in

years of age, were included in the study of India, while most couples desire a medium-

fertility. The age-specific marital fertility rates sized family, and also have a favourable attitude

computed on the number ofbirths which occurred towards family planning, no significant practice

36

