THE EDUCATION BILL AND EUGENICS.
By WM. C. MARSHALL.
THERE can, I think, be no doubt that the question to which it is most important that the practical eugenist should turn his mind, is how to reconcile the socialist legislation which is coming on us in ever-increasing waves, with the necessity, if eugenic objects are to be attained, of encouraging parentage among the more worthy as compared with the less worthy members of
society. The war has produced an astonishing amount of state-
socialism, and though nmuch of this, such as conscription and the control of the railways, may not outlast the war, we have become accustomed to the state controlling the price of food and other commodities, the rates of wages, and conditions of' labour to an extent which was not dreamt of before, and there are signs that the regulation of many other things, for instance, the housing of the poor, will be taken in hand before long.
Now the tendency, if not the aim, of socialistic legislation is to protect the weak and downtrodden, to raise the minimum wage, and secure for the feeble and incompetent worker conditions which he would be unable to secure for himself if there were free competition. It will be said that this can be done at the expense of the capitalist and financier who, under existing circumstances, take more than their fair share. This is no doubt true as far as the financier is concerned, but it is very doubtful if the saving and investing public get on the average a larger return than is needed to induce them to save and invest. Anyhow, in the main the less competent workman can only receive more than the intrinsic value of his services through the more able and intelligent receiving less. This, I am convinced, is already the case in the Building Trades-the only trades with which I am personally acquainted. Consequently there is a real danger that the pinch will come on just those who, by their
skill and industrv, have secured for themselves an improved

THE EDUCATION BILL AND EUGENICS.

I9

position and are endeavouring to raise the standard of living of their class.
That this results in decreased fertility is shown by the enquiries of Dr. David Heron' and other writers, and by the census taken by the Fabian Society2 with a view to ascertaining how far and for what reasons the number of children born of marriages is voluntarily limited.
I should like here to express the hope that the Eugenics Education Society may some day undertake an enquiry similar to this Fabian census and on a much larger scale. In the meantime the information before us points to the fact that the birthrate is being voluntarily limited in a special degree by the professional class, and by the higher grade of skilled workers, and that the reason for this is chiefly the difficulty which these classes find in starting their children in positions which will enable them to maintain the same standard of living to which thev themselves have attained.
In the October number of the REVIEW Ir. R. A. Fisher says: "To increase the birth-rate in the professional classes and among the highly-skilled artisans, would be to solve the great eugenic problem of the present generation." This is perhaps a too unqualified statement, but I believe it to be very near the truth. My object in this paper is to point out that education is one of the ways-I think the best way-of attaining this result.
Ask the professional man with a large family where the shoe pinches; in nine cases out of ten he will say in the cost of the education of his children. So, too, the skilled artisan is generally earning wages which should enable him to secure, without much difficulty, the decent housing, food, and clothing which he expects for himself and his family, but when you come to education vou find that if he has more than one or two children it is very likely difficult for him to provide the secondary or technical education which is needed in order to start them in the ranks of highly-skilled labour.
Any educational reform should consequently be of the greatest interest to eugenists, and it is natural we should enquire
1 The relation of the fertility of man to social status. 2 Fabian Tract No. I3I.

20 EUGENICS REVIEW.
whether Mr. Fisher's Bill is calculated to forward the cause of the eugenist or not.
In the first clause it is stated that the object of the Bill is to establish " a national system of public education available for all persons capable of profiting thereby." This is the frank acknowledgment on behalf of the state of a duty which, if fulfilled, would, as far as education is concerned, remove the grounds for my contention that socialistic legislation tends to do most for those who do least for themselves, and thereby encourages the less worthy portion of the population. It certainly can not be said at present, that there is a national system available for all those that are capable of profiting by being educated for skilled trades; not much is done for the middle class generally, and very little at all for the professional class.
In venturing to discuss the provisions of the Bill, and enquire how far this project is carried out, I must say at once that I do so as one of the general public, and make no pretension to special educational knowledge or experience.
The first thing that strikes one in the Bill is the very great latitude left to local Education Authorities, who are invited to prepare schemes suitable to their respective districts. This is no doubt wise, but it makes it difficult to forecast what the precise results may be. At the same time it makes it clear that those who desire to influence the course of events, will have the chance to do this through the local Education Authorities as well as in Parliament-a fact which I hope our society will keep in mind.
The most prominent provisions of the Bill are (I), the
raising the age for elementary education from fourteen to fifteen years, and the age after which exemptions may be conditionally granted to fourteen years wherever it is now below that limit. (2) The establishment of free part-time "continuation" schools, to be compulsory up to the age of eighteen. The time spent at such schools to be, to begin with, 320 hours per annum.
These two provisions will, I believe, give the general mass of working-men parents all they are asking for. Indeed, it is highly probable that many of, what I will call, the inferior

THE EDUCATION BILL AND EUGENICS.

21

grade, will resent their children being kept so long at education and away from wage-earning employment.
I look on this extension of compulsory elementary education
as distinctly eugenic in its tendency. It will discourage those who look primarily to their children becoming a commercial asset at an early age, from having large families, and they, I believe, are the less worthy of their class. At the same time it will be welcomed by those who desire further education for their children, and value the prospect it holds out of establishing them in the ranks of the highly-skilled or trained workers. The advantages to be gained become more apparent when we consider the provisions in the Act (a) for the establishment of " central schools " or " special classes," which will give the older children, and those who stay on beyond the age of
fourteen, the advanced instruction which is necessary to enable thenm to get the full benefit of their lengthened time at school, and also (b) to prepare them for " further education in schools other than elementary, and their transference at suitable ages to such schools."
In view of the acknowledged fact that many of the more intelligent children are now, during their last terms at an elementary school, in advance of the education provided and practically marking time, these provisions for a more advanced education are most important, and should, with the " continuation " classes, which will include practical instruction and physical training, give children who are prepared to make use of their chances, quite a good start in the world.
What, however, the skilled artisan will probably most value, will be the preparation of children for education in schools other than elementary, and their transference at suitable ages to those schools.
This, I presume, will mean an increase in the number of free places in secondary and technical schools, and I should hope, in a considerable increase and development of the latter class of schools.
I think, then, that Mr. Fisher's Bill bids fair, if loyally carried out, to satisfy the requirements of the intelligent artisan,
and to assure him that he can in the future count on obtaining

22 EUGENICS REVIEW.
for any children of his, inheriting his qualities and reared under
his care and supervision, an education which will assure their position in the industrial world.
The Bill, while opening the door to all, is calculated even
in its compulsory clauses, to benefit most those most anxious to avail themselves of its provisions and capable of profiting by the advantages it offers, and at the same time it provides more advanced education for those who seek it. It must consequently be selective in its action.
When we turn to the education of the professional man, tradesmen, and middle class generally, clearly this can onlv be affected by the Bill under consideration, in as far as these classes make use of the public system of elementary and
secondary or technical education; and I,take it, they make little
use of the elementary schools.
I have some evidence as to the parentage of children attending secondary schools, but it is so fragmentary that I should not be justified in drawing generalisations from it, especially as the classification of occupations is somewhat difficult. I find, however, that out of 470 parents io per cent. are professional-
using the term somewhat laxly-54 per cent. are tradesmen,
farmers, and clerks, and 36 per cent. craftsmen and labourers. The proportion would no doubt differ widely in different schools and districts. It is interesting also to note that where families are small a larger proportion are sent to the secondary schools. Out of 317 children in families of 4 or under, 58 per cefit. were sent to school, whereas out of 260 children in families of over 4, only 32 per cent. were sent. This indicates that the size of the family is a determining factor as to whether a child is sent to school or not. But much larger numbers are required for any safe generalisation.
It seems reasonable to conclude that though the wants of tradesmen and the lower middle class generallv are met to a considerable extent by the secondary, technical and commercial schools, and might be further met by an expansion of these, that the professional class makes comparatively little use of them.

THE EDUCATION BILL AND EUGENICS.

23

My own view is that the professional class, and the more well-to-do middle class parents, had best be left to meet their own wants; and that their cause of complaint could, and should be removed by freeing them from the unjust burden which is inherent in a graduated system of direct taxation, based on the income of the family, and taking no account of the numbers to be supported and educated by that income.
This is not the place to discuss the best way of doing this, but it is interesting to note that Mr. Arthur Henderson in " The Aims of Labour," has declared in favour of a change in this direction.
I have written as if the problem were to educate children to take their places in the same class as their parents; and this is, I believe, the main object, but the cry for equal opportunities for all must be satisfied, and no doubt it is desirable that a ladder should be maintained by which exceptional children can pass from one class to another. This is already the case, and the opportunities in this direction will certainly be enlarged. How far it is desirable from the eugenic point of view that this should be encouraged, is doubtful. It is possible to maintain that the ambition to pass children to a higher grade in society may lead to the limitation of numbers in the families of exceptional parents. I do not know how any direct evidence on this point can be obtained.
But of this I feel certain, that the confidence of being able to secure for his children the same position in life that he has won for himself, will remove the principal reason why the families of the most progressive members of society are now so often limited in number.
It will be seen that, I think, Mr. Fisher's Bill should be cordially welcomed by eugenists, and that they should use what influence they have to see it carried out in a thorough way, when I believe it may well prove a legislative step in the eugenic direction of the very first importance.

