REVIEWS OF BOOKS

PSYCHOLOGY
Banks, Charlotte and Broadhurst, P. L. (Editors). Studies in Psychology Presented to Cyril Burt. London, 1965. University of London Press. Pp. 283. Price 42s.
THIS BOOK IS in honour of Professor Sir Cyril Burt as he enters his ninth decade of life. It is compiled out of separate articles by sixteen contributors, including colleagues, friends and former students of his, and it has as its frontispiece a very fine photograph of Burt taken by Mrs. Ella Mollo. In a very short review, as this must necessarily be, it is possible only to cite the various contributions with the briefest comments which occur to the reviewer. However, this is certainly a book which must find its place in every library of psychology and of education, and many others besides.
The late C. W. Valentine's opening chapter, "Cyril Burt: a Biographical Sketch and Appreciation", leaves nothing to be desired, and it is sad that Valentine should have passed away before his admirable contribution to this book was published. As he was a lifelong colleague and close friend of Burt's, it is indeed fortunate that his opening chapter has been available for use.
The second contribution is by C. A. Mace, and is called "Causal Explanation in Psychology". Mace, with his great philosophical acumen, defends the view that there are limits to rigid prediction in human thought, taste and behaviour. It is interesting that he says that behaviourism is on the way out, while the reviewer, of course, thinks that it was never in, although this is a time when his staff and students are all becoming converts to it. Let us hope they will read Mace's chapter.
J. S. Wilkie, in the third contribution, "Neurology and Free Will", tells us that no advance of neurological science has the least chance of deciding one way or the other the dispute between determinists and voluntarists.
The fourth essay, by Alfred Koestler, is called

"Motivation: A Biased Review", it is part of his book, The Act of Creation. He wishes to show that the essence of motivation does not lie in unpleasurable tension, and that curiosity and the
exploratory drive are independent of the particular instincts.
In the fifth chapter P. E. Vernon presents his well-known system of personality structure depending on the public, private, insightful and depth levels and their implications. T. H. Pear contributes a chapter on "Social Ascent in England To-day"-but he seems to leave out Scotland, Wales and Ireland. Is that wise? An illuminating chapter on "Implications of Research on Creativity" is contributed by J. P. Guilford, and a very interesting chapter of a philosophical kind by Gardner Murphy, entitled "The Nature of Man".
The ninth chapter is by Max Hamilton, and is about "Prediction in Practice". It shows some of the difficulties of prediction in the medical field which may account for the paucity of work on prediction in clinical research. J. A. Fraser Roberts and Elizabeth Sedgeley contribute a valuable chapter on "Intelligence Testing of Full Term and Premature Children by Repeated Assessments". One of the, most important chapters is that of Gertru&e Keir, on "The Psychological Assessment of the Children from the Island of Tristan da Cunha". This will probably prove to be the most lasting contribution to science in the book. Charlotte Banks, with the help of R. Maliphant and C. P. Wallis, examines the problems of "Boys in Detention Centres". P. Broadhurst and H. J. Eysenck write on "Emotionality in the Rat: a Problem of Response Specificity", and Raymond B. Cattell provides the concluding chapter, "Higher Order Factor Structures and Reticular -vs- Hierarchical Formulae for their Interpretation". Then there is a list of Burt's publications since 1909, no less than 332 up to 1965.
This book is a fitting tribute to a man of genius.
R. W. PICKFORD

97

