WEALTH AND ABILITY

Eu4emcs in the Professions and Crafts

By B. S.BRAoWELL

O NE comes across much loose talk and by judicious investment amplified them

on the correlation of wealth and several times over-and this, by the way,

ability. Further, wealth may be in the midst of a busy hospitable life fully

inherited and we speak of ability being taken up with academic and municipal

inherited, which fosters confusion.. I think duties, besides many outside activities. In

it would be well if we could dissociate the this case the aptitude was there, but finance

public mind from any idea that we hold the was a pastime to be pursued out of working

possession of wealth or rank as a sure indi- hours.

cation of intelligence. I include rank I think, then, that we can say the pursuit

because everyone is aware that many titles of wealth makes little appeal to many of the

have been awarded on a purely plutocratic most intelligent.

basis during the last fifty years.

If one considers the professions, one could

It would be easy to show that many of the hardly say that the average entrant has any

ablest strains in the country have never confident hope of achieving a large fortune.

pursued wealth; their abilities have been No doubt he expects to make a living and

such as to enable them to earn without diffi- feels that there are big prizes to be won-

culty in some congenial pursuit amply suffi- by the few. Under present conditions the

cient for their needs and the education of average medical practitioner makes more

their family, and on their death they have than the average army officer, who in turn

left little in the way of accumulations. If makes more than the average clergyman,

this is true of families, it is also true of who, strange as it may appear, probably

selected individuals of high ability. Nearly makes more than the average practising bar-

thirty years ago, when it was decided to abandon placing wranglers at Cambridge in

rister. The earnings of the latter are said to be less than those of a compositor. The

order of merit, I wrote an article, which was prizes to be won by the successful barrister

published in the Scotsman, on the careers are, from the material point of view, very

of the senior wranglers in the last hundred much greater than in the other professions.

years. Needless to say, they were distin- These relative earnings may fluctuate

guished, but mostly in an academic way. very considerably from time to time. The

There were plentiful indications that they average general practitioner is said to be

could succeed in less cAoistered conditions. distinctly better off than thirty years ago;

For instance, in the 'sixties three were the pay of an army officer is distinctly

called to the bar. They all reached the higher than before the War; the clergyman,

bench, two as Lords of Appeal in the House I suppose, is in much the same position, and

of Lords and one as a Lord Justice of the average barrister worse off. The earnAppeal. I cannot recall that any one of ings of professional men are very sensitive tbe senior wranglers took to finance or the to increases and decreases in numbers of

Stock Exchange. This, I take it, was from lack of inclination and not aptitude.
Many will remember a high wrangler

practitioners. A few years before the War, perhaps owing to increases in the Services and public health appointments, " locums "

who died recently, leaving a large fortune were not to be had by the medical profes-

to his college, University, and to Ox- sion and one vacancy was actually filled

ford. I understand he inherited means from the casual ward of a workhouse. Ten

23

24 THE EUGEMCS REVIEW

per cent. either way may mean comparative nounced cases. If I toss pennies, I am very

affluence or distress as the case may be, and unlikely to toss ten heads in succession, but

numbers take long to adjust themselves. A if 1,024 people toss, the chances are that one

young man starts to qualify for a profes- will; and if I,o5o,ooo toss twenty times

sion. Six years later, when qualified, con- each, probably one man will toss twenty

ditions may have changed considerably. heads. The number of speculators is very

Numbers do adjust themselves slowly and great, so there must always be a consider-

somewhat. At the Scottish Bar they have able number of people who have made big

a Widows' Fund; it is compulsory for all fortunes by pure luck. In the past, if they

advocates to belong to it. Thirty years ago have wanted to do so, they have been able

there were over 400 members, this year to acquire titles.

there are 322. The adjustment to changed What about the retention of wealth? The

conditions is far from complete.

adage tlhat a fool and his money are soon

But while, as between professions, earn- parted suggests that a man who retains his

ing power and wealth may be poor indica- inheritance intact is no fool. I think this is

tions of worth and ability, within any one true: a passive line will soon be stripped

profession the reverse may be the case. of great wealth by death duties. To retain

So far as hereditary dignities are con- it, grit and mental powers above the aver-

cerned the professions differ extremely. age will be required. If the estate is in

Some barrister is sure to be raised to the land, the position is practically impossible

peerage every few years: soldiers are more in the ordinary case. One doubts if anyone

seldom raised, except as a reward for war working with great ability could regain

service; I can only recall four instances of from the land in an ordinary lifetime a sum

doctors being raised to the peerage, and as equal to the death duties taken out of it.

for the Church, Lord Davidson is the only If so, and we have no modification of duties,

case that comes to mind. Yet no one sug- great estates must be broken up, more is

gests that the descendants of barristers are the pity, and the country probably defaced.

more likely to be able and worthy than As regards the effect of death duties on

those of soldiers, doctors, or parsons. So stocks and shares the result is surely differ-

rank fails as a deciding test. In certain cases ent. In the first place, I am not sure if the

it may even be an indication the other way Treasury need fear this source of revenue

-where, for instance, in ten generations a drying up. I imagine four out of five mil-

family with many surrounding advantages lionaires are the engineers of their own

has not had the energy or ability to rise fortune. This will continue to be the case.

a single step.

A millionaire dies possessed of all the

In productive work it is common, though ordinary shares in his business and no other

not invariable, for the " brain " to be someone other than the head. He may not even be a shareholder of any importance. He is generally quite well paid, and may be very well paid, but the profits and the honours
are more likely to go to the titular heads and chief shareholders.
When we come to finance, dealing in money and speculation, it would be idle to say that the clever financier does not make money. At the same time, there are many others who make money by sheer luck in

estate. A large portion of the shares must be sold to pay the duties; they will probably
be sold for less than they would have fetched if he had disposed of them piecemeal in his lifetime. They will very likely be bought, in part, by those working in the business. The business does not suffer; it is not " a parcel of boilers and vats " that are sold, but a portion of the " potentiality
of growing rich beyond the dreams of avarice " at a reduced figure. His heirs

speculation. The extreme instance is the suffer, both by payment to the Treasury

winner of the Calcutta or Irish Sweep; and by the method by which they accom-

behind him come numerous other less pro- plish it, a forced sale of shares; the pur-

WEALTH AND ABILITY

25

chasers score by buying their shares below fessions, so within his trade his pay may be

their real value.

a very good indication of the operastive's

worth.

THE WORKIO CLASSES

There are strong indications of heredity

'Now passing to the consitAeration of amongst apprentices. I think about 50 per

working men, we find exactly the same cent. of our apprentices are the sons of

conditions occurring as in the professions. journeymen employed by us. Sometimes, I

In my own works we employ members of am glad to say, the sons aim higher. Soci

many different unions. An outsider might promotion or the reverse is always of

think that a man's worth and ability was interest so I quote a few instances that I

propQrtioned to his pay. He would find, on have observed. The son of one foreman is

closer investigation, that an engineer is paid training to be a chartered accountant; the

very little more than a labourer; printers two sons of a sub-manager are in a leading

in general taking 6o per cent. more than insurance company; the son of an engineer

engineers; lithographical printers double, foreman is taking the examinations for the

and lithographic tin printers still more. Institute of Electrical Engineers. In each

Why are engineers so lowly paid? I sup- case the father has risen from the ranks and

pose one reason is: " Owing to the cessa- the sons aim higher.

tion of naval building." It will right itself One is sometimes surprised that people

in time, but the lag is very long and pain- who have risen still wish their sons to serve

ful. Printers' wages have fallen very little an apprenticeship, as they put it, to have

from the highest points reached. This is a trade whatever happens. It is sometimes

largely because of the big numbers em- amply justified; one apprentice of ours was

ployed by the daily Press. Their wages in fact, if not in name, a foreman in an

form but a small fraction of the costs of pro- intricate department before he had served

duction. It is not worth the newspapers' his time, and an under-manager a few

while to risk a strike and a cessation of months after he came out. There is a type

issues and advertising revenue, so there is of the very best craftsman who prefers to

not sufficient unanimity amongst employers pursue his craft to rising to positions of

to oppose successfully the unanimity of the management. The ability may be there,

unions.

not always perhaps, but the soul is in

Lithographic printing on tin is easier creative work and is not to be tempted.

than on paper as there is no stretch in the Another family is of interest; for three

material, yet the operatives are paid more generations they have served in the army,

because they are few in number; here the in the same regiment and then in our

lag is assisted no doubt by union rules as to works, in no higher sphere but with adapta-

apprenticeship. These are not always bad. bility, trustworthiness, and efficiency.

It is a pity to degrade ruthlessly a skilled There is a machine-minder whom no one

occupation by introducing too many opera- would take as other than a working man.

tives. One good man for one good job is He is of high efficiency in no simple

better in the long run for the community process, but still a working man. I am told

than two men for one job or two jobs for his direct ancestor commanded one of His

one man. Rate of pay, then, is no criterion Majesty's ships in the Napoleonic Wars.

of ability as between different trades, We have one or two labourers of marked

because of the lag in adjustment and the aristocratic feature, such as was so marked

difficulty of a trained man, especially if no amongst many of the Australian troops.

longer young, changing from one occupation So there is ample evidence in our little

to another. " Supposing a rural dean to be cosmos that some are going up, others are

unfrocked, does he fall to be a major? Sup- static and some have come down. A

pose a captain to be cashiered, would he fall portion of our apprentices are the sons of

to be a puisne judge? " But as in the pro- labourers who have been in our employment

26 TH EUGENICS REVIEtW

for years, a fine type of man to whom the homes and are wel brought up. Family

term " casual labourer " is quite a mis- tradition, that hybrid of heredity and

nomer. These men are loyal and know- environment, is strong in them, and

ledgeable in the internal working of the regular work is the habit of theirfther.

firm; their work is far from being But here again the sie of the family is

unmportant.

dropping. It will not be from such stock

From the point of view of eugenics a that the future opti will be ited

tendency to reduce the amount of labour in the main, but from some grade definitely

required for handling material is of impor- below this in the present scale.

tance. The amot of skilled labour tends It is portant that people should realize

to increase relatively to that of skilled. that the average trade unimOno eber comes

One would rather apprentice the son of the definitely in the upper half of the com-

skilled than those of the nskilled en masse, munity, that his family is much smaller

though the latter, being the sons of men than it used to be, and that the increase

in regular employment, come from decent in the population comes from lower strata.

Eugseics Revi.w, VoL XXV, No. 1.

