AN IRISH INSTANCE OF PRACTICAL EUGENICS

B Y a lucky chance a correspondent, tracing its history in my native valley. In

who prefers to remain anonymous, every case I know I can trace a hereditary

has sent us ant account of a system taint. I know of cases of families that have

of practical eugenics in Ireland. Unlike had the taint introduced by inter-marriage

Monsieur Dachert's well-planned scheme, it with others well known to have had cases of

seems to have been largely unconscious, the insanity in its members for generations. I

joint product of economic urgencies and an have been astonished how little it has been

ancient social tradition. We give the account regarded amongst the people. The explana-

in substantially our correspondent's own tion probably is that only odd members be-

words:

come insane, and that they are at once

The eugenic customs I spoke of were in removed to the asylum, where they are soon

my youth-I am in my seventy-eighth year forgotten. Also, these families have pro-

-practised by the peasantry of the Province duced many persons of outstanding ability

of Munster, if not of the whole of what is as an offset to the afflicted.

now known as the Irish Free State. The Associated with a tendency to insanitv in

people at that time might be divided into families is the occurrence of cases of various

big farmers, small farmers, and labourers; grades of mental deficiency. These, I think,

and nearly universally each class married are mostly rather of high-grade type; I have

only its own members. The custom of giv- known and know a few-very amiable gentle

ing fortunes to daughters and to sons who persons, incapable of working a farm, but

married girls with farms, was the real cause useful under supervision in farm work.

of this system, as only big farmers could These never marry and have no offspring.

give big fortunes, whilst the servant girl A history of tuberculosis in a family is a

was able to bring nothing to her husband serious cause of difficulty for its members in

but a feather bed.

getting married. Amongst the Irish, gene-

A custom that lasted for generations rally, fine physique and beauty are greatly

brought about a sort of caste spirit in the valued.

community; and so, apart from money and I cannot say if these customs prevail

land, the big farmers married amongst amongst the urban populations in Ireland:

themselves. Ireland was at that time a very I think thev probably do to a great extent,

poor country; and as a result both the because the town folk of all but a few of the

small farmers' and the labourers' families large cities are in very close touch with the

were often under-nourished. It was actually rural communities.

possible to pick out the children of the well- In a supplementary letter our correspon-

to-do farmers from those of the others at dent refers to the very effective check on

a national school simply from their superior inzbreedintg exercised by the Catholic

growth and nutrition. It was difficult for a Church, which rules the great majority of

man with any serious physical defect to get the population of the Irish Free State. He

a wife, and for a girl so handicapped practi- writes:

cally impossible to get a husband. The rea- As a result of the Church prohibition, for

son was, probably, that a farm could only be centuries the custom has become something

properly worked by thoroughly healthy like a taboo in the communitv and marriages

people; and in many respects the health of within that degree [of third cousin] are
the wife was really more essential than that popularly regarded as unlucky. Most of the

of a husband. Obviously, the weakly marriage customs in Ireland of eugenic

labourer had little chance of a wife.

value are really founded on the necessity

There is a great deal of insanity in my for robust, healthy people to meet the exact-

county and I have interested myself in ing conditions of farm work. Up to about

I9

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

thirty years ago all butter made in Ireland member of the Irish Free State Cabinet,

was made and prepared for market in the and I notice that he is one of its most able

farm. The most important work of the wife members in defending government action on

was to prepare the butter; and this was very public platforms.

heavy work. The chief product of these The feeble-minded brothers married and

dairy farms was, and is, butter, and its had children. Those of the elder are men

quality was of primary importance for the and women of just average ability. The

welfare of the farm. It was thus essential younger died young, leaving a boy and girl.

that the wife should be able to make good The latter is quite a competent doctor in

butter.

charge of a large dispensary district. The

I know personally of three or four family boy is quite a charming personality, but

histories that would, I think, make eugenic wholly worthless for practical purposes;

enthusiasts pause before deciding on the he has let a fine farm go to rack and

wisdom of sterilizing members of families in ruin.

which cases of insanity and mental defi- This is an interesting case, on which,

ciency occur. Here is one:

however, we mrust suspend judgment until

A family of four sons and one girl. Two we know something of the ancestry. If an

of the sons were men of brilliant intellects, able family mated with a defective strain,

both priests. One was one of the ablest of or if two individuals of such mixed ancestry

the Irish bishops, and the other would almost married, a mingling of able and defective

certainly have been one had he not died at children would be likely-this, we think,

an early age from typhus fever. The two occurred with the early Spanish Hapsburgs.

other brothers might be regarded as feeble And the moral seems to be not that steri-

minded. The sister was just of normal lization is risky, but that decent stock

ability, but her only children-two sons- should never marry beneath its own

are of exceptional ability; one is now a standard.

