MARY STOCKS
B.Sc., LL.D., Litt.D.
Reflections on a Changing Class

Structure

W HEN COLIN BERTRAM suggested that I
should give this lecture, I was conscious of the great honour implied in the invitation. I was even more conscious of my inability to live up to it. I explained to him that I knew nothing about eugenics, that I was no scientist, and that the subjects of earlier Galton lectures-and still more the names of the lecturers-inspired me with icy terror. But he reminded me that I had lived in the world a long time (which is all too true), that I must have absorbed a good deal of human experience, and that what with one thing and another I ought to be able to put up some sort of a show. I will endeavour to do so; though the kind of life I have led, sliding on thin ice from one superficial field of observation to another, constitutes a better qualification for a quiz artist on the Light Programme than for a Galton lecturer. I have at any rate lived through five generations, known them all, from my grandparents to my grandchildren, and observed their ways of life and the impact of external events upon them. We are all Londoners; we are all professional class. We haven't a business man amongst us, nor a manual worker. Forgive this autobiography-but it is only honest to indicate the nature of the window through which I have observed human goings-on. Seen from this angle then, I have come to believe that it is the professional class that has borne the brunt of the spectacular social revolution through which we have passed during the last fifty years. It is the professional class that has yielded most and reaped least.
The Professional Class and the Social Revolution In recent analyses of class structure by economists, it has been customary to indicate four or
* The Galton Lecture delivered in London on February 18th, 1959.

five distinct categories-differentiating, for in-
stance, skilled from unskilled workers; the learned professions occupying a place near the
top but as one among several higher income groups. Seen from my window, the pre-revolution scene approximated rather to Disraeli's "two nations" pattern. My parents inherited from their parents and I inherited from them, hereditary membership of a privileged class. We shared it with senior business executives, and members of the aristocracy. We called no
man Sir. Socially we were a homogeneous group -separated by a gulf of habit and tradition from the great majority of our fellow citizens. We dressed differently, we talked differently, we ate differently and at different times, we were entertained differently.
It was, of course, a class system and not a caste system. Because given abnormal ability and energy (plus a little bit of luck) individuals could climb into the upper air and within a generation breathe its atmosphere with ease. The public schools with their open doors to feepaying parents, helped this process of assimilation. It did not, of course, disturb the class pattern.
In my own childhood I experienced the reality of this "two nations" set-up in its purest and bleakest form: the tall house in Kensington (now five flats) with its basement where the servants worked and the attic where they slept; the two bells on each side of the front door, one marked "visitors", the other "servants"; the nursery and night nursery; the surrounding streets of tall houses in single family occupation (now all flats or hotels or hostels) from the doors of which every aftemoon nannies in grey suits and black bonnets would emerge with children for the afternoon walk in Kensington Gardens. I am sure that we were the nearest thing to the chemically pure specimen that social scientists

II THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1959, 51, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

long for when they contemplate with envy the clean test-tubes ofthe physical science laboratory.
Two things, more than anything else, contributed to our sensation of belonging to a privileged class. One, the lesser of the two, was the upper class monopoly of mobility. We were the holiday makers-the long-distance travellers by train. The others were the day trippers. Apart from the recognized areas into which the day
trippers poured themselves at certain seasons of the year, the holiday resorts were all ours. It was for us that the lodging houses and the
hotels catered. And because, in proportion to
the unprivileged there were so few of us, it was all very pleasant. Few things contribute so effectively to the sense of belonging to a privileged class as the power to move about while the rest stay put in their slums or villages or industrial areas.
But even more potent as a contributory factor to this sense of otherness, was the prevalence of domestic service. We were so utterly dependent

will read ofhow, wishing to see how the industrial working classes lived, she adopted an elaborate disguise and, with the help of an old servant, got herself accepted as a convalescent sempstress in the home of a Lancashire textile worker. Her adventure reads like that of an infidel British explorer sojourning in disguise among the tents of Bedouin with a view to writing traveller's tales about their strange manners and customs.
It is, I suppose, a truism to say that the two forces which held this class pattern in situ were inherited wealth and the monopoly by the privileged class of educational opportunity. The educational programmes of the two classes were wholly distinct. For the great majority an elementary school leading to wage earning at thirteen or fourteen. For the privileged minority, a more complex and protracted system. The form familiar to my childhood was for girls, a day school or governess; for boys, the painful experience of a preparatory boarding school at nine or ten, leading to a public school (except for

on it that we didn't even give a thought to the potential naval officers), followed by Oxford or

fact of our dependence. There it was, there it Cambridge (except for potential army officers),

always would be.

or perhaps initiation into the senior ranks of

I am sure that insufficient attention has been business or law. The boys thereafter were

paid by social scientists to the role of the domes- expected to earn their living. The girls were not.

tic servant in the evolution of British society. If they pursued higher education or a gainful

She was the "back-room girl" of the female occupation, as indeed some of them did, that

social reformer. She let loose into the arena of was an uncovenanted benefit. Nobody thought

public life an army of well-educated leisured the worse of them if they pursued leisure.

women: Florence Nightingale, Octavia Hill, But it was this male educational background

Emma Cons, Beatrice Webb, Millicent Fawcett, that gave access to the professions and to the

Eleanor Rathbone-out of their homes they higher ranks of industry and commerce-to

streamed, kicking their domestic chores behind occupations in which one enjoyed responsibility

them for someone else to do-to devote them- and exercised authority-and in the intervals of

selves unimpeded by anything (except perhaps which, thanks to high income levels, one lived

trailing skirts) to the task of transforming the graciously and moved about freely. The higher

social structure whose shape had conditioned incomes which they commanded were shielded

their leisure. Karl Marx has pointed out that from competition by the majority because the

every social system carries within itself the germs majority were not qualified to compete. Thus

of its own destruction. Seen thus the well-trained the minority, being protected by a sort of ring

domestic servant might be recognized as one fence of educational opportunity achieved

among many obscure but potent little germs. incomes on which it was possible to save, as

It is unnecessary to elaborate further the well as to buy exclusive education. This provided

nature of a class structure whose features are a further element of firm cement for the class

doubtless familiar from early experience to many structure of their lives, because those who failed

here present. If you want an arresting example to earn had the support of unearned income

of its extreme rigidity turn to Beatrice Webb's from capital. The system was thus self-per-

autobiography, My Apprenticeship. There you petuating.

12

REFLECTIONS ON A CHANGING CLASS STRUCTURE

The Redistribution of Purchasing Power

One striking feature of the scene is the acute

I am not going to continue these platitudes by awareness by advertisers of vast new fields for

elaborating in detail the causes which have in cultivation in the wide expanse of purchasing

our own time transformed this class pattern power offered by working-class wives and

into something rich and strange. And in any affluent teenagers-of this, more later.

case the pattern was not quite as simple as the But if the old social contours are in process of

one which I seemed to see through my Kensing- obliteration, are there no subterranean imbroil-

tonian window. State-aided secondary education ments at work which may produce new ones?

under the Balfour Act of 1902 was coming into And if so, how long does it take for a new

the picture. So were the civic universities. Both economic category to evolve the distinctive

were affecting the growth and magnifying the habits of a social class? It is tempting to let the

significance of that intermediate class some- imagination play round such a question even

times described as the black coated proletariat: when convinced that it cannot be answered.

the class that according to Karl Marx was Let us then-just for fun-direct our attention

destined to be squeezed out of existence by the to one perceptible phenomenon of the new

inevitable polarization of exploiters and ex- material equalitarianism: to the fact that to some

ploited. And how wrong he was; for it has grown extent the levelling down of professional class

in such a way as to blur the whole pattern-of spendable incomes in relation to the majority

course for reasons which Marx regarded as has not to the same extent affected the world of

major if not exclusive social determinants, big business. In so far as the levelling down is

namely, changes in the mechanics and organiza- the result of taxation, sections of the business

tion of the productive forces.

community have managed to remain above the

The important thing is that to-day the whole battle. The result is a perceptible differentiation

ring fence of educational opportunity has in their standard of life.

collapsed. The underprivileged are breaking in How precisely this has come about remains to

all along the line. The social conscience has be analysed in. a book which remains to be

willed it to be so-and rightly for the honour of written. It is a reproach to our contemporary

humanjustice and the liberation ofhuman talent. economists that it has not been written already.

But the social conscience, driven by pressure Chancellors of the Exchequer are fumbling and

of events and the demands of an enfranchised their policies are drifting for want of it. Its title

majority, has done more than that to crack and is The Incidence and Effects of Taxation in the

batter the outline of our old class structure. By Welfare State. In it we shall learn of the propor-

the combined operation of graduated direct tion which expense allowances bear to taxable

taxation, the evolution of social services in a income and of the varied and sometimes obscure

welfare state, and full employment stimulated forms which they assume. We shall learn too of

by successive small doses of inflation, it has the various ways in which industrial and com-

brought about a revolutionary redistribution of mercial organization is adapting itself to patterns

effective purchasing power.

devised for tax avoidance rather than for

Differences of mobility have gone. Differences maximum productivity at minimum cost, and

of dress are on their way out; one can still how far, if at all, these distortions violate the

distinguish the Dutchess of Kent from a shop canons adumbrated by Adam Smith for an

assistant but one can no longer distinguish a economically sound system of taxation in a

Somervillian from a mill hand. Differences of free-price economy.

speech have not gone; they have, however, Unfortunately the author of The Incidence and

become irrelevant as a determinant of social Effects... will probably find himself incom-

acceptability. Indeed in the entertainment moded by one remaining element of class

industry they are a passport to success. Mean- discrimination: the immunity of the rich from

while at many points the higher levels of wages factual inquisitions. Since the days of Charles

are lapping over the lower professional salary Booth the poor have presented a fruitful field for

levels. the questionnaires of social scientists in search of

'3

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

precise knowledge. House to house visiting has and indeed introduced-to counter the effects of

played a large part in it, and its results have an inadequate survival rate. India and Japan

contributed significantly to our understanding have definite population policies to-day in face

of social phenomena. The writer of The Incidence of growing numbers in relation to insufficiently

and Effects. . . may here find himself at a disad- expanding material resources. I suppose that

vantage. He may wish to know from sample we came nearest to having one in the eighteen-

inquiry how many of the cars outside the thirties when the Malthusian population theory

Dorchester on a given day are company cars, captured public imagination and focused atten-

or what proportion of the guests lunching tion on the expansive possibilities of a natural

inside are entering their bills on expense sheets. birth rate unaccompanied by those distressing

It has been found possible to extract reliable positive checks which had, as Malthus was able

information from persons who can be convinced to show, kept human numbers at bay since the

that they have something to gain. It may be less dawn of history. Dealing with rational human

easy to deal with those who may fear that they beings, Malthus advocated the substitution of a

have something to lose.

prudential check, and this he envisaged as the

The moral of all this, which may have led us maintenance of an economic individualism so

into certain irrelevances (and there can be no uncompromising that no man would dare to pro-

doubt that it has) is that while old class cleavages pagate beyond the measure of his own unassisted

disappear the possibility of new ones may be individual family resources. This, he believed,

indicated. And I would particularly commend would generate moral restraint. The Government

this thought to the Labour Party, some of whose believed so too; and the deterrent poor law of

members are concentrating a lot of thought on 1834 represented its acceptance of the Mal-

the attempt so to order our educational policy thusian gospel-though not so wholehearted

as to prevent the emergence of a grammar an acceptance as he would have wished, because

school aristocracy while an aristocracy of a he wanted to abolish the poor law altogether.

very different kind may be in the egg-one whose The mood passed-though we met a pale

liquidation will involve a more intensive effort reflection of it a century later in the opposition

of thought than has yet been bestowed on it. of certain liberal economists to the family

All this leaves us with a number of specula- endowment agitation. It was increasingly repug-

tions which seem to arise directly out of the nant to the social conscience-but what was

grand transformation of our class structure from more important-it was rendered increasingly

the Disraelian "two nations" pattern to a con- irrelevant by the vastly expanding material

siderable and still ever-increasing degree of resources of Victorian England and in due course

equalitarianism in educational opportunity and by the development of a new prudential check in

effective puchasing power. What is likely to be the form of contraceptive birth control. This

its effect on the population problem, on the last development was not a response to insuffi-

position of women, on human psychology, on ciency of material resources, but on the contrary

popular culture? (You will observe how wisely I to rising standards of life. It had nothing what-

have kept off the inheritance of intelligence; for ever to do with population policy. It was the

reasons indicated at the outset of this lecture.) result of spontaneous action by individuals;

Overpopulation and a National Population Policy

and in so far as it came later to owe something to propaganda, that propaganda was inspired by

I would suggest, then, that this new equalitari- considerations of maternal health and family

anism is about to confront Great Britain with an welfare rather than by any Malthusian fear of

overpopulation problem for the first time in over-population-of which I think it would be

history-but we have not yet begun to consider true to say there was no sign.

the possibility of a national population policy. Twice since then we have looked the popula-

Until recently national population policies have tion problem in the face, only to dismiss it with a

been rare things. France had one between the shrug and a murmur of "pass friend and all's

wars when family allowances were advocated- well".

'4

REFLECTIONS ON A CHANGING CLASS STRUCTURE

The first occasion was the publication in 1919 and partly, I suspect, by an easy but dubious

of Maynard Keynes's Economic Consequences of assumption that where death control is imposed

the Peace. In his chapter on Europe before the from above by the World Health Organization

war, he makes a sombre forecast of Europe after or by a benevolent government, birth control

the war, faced with a probable decline in the will be an automatic individual response to it as

purchasing power in terms of food, of a unit of was the case in civilized, literate, social-service-

labour applied to industry.

minded Great Britain. However, that is by the

The economic Eldorado of the Victorian age (he wrote) lost sight of a view which filled with

way. It is a fact well known to social historians that

deepseated melancholy the founders of our we tend to discuss the problems ofto-day in terms

political economy. Before the eighteenth cen- of ideas based on the conditions of yesterday.

tury mankind entertained no false hopes. To lay the illusions which grew popular at that age's latter end Malthus disclosed a Devil. For half a century all serious economical writings held

Or, as Professor Tawney puts it in his essay on Equality: "Life is a swallow, theory is a snail". If we envisage our own population problem to-

that devil in clear prospect. For the next half- day in the economic terms familiar to readers of

century he was chained up and out of sight. Now, perhaps, we have loosed him again.

economic text books, we shall be creeping with the snail while the swallow flies over our heads.

But we hadn't. He was well and truly chained In those terms it is doubtful if we have any over-

up between the wars. And the second occasion population problem in Great Britain at all. The

on which we looked the population problem net productivity per head would in all probabi-

in the face was from quite a different angle. lity not be increased if there were fewer of us

Shortly before the second world war, a brief which economists have hitherto regarded as an

panic was occasioned by public contemplation indication that we have exceeded the optimum

of a statistical formula called the "net reproduc- population conditioned by our present environ-

tion rate" which seemed to indicate that existing ment.

trends, cumulative in their operation, would We should undoubtedly have exceeded it long

involve us in national race suicide within measur- ago had our international contacts not enabled

able time.

us to concentrate on providing the world with

On the tide of that fear, family allowances industrial products and commercial services

rode to victory, birth control propaganda had whose provision allows us to concentrate large

to adopt a somewhat apologetic attitude, and a numbers in small areas. Many of us may be

powerful Royal Commission on population was plagued by an uncomfortable feeling that our

appointed.

high standard of life under these conditions is a

By the time its report appeared, that fear too very brittle thing-that our whole economy is

had passed. To-day we have in Great Britain a most precariously dependent on overseas poli-

stabilized population with birth control and tical and economic policies over which we have

death control more or less in equilibrium-and no effective control. Many of us may feel unre-

this not as a result of any conscious population sponsive to the comfortable words of politicians

policy but rather as the development of death who assure us that the people of this country can

control in response to concern for individual in the near future enjoy a vastly improved

human welfare and the development of birth standard of life if only they work hard enough

control as the response of freely acting indivi- and skilfully enough. But our fears may be liars

duals to the same incentive.

as were the fears of Malthusians in the eighteen-

Our national concern with the problem of thirties or of Maynard Keynes between the wars.

population, in so far as it exists, is centred on Now-if we stop thinking of population in

overseas territories where death control has terms of the marginal net product of labour, if

been achieved without comparable progress in we shake off our nineteenth century "workshop

birth control. And in my opinion that concern of the world" mentality, if we relate the question

is a wishy-washy milk-livered brew; weakened of population to our new equalitarian class

partly no doubt, by fear of the Catholic vote, structure-and if at the same time we think of

JI 5

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

man as a consumer rather than as a producer of problem by concentrating much more thought

wealth-we can indeed see a very serious over- on such matters as the better distribution of

population problem looming ahead of us. The industry, the staggering of hours and holidays,

Devil which Malthus unchained has got loose and the realities of our sewage and water

again. The fact stares us in the face that with problems. Meanwhile let us keep an eye on the

our new diffusion of purchasing power each birth rate which, under the civilized conditions

individual takes up a great deal more room. The now prevailing in Great Britain, has become

only people who take up less room than they did increasingly responsive to external stimuli. And

are the professional classes who are now this brings us to the position of women.

occupying single floors where they formerly

occupied whole houses with attics and base- The Position of Women

ments-and even they have more cars and impede There can be no doubt that the coincidence of

more road space than they did before the last birth and death control has been a wholly benefi-

war. cent factor in the lives of women in this genera-

Indeed, one is sometimes tempted to view this tion-all women (or nearly all now that the

fact of individual expansion in nightmare terms. habit of birth control has worked its way down

Somebody once described Great Britain as a the social scale). On balance it has greatly

lump of coal surrounded by fish. When the reduced the burden of maternity. I say on bal-

nightmare is on me I feel tempted to describe it ance because, thanks to higher standards of

as a congested car park in an ocean of radio- child care, all kinds of requirements have to be

active sewage.

satisfied which were not satisfied in the old days

It is indeed a solemn thought how much when one had eight and buried four. One can

more room a given population takes up when thus question the proposition which used to

the standard of life reaches a certain point. For be enunciated by critics of the social services,

geographical reasons the Russians don't have to that they relieved mothers of responsibility.

worry about this, nor, I suppose, do the Ameri- They did not. They magnified responsibility.

cans. Nor do our self-governing dominions They required mothers to do all sorts of things,

which are from every point of view-economic such as mouth-cleaning, milk-sterilizing, clothes-

as well as cultural-underpopulated. But we changing, bathing, powdering and heaven knows

do. And I doubt if we worry enough. One what, which many mothers had never bothered

symptom of our tenancy of a fool's paradise is to do before. But on balance to bear three babies

our present concentration on roads and houses and rear them all, even under the eye of a

and our absence of concentration on water critical health visitor, is a less exhausting and

conservation and supply as well as on sewage more satisfying business than to produce eight

disposal. Perhaps this is because, in a working and rear four.

democracy the taxpayer must be offered the Our increasingly equalitarian society with its

most immediately obvious advantages of public welfare services, its wide diffusion of purchasing

expenditure. The gay abandon with which he power, and its full employment bringing decent

plunges into a sea of sewage at his coastal living, elegant clothes, domestic gadgets, enter-

holiday resort does not suggest that massive tainment, travel, varied diets, and glossy

expenditure on this particular service will women's magazines into millions of homes, has

redound to the electoral advantage of the govern- certainly declared a handsome dividend of

ment which incurs it.

material well-being for women as a whole.

What can we do about it? Emigration is not It is the professional class women who have

likely to help us, because I doubt if there has borne the brunt of it. For them the two decades

ever been a case of emigration-that is to say between the world wars offered a golden age, a

mass emigration-from a high standard of life golden age which had never existed before and

to a simpler or harsher standard; unless ofcourse may never come again. I was one of its bene-

the emigrants are driven by persecution or fear ficiaries, since the most active years of my life

of persecution. We can, however, mitigate the were passed in it.

z6

REFLECTIONS ON A CHANGING CLASS STRUCTURE

At the beginning of that blessed period the woman whose plan of existence remains much

sex barriers which had hitherto deprived women the same though at a higher material standard,

of professional opportunity and the more and for whom birth control information is now

interesting responsibilities of citizenship, fell one widely available, we may-I suggest-expect

by one. Opportunity opened out. Not until a much the same pattern of family.

generation later was it once again curtailed-this In Czechoslovakia, I am told by one who has

time by the withdrawal of domestic service, first recently been there, Government policy is being

by war work, later by full employment and rising operated with a view to the encouragement of

wage costs.

women's work outside the home. Amenities such

The result is that whereas formerly the profes- as radio and TV sets, furnishings and labour-

sional class woman's day-to-day experience saving gadgets, are being made available as a

diverged sharply from that of the working class stimulus to such earning-creches and com-

woman, to-day that experience is shared. And munal meals are provided to make it possible.

her professional work, if pursued after marriage, Such measures do make it possible with a one-

is pursued under difficulties which I, and my or two-member family. With three or four

generation, never had to face.

children it is not so easy. The result is a very low

Incidentally those difficulties are maximized birth rate which seems to be causing some con-

by a system of taxation which treats the com- cern. What this shows is the responsiveness of

bined income of husband and wife as a single the birth rate to social policy in a literate

income for income and sur-tax assessment. This industrialized community with inherited stand-

makes it difficult for the professional work of ards of material consumption. And the moral

the wife to be a paying proposition-sufficiently for us is that if we choose to limit numbers for

so for her to be able to pay for the modicum aesthetic or economic reasons it can be done by

of expensive domestic service which enables her manipulating the conditions of women's work

to pursue her outside job. It will remain for the outside the home. Women are very ready to

author of The Incidence and Effects ... to estimate work outside the home if it is not made too

the influence of this frustrating fiscal practice difficult for them. Whether or not this is good

on the volume of women's professional work for the children is another matter. The answer

and the consequent wastage of talent-as well as depends partly on the conditions under which

on the conventional morality of the professional it is done, partly on one's estimate of the

classes in view of the financial inducement it importance of full-time maternity in the home.

offers for irregular unions. This effect may The children of the privileged classes in the

become more potent in the future, as conven- past seem to have done very well without it.

tional morality becomes less compulsive.

Birth Rate and Social Policy
But what about the influence of this social transformation scene on the birth rate, and incidentally, on the differential birth rate as between professional and non-professional class women? Paradoxically, professional class domesticity seems to act as a stimulus to judge from statistics (admittedly compiled from a limited sample) in Judith Hubback's book Wives Who Went to College. For, so my daughter who is of this class and generation assures me, if you have to make up your mind to a life of full-time domesticity you may as well make a real job of it and have four children instead of two. Meanwhile for the others, the non-professional class

A "Classless" Society
But if we are, in fact moving towards a classless society, will such phrases as "professional class" or "wage earning class" have any relevance?
What we profess to be moving towards is a society in which equal opportunity will enable individuals to apply such talents as they are born with to the full, without frustration of the able or exaltation of the sub-standard. The national gain will be a volume of human talent which now runs to waste for want of cultivation. Such an ideal was implicit in Mr. Butler's 1944 Education Act. It is true that some people regard this ideal with more enthusiasm than others and that there are varying views regarding

3-ER

17

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the speed with which we should proceed towards it. But it commands very general lip service.
For some, however, it has its own terrors: for instance the emergence of an intellectual aristocracy which may in due course harden into

"The rich man in his castle, The poor man at his gate, God made them high and lowly And ordered their estate."

a class presenting hereditary variations of taste When that hymn was written it was certainly

and behaviour if not of speech and dress. not God who ordered their estate but the man-

Presumably it is for this reason that the Chinese made environment in which they were born.

Government is insistent that its intellectuals Realizing this, many an enlightened parson

shall perform their quota of unskilled manual caused this verse to be omitted when rendering

work. In our own country it plays a part in the that otherwise attractive hymn. In future we

strong prediliction encountered in left-wing need not be so squeamish. The dichotomy will

circles for comprehensive as compared with in fact have resulted from God's providence

selective schools. It is certainly difficult to rather than from man's injustice-provided, of

believe that mediocre children brought up in the course, that the rich man is not wastefully

homes of the higher functionaries will not tend opulent or the poor man destitute of necessities.

to react to their more rarified environment and We shall in fact be citizens of a community

acquire ideas above their station-or rather whose members are relieved of one great source

ideas which relate their own importance to their of bitterness and psychological tension: a sense

father's ability rather than their own mediocrity. of frustration: of being the victims of injustice.

In this connection it would be interesting to know They will also be relieved of one great source

something of the effect upon their children, of of comfort: the infinite comfort of being able to

the notable privileges conferred by the Russian say-and still more, to believe-that if they

Government on members of the Academy of find themselves in the less interesting and less

Science-privileges which include cars, dachas, remunerative jobs, it is someone else's fault.

differential purchasing power and much else. Never again will a man be able to say to himself

Therefore, when our great text-book on The as he gazes up at a top dog: "I'm as good as

Incidence and Effects ofTaxation in Great Britain you. If I'd had your chances I'd have been where

has been written, there remains scope for you are". Alas the obvious answer will now be:

another: an examination into the nature and "But my dear chap you did have my chances.

results of contemporary national policies con- Clearly you are not as good as I am."

cerned with the control of class structure. But it But, of course, it all depends on what you

is to be feared that if the author of the first book mean by "good".

is likely to be impeded by the reluctance of the If only our second great book were written

rich to co-operate in factual surveys, the and available to us, overseas experiments on the

author of the second may encounter even more working of what have been called "meritocra-

cageyness on the part of iron curtain govern- cies" might throw some light on whether such

ments required to submit the intimacies of their deprivation of comfort does or does not cause

social scene to the scrutiny offoreigninvestigators. more psychological disturbance than the old

In Great Britain, however, such fears have sense of frustration imposed by external social

not yet materialized. Our policy, conscious or and economic inequalities. But here again it all

half conscious, perhaps in some cases uncon- depends on what you mean by "good". In a

scious, and in many cases reluctant, has been wholly materialist society one might anticipate

based on the recognition of an open road for that human assessment of the "good" would be

natural talent. We have gone a long way along geared to worldly success as expressed in spend-

that road and we have further to go-but we will able income and public esteem. In which case

doubtless get there in the end.

the causes of maladjustment will be potent. In so

When we do, we shall for the first time be far as we can shake ourselves free from the

able to sing with a clear social conscience that tyranny of these standards-and get a little

hymn which reminds us that:

nearer to the Kingdom of Heaven-we may be

I8

RVFTLC!TIONS ON A CHANGING CLASS STRUCTURE

able to attain mental serenity even in a "meri- And that, of course, is what our equalitarian

tocracy".

society is offering, freely, to all. There will have

But can we shake ourselves free from those to be a devil of a lot of it if we are to counter the

standards? Does our new class pattern offer better or worse prospects of our being able to do so?
Education and Taste

diseducative forces ofcommercial exploitationprovided of course, we stick to those essential freedoms which Milton defended with such
potency in his Areopagitica and I fear we must, even though it involves the defence of a freedom

It is a solemn thought that our new class with which he was unfamiliar: freedom to

structure with its wide distribution of purchasing exploit the lowest human instincts in the interest

power, offers more dazzling opportunities than of commercial profit.

ever before, for the profitable exploitation of the Well-a good many people are doing their

common measure of human taste. Most best: the education authorities and the univer-

human beings are more interested in persons sities and the Arts Council and the Old Vic and

than in policies; most human beings would the non-profit-making newspaper trusts-and

rather be entertained than educated. For the B.B.C., now somewhat crippled by the

the satisfaction of these interests they are necessity ofwinning TV viewers from commercial

prepared to pay-and they can pay. Therefore programme companies dependent on mass

in a preponderantly free-price economy there appeal in the interest of advertisers.

will be found those who are prepared not merely The trouble is that education has a "fifth

to satisfy those interests, but to inflate them-to column".

blow them up and keep them at full blast. There was published many years ago by a

To-day they have been given a new and powerful French author a book entitled La Trahison des

instrument in the form of conmmercial TV. So if Clercs. I propose to borrow that title, translate

teenagers with money to spend on gramophone it as "the treason of the intellectuals", and use

records appear to like boy pop singers, find a it for a purpose quite other than that of its

boy pop singer-advertise him-organize "fan author.

clubs" for him-promote a press campaign on The treason of the intellectuals made itself

his life story-mobilize teenagers to swoon and felt very potently some years ago during the

screech round him and then advertise the fact campaign for commercial TV. For those of us

that they have done so in order that other who fought to the last ditch in the resistance

teenagers may know what is expected of them. movement, it was the most depressing aspect of

And when they are tired of that boy singer, drop what would otherwise have been a clean straight

him and find another! I would call your attention fight against an honest commercial racket. It

to the newly expanded massive circulations of was natural and reasonable that the company

the popular Sunday papers and ask you to note directors of advertising agencies and radio

what proportion of their contents are concerned industries should campaign inside and outside

with personal stories and the entertainment Parliament for new and shining sources of

industries.

profit. It was neither natural nor reasonable that

Aye, there's the rub; widespread purchasing historians and journalists and economists with

power in a free society, and lo! mankind is at no personal interest in these material possibili-

the mercy of its own widespread weaknesses. ties, should assert in public and in print (as they

The late Miss Rose Macaulay took a very did) that one man's taste is as good as another's,

dim view of our cultural future when she said, and that if you venture to say that Bach's

addressing the Society of Authors:

Matthew Passion is better music than a rock and

We are faced with-and we had better face it-the frightening formidable impact of the

roll recital by Elvis Presley you are adopting a "holier than thou" attitude, since all you have

great mass of scarcely educated minds on taste, a right to say is that you happen to like it better

literature, imagination, language and the arts. but there is no reason why anyone else should be

"The only remedy," she added, "is education." encouraged to do so.

I9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

This fifth column is very potent to-day. It is fellow-travelling with a conception of democracy based on the notion that the greatest happiness of the greatest number consists in finding out what people want-or what interested parties can make them think they want-at a given moment, and then taking steps to give it to them. Indeed many of these treasonable intellectuals
who assisted the campaign for commercial TV did so in the name of democracy. It was a word often on their lips or on their pen nibs as the case might be.
Now this conception of democracy applied to the government of a fully enfranchized equalitarian community, exposed to the full impact of mass communication by advertizers, is as dangerous to its politics as to its taste. And the growing dependence of governments on Gallup polls and

the ministrations of public relations officers makes that danger the more imminent.
At the back of this intellectual treachery there is, I think, a great fear-and fear is a bad determinant of human activity. It is a paralysing fear of being thought a prig. And it is a subtle fear because it has attractive disguises. It can parade itself so sweetly as altruism or humility. The Russians and the Chinese do not suffer from this fear, and this is a great source of strength to them.
Am I right in thinking that the Eugenics Society is not afflicted by it, that its members are prepared to evaluate quality as distinct from quantity, and that in the human society which is weaving itself new patterns under our very eyes, they will not hesitate when occasion arises to use such expressions as good and bad, trivial and enduring, admirable and shoddy?

EUGENICS IN RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT. C. P. BLACKER. 2nd Edn. Price 2S. 6d.

INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY. CYRIL BURT

Price 2S.

THE TREND OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE. GODFREY THOMSON

Price 2S.

The Galton Lecture, 1946, with a Symposium in 1947 by ALEXANDER CARR-

SAUNDERS, CYRIL BURT, LIONEL PENROSE and GODFRREY THOMSON

PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO THE BIOGRAPHY OF GENIUS.

LEWIS M. TERMAN

Price IS. 6d.

POPULATION TRENDS AND THE WORLD'S BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES.

G. C. L. BERTRAM

Price 2S.

PROBLEM FAMILIES IN BRISTOL. R. C. WOFINDEN

Price 2S. 6d.

EXPECTATION OF MENTAL INFIRMITY IN THE DANISH POPULATION.

KURT H. FREMMING FAMILY ENVIRONMENT. JOHN D. NISBET

PriCe 3S. 6d. Price 3S. 6d.

SOME ASPECTS OF WORLD POPULATION AND FOOD RESOURCES

SIMON OF WYTHENSHAWE

Price 2s. 6d.

Fellows and Members may obtain these pamphlets at a reduction of 25% on the
above net prices direct from the Eugenics Society

'I'HE EUGENICS SOCIETY and CASSELL & COMPANY, LTD.

69, Eccleston Square, S.W.1

35, Red Lion Square, W.C.1

20

