G. C. L. BERTRAM
M.A., Ph.D.
the Making and the Taking of Life*

hitroduction

allows us progressively to remove earlier limiting

T HIS TALK MIGHT perhaps have been factors which more primitively have held human

entitled Lords of Creation, but in fact I populations in check. The growth of agriculture,

have called it The Making and the Taking the domestication and improvement of plants

of Life, which means the human biological and animals, the increase of law and order and

problems of our day. I can assure you that I will removal of petty strife, the improvements in

not pour upon you an excess of figures. What I sanitation and water supplies, the growth of

propose is to start with certain considerations long distance transport (both across the oceans

concerning the making of life in bulk-reproduc- and by rail), the understanding and then the

tion and blind multiplication-wisely and often control of epidemic diseases, and more recently

now called the population explosion: and then the advancement of medicine at a more personal

proceed to the stage so far reached in the making level-all these represent the pushing back of

of life by deliberation-that is to say when the factors previously instrumental in limiting

production of children becomes the planned and human populations and checking their increase.

deliberate action of free and responsible indi- And very fortunate we are, for personal elimina-

viduals. Then I propose to consider briefly tion by strife, starvation or disease is un-

certain qualitative aspects of the situation, deniably uncomfortable-and to be avoided both

before going on to some ethical considerations. for ourselves and for others.

These will be as introduction to a variety of The net result, the population explosion, is of

topics regarding the taking oflife-at all stages- course well known to many educated people

but not including warfare and capital punish- to-day. Known it may be but resultant sensible

ment. Finally I will try to conclude with a brief joint reactions and planning remains astound-

integration which will firmly stress the need for ingly inadequate. So it is that world population

freedom and individual liberty, and the inevit- at about 200 million at the time of Christ grew

able growth of responsibility which springs from gradually to near 450 million in 1600-to 2,000

increasing knowledge. I must add that I speak as million when I was an undergraduate only thirty

a zoologist and not as a medical man.

years ago. Since then-in what seem to be a very

Making in Bulk In a sense we can define life-or an aspect of
life-as the process in which and by which assemblages of organic molecules separate themselves from, and perpetuate themselves in, an alien and chemically more simple environment. Speaking loosely, we can say that the resultant organisms are highly successful in this process, and their multiplication in space and time is continuous, except in so far as it is
checked by particular limiting factors. In our
own human case the increase of knowledge

few short years-it has leapt to 3,000 million and is increasing so as to double again by the end of the century: and so to continue to double at progressively shorter intervals-if we remain successful in holding back those limiting factors which are so uncomfortable. This rate of multi-
plication, its real meaning and its dangers, are very hard to drive home-though I hope not to an audience such as this. Here are three ways of regarding what is happening. The 50 million dead of two world wars are replaced in less than 400 days. The City of Oxford is added daily to
the world. Of all the individuals who have ever

* The substance of a lecture: Oxford Humanist Group, lived on earth 3 to 4 per cent are alive at this

March 5th, 1963.

moment.

I £9 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1963, 55, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Yet, let us recognize, this fantastic rate of population increase has been neither planned nor desired by anybody. Most of it is a mere byproduct of beneficence. We have striven to

The despoliation of the natural environment, the extinction of other species of strange and beautiful animals and plants, the fouling of rivers, the oiling of birds and beaches, urban sprawl and traffic chaos, these are all direct consequences of

check petty strife, to improve transport, water excessive increase in numbers. Space itself already

supplies and medical care because of our, and our recent forebears', joint personal kindliness and feeling for the well-being of ourselves, and

becomes a rare commodity as the conurbations grow, and cities become places of frustration rather than of culture. Even worse, for the full development of importantaspectsof theindividual,

of other individuals scattered throughout the is the progressive difficulty of finding solitude.

world. We have neither planned nor desired great population increases on the world scale, nor the national scale. They have happened, fundamentally because of kindness and com-

Likewise, as local numbers mount, so too diminishes the feeling of personal "relatedness" with the majority of those one sees.
The population explosion jeopardizes whatever worth, development and evolution-whatever

passion, the effort of the many and the initiative happiness, opportunity and enlargement of per-

and expertise of the few.

sonality-we may cherish for our children and

To take a simple and compact example, future generations.*

that of British Guiana-where I was this time Indeed the making of people-the making of

last year. It is typical of those places where human life-progressively is recognized to be

malaria has been banished with the sudden excessive and to be imposing the most severe

coming of D.D.T. at the end of the last war. strains. The pushing back of "natural" limits to Malaria was eliminated through the biological population growth is highly desirable because skill and initiative virtually of one man; infantile these factors of limitation are uncomfortable.

mortality plunged. And now B.G. at 3-4 per For a while we can repel them, and then again

cent per annum has almost the highest rate of we seem to be up against new limits-at present population increase in the world-doubling in food shortages primarily-though people can

under twenty years. Let me stress-this is a by- go on breeding in a surprising manner even when

product of beneficence. And the advantages of fundamentally undernourished or underfed.

great population increase are few and the dis- Great efforts are made to meet food shortages.

advantages very many. I wrote recently:

There is a most fortunate and widespread,

There simply are no real and admirable advantages though historically very recent, interest in the in any greater further increase in worldpopulation. well-being of others. OXFAM typifies this kindly

It cannot sensibly be argued that numbers must feeling for the needs of those at a distance-

mount in order that the mass market may increase for particular material objects. The increase of a mass market is not a true measure of advance. Likewise, reproduction so as to build bigger

though, with some other organizations, sometimes one feels that the heart drives rather than the head. I do not want here to go into the prob-

armies, whether of infantry or technicians, is not lems of potentialities versus actualities in these

admirable advantage.

matters of food production world wide. What

Not only are there no discernible and admirable advantages in further population increases, but the disadvantages are so real and many, quite

matters is the relative rates at which populations and supplies increase. So far despite all efforts

apart from poverty and undernourishment. they run neck and neck, and supplies are cer-

What is the correlation between mounting tainly not gaining significantly. Yet the analogy

numbers and national pugnacity? It is surely all too often positive. Was not World War II initiated in the name of Lebensraum? We hear now, too, of stress syndromes which are known to afflict

of a race is thoroughly bad, for the one thing clear about a race is that it has an end. In matters of population and food there is only perpetuity

our fellow mammals under conditions of high or disaster.

population-density and resultant struggle. And To deal with the major world problem we

urban man himself most certainly is not immune: neurotic symptoms multiply,

must of course both increase food supplies and reduce multiplication. Yet so far the World

* "What are people for?" in The Humanist Frame edited by Sir Julian Huxley. 1961. Pp. 377-8.

Health Organization has been impeded by the Roman Catholics in all activity which would

I6o

THE MAKING AND THE TAKING OF LIFE

help to provide even advice on restraint through contraceptive practice-that more comfortable substitute for the distressing "natural" modes of population limitation.
Perhaps we may gain perspective by pondering the query "What are people for?" and then we may see even more clearly the dangers of excess. Even if "What are people for?" is too difficult a question to answer we can at least probably agree some of the area for which it is worth striving, and then review the staggering population increases in relation to that goal.
To clear the argument, it is perhaps easy first to agree what are not among human objectives. We do not believe that the aim is the co-existence of the maximum of living human flesh. The present total is about 120 million tons.
Obviously we do not believe that humanity's proper destiny is the breeding of cannon-fodder (or nuclear ninepins); nor the production of a multitude who will have to live in squalor and hunger; nor the production of an enlarged environment for human parasites; nor is our human objective the production of the largest possible market for the manufacturers of material objects.
No. Our jointly agreeable objectives are in the realms of the "good life", the fulfilment of individuals, the achievements of societies and cultures, and the perfection of humanity in terms of biological evolution. There may, indeed, be a large measure of agreement if we attempt to define the objectives in human life in some such terms as these: that every individual shall be born a loved and wanted child, in an environment which will, in liberty, allow the full development of all the attributes with which he is endowed, physical, mental and spiritual. We desire, at the same time, a continuation of human evolution, both genetic and psychosocial, such that gradually may be produced a population in which the many shall possess a stature (or quality) which is rare indeed to-day.*
And now we must turn from the making of people in bulk-the by-product of beneficenceand consider the much more rational making of people by deliberation.
Making by Deliberation These are the years of evolution from the old blind reproduction, something haphazard, to the responsible use of personal freedom. In the western world, at any rate the British,
* Ibid. Pp. 373-4.

Scandinavian and North American world, advance is fortunately fast. Already in the United Kingdom it is estimated that probably 70 per cent of all children are wanted children deliberately conceived. But so far deliberate reproduction, family planning with the aid of contra-
ceptive practices of one kind or another, only extends to a maximum of perhaps 10 per cent of world population. There is no time here to trace the growth of what is known in this country as the family planning movement. After earlier pioneers and experimenters, it is well to remember that it is still less than fifty years since the American Margaret Sanger-who is still happily alive-was imprisoned in New York for helping poor mothers not to be burdened with still more unwanted children; and Marie Stopes in this country was embroiled in the most bitter controversy and struggle.
Suffice it must to say that the family planning
movement grew upon the view that women should-since they bear the heavier burden in reproduction-that women should be responsible for and be able to plan reproduction in freedom-so that children should first be wanted and then deliberately conceived-thus turning blindness into deliberation, and reproduction into the responsible decisions of free individuals.
Kind and Quality of Making
This is of importance whether the making of life is in bulk or by deliberation, because all people are not the same-by inheritance they differ much from one another both in obvious ways and in finer points-though of course they share the great mass of their genes in common so as all to be classified as human. All men have -or should have-equality of opportunity, of freedom, dignity and respect-but demonstrably they do differ anatomically, intellectually, and so on as between individuals, and as between groups and within groups. There should always be equality of opportunity but it is foolish to fancy that all have the same capacity to make use of opportunity-for example, in higher education.
In these matters, no suggestion is being made of superiority or inferiority, no judgements are being made, but simply a statement of differences. Superiority and inferiority are meaningless unless a proper reference is defined. Many

i6i

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

qualities are by no means evenly spread through changes. The local political implications are

all "races". To take an extreme and absurd great. Canada, with its somewhat separate

but true example-size and basket ball-the French community, feels a comparable problem.

small and elegant people of Siam will always be Again, in British Guiana (though to simplify a

"inferior" to the Americans-whose average little) those of peninsular Indian origin, who

Olympic team height was 6 ft. 10 in. It is also are mainly rural and of one political party, now

true that if you like to use musical aptitude as a multiply faster than those of African origin who

criterion of superiority then you will probably are mainly urban and of the rival party. The

be happier in Central Europe rather than in balance tilts and, if the voting age is reduced to

East Anglia. It is also true that people who have eighteen, the tilt to the former party will be

any particular quality in high degree are more faster still.

likely on average, to have comparable children There is no time now to extend this line of

than those who possess that quality in lesser thought, but it is of great importance, and must

degree. These are matters of probability, betting be recognized, both on the large scale and on the

if you like-and inherited variations are evident small-both between nations and within nations.

throughout all plants and animals. Yet, in so Differential fertilities are always to be expected

far as people are different in some of their and therefore change is inevitable.

inherited attributes, differences in actual fertility Now that the making of life, in our present

may come to be of great importance-differences sense, becomes progressively more deliberate,

between great groups or "races", or within the realities of differentials in actual fertility

limited populations which may call themselves will likewise progressively become more promi-

nations. This was in the minds of those who nent. Whether in fact there emerges a will to do

marvelled, or were dismayed, by the so-called so, certainly the opportunity arises to steer-

"spawning of the English" a century ago; or or to refrain from steering and take the conse-

have been alarmed at the "Yellow Peril"; or have quences. If a vigorous and highly patriotic

been saddened by the, probably temporary, and uninhibited people were deliberately to

adverse differentials which appear within a arrange-for example by differential taxation

population during the period of first spread of and public pressure-not only to limit the total

contraceptive practices.

of their breeding-and that they must do-but to

What I am driving at is the importance of build differentials between their people of most

differential fertilities, whether simply occurring and of least ability and vigour, some astonishing

while the making of life remains a blind bulk results might appear in two or three generations.

activity, or contrived or stimulated when the This might well happen.

making of life has at last become a matter of The essential core of this argument is that not

personal responsibility in freedom.

only is there responsibility for how many we

What this amounts to at the present stage is make, but for what we make as well.

that, with the passage of time, differential

fertilities change the human complexion of the Ethical Considerations

world, or of parts of the world. This of course While human multiplication remained the

is true of other species too. If the Chinese, as chief objective, even duty, of life in a harsh

they do, now breed faster than the British, then environment, ethical considerations could re-

in years to come the proportion of world main relatively dormant. There may be some

population which is Chinese may be relatively wonder, in the mind of the observer looking

greater than now and the proportion which is back, at the lack of clash between the contem-

British will be relatively less. Some will feel the poraneous earlier admonitions to "reproduce

prospect admirable, and others will think it sad. and fill the earth" and to "holy chastity". Yet

Likewise take Fiji: there the immigrant people always new knowledge brings new responsibili-

of peninsular Indian origin now breed a good ties and new ethical problems, whether in the

deal faster than the indigenous Polynesians- realms-say-of nuclear physics or of repro-

so that the whole complexion of the population duction. In these days when reproduction

I62

THE MAKING AND THE TAKING OF LIFE

becomes deliberate, new ethical problems inevit- a child. Any tampering here raises emotional,

ably proliferate. Not only Hamlet's "to be or legal and theological issues which vary much in

not to be", but now "to create more life or to time and geographically. Yet abortion is a world-

refrain".

wide practice, permitted in some countries,

Now here is a matter which I will not embark condemned in others. The Japanese, using it as

upon in detail, only mention as one more piece their traditional method of limitation, cut their

to be fitted into the puzzle whose completion may excessive birth rate from thirty-four to seventeen

provide mature perspective. Ponder the modern per thousand in five years around 1950. Hos-

techniques which allow, for example, artificial pitalization was good and 1l million abortions

insemination, and recognize the new ethical a year was acceptable, and only seemingly

problems and worlds of responsibility induced clumsy to those with knowledge of more con-

by the new possibilities of creation. There could venient methods of contraception.

be the deliberate making of human lives of a In this country thirty years ago Mr. Justice

kind previously impossible-for reasons of both McCardy said in open court that he could not

space and time. But modem transport, plus conceive it ever to be right that a woman should

novel techniques for the long-term storage of be forced to bear a child against her will. He was

human semen, soon makes possible the strangest roundly condemned for his kindliness. Our

of genetic mixtures. Ethical considerations local emotional, legal and theological tangle

quite inevitably-and entirely properly-impinge continues to this day-so does the multiplicity

most powerfully upon the thoughts of the edu- of illegal abortions. We have a vigorous Abor-

cated. I draw attention to new realms but do not tion Law Reform Association which puts for-

propose to go further here. The existence, of new ward Private Members Bills in Parliament to

ethical problems and responsibilities as an cover stated categories of cases. This aspect of

inevitable accompaniment of new knowledge, the problem of taking life is a very live issue-

is what I wish to stress.

more especially, recently, when linked with

The Taking of Life I have already said that I do not here propose to discuss either warfare or capital punishment. Nor will I embark upon road acciden;ts, murder and things of that kind.
Ethical problems concerning the taking of life may spring into prominence by mistake or because, for example, deliberate contraceptive intent has failed; or for reasons of defect; or for reasons which are personal in some other way. Here are some examples of the problems of "taking", starting with a laboratory technique and mounting up to euthanasia.
Reductio ad absurdum-no one presumably condemns the throwing away of unwanted tissue cultures of human cells, which might have
been nurtured carefully for years-yet assuredly

probable defect or drug-induced monstrosity. Proceed to a slightly later stage. At a particular
instant the foetus becomes a separate airbreathing entity-a baby. The taking of the life of a baby is infanticide-in the past a widespread practice for a variety of reasons. As a fact, in countries which call themselves civilized, infanticide is now regarded as inappropriate, unethical, illegal, damnable or call it what you will. But
here comes a difficulty-vividly in the minds of
many from the recent thalidomide controversy. It is only at birth that gross defect or monstrosity becomes conveniently-or horribly-visible. And it may take a vast number of different forms of varying degrees of severity. Suitable
action is a matter of intense heart searching.
Emotions are very powerful-and not all in one

those cells possessed "life"-and human life direction. The Liege trial demonstrated a clash

at that.

of opinion most vividly. The thalidomide affair

The surgeon may, for therapeutic reasons and has alerted people's consciences and stimulated

with valid consent, cut away living tissues- thought on a most difficult topic in a way that

even cut away reproductive organs, so taking the far more numerous non-thalidomide mon-

away "life" both actual and potential.

strous or defective infants have never done.

To go further-consider the tiny human In the Liege community the evolution of public

embryo which grows into a foetus and later into opinion seemed to have forged ahead of the law.

I63

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Roughly, about 500 thalidomide-damaged The ethical problems here presented are most

babies were born in this country and about half distressing. At present the appropriate treatment

of them survived. The actual figures do not of deformed infants is a matter for the con-

matter-within a few hundreds-for the total sciences of individuals. It is difficult to see how

is small in proportion to the gross total of about the problem of the deformed infant-including

15,000 badly defective babies born annually in mental and physical deformation-can be dealt

the U.K.-for combined reasons of faulty with except by special legislation, since "sound"

heredity and uterine environment. The thalido- and fashionable medical practice will never be

mide affair will have done good if it has brought able (except in the case of the occasional per-

more fully to public consciousness the problem ceptive midwife or obstetrician) to deal with it

of this "normal" crop of gross defect.

without legislation. A doctor cannot yet openly

The problem of the severely deformed infant, help without committing an offence.

whether mentally or physically deficient, has Is it rational-is it evil-is it ethical-having

facets which are emotional and ethical, rational created an infant burdened with gross defect, in

and traditional, of the head and of the heart. compassion to end the life that has scarce

The suffering of a child with gross physical begun ?-to end the one in the expectation that

deformity, even after surgery or partial allevia- a better may be deliberately created? That

tion with gadgets, can be immense. Additionally, happened surreptitiously at Liege and was

there is the mental suffering of the parents, and condoned. Will the evolution of conscience,

often of the siblings too, if the mother tries to law, or social acceptability, come to allow such

compensate for the disability by so much devo- termination of defect to be regular practice under

tion that they obtain insufficient love and care. suitable professional safeguards? I ask the ques-

Dogmatic, but varied, assertions based on clear tions. Consciences and opinions are greatly

consciences have been many, but few seem to divided. There are noble, educated and wise

have recognized, at least in letters to the Press, people holding totally opposite views on all

two fundamentals. The one is that this problem these questions. The head and the heart, pro-

has both physical and temporal degrees, and the priety and expediency, struggle together in

other is that there is an evolution of conscience seeking solutions. The answers, and the prac-

among even the most devout of individuals and tices approved, will doubtless continue to vary

the most dogmatic of groups, with the passage from land to land-for example, infanticide in

of time, and from one generation to another. one will be called infantile euthanasia in another.

The history of the introduction of anaesthetics In the House of Lords in 1936 Lord Dawson

provides an admirable example.

of Penn, that great physician, said "This is a

In June 1960* the Bishop of Exeter preached courageous age, but it has a different sense of

in Torquay to the 128th Annual Meeting of values from the ages which have gone before.

the British Medical Association. He took as his It looks upon life more from the point of view

text the couplet

of quality than of quantity." That was in fact

Thou shalt not kill; but needst not strive

said in a discussion on euthanasia.

Officiously to keep alive.

So continuing our survey of the making and

The unfortunates whom he had in mind on the taking of life, we come to suicide-a matter

that occasion were the elderly, desperately and of personal decision with grave social overtones.

chronically sick-whose mortal misery could Again the problem is one of extreme difficulty

be extended a little further bymoderntechnology. and often of extreme sadness. Recently, in this

He did not include-as perhaps he might have country, the slow evolution of the law has

done-the infants born grossly defective-infants allowed suicide to be no longer a criminal act.

who, under "natural" or more primitive condi- The failed suicides-and they may possibly be as

tions, would indubitably die at once or very ten to one in comparison with those successful-

soon-while now, with technical aids, they may are no longer to be punished for their attempted

linger longer or even survive for years.

crimes, but treated with a curative kindness

* See THE EUGENICS REvIEw. 1960. 52, 134.

which may assuage their despair. But to help a

I 64

THE MAKING AND THE TAKING OF LIFE

suicide to commit his now non-criminal act Conclusion

does itself remain criminal, and vigorously Thus I have tried to spread before you a whole

punishable. The argument is understandable. area of importance within which new knowledge

Yet, take the matter further, to the realms of brings new responsibilities. And new responsi-

euthanasia-that is to say the deliberate desire bilities are already there, whether or no many

to take one's own life-an exercise of personal people have yet appreciated the inevitable

freewill-to take one's own life in the event, consequences of the new knowledge. Within this

usually, of lingering sickness and great pain in area of biological concern for our own species

old age. If done alone, now no crime has been we are, on every side, beset with emotions and

committed. But in the circumstances where inhibitions, to speak not at all of ignorance,

the personal need is likely to be greatest, the prejudice and dogma. All these delay the

capacity and facilities for lone action are often appreciation of what is rational, and impede

minimal. The Euthanasia Society promotes whatever actions may be sensible.

legislation to ease this difficulty-so far without Blind and dangerously excessive multiplica-

success. That Society is another body of kindly tion must, world-wide, be replaced by moderate

individuals, convinced of the need to increase and deliberate reproduction by thoughtful

personal freedom-the freedom to have medical individuals acting in freedom. There must be

aid to remove one's life when, in one's personal appreciation of the astonishing genetic diversity

judgment in old age and sickness, it has grown of men and women, and there must be conscious

miserable to excess. The need for legal safe- appreciation, too, of the kind of goal for which

guards is obvious to all: but the opportunity we strive for all people. And that goal must

for euthanasia seems a proper freedom to many, include appreciation of the worth of all indi-

and to others a damnable tampering with God's viduals-however varied-and their equality

will. In that regard one may add in parenthesis, of right to opportunity and freedom. The most

again, that anaesthetics only a hundred or so dangerous feature of all, as I see it in the present

years ago were equally condemned by some; picture, is that excessive multiplication is itself

and pneumonia used often to be called the the foremost adversary of personal freedom in

poor man's friend.

almost every way.

i6S

