RECEPTION FOR GENERAL FREDERICK OSBORN

FOR the last twenty years the friend- Mr. Geoffrey Eley, the Society's treasurer,

liest relations have existed between who, from the chair, expressed the Society's

the British and American Eugenics Societies, both of which have changed their
philosophies in parallel ways.

appreciation of General Osborn's many acts of friendship to us, including the gift of numerous books to the library during the

The difficulties of each have been generally war, when American books were unpurchas-

similar. In a world which was becoming ever more conscious of class differences, an

able. Among these books were several copies of his Preface to Eugenics, for which there

exposition of eugenics in terms of those dif- had been a continuous demand.

ferences provoked, on both sides of the General Osborn then gave an informal talk

Atlantic, an increasingly passionate dissent. on the development of eugenics in the

The Nazi doctrines of racialism and the prac- U.S.A. A large-scale inquiry, comprising

tices carried out in Nazi Germany did grave several thousand married couples and de-

harm to the movement-perhaps more here signed to elucidate problems of marriage and

than in America. Communistic doctrines parenthood, had been carried out at Indiana-

which disparage genetics and maximize the polis. The findings had been coded and

r6le of nurture are now casting most un- transferred to punch cards. A large volume

welcome political shadows. These three of information had been assembled and was

circumstances-the class formulation, the being published, in a series of articles, in the

racialism of Nazis, and the environmentalism Milbank Memorial Quarterly. Analysis of the

of Communists-have similarly affected the results was still continuing. Mass data had

American and British Societies. We were also been obtained from the American

therefore especially happy to seize an oppor- Army. General Osborn had been supported

tunity of welcoming General Osbom, the by an able team of psychologists and

president of the American Eugenics Society, sociologists. From such large-scale inquiries

who has done more than anyone else to steer valuable information had been gathered on

American eugenics through the shoals of the what people were thinking, how they reacted

inter-war period.

to propaganda, and their response to educa-

General Osborn was raised to high military tional methods. As a result, we now know

rank during the recent war when he was made better than before the war how to introduce

responsible for the education and information to the public eugenic ideas and policies. We

of the American armies in all the theatres. are also establishing these policies on solid

When hostilities ceased, he hoped to be in a foundations.

position to devote his main energies to General Osborn then reviewed the develop-

eugenics and population studies. But he ment of demographic methods. Twenty-five

found it impossible to refuse a request to act years ago problems of population were the

as the American Deputy on the United subject of armchair discussions. But a

Nations Atomic Energy Commission; and series of books, among which Sir Alexander

his visit to this country was brought about Carr-Saunders's World Population was note-

by the duties-connected with this appoint- worthy, had raised demography to a new

ment.

plane. There were now professional demog-

A reception was held in the Society's raphers. A widespread interest in population

Library at five o'clock on Tuesday, Novem- problems had sprung to life in the U.S.A.

ber 23rd, at which about forty Fellows and Two recent books, Fairfield Osbom's Our

Members were present. Tea was provided. Plundered Planet and William Vogt's The

General and Mrs. Osborn were welcomed by Road to Survival had excited keen interest

2II

2I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and discussion. The old Malthusian controversy was being revived, -and two schools were discernible, one in effect declaring that Malthus was right after all and the other continuing to sustain that he was wrong. None denied that the population of the world, which had probably doubled during General Osborn's lifetime, would continue to increase; indeed, it might even double again in thirty years. None doubted that the world's foodproducing resources were being insufficiently
conserved. But there were differences of opinion on how far improved agricultural and other techniques could increase yields.
It was a matter of time only before the fact
was grasped that some adjustment was necessary between the world's food resources and its population. Once the quantitative aspect was duly appreciated, the qualitative would emerge of its own accord. Then would
the eugenic argument tell. General Osborn concluded his talk by stressing the import-

ance of appropriately timing propaganda. A

publicity campaign in favour of eugenics, if

launched at the wrong season, would en-

counter insurmountable prejudices and do

more harm than good. Further large-scale

sociological investigations, such as that re-

ported by Professor Godfrey Thomson on the

intelligence of eleven-year-old Scottish chil-

dren, were needed. The time for propaganda

would come later.

In the discussion which followed, General

Osborn dealt ably with miscellaneous ques-

tions about the activities to-day of the

American Eugenics Society, population

policies in Japan and Porto Rico, courses in

eugenics at American universities, the place

of birth control in eugenics, the lack of sup-

port for eugenics among geneticists, and the

Eugenics Society of Northern California.

A vote of thanks, proposed by Mr. Eley,

was warmly endorsed by an appreciative and

grateful audience.

C. P. BLACKER.

SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW
JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY
Editorial Board: A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON and MORRIS GINSBERG Assistant Editor: JULIAN BLACKBURN
This Review has now been in existence for over 30 years. It Is the only British quarterly devoted exclusively to sociology and is well known In all countries where sociology Is studied. It publishes
papers read to the Institute and other papers embodying the results of original thought and research
in sociological matters. Population, race, social Institutions, the relations between the social scences, and the sociological aspects of the social services fall within its scope.
Annual Subscription £1 Is. Od., post free: Bach Part 5s. 3d. powt free; War-time issues (3 parts in 1) 10s. 6d. post free.
'Cbe 1e Vlav lbouse press
LE PLAY HOUSE, ALBERT ROAD, MALVERN

PUBLICATIONS OF THE ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY 21 BEDFORD SQUARE, W.C.1

JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL

MAN

ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE

A MONTHLY JOURNAL OF

In Half-Yearly Parts

Fifteen Shillings Each

ANTHROPOLOGICAL SCIENCE

Annual Subscription, Li; monthly numberS 28. net

HUXLEY MEMORIAL LECTURES
(Complete List on Application)

OCCASIONAL PAPERS
(Complete List on Application)

