REVIEWS OF BOOKS

CONTRACEPTION

felt that family limitation had any appeal to the poorer classes.

Fryer, Peter. The Birth Controllers. London, Another good point with this book is that the

1965. Secker and Warburg. Pp. 269+Pp. 115 author has not allowed the large amount of

Notes, Bibliography and Index. Price 42s.

research, which has clearly been necessary, to

dull his sense of humour-which indeed is

A BOOK SUCH AS this has been long awaited, almost Rabelaisian in places.

for it contains accurate and readily available Could such courageous and high-minded

information covering the whole of the history pioneers as Dr. Charles Knowlton, in America,

and development of conception control (in- and our own Francis Place, Dale Owen,

accurately dubbed "birth control" at a special Bradlaugh, Annie Besant and many others have

meeting convened to decide on a telling title for seen this book they would feel that their efforts

the movement) together with an extensive and sufferings have at last received honourable

bibliography, innumerable interesting notes and notice. Let us hope that it is not too late for

lively descriptions of the actors who have played Margaret Sanger-now in her ninth decade-to

their part in this most human of dramas. read of and recall her former tribulations and

Although perhaps "martyrs" would be a more her triumphs and reflect again on the told and

apt word than "actors". Too little do we appre- untold misery and suffering directly attributable

ciate the enormous benefits we all enjoy to-day to the life and work of the misguided and in-

as a result of their sacrifices. Moreover, the time famous Anthony Comstock.

has now come when the printed word need not

C. W. USHER

conform to extreme delicacy of expression, with

a result-particularly in a subject such as thiswhich is especially refreshing. In the past a considerable amount of personal research was needed even to discover, for instance, exactly

Draper, Elizabeth. Birth Control in the Modern World. A Pelican Original. Harmondsworth, 1965. Penguin. Pp. 332. Price 5s.

what it was that John Humphrey Noyes advo- IN THIS BOOK the author discusses all aspects of

cated and practised at his Oneida Community, birth control, stressing its essential and inter-

or just what it was that the Reverend Joseph related importance to society as the humane

Townsend recommended to Jeremy Bentham. solution to population pressures and to indi-

And it will be news to many to learn that Annie vidual happiness and well-being.

Besant ("rhymes with pleasant") gave birth There are four parts. The first, "Introducing

prematurely to her daughter Mabel as the result the Problem", poses the question why control?

of a blow from her clergyman husband while The second, "Reproduction and Control",

she was pleading with him to restrict their comprises three chapters-sex, sexuality and

family-and in this connection it is noteworthy eugenic selection, infertility and associated dis-

that it was the better-off and better educated orders, and, lastly, methods of control which are

classes which first adopted family restriction. categorized as "mystical" and "rational" and

The poorer classes regarded babies as "savings explained in detail and at some length.

banks" because of the fact that they became The book is sub-titled "The Role of the

breadwinners, working in the mills, from the Individual in Population Control" and this is

earliest possible age. Not until the Workshop emphasized in part three which, under the head-

Regulation Act of 1867 did it become illegal to ing "Society and the Individual" discusses inter-

employ a child below the age of eight, and from actions, education and attitudes both of religions

eight to thirteen they were only allowed to work and of states-"the two great authoritative in-

half time. Then the Education Acts of 1870 and fluences in birth control". The fourth part,

1876 compelled parents to send their children "Practice and Prospects", includes a description

to school between the ages of five and fourteen of the search for new methods and an assessment

and no employment was allowed under the age of the extent to which contraception is used.

of ten. It was not until these Acts began to be The population problem is discussed and the

35

