Darwinian Evolution of Mutations.
By R. A. FlqsTI:lt, M.A.
Dulring the second half of the ninetecnth century the Darwinian theory of the gradual evolution of all living forms bv the agency of Natural Selection, slowly won its way to acceptance, first bv men ofscience, especiallv breeders and geologists, and finally by the whole
body of educated opinion. It is not here the place to survey the full
extent of this revolution in human thought: it is enough that to tboughtful minds it dominated the outlook upon the historv and destiny of the human race, and gave birth at the hands of Francis Galton to the Science. or rather the philosophy of Eugenics. But, during the present century Darwin's views have been exposed to criticism in detail and in gross, from the two classes of stuidents. the breeders anld the Palacontologists by whom it was first most readily received. It is the purpose of the present note to examine 'Very briefly the cauises of this clhange of attitutde, and to clear away certain inisuinderstand ings, which spiing chiefly fronm changes in the use of words, which have taken place during
the past half centurv. In the first flace the discovery of Alendelism had made us familiar
with the fact that obvious and easilv distinguished differences* in animals and plants are somnetimes due to a single heritable factor, and some Mendelians have in consequence taken offence at the gradLual and cumulative character which Darwin assigned to evoluLtion. On the other hiand certain palaeontologists to whom the gradual and progressive character of the evolujtion of lossil remains is becoming more and more evident, feel that we have here something which the geneticist cannot explain, and consequently fall back upon Lamarck's suggestion of the inheritance of acouired characters. or upon the mystic word "orth,ogenesis. Others again. impressed by the genetic constarncy in puire line breeding, have somewhat rashly insisted that genuine mtutations never occur. These different views, though proper to puit forward for discussion among men of science. exert a bewildering effect upon the
general puiblic, who tend to lose their belief that science has anything to teach them about the historv and the destiny of their race.
Of the facts unknown to Darwin and his contemporaries we have to take two into consideration. In the first place Mendelism shows not only that obvioIus and easily distinguished differences may be duie to single factors, but that the ordi iary differences between parents and offspring, or between children of the same )arentage, mav be, and probablv are for the most l)art, due to tle segregation of Mendelian genes, and not, as Darwin seenis to have thougaht, largely to new and(l arbitrary mutations of a heritable nature. What the older ev olttionists took to be for the most part new heritable differences, the Mendelian interprets as, for the most part, old heritable differences, newly arranged accord-

82 IMT-GFNICS RICVIEW.

ing to the Mendelian svstem. In the second place puire line experiment

have shown that in genetically strains, the appearance of entirely new

genes is of relatively rare occurrence. It is not usuallv understood
that these two new fa-ets arc logically connected: for, once the Mendelian

view is accepted that genes do not blend, btut segregate intact, it is

clear that if in every generation new genes are introduced, the vari-

ability parents

owfertehetospbelcieensd

will increase withouit limit. If the genes in the offsprina, continual niew mutations

of the would

be necessarv to maintain the variability; but as under the Mendelian svstem of segregation there is no tendency for the variability to dimin-

ish, tend

etxocedpitsaipnpesaor,fawr easmbuystthneotgraasdsuiuamleatchtaitoninofa

selection certain state of natutre,

genes where

the variability is approximatelv constant, new Mendelian alterations

are introduced into the currency of the stock, more rapidly than this

upl-ongradual elimination takes place. The fundamental facts which Darwin grounded his theory are

more firmly established than ever: the universal tendency of animals

and plants to breed up to the limits of subsistence has never been seri-

oheursiltyabqlueesdtiifofenreedn;cesthehasexbiseteenncceonisnistweinltdlyanvedridfoilemdi;estthiecatiendcidreacnecse

of of

natural selection and the actual modirication of types has been proved

by many careful investigations. Nevertheless owing to the changes

which
thouLgh

have
thev

taken were

place in the
otit of date

use if

of words, manv would feel almost as
they styled themselves Darwinians.

This change in terminology is principally due to the far reaching effects

of the factorial system on our ideas of the constitution of living things.

There is no need here to discuss the proper use ofnmodern terms; for the

p)resentpurposes of the

note. it will he sufficient to say that we shall

speak of a species as differing in any Mendelian factor, when two or

mspoercieesa;lltehlaotmoervperhys

of that factor individual of

are the

to be found
species muist

in individuals of the
belong, in respect of

tfhoirsnmfeadctboyr.

to one or other of the homnozvgous and
combining like or unlike alleloinorphs,

heterozygrolus types
that the word gene

will be used for the material basis of any allelomorph, and the word
loatw for the material basis of a factor: so that we may speak ofoune gene
supplanting another in the same locus as one allelomorph replaces
another of the same factor. On the factorial svstemn, then, anindiv id-

ual is specified, if, for everv factor concerned, we assign it to one- or other of the homozvgous and heterozygotus types: in the simplest case,

when the factor is dimorphic, there beina only two homozygouis and

one heterozygous types. Any organ or trait of the individual will

usually be influenced by many factors, so that the selection of any one

twrhaiicth

will influience
effect that

the proportions of the allelomorphs of trait. Since in nature many traits

all the factors are, or more

corrcctlv
selection

the wl-ole
within any

conmplex of
species will

traits is, subject to selection. natural necessarilv be gradtuallv increasing the

proportions alternatives,

of so

some
that a

allelonmorphs, and
gradual progress of

diminishing those of their the whole speeific groupmnusit

take place on the whole in the direction ofimproved adaptation to those

needs which dominate selection.
The action of selection upon such a species will be exactly what the

DARWINIAN EVOLUTION OF MUTATIONS.

83

Darwinian woiil l'anticipate, with the theoretical reservation that in

the ab3ence of anv muitations, progress must sooner or later cease; for the

number of possible, types formed by combining all the possible allelo-

morplis of all the factors present, thoughl inconeeivably great, is still

finite. Of these types onc is presuMablv the best adapted to the

selecting environment, and when that type is attained improvement

ceases. Of course the best possible combination of factors mav not,

when selection commences, exist in a popiulation of many inillions;

thousands of generations of severe selection may be needed to bring it

into existence, and establish it as the dominanit tvype; it is truie also that

in the absence of new genes, the average value of any trait, such as

human statuire, might be changed to a value far outside the existing

range of variation, nerely by selection. Still it must be admitted

that in the absence of miitation the inivariability of the selected species

wouild be p)rogressively diminished, and will finallv vanish, so bringing

evolutionary progiress to an end.

Bit mod.ern work. especially that of American work-ers on

Drosiphpila shows conclusivelv that mutations, though infre(1tent, do in

fact occur; and it is worth while to observe exactly what bearing this

fact haas upon the Darwinian theory of ev%olution.

If we suppose then that a mtitation has occurred. and an entirely

new gene is )resent in a singqle individual of popuflation eonsisting of

some thousands of nmillions, the history of its suirvival nmay be broadly

divided into two periods. Tn the first period its suirvival or extinction

is due mainlv to chance; in the second period mainly to the general

advantage or disadvantagfle in the struiggle for existence which the ne.w

allelonmorph confers, on the average andl in combination with the

existing currency of genetic types, as compared with the alternative

allelomorph which it displaces.

In consideration of the first stage we may suppose that the chance of

any aene of one individual aplpearing i,n, , 2, 3,

individuals

individuals in the second generation, to be Pv Pi. P2, p3,

etc.. such that pv + PI + p2 + . . .1. These fractions will depend

on the stage in the life history of the individual which we pick out for

consideration: for the adult reproductive stage of nmanv )lants and

animals, the series will be venr similar to the Poisson series.

If we construct a function f (n) = fv + p, n + pz n +

then the chance of any one gene being represented in the second filial

gener:ation by 0, 1 ,2,3. -- individualb will be fouin l by substituting

f (f(x) ) for f(x).

This nietho(d eniables uis to cornmTute the chance that the gene will

not have become extinict in any nuniber of generations; assuminig the

Poisson series the chance of survival for n generations is nearly 2/n;

while if if dto sarvi.e the averaae number of individuals affected will be

In.
if so.

thus rouahly one mutation in 50 will survive it will on the average be represented in .50

100 gelkerations, and individuials. These

results are work-ed out for a population stationary in nunmber.

Very disadvantageous genes, such as dominant lethals, will of

course be cut ort at once, btut for those which are only of moderate

advantage or disadvantage. the above may be taken to represent the

-first stage in survival, which is principally governed by chance. The

84 EUGENICS REVIEWN.
second stage commences withl the new gene established in a fairly large grourn of individutals, of varying gcenetic constitbtion, so that a fair number of new genetic combinations are being tested simultaneously. If those individuals whichl contain the new genie are fouind on ths average of the chanees of life, and on the average or the genetic natulres with which it is eombined. to he at a disadv,antage in the struggle for existence. then tlhe number of the mutant lorm will gra(lually diminish with large fluctiations due to chance; in thlis way the disadvantageous genie will always be kept ;ufficiently rare to be in danger of extinction, andl tholugih the numnber bearing it mav repeatedly be reduced \ery low without actuial cxtinction, vet sooner or later fortune will fail it, and it will (lisappear from the race. On the other hand the gene which is found to confer a slitght axverage benefit on the individuals bearing it, will tend to increase in numbers somewhat niore rapidly than its less favourable allelomorph. EIven if the average advantage be oniv of the order of 1 % in a getnerationi. itwill gradually sprea(d through the population
At first tlhe fluetuiations froni year to year will be large; so that when 100 individlals are affected the averaoe increase will be one in a generation with a standard dev-iation of 10. Buit wlmer. the numniber of affected individuals is larg,er the increase takes place wvith greater and
greater regularity; when the number of the new type has reached 1,000,000, each generation will bring an inierease of 10.000 with a
standard deviation of 1 ,000. At this point the sprea(d of the favouired gene takes place with calculable regularity. Finally when nearly the whole population is affected, its less favourable alleloinorph becomes sufficiently rare for its survival or extitnction to be at the caprice of
fortune. If we have riahtly described the manner in which a new mutation
is incorporated into thle general stock ol the hereditary cualities of a species. and the mainner in which the \ariabilitv of the species is maintained in spite of the occasional e\tiueItion ot genes b-y selthet ion, we are in a position to see howv Treat an advanitaae it is to a species to ha\e adopted mlethlods of sextual reproduction with inheritance on the Mendelian s\vstent. For muLtation- is neessarikv a leap in the dark: the chlances of fail nre is far greater than those of success, especially when the effect of the mutation is largre. hlencec thlere is a irreat (leal to be aTainedl if it be
possille to maititaiii tlhe variability of the specieswvith anmin imi-num of
mutations :-that is to sav witlh the greatest stability of the reproduictive processes. Now in a population differing in a grreat nmany Mendelian factors, as all sexxual populations are, foutind in natuLe to do,
a single muitation nmav enable thousands of new genetic combinlatioins to be tested, and if any of these shouild happen to he very a(dvantageous, it will by selection becomie th-ie predomninant type. It cannot be denied that n-manv groups of animals and plants appear to carrv oni successfully bv asexual methods of reproduiction, but the advantage of the Mendelian inheritance of sexually reproductive organisms, especially when complex adaptations have to be made to a slowly changing environment, is
sufficiently manifest.
Feb. 2nd, i191.

