RECEPTION AT HEADQUARTERS OF THE
SOCIETY

A LARGE gathering of Fellows, Mem- his work. If the Eugenics Society would care
bers and their guests attended the to keep it as a small memento ofthisoccasion,

reception that was held by the I shall be glad to present it to the library.

Eugenics Society on November 2ist, both to Indeed it might be worth while to get per-

inaugurate the new premises at Eccleston misson to rept it, especially in view of this

Square and to commemorate the fiftieth endorsement of its contents by Galton him-

anniversary of the first use by Galton of the self, or to induce someone to write another

word " eugenics." The excellence of the work on the same lines.

attendance was due in great measure to the My acquaintance and correspondence with

desire of Fellows and Members to do honour Galton extended over a period of many

to Major Leonard Darwin, to whose activities years, though there were long gaps in this

and guidance the Society is so deeply in- intercourse. Indeed, all the letters received

debted; and the occasion was made me- by me from him are contained in this small

morable for the audience thatfilledto capacity packet, which I should like now to hand over

the spacious room that now houses the to my friend Professor R. A. Fisher in order

Society's library by the address-reproduced that he may, if he sees fit, preserve them at

in full below-which he delivered in person. the Galton Laboratory. In doing so I must

The President of the Society, Sir Humphry be allowed to congratulate him heartily on

Rolleston, received the guests and later his appointment to the Galton Chair of

occupied the chair.

Eugenics, an appointment which, I am sure,

Major Darwin said:

augurs so well for the continued progress of

We meet here to-day to celebrate the our science. fiftieth anmiversary of the birth of the Naturally my correspondence with Galton word " Eugenics," and it has been sug- throws but little light on his scientific views. gested that my part in the proceedings I was, however, myself surprised to find that should be to recall some personal memones in 1898 I had ventured to make a " very just of its sole parent, Sir Francis Galton. criticism" on his law of ancestral descent, This is no easy task on many accounts, which he characteristically advised me to
one of them being how to avoid intruding pubish, advice which, considering my then my own personality too much. Then imperfect klowledge of the subject, I wisely again, almost everything which could be refrained from following. In i9io, when said on this subject is to be found in the commenting on the first address on eugenics monumental life by Professor Karl Pearson, which I ever gave, he wrote that differential

for whom Galton had both a keen admira±ion fertility was to his mind the most important and strong affection. In this connection I of all factors in eugenics, a statement which should like to mention the excTellent little I should like even now to hear continually sketch of Galton's opinons whiclr I hold shouted from the house-tops.

in my hand, a work translated 'trom the Galton was unquestionably a great man of

German and privately printed at the instance science, a fact which will become more and

of his niece, Mrs. Ellis. This copy was sent by more apparent as time goes on. But in order

Galton to my eldest brother with a note, to promote racial progress, even if the

now pasted in it, in which he stated that it scientific foundations of eugenics were per-

was so " over-appreciative " that he was fectly laid, something more than correct

"timid about sending it," and that its merit theoretical knowledge would be required;

in his eyes lay " in justly pointing the unity for we shall always find that the greatest

of purpose in a diversity of work"; that is, of obstacle in our path of progress is that most

255

256 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

unguidable material, human beings in the he suffered from one material disadvantage

mass. In such a campaign, Galton had many namely deafness, which he bore very

advantages, not least amongst them being, patiently. As regards one ear he attributed

as his letters to me indicate, a keen sense of this ailment in part at all events to his treat-

humour. Indeed, an amused smile, combined ment by an aurist who was very soon after-

with a look of keen intelligence, is the wards certified as insane. "You have a

expression on his face which is indelibly tumour m your ear; everybody has one;

stamped on my memory. He had travelled the Queen has one, id this aurist, and at

much, and I was pleased to be reminded by once proceeded to pierce the drum of his

his letters that when I was President of the ear with a pen-knife. The eugenist may

Royal Geogaphical Society, we paid him perhaps quote this imcident as an example of

the compliment of nominating him a Vice- the dangers to which we are exposed in

President of the Geographical Club; that is, consequence of the harmful hereditary quali-

of the body which was the parent of that ties of those with whom we necessarily come

society. He was a keenly sympathetic friend, in contact!

and when in 1892 I was standing for the I have felt it a plnt task thus to speak

Lichfield Div'ision, he wrote to say " how of one Irespected so highly; but to show

delighted Dr. Erasmus Darwin would have that I am holding back none of my thoughts,

been if his prescient eye had foreseen" my I should perhaps add that it is concerning

candidature for the city where he lived, at some of his proposals in regard to the

the same time reminding me that I should practical applications of his theories that I

find a medallion of bim in the Cathedral, he believe I see certain weaknesses. I certainly

being our mutual ancestor. Galton subse- concur with this great teacher in believing

quently sent me some hints for my speeches. that when once an idea is widely held with

Then again, a happy married life is a great religious fervour, its effects may be immense.

asset for any man, and that was certainly his To illustrate where my doubts come in I will

lot. He wrote to me in 1897 from abroad, a only allude to his statement that he looked

few hours after his wife had died, to say that " forward to a suitable authority issuing

he should go back to his " desolate home at Eugenic Certificates to candidates " applying

least for a while." All the many happy for them.* The effects of such a scheme, and

memories connected with that home, how- I should perhaps add of others recently

ever, led him to remain there for the remain- proposed by Eugenists whom I highlyrespect,

ing twelve years of his life; that is, in the would be in my opinion to lower the fertility

house in Rutland Gate on which is now of the rejected to an inappreciable extent,

placed a tablet to his memory. And it is not whilstraising the birth rateof the selected but

without significance as to his character that very little if at all; and, having regard to

the first person to move in regard to the erec- the comparatively small numbers probably

tion of that tablet was his butler and friend, selected, to the effect of the regression to the

Gifi, a familiar figure to all who knew mean in the next generation, to the impossi-

Galton at home. He wrote to me more than bility of keeping such a group as a separate

once in his eighty-eighth year, declaring not caste for many generations, and to the

many months before his death that he did swamping effects of interbreeding, it seems

not feel his " faculties to wane distinctly," probable that in the end a negligible effect

though he tired very quickly. He was even on the racial qualities of the nation would

then writing to Nature in order to prove thus be produced. The great labour involved

that it is possible to" convey a very respect- would, in fact, be better bestowed in other

able profile likeness" by telegraphing four directions. To win in our struggle against

groups of five letters. To the end he was racial decay we must actually reverse the

trying to benefit his fellow creatures in ways

both great and small.

During all my acquaintance with Galton

* Sociological Papers. I905, II, p. 17.

RECEPTION AT HEADQUARTERS OF THE SOCIETY

257

differential birth rate, and to do this our net C an exact knowledge of the true principles

must indeed be very widely spread.

of heredity would hardly help us " in solving

In his Memories Galton declared that the the main practical problems before us.*

publication of the Origin of Species in 1859 Neither breeders like Twitchin, nor Nature

"made a marked epoch" in his " mental herself, have acted as if under the influence

development"*; for the idea of natural of a klowledge of the laws of animal genetics;

selection brought before his mmd the possi- and yet breeders have produced pugs and

bility of those new methods of racial advance greyhounds out of some unknown wild

to which twenty-four years afterwards he ancestors, whilst the action of Nature has

gave the name of eugenics. Nature's method resulted in the evolution of man from some

of promoting progress has been to throw lowly organism. What is now most wanted

all the organisms committed to her charge from science is that she should demonstrate

almost haphazard into the different environ- that a comparatively wide and rapid advance

ments available for them, and afterwards to in nearly all human qualities is now at all

eliminate all failures without, as it were, evenits a possibility, whilst if, as I believe,

paying the slightest attention to any excuses that which is now actually taling place is a

that might be offered on the ground of ill slow and invisible deterioration in our race,

luck. Science aims at avoiding all errors; she should make this truth widely known.

but we should learn from Nature that we are What is wanted from practical eugenists is

fully justified, not only in running consider- that they should make it universally felt

able risks but also in paying " scant regard " with religious zeal that, whilst parenthood

to the good of the individual when a great is often undesirable and somatimes a grave

issue, like that of the fate of our race, is at crime against posterity, all of good stock

stake. Our aim should no doubt always be to who unduly limit the size of their families are

" replace Natural Selection by other pro- either lanentably ignorant or else no true

cesses that are more merciful and not less patriots. We must have men of science and

effective,"t to quote some of Galton's last men of affairs pulling together side by side

written and most pregnant words conceming in our team if we are to win in our hard

Eugenics.

struggle to save our civilization from decay;

Before concluding may I add that there is and, this being our aim, we must strive to

another name besides that of Francis Galton advance along that path which was clearly

which certainly ought to be recalled on this surveyed for the first time by Francis Galton

occasion; for if we had not received a very now more than fifty years ago.

large bequest from Henry Twitchin we Mrs. Neville Rolfe recalled the early

should not have been meeting here to-night. days of the Society and indicated the

Without any aid from science he inde- encouragement and help that had been

pendently hit on the idea of eugenics; for given to the initiating group by Sir

it was his knowledge of the good results Francis Galton. A special effort was

obtained in Australia by care in the breeding made during this period to bring the

of animals which convinced him that we word " eugenics " into current use. A

ought at once to begin to try to improve the number of prominent journalists of the day

breed of man. His money was left to the gave valued assistance, particularly Mr.

Eugenic Education Society in the hope that Arnold White and Mr. Knox. The emphaesi

progress might be made without delay by laid by Sir Francis Galton on the need of

means of widespread public appeals; and securing lay public opinon in support of the

all who follow him in advocating an imme- fundcamental idea and ideal of eugenics had

diate forward policy in order to promote a been embodied by him in the Foreword he

" low amelioration of the human breed" wrote to the original EUGENICS REVIEW.

may fairly quote Galton's statement that "There are [he said] two sorts of workers in

* Memones of My Life. p. 287. tlbid.. p. 323.

* Life of Gallox. Pearson IIIa. p. 221.

258 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

every drtment of kmowledge-those who cerned. Now and again the Sixteen Quarter.

establish a firm foundation, and those who ings of a given individual we worked out,

build upon the foidation so established but always with a view to proving an

The foundation of Eugenics is, in some unblemished 'noble' descent; never for

measure, laid by applying a mathematico- biological purposes. Galton's methods were

statistical treatment to large collections of directed entirely to the latter. Under the

facts, and this, like engineerng deep down old system, for example, the descent in the

in boggy soil, affords little outward evidence direct male line of the late Lord Salisbury

of its bulk and importance. The super- from Lord Burleigh was regarded as of special

structure requires for its success the co- import, under the Galtonian system it had

operation of many minds of a somewhat no significance, as Burleigh was only one of

different order, filled with imagination and 512 ancestors in that degr. On the other

enthusiasm; it does not require technical hand the fact that Salisbury's mother came

knowledge as to the nature of the foundation of a successful commercial family, intro-

work. So a navigator, in order to find his ducing an entirely fresh element, was of

position at sea, is dependent on the Tables great importance in considering that Prime

calculated for him and printed in the Minister's character and ability.

Nautical Almanack or elsewhere. But he The new orientation given by Galton to

may safely use these Tables without having genealogical studies was reflected also i

the slightest acqntance with the methods biographical studies, but it had to be

by which they were constructed."* The admitted that progress in both directions

speaker paid a tribute to the many voluntary was somewhat slow. The old fashion in

workers who for the first five years of the biographies of dismissing ancestors as of no

Society's life carried on all its activities, account had, however, largely died out.

particularly Lady Chambers, Mrs. Heath, Lord Zetland, who in his biography of Lord

Miss Henderson, Miss E. Corry, Miss Sellar, Curzon admitted the existence of parents

and Miss Attwood and last but not least Dr. but went no further, was an exception at the

Edgar Shuster, who had acted for several present time. The model biography in this

years as joint Honorary Secretary and respect was most certainly Mr. Garvin's

Editor of the REvIEw.

Life of Joseph Chamberlain, where a full

Mr. W. T. J. Gun spoke on the influence of account of ancestry was given in the opening

Sir Francis Galton upon genealogical and chapter. This, at least, was directly due to

biographical studies. Galton's Hereditary Galton's influence, and it was to be hoped

Genius, published in 1869, was unquestion- that the example would be widely followed.

ably the first introduction of biology into Lord Horder paid his tribute to Sir

genealogy, the study of which latter had Francis Galton, following two previous

hitherto proceeded entirely on historical and speakers. He also bore testimony to the

traditional lines. It was, in fact, an epoch- invaluable work of a foundation Idnd done

making book, as epoch-making, though of by those speakers themselves, and their co-

course on A smaller scale, as those of the workers. He congratulated the Society upon

author's cou, Charles Darwin.

its new premises. He also spoke of the very

The older genealogists devoted their atten- useful labours of Dr. Blacker and of Mr.

tion for the most part to direct male descents, Clinton Chance, the former as General

and female lines were rarely considered Secretary and the latter as the friendly

except where the inheritances of landed guide of the Society in the direction of its

estates and occasionally of titles were con- finances. He looked forward to renewed

activity on the part of the Society, and a

stimulation of the eugenics-sense in this

* Foreword in EUGENICS REvIEW, I908.

country.

3ugmiu Bww, VVoOlL. , No. .

