PRACTICAL EUGENICS

Aims and Methods of the American Eugenics Society*

I. General Philosophy

In the light of such criteria of human

HE ideal of democracy requires free-
dom for normal parents to decide how .many children the mother will attempt
to bear and both will accept responsibility for rearing. The conditions of society as a whole may greatly affect the freedom of decision of parents as to the size of their family. Eugenists therefore believe that the good social order must provide such conditions and motivations that parents of sound heredity will of their own volition have more children than at present, whereas parents of inferior heredity will have fewer.
The American Eugenics Society holds that
good heredity is indicated by the personal

qualities, the present social order seems seriously deficient so far as the distribution of births is concerned. Indeed, some people
believe that a eugenic social order is impossible under our present economic system. Others believe that economic systems differing as widely as communism and capitalism may be either dysgenic or eugenic, according to their attitude toward family life and children. The programme here set forth has been formulated with reference to the
present economic and social conditions in
the United States. It deals with modifications of these conditions to promote eugenic aims in harmony with democratic ideals.

qualities of the individual and of his home far more than by the class of society in which he is found. Desirable qualities are evidenced by the character of the home environment which parents provide for their children, by the personal interests and attainments of the parents, by their services to the community and by their capacity for living happily. These criteria provide an approximate measure of an individual's hereditary endowment when, and only when, they are used in comparing individuals who have enjoyed essentially the same environmental
opportunities. For the present, while biolo-
gists and psychologists are discovering more
exact methods of measurement, such criteria constitute a practical means of comparing the eugenic value of different individuals. They form a much needed supplement to the imperfect biological methods thus far available. They have the added advantage that changes in the distribution of births, if made in accordance with these criteria, would make for larger families in the homes which provide the best environment for the nurture of children in every class of society and in every racial and regional group.
* Published by the American Eugenics Society, 50
West 5oth Street, New York, N.Y., as a pamphlet, pnce io cents per copy.

2. Implementing Eugenic Ideals through Existing Social Activities
The major purpose of the American Eugenics Society is to develop to their utmost all those influences which may help to bring about a more eugenic distribution of births. Existing social institutions provide the principal means of accomplishing this purpose. Along with their other purposes, social institutions must be shaped to strengthen those ideals of family life which make for larger families among persons of high quality and smaller families among less promising parents. The American Eugenics Society therefore seeks to develop the eugenic implications of every kind of social effort. It seeks co-operation with leaders in education, medicine, including public health and hygiene, religion, recreation, housing, rural life, social work, and other fields of
social activity. In the present publication special consideration will be given to education, because of its relation to all other fields. The others will be considered in later publications.
The eugenic implications of every kind of social effort must be fully developed in order to establish physical and social conditions under which a fair proportion of superior

187

i88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

people in each generation will not only desire usual one, it will be the purpose of eugenics

to have larger families, but will be able to to so encourage child-bearing so as to intro-

have them without undue sacrifice.

duce a substantial proportion of large fami-

lies. It will not be easy to do this. When a

3. The Modification of the Small Family certain customary way of life has become

System

established in any community it is difficult

Among people with moderate incomea in for individuals to depart from it. It is hard

our cities, families no larger than one, two, to rear five or six children when housing and

or three children are the almost universal other facilities are not readily available for

rule. The proportion of parents with such such large families, and when, as among city

small families is increasing rapidly, and people to-day, the expense of so many

the decline in the proportion of large fami- children forces a reduction in the level of

lies is now reaching groups and regions livng of the whole family. To increase the

where large families have hitherto been the proportion of large families will require an

rule. There are many reasons outside of attack on many fronts, including such

eugenics which might make a further reduc- diverse aspects as economic security on the

tion in births desirable in some parts of the one hand and early emotional conditioning

United States. For example, the high birth- to high family ideals on the other hand.

rates which still prevail in some of our rural In rural districts, or other communities

sections make for difficult problems of migra- where the small family ideal is not generally

tion and social readjustment. At the same accepted, eugenic emphasis will be along

time, sound eugenic policy requires an equal different lines. It is important to distin-

availability of contraception to all portions guish between rural districts, where the pro-

of the population. To offset the reduction portion of large families remains high, and

in births which will result from the further urbanised communities where the small

spread of birth-control, and in order to de- family is almost universal. Since more than

velop a eugenic structure of society, the half of our people live in cities now, measures

economic conditions which now make for relating to the urban group call for especial

smaller families must be modified by giving emphasis in the programme of eugenics.

to normal parents everywhere increased free- The prospect of modifying the small

dom to have larger families if they so desire. family practice is greatly improved because

Under a sound eugenic regime every com- the eugenic motive is reinforced by other

munity would show wide variations in size considerations. The women of child-bearing

of family. The present tendency toward age in the United States are to-day not hav-

establishing the family of one to three ing enough girl babies to replace themselves,

children as the only type is incompatible and their rate of reproduction seems to be

with eugenics. The essence of eugenics is that still rapidly declining. When this shortage

better-than-average stocks should be on the of births is brought home to the American

increase. Couples who have only one or two people by an actual decline in numbers, there

children are not replacing themselves under is likely to be a reaction against the small

present conditions of mortality, sterility, and family system such as is now occurring in

celibacy. Those who have three children England, Belgium, Germany, and Sweden.

are barely holding their own. Only those The public may demand large families in-

with four or more children are really in- discriminately in order to stem the decline

creasing their stock. Since many persons in population. Before this stage is reached

must for one reason or another have few public opinion must be educated to demand

children, or none, a substantial proportion that the large families be born to couples with

of families with four or five, or more children a desirable biological inheritance. For-

among the superior stocks is essential if tunately there will be an intervening period

eugenic advance is to take place. Hence, during which sound eugenic policies can be

wherever the small family is found to be the developed and the public can be educated.

PRACTICAL EUGENICS

I89

4. The Development of Public Opinion

schools as to lead to a sound biological view-

The education of leaders of public opinion point. Successful demonstrations along this

is the first step toward the practical realisa- line have already been carried out through

tion of eugenic aims. The leaders must be the introduction of appropriate nature study

drawn from many fields, such as medicine, courses in the third and fourth grades. At

nursing, education, religion, the different later levels, more mature material may be

branches of the social sciences, psychology, introduced leading not only toward more

business, industry, and public affairs. Edu- adequate understanding of biological and

cation as to the ways in which their own work social processes, but also toward an apprecia-

may lead to a more eugenic distribution of tion of the complementary roles of heredity

births will enlarge their view as to the and environment in the development of

value of the other objectives they are already human traits and capacities. The interest

striving for. At the same time, contact with of high school students in the social implica-

such leaders will give eugenics new insight tions of population study indicates the desir-

into the practical application of a eugenic ability of further use of materials from this

philosophy.

field during the impressionable adolescent

The American Eugenics Society will there- years.

fore devote special attention to the education It may be fairly insisted that any pro-

of leaders of public opinion and social activi- gramme of education on the college level can

ties, at the same time attempting to learn not be considered properly balanced that

from them how eugenics can best be recon- does not include serious work in the biological

ciled with other social needs. This part of and social sciences. On this level, the presen-

the Society's programme calls for a continu- tation of eugenics should be made through

ing series of conferences in many fields, and the co-operation of the biological and social

with many groups. It calls for discovery and science faculties, if possible. Where this is

publication of new facts bearing upon the not possible, it is important that the in-

science and practice of eugenics through structors responsible for developing such

periodicals and newspapers. It should aim courses be themselves properly grounded and

to develop eugenic applications, and at in touch with current developments in these

the same time to create a public opinion fields. The eagerness with which college

sufficiently discriminating to approve of courses on marriage and the family are

large families of good quality and discourage chosen in the few institutions where they are

large families of low quality, in whatever now offered indicates the growing desire of

class of society either may be found.

American youth for more adequate know-

ledge of the conditions of harmonious mar-

5. Eugenics Education

ried life and healthy parenthood.

Eugenics education may be thought of as Physical and mental preparation for

having two main objectives: (I) the develop- parenthood is even more important than for-

ment of an understanding of the principles mal eugenic education. This too must be

of heredity to be followed by more specific effected in many ways and at many different

studies of the theoretical and practical aspects levels. Parents as well as teachers must con-

of eugenics, and (2) the intellectual, emo- stantly bear in mind the value of emotional

tional, and physical development of indivi- experience in developing permanent atti-

duals for the fulfilment of their roles as tudes. In this sense, sound, indirect eugenic

participants in family life, and especially education begins in the home, while children

as parents. To attain these objectives would are still very young. As they grow older, the

require a reorientation of the whole educa- same indirect methods will unconsciously

tional process with reference to eugenic give to young people a deep realization of

values.

the value and responsibilities of parenthood.

The simpler aspects of biology and genetics Recent attempts to include in college

may be so effectively presented in elementary courses materials relating to personality

IQO THE EUGENICS REVIEW

development and family life may well be desire them, means must be found for

encouraged because of their indirect eugenic diminishing the present heavy expense of

significance.

large families. At the same time an extension

It is also important that the subject of of knowledge of safe and trustworthy

genetics and eugenics be continued in many methods of voluntary control of the repro-

of the professional schools. They should ductive process will give all parents freedom

there be developed in relation to the special to restrict the size of their families if they

problems that must be met by doctors, want to. Such twofold freedom is necessary,

engineers, teachers, social workers, and if eugenic ideals are to become permanently

other professional groups. Moreover, the effective.

work of the schools should be supplemented Measures for redistributing the expense of

by a continuous campaign of education to rearing children depend partly upon indivi-

keep the public informed as to population dual initiative, and partly upon co-operative

trends, advances in the science of genetics, effort or governmental action. Individual

understanding of the roles of heredity and initiative can find many ways to diminish

environment, and advancement of eugenic the economic burden of young married

measures. Much of this education need not couples, once the need is recognized. The

carry any explicit reference to eugenics; tradition that young people should fend for

but it is also desirable that a constructive themselves, without help from their parent,

appreciation of the eugenic ideal as such is eugenically suicidal, because it tends to

be cultivated in the public mind. It is also delay childbearing among many of the most

possible that the parent education move- competent couples. It would perhaps be

ment, somewhat re-oriented in relation to better to follow the tradition of older coun-

population trends and other current social tries, where parents expect to help their

situations, may play an increasingly large children through the early years of marriage.

role in the field of adult education.

Insurance can be used to provide for future

The American Eugenics Society does not children and the expense of their education.

at the present time have facilities for exten- The time-honoured virtue of thrift finds

sive educational undertakings on its own special application in preparation for parent-

account. Much might be accomplished hood. Most important of all, perhaps, is the

through more extensive, sound educational help that should be given by family groups;

work directly concerned with eugenics, if not only by grandparents, but even by

facilities permitted. Even so, the most uncles, aunts, and other relatives who are

important phase of the work of the Society not themselves burdened by children. Gifts

in this connection would still be that of of this sort, within moderate limits, should

working with leaders in various lines of be exempt from taxation. Such exemption

education in orienting their efforts so as to would itself help to focus attention upon a

produce the maximum eugenic effect. Much new ideal of responsibility for the life of the

can be done and is already being done along family.

this line at the present time.

Society itself, especially in the cities, is

already beginning to take a larger share in

6. Economic Measures

the cost of educating and rearing children. This is being done either by the State or by

The programme thus far outlined is con- co-operative effort, and in many ways. Some

cerned chiefly with changes in individual of these ways are eugenic; others, such as

motivation and social ideals. Such changes, bonuses for babies, are probably dysgenic

however, will probably not have much per- as now administered. Every means of in-

manent effect unless the rearing of children creasing freedom of parenthood must be care-

can be made less burdensome to parents. fully considered by eugenists. The following

If we are to provide real freedom for all methods are among those which at present

normal parents to have more children if they appear theoretically most promising:

PRACTICAL EUGENICS

Community efforts, such as co-operative nurseries, providing frequent relief and relaxation for mothers: co-operative medical services for families; reduction of medical costs for middle income groups.
Greater assurance of scholarships for intelligent children in large families; a changed basis of scholarships for graduate students and others now often restricted as to marriage.
Tax reduction favouring parents of large families, especially income tax changes whereby exemptions are more closely related to the actual cost of rearing children.
Provision of adequate maternity leave, with salary, for teachers and others employed in public and institutional service.
Family allowances, proportional to level of living and number of children.
Space prevents discussion of these matters in any detail. The interesting experiments wherein European governments are giving subsidies to parents indicate the extent to which political interest is aroused when the decline in births becomes evident. Recent population measures in Europe are concerned with checking the decline, chiefly for political, military or industrial reasons. But eugenists will watch the operation of the measures with keen interest. In Sweden, the extensive report of the Government's Population Commission sought to frame measures which would improve the quality of the population, as well as ultimately check the decline. They recommended the extension of contraceptive services, (instead of their restriction as in Germany,) and payments to parents in kind rather than in cash. Thus Sweden applies its housing subsidies to the equalization of rents for couples with large families, is establishing a country-wide system of day nurseries, and supplies a free noonday meal to children at school. In the United States the family wage scales in effect for years among foreign missionary institutions have produced quite satisfactory results. The extension of the system to the clergy and to the staffs of schools and colleges in the United States has been seriously discussed. In France and Belgium a system of

family wage scales, at first inaugurated by private initiative, has now been made the subject of legislation and appears to be raising the standards of child-care in those countries.
7. Contraception
Voluntary control of reproduction in marriage is the most widely used method of family limitation. It is often decried as the cause of the small family, but it is a method, not a primary cause. Control of reproduction gives parents freedom to decide how many children they will have. If the necessary information is expensive or difficult to obtain, some parents are denied freedom
of choice. Eugenics, therefore, requires a
method by which all potential parents, and especially the less adequate, may learn to limit the size of their families.
Quite apart from eugenics, means of limiting the growth of population are essential to the continuation of an advanced civilization. If our people doubled in number every twenty-five years, as in the eighteenth century, the population would number about 700,000,000 by 2000 A.D. Our standard of living might drop toward that of China. Contraception violates our existing mores less than any other form of population control. Abortion, asceticism, infanticide, have in the past supplemented the effects of famine, disease, or war. Aside from eugenics, the avoidance of these evils furnishes urgent social reasons for the extension of the knowledge of methods of contraception. Outside of eugenics there are also reasons for diminishing the economic burdens of parenthood. For a long time to come social change is more likely to occur in response to immediate needs than in obedience to the far-reaching considerations implied by eugenics. Nevertheless, good sense would dictate that current social changes be developed in a form compatible with eugenic advance.
The American Eugenics Society therefore urges the extension of contraceptive services to married couples everywhere in all income groups. It is important that further attention given to developing safe and inexpensive means of contraception.

192 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

As the economic handicaps of large fami- ity cannot be trusted to refrain voluntarily

lies are reduced, and as knowledge and use from having children. For such people the

of contraceptive methods become increas- only choice is between segregation and

ingly available, parents will be more nearly sterilization. The American Eugenics Society

free to have families of whatever size they believes that in the great majority of cases

choose. With such freedom it will be far sterilization is much to be preferred. There

more possible than now for persons with fine are two chief reasons for this. One is that

qualities to have large families, and easier its cost, on an average, is far less than one

than now for those less well equipped with per cent. of the expense of segregating the

vigour, character, and intelligence to have same people during the period when repro-

small families. In fostering freedom of choice duction is possible. The second is that a

in parenthood, the American Eugenics sterilized defective is much more free than is

Society is attempting to prepare for a wider one who is segregated. He or she can live a

and more permanent application of eugenic normal, useful, self-supporting life to a degree

ideals than is possible when freedom of parent- that is impossible under segregation. Never-

hood is denied to many persons.

theless, the Society also believes that sterili-

zation should not be imposed upon people

8. The Elimination of Hereditary Defects: who oppose it on religious or ethical grounds,

Sterilization

provided the friends or co-religionist of such

Certain types of physical abnormality people furnish the means of effective segre-

that make people's lives unhappy and many gation at their own expense and not at that

types of mental deficiency that are a menace of the general public. Such a measure leaves

to society are undoubtedly hereditary. The no logical ground for opposition to steriliza-

only way to eliminate these defects is through tion laws.

voluntary refusal to have children, or else Sterilization has progressed so far that

through the prevention of reproduction by 29 States now have laws permitting the

means of either sterilization or the segrega- sterilization of mental defectives and of

tion of the sexes. Two great difficulties con- certain mentally diseased wards of the State.

front all of these methods. First, it is diffi- Under these laws, more than 25,ooo persons

cult, and in many cases still impossible, to had been sterilized up to I937, and the

determine positively whether a given defect number per year is steadily increasing.

is hereditary or due to an unfavourable In accordance with this trend, the Ameri-

environment. Second, the inheritance of a can Eugenics Society seeks to promote wiser

defect is often recessive, so that apparently legislation and wider application of steriliza-

normal people may carry defective genes and tion in accordance with constructive eugenic

transmit them to their offspring, although principles.

they themselves show no sign of a defect. Sterilization is being applied more and

Hence even the most drastic programme of more on social rather than specifically eugenic

sterilization, segregation, and voluntary self- grounds. This is desirable because mentally

control cannot eliminate hereditary feeble- deficient or defective parents cannot provide

mindedness and other hereditary defects in a a home environment suitable for rearing

single generation, or even in many genera- children, even in cases where there is no

tions. Nevertheless, the prevention of births certainty that the traits of the parents will be

among certain types of people would sub- passed on to their children through their

stantially reduce the proportion of defectives heredity. Another tendency, which for the

from generation to generation. The cost of present at least seems wise, is to make

such an effort would be far more than offset sterilization purely voluntary, or else depen-

by saving in public expenses for the care of dent upon the consent of legal guardians in

defectives.

the case of persons incompetent to judge for

Among people who are afflicted with defects themselves.

that are a menace to society, the great major- Nebraska and South Dakota provide for

PRACTICAL EUGENICS

State registers of the feeble-minded and pro- who for any reason ought not to have

hibit issuance of a marriage licence to any children.

registered defective except on proof of pre- The American Eugenics Society feels that

vious sterilization. Similar provision is needed the ultimate responsibility for the develop-

everywhere, but to be effective eugenically ment and application of a sound eugenic

it must be accompanied by adequate provi- system of sterilization must lie with the

sion for sterilizing the defectives involved. medical profession, especially with psychia-

Recent laws tend to permit sterilization trists. Under the pressure of recent superb

of any mentally defective or mentally diseased developments in medicine and psychology

person in the entire State. This is in striking the field of heredity has been relatively

contrast to earlier laws, most of which applied neglected. Little attention is paid to human

only to the small number of handicapped genetics even in the best medical schools.

persons who are legally committed to State Naturally, then, the medical profession can

institutions for the insane or feeble-minded. hardly be expected to discharge its full respon-

It is obvious that such a restriction is eugeni- sibility in this important matter until hered-

cally unsound, and that anyone in the State itary relationships are fully studied by all

whose condition requires sterilization should physicians. Hence the American Eugenics

have the privilege of having this operation Society believes that one of its most import-

performed upon them which prevents parent- ant duties is to co-operate with far-sighted

hood without changing the individual's life medical men in making both physicians and

in any other way.

laymen aware of the great responsibility

The spread of voluntary sterilization, even which the medical profession must ultimately

in States with no sterilization laws, has been assume in eliminating inherited mental as

rapid. This is a natural consequence of the well as physical defects.

fact that sterilization is not a punishment

but a protection. Therefore, in the case of 9. Choice of Mates and Marriage

many handicapped persons it is eagerly The eugenic ideal demands a social atti-

sought by themselves or by their relatives. tude such that in choosing their mates young

They know, better than anyone else, the people will be guided not only by obvious

undesirability of childbearing-or of further personal qualities, but by the probable value

childbearing-in their own cases. Many of of their mates as fathers and mothers. One

them could not or should not be committed of the chief reasons for unhappy and dysgenic

to State institutions as insane or feeble- marriages, and for the failure of fine people

minded. Moreover, such State institutions to marry, is lack of opportunities to become

are not properly organized to serve as sufficiently acquainted with eligible partners.

surgical clinics. At present the most impor- The American Eugenics Society therefore en-

tant step toward making sterilization more courages activities and recreations which

widely available and more truly eugenic is enable young people to become acquainted

probably to provide facilities for sterilization with one another. It especially stresses the

of voluntary patients at public expense under importance of contacts which reveal every-

proper safeguards. To this end, every State day conduct and the quality of homes and

should adopt the necessary legislation, author- immediate relatives.

izing hospitals supported by the taxpayers to The American Eugenics Society also be-

accept patients who request to be sterilized. lieves that the quality of our children will be

If this is done under proper restrictions, it improved by changes in our attitude toward

seems probable that during the next genera- marriage itself. Very early marriages are

tion sterilization of this type will increase frequently followed by large families, and are

rapidly. Wider knowledge will not only make especially common among people who give

the public realize that the operation does not their children the poorest heredity and train-

in any way unsex the patient, but also that ing. Hence marriages below the age of i6

it is a highly valuable protection for people should be discouraged by both law and custom.

C

194 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

On the other hand, the postponement of the replacement level. Although the birth-

marriage until after the period of greatest fer- rate of the farm population provides some

tility should also be discouraged. The greater increase of population in prosperous areas

the hereditary endowments of a couple, the where farm work is highly mechanized, it

more advisable it is that they should have chil- reaches far the highest level in areas of very

dren while they are still young and vigorous. limited opportunity. It seems probable that

The American Eugenics Society strives to the difference between the rural and urban

create social and economic conditions which rates will be narrowed during the next few

promote early marriages and early child- decades, and the same may be expected of

bearing among desirable types of young the present differentials between the more

people, and hinder such marriages among less prosperous and the poorest rural areas.

desirable types.

Nevertheless, for a long time to come, the

Advance notice of marriage, now required farm population will remain one of the chief

in a majority of the States, should be obli- sources for the replacement of urban popula-

gatory in all. Publication of intention to wed tion. Thus the quality of the farm population

gives social opinion a chance to form and and of the migrants from the farm is of im-

public authority time to act. Medical examin- mense importance. The city cannot afford to

ation before marriage, such as is now re- neglect the standards of education, training,

quired in many States, is primarily for health and health which prevail on the farm, nor to

protective purposes, but has eugenic value ignore the benefit to be expected if the rural

in so far as diseased persons tend to lack districts from which it receives recruits were

intelligence, self-control, and altruism.

able to maintain high standards in these

The main changes necessary are earlier respects. Only at its peril can the United

marriages among the best educated part of States as a whole neglect the eugenic implica-

the population; more stable marriages and tions of the high rural birth-rate.

fewer broken homes; better matrimonial If the best individual stocks have a ten-

opportunities for educated women. While dency to migrate from the rural areas of high

the marriage rate of such women, particu- birth-rates to the cities where the birth-rate

larly college graduates, has been increasing is low, as appears to be the case in some areas

during recent years, it is still undesirably at least, there will be an inevitable decline

low. The failure of many college women in the quality of our people. If at the same

to marry and have children is due in part to time isolated groups composed of highly

exaggerated ideals of what mates would be deficient stocks with high birth-rates are

desirable, in part to long postponement of allowed to persist in certain rural areas,

marriage, and in part to their entrance into problems of hereditary inadequacy will

occupations where contacts that lead to greatly increase. Thus the eugenic problems

marriage are not easily made. Correction of of rural areas are distinct from those of

these conditions obviously requires changes urbanized communities, even though the

in the education of men as well as women. two are intimately interlocked.

Young women of the finer types must not Although the problem of selection in rural-

merely be prepared for marriage and parent- urban migration has not yet been adequately

hood as well as for careers, but must enjoy studied, it is attracting serious attention,

greatly increased opportunities for normal and more decisive information will doubtless

acquaintance with young men who are soon be available. The most reasonable

equally well prepared.

hypothesis seems to be that when people

Io. Eugenics and Rural Life

migrate from areas of low opportunity, especially during periods of diminishing re-

The I930 Census showed that on farms turns for agriculture, there is likely to be a

there were 6o per cent. more children than kind of self-selection such that those who go

were needed to replace their parents, whereas away are more intelligent and energetic than

in cities the number was substantially below those who stay at home. On the contrary,

PRACTICAL EUGENICS

I95

such selection may be absent or reversed in the case of promising agricultural areas. There is some evidence to this effect from studies already available.
The American Eugenics Society plans to
take an active part in furthering movements designed to raise the social and economic level of farm living, to improve rural education, and to encourage the redistribution of certain parts of the farm population so that they may live in regions of greater oppor-
tunity. The extension of contraceptive facilities in
rural areas is both desirable and inevitable. It is important, however, that such services be made equally available to all elements in the community. This is a matter in which the co-operation of rural health agencies is of prime importance.
Scattered groups of defective families in rural areas present a special and difficult problem. Such groups are often characterized by very rapid natural increase, and constitute " pockets " for the multiplication and spread of deficient stocks. The co-operation of State and local agencies must be sought in meeting the immediate needs of deficient families in such communities, and in restricting their reproduction. Sterilization is especially important in this connection.
II. Imnmigration
Immigration laws must be framed from many points of view, such as the effect of cheap labour on standards of lving and the rate at which persons from different cultural and political backgrounds can be assimilated. The American Eugenics Society, however, maintains that in every case the eugenic requirements should be met. The main requirement is that the United States should not admit immigrants whose hereditary capacities are below our own present average. From the eugenic point of view the policy should be to make country of origin secondary to the quality of the individual. The political advantage of such a policy is obvious for it involves no discrimination against any nationals as such. The practical difficulties are not as great as may appear and could be worked out with experience.

Immigration restrictions should be extended to all territory outside continental United States and Alaska.
I2. War
War is a threat to the hope for orderly eugenic advance. Although public opinion will be swayed largely by other than eugenic motives, the American Eugenics Society will continue to emphasize the dysgenic aspects of war, and the drastic measures which might be necessary to preserve the qualities of our people during a prolonged and devastating conffict. Eugenists will cooperate in every possible way with existing agencies to develop means of preventing war.
I3. Research
The American Eugenics Society is concerned with scientific investigation in two respects. First, it endeavours to foster research by other agencies on all problems of eugenic significance. Second, it has a special responsibility for the study of practical measures which may effect eugenic results.
There is great need of research by psychologists and others on the reasons why families differ in size, and on the effect of physical and cultural environments on sex, marriage, children and family life. There is also need for greatly extended study of the interaction of heredity and environment in the development of human traits. Studies of the origin of groups which at present display outstanding characteristics may become important if critically developed.
The new field of population study has developed important data on differential rates of birth and mortality among groups classified by occupational status, socio-economic class, or regional location. It is essential that such studies be extended to groups classified by socially desirable qualities, such as health, intelligence, and valuable personality traits.
Further research in genetics is immensely important to eugenics. There should be an organized, co-ordinated study of the inheritance of mental deficiency, crippling abnormalities, and pre-disposition to various physical and mental diseases. Of equal, if not

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

more, importance is the study of the inheritance of specific factors favourable to the
development of socially valuable qualities. At present, the genetic quality of many persons can be judged only by empirical
standards based on personal qualities, as described in a preceding section. These standards are sufficient to indicate many changes by which the future genetic capacities of our people could be improved. Equally empirical standards have been employed successfully in the improvement of plants and animals, but more rapid progress was made when the science of plant and animal genetics was highly developed. It is reasonable to suppose that human improvement will follow a similar course.
I4. PracticalApplications: Aims and Methods
The preceding pages make it clear that the objectives of the American Eugenics Society may be grouped under three main heads.
The first is the creation of a public attitude appreciative of eugenics and inclined to put it into practical application. This means education in the broadest sense. It includes a new orientation of leaders in many fields, a widespread change in public opinion, more accurate knowledge of the scientific basis of genetics and heredity, and especially the training of a young generation which will be the first to put eugenic principles into practical use on a large scale.
The second major aim of the American Eugenics Society is to foster well-directed practical attempts toward modifying social and economic practices in such ways as to influence the birth-rate eugenically. This involves a careful study of plans for such purposes, and the dissemination of information as to how various types of plans are working and how they can be improved.
To attain these aims, it is necessary to develop a broader and deeper scientific knowledge, not merely of genetics but of the sociological and psychological principles that control the processes of population renewal. Therefore, the third major objective of the American Eugenics Society is to encourage scientific research along every line that may have bearing on size of family and the kinds

of families in which children are born. Such encouragement necessitates efforts to procure funds and opportunities for persons and organizations that are competent to carry on research. Moreover, the real significance of scientific discoveries must be so publicized as to create a public opinion that will look with favour upon large expenditures for such purposes.
The chief methods by which these three great aims may be turned into realities by the American Eugenics Society are as follows:
i. A strong central office. This should be manned by experts in eugenics, publicity, and the arts of writing and lecturing. Our present central office is already under pressure in carrying out the routine work of keeping up the membership, answering letters and supervising the physical side of conferences and publications. Little or no time is left for the purposes listed below.
2. The building up of a large membership including a great many small givers and a considerable number of large givers. During the past two years the paid-up membership of the Society has more than doubled, but it is still extremely small in proportion to the importance of the subject.
3. The provision to members and others of publications, both periodical and occasional, dealing with special topics and with matters of general interest in either popular or semi-technical style. The unpaid services of the directors and members have been invaluable in this respect, but cannot obviate the need for the services of paid experts. Especially at the present time, the Society should be in a position to publish monographs and pamphlets on such topics as the practical relations of eugenics to recreation, housing, co-operatives, nurseries, and many other subjects.
4. Conferences with leaders in many fields of social activity. Such conferences during the past two years have proved highly stimulating and fruitful.
5. Lectures and organizers who can

PRACTICAL EUGENICS

make contacts with local leaders, stir up local interest, increase the membership and funds of the Society, and help to organize local groups. Thus far, scarcity of funds has prevented work of this kind except very sporadically by volunteers.
6. Agencies with proper financial backing, which will co-operate with other organizations in putting the eugenic ideal into practical effect along lines such as are
suggested by the preceding sections on education, economic measures, contraception, sterilization, marriage, rural life, immigration, war, and research. Interest in the eugenic aspects of all sorts of social
and economic activities is now so great
that very strong committees would volun-
tarily devote much time to these matters, if paid executive secretaries were available for the purpose.

The programme outlined in these pages
cannot be followed arbitrarily, for the American Eugenics Society must take into account its own limitations in funds and personnel. Moreover, a sound eugenic movement will be characterized not only by consistency of purpose, but by responsiveness to new scientific advances and to changes in social trends.
To-day the road to eugenic advance is more clearly marked than ever before. Those agencies which are at present concerned with improving the conditions of human life have shown every desire to co-operate in the eugenic effort. We must have faith that difficulties can be resolved, and that both quantity and quality of births can be turned to the improvement of the race, which is the goal of all.

Price 5/-
THE SOCIETY OF GENEALOGISTS
Catalogue of Parish Register Transcripts

In print, Manuscript and Typescript in possession of the Society of Genealogists. Eighty pages interleaved, covering over three thousand parishes. Second edition, revised and enlarged, comprising: Parish registers of England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland and the British Commonwealth; Roman Catholic and Nonconformist registers; Marriage Licences; Incomplete extracts of registers from other publications, etc.

Tekrphom: Euston 333o.

From Te Seetry,
The Society of Genealogists,
Chaucer House, Malet Place, London, W.C.z

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 8.

