THE EUGENICS REVIEW
~ALL,,7)
>\RjC7T(/
r 1 i!
To Mrs. Alec Tweedie from W. K. Haselden
THE FIRST INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS, LONDON, JULY 1912

THE PRE-MARITAL HEALTH SCHEDULE AND THE PRESS

By C. P. BLACKER, M.D.

IN the course of the past year, the fact Standard, People and Sunday Chronicle. To

that the Society was engaged in preparing the representatives of these papers copies

a Pre-nuptial Health Schedule became of the Schedule were given, and I outlined

known to the outside world, and a consider- briefly its intentions and scope, afterwards

able interest was evinced by various news- inviting questions.

papers. Telephone calls were frequently put

through both to myself and to Dr. Stella Churchill and various announcements of a misleading character appeared in the Press.
Publicity was further given to the proposal
by a public address delivered by Dr. Killick
Millard, Medical Officer of Health for
Leicester, who has long been a keen supporter of the project. The Press comments on Dr. Millard's speeches all referred to health certificates. For reasons set forth in the January issue of the REVIEW (page 275), we regard this as a misleading term, since nowhere in the Society's Schedule is the doctor asked to certify anything. Many of the newspapers, moreover, have represented the
Society's proposals as being compulsory, and in this way a good deal of misconception has arisen. We did not take steps to correct these errors, feeling that they could be corrected when the time came for the Schedule
to be issued. Considering, as may be seen
from the cartoon reproduced in this issue,* that the subject had already been discussed in i9i2, the little extra delay could hardly do serious hann!
On the morning of February 6th, I936, a Press reception was arranged in the Society's Library. This was attended by representatives of the following papers: British
Medical Journal, News Chronicle, Daily Express, Daily Mail, Press Association,
Scotsman, Daily Telegraph, Times, Evening

The National Press
The reception accorded by the Press the next day was in general satisfactory, and the aims and purpose of the Schedule were, on the whole, fairly and accurately described. Most of the announcements were serious, though some were written in somewhat
flippant or jeering terms. Thus the News Chronicle had a heading, " Marriage Doctors Soon: Wedded Bliss Schedule for Engaged Couples"; the Newcastle Evening Chronicle of February 8th had a paragraph entitled " Wedded Bliss-One Shilling." One or two papers, notably the Western Daily Mail, still insisted on referring to the Schedule as a certificate. Several leading articles or editorial notes upon the Schedule appeared. These were mostly couched in terms of qualified approval. Eugenists seem to be regarded by the editors of many of our daily papers as dangerous cranks whose proposals should be received with cautious reserve. Occasionally, however, more or less by accident, some eugenists may make reasonable suggestions. Thus, an editorial occupying a column of the Western Daily Press ended as follows: " There is undoubtedly much more in a happy or an unsuccessful marriage than comes within the ken of the Eugenics Society. Nevertheless, so long as that body does not promise more than it can perform, or seek to impose its tenets on a bashful population, its

* The cartoon was kindly given to the Society by Mrs. Alec Tweedie and the copy from which the block

endeavours in the cause of healthy marriage may be regarded with sympathy and good-

was made was signed and given to her by Mr. Haselden. will."

We are indebted to Mrs. Alec Tweedie for the gift of the cartoon and to Mr. Haselden and the Daily Mirror for their courtesy in allowing us to reproduce it.

The Society's proposals produced a letter in the correspondence columns of the Daily

II9

I20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Herald. The writer remarked that a " vitally further the ideals of preventive medicine.

important question missed by these learned Further education of public opinion is

people of the medical profession is the essential to success and all who undertake

standard of living, which causes more misery propaganda on behalf of the maternity and

and ill-health than hysteria, neurosis and all child welfare movement can undoubtedly do

the other nervous complaints put together." much to encourage the public to regard the

An editorial note in the Southern Daily Echo Pre-marital Health Examination as a reason-

of February ioth conceded that " the able and thoroughly desirable measure."

Eugenics Society certainly have a certain In the Medical Officer of February 29th

amount of logic on their side in this matter. appeared a mildly disparaging leading article.

They have common sense, too. Even though The writer says of the Schedule: " This is a

we may not believe in all their theories or the most elaborate document which, in our

ideals for which some eugenists stand, many opinion, would defeat its object. . . . Our

of us in these days will be prepared to agree criticism of the Schedule is not meant to be

that the unborn have their rights, and that destructive. We gave it a practical test of

a healthier race would not be too dearly trying it out on ourselves and some

bought at the expense of a little common colleagues. We did not get far before we got

sense introduced into the sphere usually into difficulties. At the end we decided

sacred to romantic glamour."

unanimously that none of us was fit to marry,

Cavalcade devoted a full page to an or even to live, which may be true, but not

appreciative notice of the Schedule in the helpful. Our conclusion was that in its

issue of March 7th.

ptesent form the Schedule fails from over-

elaboration; that a person about to be

The Medical and Scientific Journals

married would be harassed if not terrified of

The two most important medical weeklies, it, and that only those for whom it is un-

the Lancet and the British Medical Journal, necessary would submit to the ordeal. A

gave us full notices. An annotation in the much simplified form would be of greater

Lancet of February I5th ended as follows: utility."

" It is clear that the Eugenics Society in I confess to having been surprised when

issuing these Schedules is in no way trying I read this review. Before issuing the Sched-

to override the functions of the practitioner, ule I gave it to six non-medical persons asking

who is in fact made the central agency them to fill up Parts I and II as they would

through whom they will be distributed. The do if they were contemplating marriage.

Society wil not communicate with individual Part II, which deals with previous medical

applicants and indeed will come into the history, was filled up in an average of 4

picture only when its help is needed on a minutes by these six people. Part I took an

genetic problem. We believe that family average of eight minutes, but none of the six

doctors who have not hitherto given much persons in question had, at the time of filling

attention to these problems will welcome up the Schedules, knowledge of the dates

assistance in dealing with them."

and causes of death of all the relatives of

The British Medical Journal compli- whom this information is tentatively asked.

mented the Committee on its work and re- The important and comprehensive question

marked in the course of an appreciative with which Part I ends was filled in quickly

notice: " The whole scheme and the litera- and without difficulty by them all.

ture accompanying it have been framed with Some of these points were made by Dr.

great care to avoid the tender susceptibilities Stella Churchill in a latter published in the

with which such a subject is surrounded." correspondence column of the Medical

An editorial in Mother and Child says: " The Officer on March 2iSt, I936.

wide basis upon which the Schedule has been In the issue of April I5th of the Medical

established is wholly admirable, and if this Press and Circular appeared a long leading

scheme can be extended it will do much to article entitled " Health Examinations before

THE PRE-MARITAL HEALTH SCHEDULE AND THE PRESS I2I

Marriage." This consisted of a review of the schedule appears above the signature

facts set forth in the two articles entitled V. E. M. B., who writes: " This effort is

" Fitness for Marriage " and " Laws on worth while, as is anything which arouses

Health and Marriage" which I wrote for public opinion to a realization that the very

the April and October I935, issues of the best is required for parenthood if the race is

REVIEW, and concluded with a brief notice to ' make good '; the best for our triple

of the Society's schedule.

make-up, physical, mental and spiritual.

Perhaps the most satisfactory notice . . .The proposed form seems to be unduly

which appeared in any journal was a leading cumbrous and the B.M.A. and especially its

article published in Nature (April 4th, I936). section of General Practitioners, who come

" The Eugenics Society," the writer said, " is into intimate contact with the people as

to be congratulated for having prepared a their family doctor, should be asked to

scheme of voluntary pre-nuptial health exam- collaborate in the drawing up of an adequate,

inations which is meant to help the family but simpler, form and in fixing a suitable

doctor. . . . Without doubt the scheme is fee for the doctor's services. . . . The

a most excellent one, not so much because, booklet Health Examination before Marriage

through its help, either the practitioner or seems calculated to be provocative of useful

the board of specialists will be able to offer thought in those for whom it is written if

compelling advice to any given individual they can be induced to read it."

or pair, but because it can, and probably

will, encourage the development of a eugenic conscience (though probably only in the

Some Criticisms

middle class where such a conscience already I will conclude this review by quoting the

exists), and furthermore because, if properly only two actively unfavourable Press com-

employed, it can be the means of adding ments. In the issue of Truth, dated February

greatly to our knowledge concerning the 26th, there appeared an editorial entitled

reasons for the success or otherwise of " Marriage and the Millennium." The writer

marriage in individual cases, and of the said: " The Schedule is designed exclusively

incidence and mode of inheritance of patho- for voluntary use, and the Society expresses

logical characters in mankind. But two the opinion that in this country compulsory

things must make the working of the scheme health examinations such as exist in Germany

difficult. One is that exceedingly few medical and Turkey would be as much out of place

men of the present generation know anything as compulsory sterilization. I congratulate

of sexual psycho-pathology or of the princi- the Eugenics Society upon its forbearance,

ples of genetics, and the other is that our but I am afraid, as I turn over the pages of

knowledge of human genetics is exceedingly the document with which it has supplied me,

slight and most imperfect.

that I cannot also congratulate it upon its

" However, the project is a step in the right common sense." Some of the questions

direction, right in the sense that it, a purely asked in the Schedule are then jeeringly

voluntary scheme devised by a private quoted out of their context, and the writer

society, is undoubtedly an intelligent antici- concludes: " The trouble with the eugenists,

pation of what will be, in the not too distant as with most other cranks, is that they will

future, a compulsory scheme backed by law. not look at human nature as it is, but con-

The State is bound, in its own interests, tinue hopefully to hold up an ideal pattern

sooner or later to place its sentinels at the to which they expect human nature to

portals of birth, for it is by this route that conform. This is the root error of the people

most of our undesirables enter the realm." who believe that they can educate men and

The publications of the Eugenics Society women out of their prejudices."

have not hitherto been well received by the The other journal which adopts a hostile

Catholic Press. In the Catholic Medical attitude is one from which we might have

Guardian (April 1936) a notice of the hoped for better things-The Post-Graduate

I22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Medical Journal, edited by Professor Leonard
Finlay. The following is the notice in full: " We cannot imagine a better example of
the value of eugenics in the prevention of disease than that of deaf-mutism, which is discussed by Dr. James Kerr Love on p. 92 of the present issue [that of March I936].
Indeed, as Dr. Love points out, selection of parentage is our only means of preventing
one of the greatest calamities that can befall an individual. There are, of course, one or
two other conditions, e.g. haemophilia and muscular dystrophy, in which the same pre-
cautions are equally applicable, and we are convinced that the Eugenics Society would be well advised, in their endeavours to educate the public, to concentrate their attention on such instances where their suggested
measures would meet with indisputable success rather than to dissipate their energies

over a wide field of more or less problematical questions. In this latter way failure of their prophesies is bound to result and harm to, and distrust in, the value of
eugenics can only follow. This word of warning is surely called for in view of the Society's latest announcement, even although it is reputed to have the support of certain eminent physicians, that they are now prepared to give advice regarding the con-
tracting of happy marriages." I should be very grateful to readers of the
REVIEW for criticisms and suggestions on our
Schedule. Members of the Society are invited to send for the Schedule and to try filling it in
as they would if they were about to get married. I should be much interested to know if, as a result of doing this, they come to the conclusion that the Schedule is too elaborate or needs modification in any other respect.

CHARACTER AND PERSONALITY
An International Psychological Quarterly
Edited by C. E. SPEARMAN
Contents of June 1936 issue
SOME SOCIAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE
UNITED STATES AND GERMANY. By KURT LEWIN (State University
of Iowa).
SOME RECENT CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE THEORY OF PSYCHOMETRY. By WILLIAM STEPHENSON (University College, London).
WAR AND PACIFISM: SOME INDIVIDUAL (UNCONSCIOUS)
FACTORS. By EDwAR GLOVER (London.) DYNAMICS OF THE GESTALT PSYCHOLOGY, Part II. By WILLIAM
MCDOUGALL (Duke University).
RECENT RESEARCH ON UNITARY MENTAL TRAITS. By KARL J.
HOLZINGER (University of Chicago).
I. P. PAVLOV (I849-.1936). By M. J. SEREJSKY (Moscow). Subscription price 7/6 per annum; Single copies 21-
LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD
40 MUSEUM STREET. LONDON. W.C.1
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVIII No. 2.

