AUBREY LEWIS
M.D., F.R.C.P., Professor of Psychiatry, University of London
Fertility and Mental Illness*

ANYONE WHO HAS THE HONOUR of de- tions and other barriers to procreation. For

livering the Galton Lecture has no Morel degeneration was a process whereby

shortage of topics to choose from, if he tainted stocks were firmly predestined to ex-

assumes that it is his duty to deal with a theme tinction through hereditary disease, a medical

that had interested Francis Galton. In the counterpart to reprobation in the religious

amingly wide range of subjects which aroused sphere. His definition of degenerative conditions

Galton's curiosity, fertility took a prominent indicates that decay and extinction of the stock

place, and so did mental disorder. But of the was an essential part of the concept. "Les

fertility of those who fell ill in this way, he did deg6nerations sont des deviations maladives du

not write, as far as I know, and there has been type normal de l'humanite hereditairement

relatively little attention given to the matter transmissibles et evoluant progressivement vers

since his time: doubtless the volume of research la decheance."

and discussion would have been greater if there

had been the initial stimulus of his ideas and The degeneration theory

inquiries. I should make it clear that I am exclud- Morel's views, published in 1857, had great

ing mental defect and dealing solely with influence and were widely accepted. They were

mental disorders in this lecture.

reinforced, as time passed, by the convenient

**

*

A hundred years ago an audience such as this would have taken it for granted that the connection between fertility and mental disorder could be summed up in the word "Degeneration". The French psychiatrist, B. A. Morel, had at about that time propounded a doctrine of degeneration which had a strong theological flavour. In some stocks or families, he declared, a morbid deviation from the normal type could
occur, most often in the form of mental ab-

fallacy of "anticipation", which seemed to lend colour to Morel's theory since if hereditary disease appeared earlier in succeeding generations, it would infallibly extirpate the affected stock: the neat model consisted of a first generation characterized by senile dementia supervening on a healthy adult life; in the next
generation came involutional melancholia or depression asserting itself in the prime of life; then in the third generation dementia praecox
came on in late adolescence or early manhood (it was Morel who coined the term "dementia

normality. It would then exhibit progressive degradation. In the first generation the abnormality would become manifest as nervous

praecox", with this connotation): and the fourth generation, afflicted from birth with idiocy or imbecility, was even more completely precluded

temperament, moral defect, instability and from reproduction than that which had preceded

excess (what we should call psychopathic it. This tidy scheme ignored much evidence, and

personality): in the second generation, gathering strength, it would appear as severe neuroses, alcoholism, general paralysis: and in the third

was of course linked to the notion of a general polymorphous "neuropathic taint" which could produce any one of several varieties of mental

generation it would burst into full bloom as disorder and defect. Indeed Morel held that "all

melancholia, paranoia, hypochondria; a fourth generation, if the stock survived so far, would consist of people with idiocy, gross malforma-

hereditary diseases are sisters". In spite of its weaknesses-not all of which could be recognized when it was propounded-his scheme

* The Galton Lecture delivered in London on February gained much support, outside France as well as

19th, 1958.

within it. Thus Henry Maudsley, then rising into

9' THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1958, 50, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
prominence, wrote in 1862: "Such is the bene- degeneracy." And as late as 1926 a prominent volent purpose of nature that no efforts what- German psychiatrist, Hoffman, argued in favour soever can perpetuate a morbid human type; for of progressive degeneration in families with although the offspring of degenerate parents is mental disorder. a further degeneration, the evil soon corrects By the turn of the century, however, the itself; and long before man has descended to the fatalistic picture of diminishing fertility, decay, animal level, there comes an incapability of and then extinction of the degenerate stock had producing offspring, and the morbid type dies been pretty well dropped. An entirely opposite out. Insanity, of what form soever, whether and more alarming view took its place. Instead mania, melancholia, moral insanity or dementia, of the picture of Nature-far-sighted, purposeful is but a step in the descent towards sterile Nature-wiping out the hereditarily diseased idiocy.... It is almost impossible to avoid and insane by a rapid, benignant reduction of expressing a grateful admiration of the wise, sure their fertility, man was now seen as the blind and merciful provision of Nature by which agent of a social and biological process which degenerate mind is so quickly blotted out." The would increase the relative fertility of the theory thus eloquently expounded spread out mentally ill, and consequently the total amount into literary and other non-medical circles. The of mental illness. If I had read a paper on ancient argument about the relation between Fertility and Mental Disorder fifty years ago, it genius and insanity was revived, and seemingly would have been assumed, I think, that I would illuminated: the genius and the madman were address myself not, as in 1857, to the way the both seen as degenerates, though the genius was mentally ill extirpate themselves, but to the way a dJgJngrg superieur (or, as some now say, a they threaten to swamp the rest of society creative psychopath), and both were doomed to through unchecked and probably increasing extinction. Lombroso gained for the theory fertility. That, at any rate, was what people some anthropological backing and disseminated feared in 1907. it further; Max Nordau vulgarized it until it became, like other discarded theories, a con- Fears of excessive fertility venient vehicle for prejudice, superstition and The issue was stated, in moderate language, facile explanations. It did not die easily even in by Dr. David Heron in his important Eugenics medical circles, and I find that Adolf Meyer, one Laboratory Memoir. After setting out his of the most enlightened of modern psychiatrists, findings, he concluded that "our present statistics wrote in 1895 that Morel's description of the amply confirm the general result reached by successive stages of degeneration through which Pearson that pathologically abnormal stocks ... a "degenerate" family passes, could well be are not less but rather more fertile than the correct, adding: "I could indeed report as normal stocks in the community. The eugenic corroborative several instances from my personal importance of this in relation to the insane experience . . . the scheme is most closely diathesis is self-evident, for within the comfollowed by people that live for three generations munity natural selection is largely suspended, under the same conditions and where the child and the 'insane' restored to family life as is, in every generation, exposed to the same recovered." And later, at the end of the Memoir, poisonous influences." Karl Pearson gave one he states plainly: "There is no reduction in, aspect of it qualified assent in his Boyle Lecture: possibly rather an augmentation of, the fertility "We are at present only reaching light on what of insane stocks, when compared with that of is a very important principle, namely, that stocks sane stocks.... The normal, or probably more exist which show a general tendency to defect, than normal fertility of the insane, notwithtaking one form in the parent, another in the standing their partial seclusion and high death offspring. Neuroses in the parents become rate, and the fact that insanity is a disease largely alcoholism or insanity in the offspring.... of middle life, must make us pause before we Even now, I doubt whether it is absolutely acquiesce in the unrestricted return of the unscientific to speak of a general inheritance of 'recovered' insane to family life."
92

FERTILITY AND MENTAL ILLNESS

Dr. Heron carried out his inquiries under the stimulus of Karl Pearson, in whose laboratory
he worked, and Pearson expressed the same warnings in more vivid and urgent language. "To-day we feed our criminals up, and we feed
up the insane, we let both out of the prison or the asylum 'reformed' or 'cured' as the case may be, only after a few months to return to State supervision, leaving behind them the germs of a new generation of deteriorants.... Education
for the criminal, fresh air for the tuberculous, rest and food for the neurotic-these are
excellent, they may bring control, sound lungs, and sanity to the individual; but they will not save the offspring from the need of like treat-
ment.... They cannot make a nation sound in mind and body, they merely screen degeneracy behind a throng of arrested degenerates." And
elsewhere in the same Lecture occur such passages as "degenerate stocks under present social conditions are not short-lived, they live to have more than the normal size of family. Natural selection is largely suspended, but not the inheritance of degeneracy nor the fertility of the unfit. On the contrary there is more than a suspicion of the suspension of the fertility of the fit."
These uncompromising views were reared, so far as the fertility of the insane was concerned, on information about 331 families containing at least one insane member who had been treated
at James Murray's Royal Asylum at Perth. In these families Heron found that the mean number of children was 5 97; whereas in ordinary English marriages lasting at least fifteen years, the average gross number of children was 6-58, from which he inferred that marriages in the insane stocks (which had not all lasted fifteen years) were at least as fertile as the sane. He compared the number of children of insane parents who had come into his series with those recorded for a normal group-the Danish professional classes-and found it the same. The normal population, whose marriages had lasted fifteen years or more, were therefore assumed to have a lower fertility than the parents in the families with an insane member.
Now these findings of Heron's are, as he recognized, based on a small material, and take no account of the varieties of mental disorder:

thus general paralysis of the insane, other organic cerebral affections, senile dementia, cretinism, epilepsy, transient depression and recurrent mania, are all lumped together. But a more serious objection was brought forward, first by Weinberg and soon after by Greenwood and Yule. By taking an insane person always as the starting point for study of the fertility of the family or stock, i.e. of the patient's parents, Heron not only excluded all childless marriages but unintentionally ensured that he would have an undue proportion of large sibships since large families have more individuals in them than small families and therefore, other things being equal, more often have an insane member: in the Copenhagen material, on the other hand, parents had been taken as the starting point for the inquiry. When the appropriate statistical correction was made (as by Popenoe in 1928) the size of the insane persons' sibships tended to be smaller, not larger, than normal.
These objections, however, did not shake the conviction, widespread among eugenists in the earlier years of the century, that social and medical advances, however excellent on humanitarian grounds, were in danger of promoting the fertility of the insane, already high: consequently, it was often cruelly said, they would allow the weeds to choke the garden.
In spite of the eloquence and authority with which the issue was stated and the fervour with which woeful implications were stressed, little was done to amplify the meagre and contradictory data on which the argument rested. Studies by a handful of American and European investigators yielded some information, but it was not until the nineteen-thirties that adequate sophisticated contributions appeared. The first of these was by Professor Gunnar Dahlberg, of
Upsala.
Systematic investigation of fertility in psychoses Dahlberg was acutely aware of the excesses
to which eugenic enthusiasm had carried Goddard, J6rges, Estabrook and Davenport. He was alive to the gross statistical and genetical fallacies besetting the interpreter of large pedigrees. He was moreover by temperament and outlook averse from the sombre measures of compulsory intervention that were advocated

93

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by ardent believers in the tares-choking-out-the- the fertility of sane women of the corresponding

wheat view of the matter. He therefore set about age group, and that married women discharged

his inquiry into the fertility of insane women from the hospital at some time before the end of

cautiously, and he drew no overbold conclusion. their reproductive life had subsequently borne

His propositi were 2,200 women admitted to either very few children, or a relatively large

the Upsala Mental Hospital in the period number of children.

1890-1929. Of these 1,219 had been under Dayton, in his analysis of 11,959 consecutive

observation until they had passed the age of discharges from two large mental hospitals in

forty-five, and were therefore unlikely to have Massachusetts between 1917 and 1928, had

any further children.

made much the same observation as Dahlberg.

These women had borne in all 2,407 children, Both in the completed and the incomplete

i.e. the average number of children per woman families, the average number of children born

was 1'97, though of course the younger the to married patients having at least one child

women had been when they were first admitted was decidedly less than the average in the general

to the mental hospital, the lower their number of population for each age-of-mother group. He

children: there is a steady gradient from 0-05 concluded that "the stock producing individuals

for women first admitted before the age of with mental disorder is not on the increase. It

twenty to 2A45 for women first admitted over appears that this stock is barely holding its own,

the age of fifty. Against the average of 1-97 for if not actually decreasing."

these women could be set the average of 3-78 Dahlberg's notable conclusion, coinciding

for the general population of Sweden. Insofar with Dayton's, is in direct contradiction of the

as the insane have a higher mortality than the alarming view so prevalent in the first decade of

sane, so that some insane women will not have the century. His material plainly indicated that

survived to the age of forty-five, the figure mentally ill women, taken en bloc have sub-

arrived at in Dahlberg's count probably, as he normal fertility. But to take the mentally ill

points out, overstates the fertility of insane en bloc is to ignore the genetic, pathological,

women.

clinical and social differences between various

The proportion of single women among the types of mental illness. It is, for example, im-

propositi could greatly affect the average in proper to confound the fertility of those with

Dahlberg's sample of women observed until general paralysis-a disease which can limit

past the age of forty-five. There were 551 un- the fecundity of those affected, making them

married and 668 married. This gives 55 per cent impotent or sterile-with the fertility of those

married, whereas for the whole Swedish popula- with recurrent mania. There are, it is true,

tion 81 per cent were married. The married difficulties in distinguishing between one form

women in his sample had borne, on the average, of mental illness and another. Karl Pearson was

3*32 children; for the unmarried the corres- so well aware of this, and so impressed by the

ponding figure was 0 34. The fertility of the frequency with which the same patient would

unmarried women being so low, married women be differently diagnosed by successive doctors,

are responsible not only for replacing themselves that he deliberately treated all mental illnesses

and their husbands but also in large measure for as one illness taking many forms. But methods

making good the reproductive deficit of the of diagnosis, though still defective, are more

unmarried. This the insane married women were satisfactory now than they were fifty years ago:

not achieving. Their failure to do so could be we have very good grounds for believing the

attributed in part to the long period many of inheritance of the main mental disorders to be

them spent in hospital, debarred from the distinct: and the natural history of these main

possibility of conceiving: on this, however, disorders is so different that we would expect the

Dahlberg's statistics could not throw light, reproductive behaviour of affected persons to

except to indicate that the fertility of the differ appreciably. Whether this expectation is

insane married women had been lower before justified, can be -discovered from three major

their first admission to the mental hospital than studies, of which the largest and most thorough

94

FERTILITY AND MENTAL ILLNESS

was carried out by Professor Essen-M6ller of suit, while the schizophrenic women, starting

Lund.

with a lower birth rate and declining more slowly

His propositi were 4,904 persons, of whom than the normal women in this respect, even-

1,679 were manic-depressive, 2,509 were schizo- tually have much the same rate as the normals.

phrenic, and 716 were epileptic. They had all In the number of children born after the out-

been treated in the Munich Psychiatric Clinic break of illness, the married schizophrenics con-

between 1904 and 1927. A series of 1,239 normal firmed the expectation that the circumstances

married people was also investigated, for and effects of the illness would greatly reduce

purposes of comparison. The number of children their fertility: it fell by about 70 per cent when

born to the propositi before the onset of their due allowance was made for their age and the

mental illness was calculated separately from duration of their marriage. The exception to this

the number born thereafter.

finding lay in the schizophrenics who married

In the manic-depressive group the number of after their illness: their fertility approximated

children born before their illness, and sub- to that of the rest of the population, a finding

sequently, did not differ from the normal. In the which, taken together with the fact that these

schizophrenic group, however, the number born patients had spent a relatively short time in

before the outbreak of illness indicated a curious hospital, suggests that the schizophrenics who

difference between the sexes: whereas the male had married after their mental illness had had

propositi lagged behind the general population the disease in a mild form and had recovered.

in the rate at which the birth rate fell during In this matter of fertility before and after the

the period covered by their marriages, the women illness, Essen-Moller's material yielded an

behaved in the opposite way, anticipating the interesting further point which illustrates the

general decline. The schizophrenic men had had great risk of jumping to conclusions in such

much the same average number of children as inquiries. He examined the fertility of his

the rural population before 1904, but- a propositi during the twelve months before their

higher rate than the urban population of admission to hospital. He found it higher than

Munich: in the period 1904-1918 they had the expected. He then looked to see if the rate of

rate which the rest of the Bavarian population conception is raised shortly before the onset, or

had shown before 1904, and in the period in the early stages, of the illness: if so, an

1919-1930 their rate had fallen only to the level appreciable number of the women would be

reached by the rest of the population in the pregnant at the time of entry into hospital.

previous period 1904-1918. The schizophrenic This was not the case: there was evidence that

women, on the other hand, showed before 1904 in fact the rate of conception during the year

the rate which the rest of the population fell to preceding admission to hospital was depressed.

between 1904 and 1918, and kept correspondingly It would seem obvious that if, shortly before

ahead of the trend in the ensuing period.

admission to hospital, conception was no more

Essen-M6ller emphasized, in the light of these frequent but births were more frequent, the

findings, that it is improper to talk of the explanation must lie in the assumption that a

fertility of people with a mental illness: it is proportion of the illnesses were puerperal, i.e.

necessary to take into account the social differ- had been the outcome of childbirth. This easy

ences which affect reproductive behaviour at explanation, however, will not do. It was not

different times. In a stable population, as it only the women who behaved in this way. The

appeared from his data, the fertility of married married schizophrenic men also showed a rise in

manic-depressives and schizophrenic men before births of live children during the three months

the outbreak of their mental illness does not before admission. The most probable explana-

differ from that of the rest of the population, tion-unless one invents a couvade-psychosis

though the schizophrenic women have only -now becomes the socio-psychological one that

about half the fertility of normal women. But in both men and women, when a child is expected

when the birth rate begins to fall in the general admission to hospital is put off, wherever

population, the schizophrenic men slowly follow possible, until the baby is born.

3-ER.

.McA Dp A

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

\:.9

Figure 1
GROSS REPRODUCTIVE
INDEX (R) OF MARRIED
S CHIZOPHRENICS AND MANIAC-DEPRESSIVES RELATED TO NORMAL POPULATION
Md A = maniac-depressive Dp A = dementia praecox Md K = Schizo-affective
Broken line ---- represents R of normal population. (From Essen-Moller, E. Acta Psychiat., 1935. Supp. 8)

200 100
R. GENERAL POPULATION
R Mi A'
200 i

0
al

XW i\W
R. GENERAL POPULATION
From Essen-Moller's masterly study it emerges population, but that schizophrenics reproduced that (in Bavaria at any rate) the fertility of significantly less than the general population; patients with manic-depressive psychosis did not the disparity was greater when the general differ appreciably from that of the general population had a high birth rate. In general the
96

FERTILITY AND MENTAL ILLNESS

total fertility of schizophrenics was between of a rural area in the extreme north of Sweden

one-fifth and two-fifths-at most between a which has had poor means of communication

quarter and a half of the normal.

with the rest of the country: the migration rate

At the same time as Essen-M6ller's study, a was low: and marriages between first cousins

parallel inquiry was made in North Germany accounted for over 2 per cent of all marriages.

by F. J. Kallmann. By agreement their methods Through a painstaking combination of inter-

of enumeration were harmonized. Kallmann views and search through appropriate records,

limited his study to schizophrenics admitted to all surviving persons who had had a major

a large mental hospital in Berlin between 1893 neuropsychiatric disorder between 1902 and 1949

and 1902. He subdivided his propositi into two were identified and examined. Book found that

main groups-those with hebephrenia or cata- the fertility of marriages contracted by the

tonic forms of schizophrenia, and those with schizophrenics (estimated as the average number

paranoid or mild forms. The former, with of children born per year, counting from the

typical or "nuclear" schizophrenia, had on the year of marriage to the year when the wife

average only half as many children as the latter; reached the age of forty-eight, minus the number

as they comprised 70 per cent of the propositi, of years spent in hospital) was higher than in a

the average number of children for the whole control group of mentally normal people in the

population studied was close to that of the same area: the differences, however, were not

typical, less fertile group. The fertility of the statistically significant. Now this finding is sur-

propositi, however grouped, was below that of prisingly at variance with Essen-M6ller's and

the normal population: the males averaged 3 1 Kallmann's. It was only when Book took all

children and the women 3 5 children for "com- schizophrenics, and not only those who were

pleted" families. The averages obtained for the married, that he found their fertility to be

prepsychotic period of marriages contracted appreciably lower (by 30 per cent) than that of

before the onset of illness did not fall far short the normal population. The explanation lay in

of these completed figures: for men the prep- the very large number of unmarried men (75

sychotic average was 2-7 children and for women per cent) among the schizophrenics. It raises a

3*4. Almost all the offspring of schizophrenics question of the utmost importance in the whole

had evidently been produced before the illness matter: how far is the reproductive capacity

became manifest. The exception to this general- of schizophrenics as a group reduced not because

ization lay in the sub-group of schizophrenics their illness lowers their fecundity but because it

who recovered from periodic or mild forms of lowers their chance of marriage.

the disorder leaving few traces behind, so that

the patients resumed their normal lives in the Marriage rate and reproductive capacity

community; many of them married after their The high proportion of single men and women

first discharge from hospital and had an among those in mental hospitals has long been

appreciable number of children.

observed, and its significance debated.

Kallmann sums up his findings in terms which Thurnam, writing in 1845, found that two-

agree closely with Essen-M6ller's. "The fertility thirds of the patients admitted to the York

of schizophrenics lags markedly behind that of Retreat had never been married, and that of

the general population.... We find the legiti- those who were married one-fifth had never had

mate fertility rate lowered by 1 6 children in offspring, and he emphasised that "many of the

comparison with the corresponding average cases occur in a class of persons, as regards

population."

mental vigour, less likely to be married than the

The only other large study which has provided average of the community at large.... The

data on the fertility of schizophrenics has been celibacy is to be regarded as an effect rather

J. A. B66k's thorough investigation of an than a cause."

isolate, i.e. a population more or less shut off In all psychoses and at all ages the single out-

geographically, which is relatively homogeneous number the married among the mentally ill.

in its genotypical structure. He took the people It can be inferred that this is far more evident

97

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 1

MENTAL HOSPITALS: ADMISSION RATES PER MILLION 1951 CENSUS
Population by Sex, Age and Marital Status for Certain Diagnostic Groups, 1950

Diagnosis and
LS.C. No.

Sex

Marital Status

75 and
20- 25- 35- 45- 55- 65- over

Schizophrenia (300)

Males S 974 2,204 1,387 586 219 M. W. &D. 191 230 185 79 43
Females S 762 1,617 1,160 590 206 M. W. &D. 187 296 255 170 104

60 20 93 44

5 13 10

Males S 104 360 673 1,005 953 617

Manic-Depressive

M. W. & D. 73 139 267 456 666 491

Reaction

Females

S

187 534 953 1,268 1,331 723

(301) M. W. &D. 177 372 584 793 919 578

145 160 194 142

(From Registrar General's Statistical Review of England and Wales for 1950-51. Supplement on General Morbidity, Cancer and Mental Health.)

in schizophrenia than in other psychoses. If variety of studies the first of these explanations

standardized rates of admission per 100,000 per has been shown to be far the most probable,

year are calculated, it is found that in schizo- though the other two factors may play a part.

phrenia the rate for single men is 4-7times as high If then the personality of the patients militates

as for married men and the rate for single women against their getting married, why are the single

3 times as high as for married women: the so much more frequent among schizophrenics

corresponding rates for manic-depressive patients than among the manic-depressives: and why

are 1 6 times higher for single men than for more frequent among males than females. The

married, 1-5 times higher for single women. answer is that the majority of persons prone to

These are Scandinavian figures. The corres- manic-depressive psychosis commonly have,

ponding English figures, collected by the late before and between attacks, a sociable, responsive

Dr. Vera Norris, are even more striking: e.g. personality that would not be detrimental to

first admission rates for schizophrenia six times their seeking marriage and being sought in

as high for single men as for married men. marriage. The schizophrenics have, as a group,

TABLE 2

quite a different mental constitution: morbidly seclusive, shy, sensitive, and socially awkward,

AGE-STANDARDIZED RATIOS OF THE FIRST ADMISSION RATES OF SINGLE (Rs) TO THOSE FOR MARRIED (Rm) PERSONS

they may be heavily handicapped in making and responding to any advances; the men show the

discrepancy between single and married more

Diagnosis

Men Women Rs/Rm Rs/Rm

than women because lack of initiative will tell more heavily against their prospects of

Schizophrenia .. .. 62 3.7 getting married than the same quality would

Manic-depressive psychosis . . 1-8

Psychoses of old age

.. 2-3

Other disorders .. .. 30

1-6 16 15

reduce a woman's prospects. This matter is sumnmed up by Odegaared, the Norwegian

All disorders .. 3-5 2.0 psychiatrist who has studied it closely: "Certain

(From Norris, V. J. ment. Sci., 1956, 102: 467)

personality traits reduce the chances of getting married, by making contact with the opposite

± There are three possible explanations for the sex more difficult or less attractive, or indirectly

predominance of the single among psychotic by blocking the way towards social and economic

persons: first, that because of their premorbid success. Some of these traits are dispropor-

personality they are less likely to get married; tionately common in persons who are predisposed

second, that they have not been protected against towards certain psychoses, or in the initial stages

harmful stresses by the affection and other of such disorders."

advantages of married life; and third, that they There is another aspect of the relation between

are more likely to be sent into hospital. In a mental illness and marriage. When Dr. Norris

98

FERTILITY AND MENTAL ILLNESS

looked into groups of patients who were com- capacity for hard work than by psychological

parable in previous history, length of follow-up oddities: there was moreover a constant shortage

period, legal status, age, sex and diagnosis, she of young women because of emigration. Though

found that single persons stayed longer in the not in itselfofimportance, the peculiarity of these

mental hospital than married persons. It may schizophrenics living within the Arctic Circle

therefore be inferred that they stood a greater is a warning against generalization based on a

chance of becoming chronic hospital patients, few studies. Social factors may greatly alter the

debarred from procreation.

picture. Another reminder of this lies in the

The relationship of marriage to the time of mortality figures for schizophrenics. In the big

onset of the illness has been closely examined German investigations carried out a quarter of

by Essen-Moller. He found that whereas before a century ago, declared schizophrenics were

the illness marriage was half as common in found to have three times as high a mortality as

schizophrenics as in normal people of their age, the normal population; tuberculosis was a very

it was only about one-sixth of the normal rate conspicuous cause of this raised mortality-so

after the illness in those who had been single much so that a close genetical relationship was

when they were first admitted to hospital. For postulated between the susceptibility to schizo-

manic-depressives, before their first admission phrenia and to tuberculosis. Now tuberculosis

the marriage rate was, as we have seen, almost has ceased in most countries to be an important

identical with that of the normal population, but cause of death in schizophrenics or indeed in

after the illness it fell to half the normal. It is any group of psychotic patients. The change

noteworthy that in a group of schizophrenics could not have been foreseen, nor its impli-

whose illnesses had begun with clinical features cations for fertility worked out, unless the main

suggesting manic-depressive psychosis, the social and medical factors determining the

prepsychotic marriage rate was as high as in the course of tuberculosis had been known. Al-

manic-depressives, but after the illness it fell to though schizophrenia seems to be substantially

the same level as the typical schizophrenics. The the same in form wherever it is met, no matter

length of time before, or after, the illness does what the ethnic and cultural diversities of the

not affect the frequency ofmarriage: thus schizo- people affected, any statement about the

phrenics as a group show the same lowered fertility of schizophrenics must be qualified,

marriage rate many years before the onset of and for the present should be restricted to

illness as they do in the period immediately populations of the same sort as the very few

preceding their first admission.

that have been adequately studied in this regard

All this points towards the personal charac- -almost entirely West European populations.

teristics of the patients, rather than their The effect of a low marriage rate was, as I

enforced residence in a mental hospital, as the mentioned earlier, striking in Book's investiga-

main reason for their low marriage rate and tion. The intra-matrimonial fertility of his

low fertility. It is reasonable to suppose that the schizophrenic propositi was actually higher

influence of schizoid personal characteristics than that of his normal controls, but the total

on marriage rate will operate differently in reproductive capacity of his schizophrenic

diverse cultures, and under different social and subjects, married and single together, was

economic conditions. This is borne out by reduced to about 70 per cent of the normal,

Professor Book's finding in his North Swedish entirely because of the very low marriage rate

population: the proportion of schizophrenic of his male propositi: three-quarters of them,

women married was lower than normal (73 as you will remember, were unmarried. Schizo-

against 93 per cent) but not nearly as much so phrenics evidently conform to the hope Charles

as elsewhere. Professor Book attributes the dis- Darwin expressed in the Descent of Man: he

crepancy to the fact that this rural and isolated wrote that we must bear the undoubtedly bad

population had been living under relatively effects of the weak propagating their kind, but

primitive conditions where selection of a wife there could be a steady check on this "by the

was influenced more by physical strength and weak in body or mind refraining from marriage,

99

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

though this is more to be hoped for than There remain, as possible explanations, the

expected."

occurrence of fresh mutations, and raised

It might of course be misleading to assume fertility of heterozygous carriers. To inquire into

that schizophrenics who remain single produce the latter hypothesis, Essen-M6ller took the

no children. Essen-Moller, with his customary brothers and sisters of his schizophrenic subjects,

thoroughness, looked into this matter. He found and ascertained how many of them had married.

that on the average one in eight of the single The proportion of sisters who were married

women among his propositi had produced a was well below the average figure for the corres-

child; of manic-depressive women the corres- ponding normal population: likewise with the

ponding figure was four. Kallmann, who brothers in the younger age-groups, i.e. under

counted as illegitimate all children born outside thirty-five. A similar finding was reported by

wedlock, even though subsequently legitimized, Mertens. In general the probability of marriage

reports 162 such births among his propositi: in the siblings of schizophrenics is about two-

seventy-eight of his 537 unmarried female thirds of what it is in the general population.

schizophrenics had had an illegitimate child. How many children were the offspring of these

From these data it would seem that the number marriages? Essen-Moller had no count of these,

of children produced by single women among but on indirect evidence concluded that not

the schizophrenics is too low to affect appreciably only the frequency of marriage but also the

the figure obtained by investigating the fertility total fertility of these brothers and sisters was

of the married women. For men, the findings are subnormal. Kallmann arrived at a similar

equivocal: Essen-M6ller inclined to the con- conclusion.

clusion that the schizophrenic bachelors had a It might be supposed that although the sibs

higher reproductive rate than the spinsters, but failed to confirm the hypothesis, the parents and

Kallmann arrived at the opposite opinion. the children of schizophrenics might. Heron had

Clearly it is more difficult to established the facts in fact stated that in his material the parents of

for men than for women. In any case they do his propositi were more fertile than the general

not, on the information at present available, population. But Weinberg and others demon-

alter the general finding that schizophrenics of strated the fallacy in his method: as Greenwood

both sexes have a low fertility.

and Yule put it: "The size of family is not, as has

Since the fertility of schizophrenics is so low, been stated, abnormally large. On the contrary,

the question inevitably arises: how is it that so far as the data go, they seem to support the

schizophrenia remains as prevalent as ever. conclusion that the fertility of such stocks

Three explanations are possible: (1) it is not, or [stocks containing one or more members

some varieties of it are not, of hereditary suffering from the disease] is below the average."

causation; or perhaps (2), though the condition Kallmann studied the fertility of the married

is hereditary, the outwardly healthy carriers daughters of schizophrenics. He found that it

reproduce at a higher rate than normal and was much lower than that of the married sisters

therefore compensate for the relative infertility of the patients (doubtless reflecting the general

of those with the manifest disease; or finally fall in birth rate in succeeding generations) and

(3), mutations may be constantly replenishing was belownormal. It must therefore be concluded

the otherwise dwindling supply of people that, although the sisters and children of schizo-

predisposed to schizophrenia.

phrenic subjects transmit the predisposition to

Against the first possibility there is a con- schizophrenia, and do so to a serious extent,

vincing array of evidence. There is still their fertility is not sufficient to compensate for

uncertainty as to whether schizophrenia is, as the losses entailed by the low fertility of those

Book holds, a matter ofa major simple dominant who manifest the disease.

gene with a 20 per cent heterozygous penetrance,

or, as others believe, is a recessive trait; but as to Mutations

its being in its typical forms to a large extent gen- There is left, then, as an explanation of the

etically determined, there is little room for doubt. continuing prevalence of schizophrenia, the

100

FERTILITY AND MENTAL ILLNESS

mutation hypothesis. The argument is now a familiar one and is more easily tested where
dominant or sex-linked characters are in question. For a probably recessive character like schizophrenia, with a possibly deleterious or undetectable heterozygote, calculations are much more difficult, and the assumptions on which they are based more shaky. Book has critically stated this problem as it affects schizophrenia, and from his North Swedish population has
derived a spontaneous mutation-rate of 5 x 10-' genes per generation. This is higher than Penrose's estimate, which is 1 in 2,000. Much

diseases constitute the most important single category of disease which is determined to a marked degree by heredity and which is serious, in the sense both of being highly harmful to the individual and of making heavy demands on medical resources. We are aware that this is only an opinion and that others may have different views. We believe, however, that it will be conceded by all that the mental diseases contribute a very substantial proportion of the total number of those suffering from serious hereditary disorders.
This restrained statement indicates the gravity of the problem of fertility in mental disorder, quite apart from the alarming issues raised by

depends in these calculations on the gene possible artificial increase of the mutation rate frequency, which Book took as 7 per cent, for this group of diseases.

whereas Nixon and Slater recently assessed it at approximately 3 per cent. Whichever provisional Fertility of neurotic persons figure is accepted, the spontaneous mutation All the data I have been dealing with so far rate is considerable. It is well to bear in mind concern the two major forms of insanity-
Penrose's warning that the rates now calculated schizophrenia and manic-depressive psychosis.
may be too high, when it is remembered that About the fertility of those with neurotic suppression of even the most regular kinds of disorders there is practically no information.

dominant inheritance may mimic mutation, The only published material I know which is

different conditions may be grouped (in the relevant comes from the Indianapolis Study-

case of schizophrenia very probably are grouped) Clyde Kiser and C. J. Westoff asked 1,444

under one clinical heading, and finally that "relatively fecund" couples a series of questions

heterozygotes of recessive traits may have about feelings of personal inadequacy. Most of

formerly carried slight advantages. But even if the questions are such as are included in

the accepted mutation rates are too high, the neurotic "inventories" and although by no

occurrence of fresh mutations responsible for means indicative of illness, positive answers may

schizophrenia on a substantial scale must be be assumed to indicate an anxious, depressive,

inferred.

worrying, dissatisfied personality of the sort

For manic-depressive psychosis, in which the which verges on neurosis. An index was con-

fertility of most of those affected does not seem structed ranging from under fifty to 100 and

less than that of mentally healthy people, the over, and the replies analysed statistically to see

mutation rate is much smaller. Penrose assesses if there was a relation between fertility and this

it at 1 in 28,000 per gene per generation. Even index. The findings were not clear cut. They

so the proportion of affected persons in whom suggested a slight relationship between size of

the condition is due to a fresh mutation would family and feelings of inadequacy-the more

be high (1 in 70) in each generation.

inadequate, the smaller the number of children;

The possible effect of radiation in raising the but size of family was more closely related to

mutation rate for heriditary diseases has been economic security than it was to neurotic

considered by the Medical Research Council. feelings.

Serious as this matter is, it is not strictly relevant In view of the extreme dearth of evidence the

to the question of fertility under conditions following unpublished findings, for which I am

existing hitherto, with which we are concerned indebted to Miss Nancy Goodman, are of

here. It is, however, relevant to quote a passage interest. Miss Goodman looked into the fertility

from the Medical Research Council Report: of 375 neurotic married women of forty-five

We have expressed the opinion that from the years of age or more who had been seen at the standpoint of the social load imposed, mental Maudsley Hospital in the years 1954 to 1957.

IOI

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
TABLE 3
NUMBER OF CHILDREN OF MARRIED NEUROTIC WOMEN AGED 45 AND OVER, COMPARED WITH GENERAL POPULATION

MARRIAGES OF

MARRIAGES OF

1925-1 929

1920-1924

Family Census

Bethleml

Family Census

Bethleml

Non-Manual Manual Maudsley Non-Manual Manual Maudsley

FAMILY Sn

0 1 2 3 4 5 and over

21-5 14 3 14 3 27-5 23-1 34-3 27-9 23-4 18-6 12-8 15-1 17-1 5 5 8-9 5 7 4-8 15 2 10 0 100 100 100
(Goodman, N. Unpublished)

18-3 25-3 26-6 15-2 7-6 70
100

12 1 19-1 21V7 16 6 10 8 19 7 100

25 0 22-4 27-6 13 2 6-6 53 100

The average number of live children born to these women did not differ greatly from that shown for normal women in the Family Census carried out in 1946 for the Royal Commission on Population. In view of geographical limits and difficulties of ascertainment it would be unsafe to stress the apparent difference between the neurotic women, especially of the 1920-24 marriage cohort, and the general population. The same caution applies to the apparent preponderance of small families in the neurotic women of the later cohort. The average age at marriage of the neurotic women was three years less than that of the average bride in England and Wales, but this may reflect only differences in "social class" composition.
The fertility of neurotic women as a whole
TABLE 4
PERCENTAGE OF SINGLE WOMEN AMONG NEUROTIC WOMEN AGED 45 AND OVER, COMPARED WITH GENERAL
POPULATION
1951 CENSUS
Age England London Greater Bethleml
Group and Wales H.C. London Maudsley

45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74 75-79

15-2 21-3 17-2 14.8 19 9 16-8 15-5 19-7 17-0 15-5 18.6 16-4 16-1 17-7 15-8 15-9 17.4 15-7 16*1 18-3 16-3 (Goodman, N. Unpublished)

19 9 21-0 11-6 (10-8)
((12255)
(20 0)

could, of course, be less than that of women in
the general population if a higher proportion of them remained single. But no clear evidence emerged that this is so.
The proportion of single women in the whole sample (670 women) was 167 per cent, which is the same figure as for Greater London; and for the separate age groups the proportion was not consistently or unequivocally different from that of the normal population. This was disappointing. For if the fertility of the neurotic women in this Maudsley sample had diverged from that of the general population in either direction,
some plausible hypotheses could have been suggested to account for it, in the light of psychopathology and social data about women and marriage-but there is nothing as yet to explain.
It is necessary to say "as yet", because this may be an unrepresentative sample of neurotic women. The exclusion of women who had not yet reached the end of their reproductive life has probably biassed the sample in the direction of those who neurotic symptoms had not become troublesome until middle age. Slater and Woodside who detected "a suggestion of lower fertility in neurotics", remark that the sexual abnormalities associated with neurosis nearly always "lie in an impoverishment of sexual life", inhibitions and frigidity. In keeping with this view are the reports put forward by various psychiatrists about the psychological causes and mechanisms of sterility. The evidence in support

io2

FERTILITY AND MENTAL ILLNESS

of the latter, however, is extremely tenuous; and those with schizoid personality or with a

in a society in which family size is deliberately history of manic-depressive attacks, because the

restricted, the influence of neurotic inhibitions lesson that "mental illnesses are illnesses like

would be hard to distinguish from those of any other" will have been so well learnt by the

prudence and rational restraint. At all events, public that existing social and psychological

until we have a clear indication that the fertility barriers to such marriages will become much

of neurotic persons, or of those with a particular weaker. I am aware that intrinsic biological

variety of neurosis, is restricted, explanations and psychological factors in the affected persons

are premature.

may be much the most powerful determinant of

We have seen that mental disorder is not whether they marry, far outweighing conscious

associated with higher fertility than normal; beliefs and attitudes. But the findings of Book

the commonest and gravest mental disorder, to which I have referred, and Essen-Moller's

schizophrenia, is indeed characterized by much demonstration of the way in which the birth

lower fertility than normal. The fears so strongly rate of schizophrenics slowly or hastily followed

voiced fifty years ago have little substance: the trend downwards in the general population

society is not in danger of being swamped by suggest that extraneous influences cannot be

increasing numbers of insane people. But there safely minimized. This applies not only to the

is still cause for discomfort. Distressing and proportion of marriages among the patients and

disabling hereditary mental diseases are being the number of children they produced but also

propagated, and it may well be that factors are to the fertility of their sibs and children: these

at work which will increase rather than diminish refrain to some extent from marriage and pro-

the fertility of those who are mentally ill or who creation for reasons which could be weakened if

can transmit the predisposition to mental there were widespread acceptance of the view

illness.

that mental illnesses are illnesses like any other,

It is notoriously perilous to attempt predic- without reference to the need for caution because

tions about the future size and genetic of the strongly hereditary character of some of

composition of populations (Dorn, Glass, them. I wish enough were known about the mode

Larsson). The effects of mutation, selection, gene of inheritance of mental disorders and about

flow and genetic drift are hard enough to foresee: the factors which determine fertility, to offer

harder still the effects of social, cultural, econo- clear guidance to those who engage in education

mic, therapeutic and political changes. Here, as of the public on matters of mental health and

Robert Bridges said of the alternative to "pur- mental illness: but in the light of present know-

poseful and wise self-breeding", we see "com- ledge I think it is reasonable to urge that the

plexity irresoluble in obscurity". But I think hereditary aspect of these illnesses should be

there are some recognizable shifts of opinion and fairly stated, neither slurred over nor unduly

practice which could alter in an unwelcome stressed. There is little doubt that it is now often

direction the reproductive behaviour of those played down in mental hygiene campaigns: thus

prone to mental illness.

the National Association for Mental Health

tells the public that "heredity plays a less im-

Dangers and opportunities

portant part in insanity than is popularly

Because of the irrational fears and misunder- supposed.... This age-old question has not yet

standing about mental disorders which have been completely answered, but more harm is

clogged progress and made the lot of the done by worrying over possible inherited factors

mentally ill needlessly hard, great efforts are than by the factors themselves" and goes on to

now being made to instil into the public a more say on the following page, with contrasting

sympathetic and informed understanding of the assurance, that "it is quite certain that the surest

nature and course of these illnesses. Such defence against mental illness is to have a secure

activities, responsibly conducted, obviously do and happy childhood". Unfortunately the issue

much good. They could, however, result in a is fogged by misunderstanding and the adoption

rise in the proportion of married people among of an extreme position by some who concentrate

4-ER.

103

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

on the psychodynamic aspect of causation. "The voluntary sterilization in individual cases. Even

genetic approach to the problem of schizo- so severe a critic of many eugenic proposals as

phrenia and manic-depressive psychosis is not Professor Haldane has said, of metabolic and

so pessimistic, deterministic or sterile as many other abnormalities inherited as autosomal

psychiatrists are still inclined to believe.... recessives, that though negative eugenic measures

Nor is there any conflict between a genetic like sterilization would be of little value in

theory and the idea that psychological and other reducing the frequency of these abnormalities

factors may precipitate ... psychoses, which "doubtless parents who have produced one

appear in persons having a specific genotype." child with a grave recessive defect should

(Book, 1952)

have no more children". He advocates, of

There is now a strong move towards keeping course, persuasion and not compulsion, to

the mentally ill in the community if at all this end.

possible. The many virtues in this movement There is a place for persuasion and advice in

need no emphasis. It coincides with a disposition this matter of reducing the fertility of those who

in psychiatrists to discharge patients from have had a mental illness. I doubt, however, if

mental hospitals soon after the acute symptoms we know enough to advocate celibacy and

of their attack have subsided, even though childlessness to many of those who seem to us

there is a recognized possibility of relapse within predisposed to mental illness, in the light of their

a short time. The development of therapeutic family history and constitutional traits: there

methods in the last twenty years has promoted are too many opportunities for error in judging

the tendency towards much shorter periods of that a "schizoid" or "syntonic" personality or

stay in the mental hospital. All in all, the a particular bodily habit forebodes mental

chances of a particular patient with schizo- illness, and there are too many valuable qualities

phrenia or melancholia spending a substantial closely allied to supposedly premorbid ones, to

part of his life in uninterrupted residence in a justify such a step in most cases. But once a man

mental hospital are becoming much less. This or woman has been overtly ill with one of the

may increase the fertility of schizophrenics; it illnesses that are genetically controlled, advice

seems unlikely, however, that it would greatly about having children may be called for: and it

do so, since, as I mentioned earlier, Essen-M6ller may prevent much individual unhappiness. This

had found that there was little relation between presumes, ofcourse, restraint and soundjudgment

duration of hospital stay and fertility after the in the advising physician-the antithesis of the

onset of illness. The question is still open, and irresponsible attitude sometimes shown when

important. We have unfortunately only the a depressed or neurotic woman is advised to

German inter-war data to go on, which may not become pregnant so that she may have a child

correspond to post-war experience in various to interest her.

countries.

There are, of course, psychiatrists who believe

Sterilization is a topic impossible to ignore that most of the evidence put forward in favour

when discussing the eugenic aspects of the of hereditary transmission of mental illness is

fertility of mentally ill persons. We have, it is better interpreted as evidence of the paramount

clear, abundant evidence that many schizo- influence of upbringing and personal relations

phrenics need no such surgical aid to sterility. within the family. To them the fertility of the

There are, however, also the manic-depressives, mentally ill is of little or no consequence, except

with their approximately normal fertility. It is insofar as the patient is likely, or unlikely, to

generally agreed that sterilization would not bring up her children well, in the light ofaccepted

appreciably reduce the amount of schizophrenia psychodynamic principles. Such a view is un-

and manic-depressive psychosis in the popula- warrantably one-sided. The fertility of those

tion, even if it were carried out with the abomin- with mental illness is important, and is not less

able thoroughness and compulsion which the so because it carries implications that we cannot

National Socialists employed in Germany. But fully assess at present because our information

this does not preclude the employment of about relevant biological, demographic and

104

FERTILITY AND MENTAL ILLNESS

social facts is too scanty. Not only eugenists but

REFERENCES

all compassionate and reflective people must surely be concerned at an increase in the number of children born to parents who are themselves affected by a prolonged mental illness or who are destined to become mentally ill-perhaps
many times-before they reach old age. Because of this much further inquiry is needed into the biological, social and psychological factors that control fertility in the mentally ill.

Book, J. A. A Genetic and Neruopsychiatric Investigation of a North-Swedish Population. 1953. Acta Genetica. 4:133
Dahlberg, Gunnar. Die Fruchtbarkeit der Geisteskranken. 1933. Z'schr. f.d. ges. NeuroL u. Psychiat. 144: 427
Dayton, Neil A. Size of family and Birth order in Mental Disease. 1930. Studies in Quantitative and Cultural Sociol. 24: 123 New Facts on Mental Disorders. Baltimore. 1940. Thomas.

Summary A hundred years ago mental disorders were believed to occur in "degenerate" families, which tended to die out. By the turn of the century this
was replaced by the opposite view, that the hereditarily diseased and insane would multiply until they swamped the rest of society. Systematic investigations have shown the falsity of
these extreme views. Of the two commonest and gravest mental disorders, manic-depressive psy-
chosis is characterized by approximately normal
fertility, and schizophrenia by much lower fertility than normal, largely because of lessened capacity for marriage. Very little is known about
the fertility of people with neurotic disorders, but there is no evidence that it differs greatly
from the normal.
The hereditary transmission of mental disorder is still a grave problem, though often slurred over in mental hygiene campaigns. Schizophrenia is largely a hereditary disease or group of diseases; since it remains as prevalent as ever in spite of the relatively low fertility of those who suffer from it, fresh mutations are evidently replenishing the otherwise dwindling supply of people predisposed to it: the same might be said, though to a much lesser extent, of manicdepressive psychosis. Radiation may be raising the mutation rate for these hereditary diseases.
We do not know enough to warrant our making firm predictions or advocating celibacy and childlessness to outwardly healthy people who seem predisposed to mental illness, but once a man or woman has been overtly ill with one of the mental disorders that are genetically controlled, advice about having children may be called for: it should be cautious and should draw on the best available genetic and psychiatric information.

Dorn, H. F. Pitfalls in Population Forecasts. 1950. J. Amer. Stat. Assoc. 45: 311
Essen-Moller, Erik. Untersuchungen ulber die Frucht-
barkeit gewisser Gruppen von Geisteskranken. 1935. Acta Psychiat. Suppl. 8. Copenhagen: Levin and Munksgaard. Die Heiratshaufigkeit der Geschwister von Schizophrenen. 1936. Arch. f. Rassen u. Gesell. Biol. 30: 367 Glass, Bentley. Genetic Changes in Human Populations. 1954. Advances in Genetics. 6: 95 Greenwood, M., and Yule, G. Udny. On the determination of size of family. 1914. J. Roy. Stat. Soc. 77: 179 Haldane, J. B. S. New Paths in Genetics. London. 1941. Allen and Unwin. Heron, David. A first study ofthe statistics ofInsanity and the Inheritance of the Insane Diathesis. London. 1907. Dulau. Kallmann, Fritz J. The Genetics of Schizophrenia. New York, 1938. Augustin. Larsson, Tage. The Interaction of Population changes and Heredity. 1956/57. Acta Genet. et Stat. Med. 6: 333 Maudsley, H. The Genesis of Mind. 1862. J. Ment. Sci. 8:61
Mertens, K. Untersuchungen ilber die Heiratshaufigkeit der Schizophrenen und der Manisch-Depressiven sowie deren Geschwister. Wurzburg, 1939. Inaug. Dissert.
Morel, B. A. Traite' des Di'gcn6rescences physiques, intellectuelles et morales de l'espece humaine. Paris,
1857. Bailli6re. Nixon, W. L. B., and Slater, E. A second investigation
into the Children of Cousins. 1958. Acta Genet. et Stat. Med. 7: 513 Norris, Vera. A statistical study of the Influence of Marriage on the Hospital Care of the Mentally Sick. 1956. J. Ment. Sci. 102: 467 Odegaard, 0. Marriage and Mental Disease. 1946. J. Ment. Sci. 92: 35 New Data on Marriage and Mental Disease. 1953. J. Ment. Sci. 99: 778 Pearson, Karl. The scope and Importance to the State of the Science of National Eugenics. 14th Robert Boyle Lecture. London, 1907. Frowde. Penrose, L. S. Estimate of the Incidence of Cases of Schizophrenia and Manic-Depressive Reaction due to Spontaneous Mutation. Appendix E. Hazards to Man of Nuclear and Allied Radiations. 1956. H.M.S.O. Mutation in Man. 1956. Acta Genetica. 6: 169

lO0

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Popenoe, Paul. Fecundity ofthe Insane. 1928. J. Heredity. 19: 73
Registrar-General's Statistical Review of England and Wales for the two years 1950-51: Supplement on General Morbidity, Cancer and Mental Health. London, 1955. H.M.S.O.

Weinberg, Wilhelm. Die Rassenhygienische Bedeutung
der Fruchtbarkeit. 1910. Arch. f. Rassen u. Gesell. Biol. 7: 684 Westoff, C. F., and Kiser, Clyde V. Interrelation of Fertility and Feeling of Personal Inadequacy. 1952. Milbank Mem. Fund. Quart. 30: 239

POPULATION STUDIES
A Journal of Demography
Edited by D. V. GLASS and E. GREBENIK

Vol XI No. 3.

CONTENTS

March 1958

G. ROWNTREE and N. H. CARRIER. The Resort to Divorce in England and Wales, 1858-1957

C. T. E. QUENSEL.

The Interrelations of Marital Status, Fertility, Family Size and Intelligence Test Scores.

WOLF SCOTT.

Fertility and Social Mobility Among Teachers.

B. BENJAMIN.

Inter-Generation Differences in Occupation.

Book Reviews. List of Books and Publications Received.

Subscription Price per volume: L2. 2s. Od. (U.S. $6.75, post free).
Price per part: ,1. Os. Od., plus postage (U.S. $3.25, post free).

Published by the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE, at the LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE, 15 HOUGHTON STREET, LONDON, W.C.2.

Io6

