THE
EUGENICS REVIEW

Editorial Offices: The Eugenics Society, "Eugenics is the study of agencies under

69 Eccieston Square, London, S.W.1. social control that may improve or impair

(TeZephone-Victoria 2091.)

the racial qualities of future generations

Editor for the Society-Maurice Newfield. either physically or mentally."

THE GALTON LUNCHEON, 1941
Discussion on Eugenics in War-time

AS m 1940, the Eugenics Society held victory going to him who pursued it

an informal luncheon on February promptly, unremittingly, and with all his

I7th instead of the Galton Dinner and available strength. This state of affairs did

Lecture which normally fall on that date. not seem to allow much scope for normal

Once again, notwithstanding the pressure of activities, yet in his view the Society was

public duties, Lord Horder presided and right not to close down. There were many

opened a discussion on eugenic principles things that had to be watched and noted.

and policies in war-time.

The Society had to be prepared for, and to

Welcoming members of the Society and reinforce, any movement arising out of war

their friends, LORD HORDER recalled St. conditions which favoured its cause, and to

Paul's injunction, " Not forsaking the combat any tendency which might check it.

assembling of ourselves together." They As a favourable movement, he instanced the

had met that day to honour the memory of present widely spread propaganda for a

Sir Francis Galton, the founder of eugenics system of family allowances. War was a

and of the movement represented by the great accelerator as well as a great destroyer,

Eugenics Society.

and if the slack due to apathy in peace-time

At the outbreak of war it had been held was taken up in any direction, it was our

by some members that the best course would duty to avail ourselves of the advance and

be to go into cold storage-both the Society to see that it was maintained when the war

and themselves perhaps-but the Council was over.

had decided otherwise. The Society main- To this attitude Lord Horder applied. the

tained its activities, through a small Emer- term vigilant conservatism. It was one

gency Committee, and full Council Meetings which was not, he said, popular with some

would be held if and when necessary.

members of the Society, who wished to direct

By their nature the principles of eugenics its activities, and its income, into channels

depended for their operation on a long-term which on analysis scarcely seemed to con-

policy. But both of the means by which the form to the constitutional meaning of the

Society could forward these principles de- Society's existence. But the officers of the

manded time and opportunity: he referred Society were very willing to consider any

to research and education. War, on the activity consonant with eugenic principles.

other hand, was entirely an opportune affair, He hoped that in the ensuing discussion both

III

I2 THHE EUGENICS REVIEW

members and visitors would give their views to the potential fathers who were killed.

on these matters.

Separation, anxiety and fear certainly led

Addressing himself to the Press, Lord to fewer births, and we should do our best

Horder said that he felt he ought to offer to see that these inevitable results of war

them an apology. Had he been consulted were minimized as far as possible.

he might have hesitated to invite them, THE HON. MRS. GRANT DUFF said that since

welcome guests though they were, to what the last Galton Luncheon the need for a know-

was essentially a domestic gathering. Never- ledge of eugenics in this period of crisis had

theless, the fact that the Eugenics Society become increasingly evident. It might per-

was alive and meeting for this discussion haps be argued that the facts of heredity were

was, he trusted, an item of news, if not such never more conspicuous; it was necessary

a " story " as they were said to desire, and only to witness the achievements of General

perhaps they would not feel they had come Wavell and his army of highly selected men.

on an empty mission.

Nevertheless, an efficient Eugenics Society

MRS. HUBBACK said she was very glad that was needed for the fulfilment of Galton's

the Society had decided to carry on during purpose, " the study of agencies under social

the war. In such a time people's thoughts control that may improve or impair the

turned more readily towards fundamental racial qualities of future generations either

issues, and she had found an unusual readi- physically or mentally." We needed, as

ness to accept new ideas and to look forward. ever, research on how the laws of human

All could not help directly in the war effort, heredity worked, so that doctors might guide

but most people were ready to do what they their patients and society get the best from

could. It was worth recalling what a its existing human material. But equally

number of fine movements were started we needed to inform the public of the possible

during the last war-social insurance, hous- applications of knowledge already available

ing, and the emancipation of women.

-not indeed in the hope of producing genius

The question of family allowances was one at will, but in the reasonable expectation

in which all members were actively con- that we could raise the general level of

cerned. She believed that there would soon intelligence and physical fitness and lessen

be some sort of family allowances scheme on the proportion of the hereditarily unfit.

the Statute book; public opinion was turn- Heredity and environment were the warp

ing towards it. The cost of living had gone and woof of life, so inextricably woven

up, and would probably soon be higher, and together that we were bound to regard not

this bore most hardly on those who combined only the applications of heredity but all

low earnings with several small children. social service as part of our domain. Well-

Several important committees of the Labour directed social service, while helping to make

Party had declared themselves in favour of the best of our population to-day, would

this system-a State scheme financed out never lose sight of the welfare of future

of taxation. This would have to be on a generations.

flat rate, but the Eugenics Society had It was impossible, continued the speaker,

examined schemes for supplementing it, to see how we could have any lasting peace,

possibly by mutual insurance, in the higher any true reconstruction of our unhappy

income grades.

world, unless we learnt the lessons of science,

Family allowances by themselves would especially as they concerned human heredity

not lead to an immediate reversal of present and capacity. The supreme importance of

population trends, but it was realized that these factors had been brought home to

the possession of a family was now a financial those who had received evacuee children,

liability. We would do well to remember many of whom were difficult in character

that as an immediate result of the last war and subnormal in intelligence and behaviour.

there were half a million fewer births, ex- The hosts must have asked themselves how

cluding the estimated loss in population due much of this evil, affecting people of our own

THE GAITON LUNCHEON, 1941

stock, was due to bad housing, bad nutrition Snow medal by the American Social Hygiene

and faulty education, and how much to Association.*

inbom defects. It was the business of the MRS. NEVILLE-ROLFE said that the fact

Eugenics Society to try and answer these that this was the first time the award had

questions. Such knowledge was needed to been made outside America, and to a woman,

guide our legislators, our doctors, our was a tribute to social science. There was,

teachers and our children, in the hope that she believed, one point about this war which

our grandchildren might yet live to see a was favourable from the eugenic standpoint.

better world.

Brutal though it might sound, total war was

MR. TITMuss said that Mrs. Hubback had far less damaging to the race, for it took a

referred to the influence of the last war on cross-section of the population, of all ages

social thinking. In this connection it was and both sexes, whereas in the last war, in

interesting to see what the Eugenics Society each belligerent nation, the flower of young

had had to say about eugenics in war-time manhood was swept away. We were fight-

at the same stage in the last war. In I9I6 ing for intellectual as well as material free-

Professor Thompson gave the Galton Lec- dom, and she urged that the younger

ture, and said that both materially and generation should be equipped mentally

spiritually the world would be a better with all the knowledge we had available.

place: " There will be some compensations. She would like to see a very widespread effort

. . . A new era will have been born." And made to educate the many young people

yet we had failed. Perhaps the dysgenic now gathered together in this country,and

effects of loss of man-power had led to lack to help them to rebuild Britain on eugenie

of leadership. So far, in this war, our losses lines.

had been very much lighter; and even these THE HON. MRS. HOME PEEL gave an

losses might be compensated by using our account of the work of the National Council

man-power more intelligently. We had seen of Women, and showed that its work was con-

how the average urban toiler had stood up tinuing as far as possible during the war.

to total warfare. Neither the falling birth- MR. BRAMWELL mentioned the doctrine of

rate nor the drift from the land had under- equal opportunities for all and discussed its

mined their powers of resistance or their impracticability. It was, for example, no

bravery. In his opinion the dysgenic effect use training a colour-blind person to become

of prolonged unemployment and economic a portrait painter. Similarly, it would not

depression was almost as far-reaching as that be practical for all young people to receive a

of war. The war had not brought about an university education, for so many would be

outbreak of neurosis, and this fact alone needed to teach them that there would

could bring some comfort.

hardly be enough people left to carry on the

Turning .to the trend in fertilty, Mr. Titmuss said that the birth-rate was almost
certain to decline if the war went on for a considerable time. This was a matter about
which we could do little in the midst of war, but what we could do was to help to guard and extend measures taken for the health
of children. We should not concentrate wholly on the replanning of Britain in the material sense; we also wanted better citizens and not a social order that was merely 19I4 refurbished.

work of the country. The best that could be hoped for would be that intelligence and not influence should be the passport for higher education.
MR. GUN spoke of the heredity of leader-ship, instancing Sir Maitland Wilson and Admiral Cunningham. He said that if none of the sixteen ancestors of an individual displayed this quality, one could be certain that the man, whatever other good qualities he possessed, would not have it either.
MRS. HODSON said that although our gross
losses had not yet been so great in this_war

LORD HORDER then congratulated Mrs. as in the last, they had been particularly

Neville-Rolfe on her recent award of the

* bee page 135.

114 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

great in the Air Force and Navy, and we had
therefore lost many picked men. She appealed to the Press to counteract the feeling among all ranks of those chivalrous men who refused to marry because they did not wish to leave a widow. If they had to leave a widow, they should also leave a mother. The young men in the Forces should be urged to marry as quickly as they could.
MRS. MITCHELL told of the campaign of
the Incorporated Midwives' Institute to
obtain State aid to enable mothers to stop away from work for four weeks before the
birth of a child and eight weeks afterwards. LADY CHAMBERS asked if a special film
could be made to be shown throughout the country, and if the Ministry of Information
would allow this.

MRS. GRANT DUFF replied that the Ministry of Information had turned down the Society's film as unsuitable, but said that they would make one if the Ministry of Health asked for such a film.
LORD HORDER said that the suggestion
was good in principle, and he would try and see if the new broom at the Ministry of Health would sweep in this direction. The
luncheon had evoked proof that the Eugenics Society was alive. The discussion had brought to light a number of suggestions about the ways in which the eugenic principle could express itself. He was grateful to Mrs. Grant Duff for having brought this scheme into operation, and for the support of all present.

THE STUDY OF RACIAL MIXTURE IN THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH
Some Anthropolo,ical Preliminaries By K. L. LITTLE
(The Duckworth Laboratory, University Museum of Archcsology and Ethnology, Cambridge)
IN a recently published and noteworthy anthropometric material collected by Prosymposium entitled " Race Relations fessor Melville J. Herskovits, who in his turn and the Race Problem," eleven pro- attributes the rise and growth of this new
minent American writers reviewed the socio- hybrid " race " to the effect of social logical implications of racial contacts on the selection. American continent, with special reference Although the interest shown in North to problems arising out of the very large America to problems of racial relations in racial minority in the U.S.A. of some I3 particular, and to human genetics in general, million American Negroes. One of these as proved by the articles in such journals as authors, Professor S. J. Holmes, has pointed the American Journal of Physical Anthroout elsewhere that there are three racial pology, is readily understandable, it stands possibilities in view for the United States. out in very sharp relief to the lukewarm The entire population may become attention afforded to such matters in the " white "; it may become " black"; or countries which compose the British "whites " and " blacks " may fuse together Commonwealth. The latter empire cominto a hybrid stock. This last possibility prises practically speaking members of every seems to be fairly well substantiated by the major and minor race group in the world, and

