A EUGENIC COLONY

A Proposal for South America

By C. WICKSTEED ARMSTRONG

I HAD the honour of being invited by It is easy and fashionable to excuse our-

the Council of the Eugenics Society to selves from action by saying that we do

read a paper on " A Eugenic Colony " not know enough yet about genetics, nor

last November, and had accepted the invita- are we sufficiently agreed as to what

tion; but unforeseen circumstances obliged hereditary qualities are desirable in man-

me, to my great regret and keen disappoint- kind, to be able to do anything in the way

ment, to leave Europe for Brazil before the of positive eugenics. But if man had

date fixed for the reading of the paper, and always been so cautious in his social,

I see no prospect as yet of being able to political, or scientific spheres of action, no

return even for a flying visit.

great enterprise could ever have been

Although my paper was to have been undertaken; for, more especially in soci-

descriptive of a garden suburb which I had ology, it is very difficult indeed to know

hoped to be instrumental in founding in with absolute certainty, in advance, the

England, on the lines, more or less, of the exact results of any proposed line of

Jardins Ungemach which I had studied de action, having a view to human better-

visu in Strasbourg-but more definitely ment. We know, in the present instance,

eugenic in its conception-I have come to that health, intelligence, and moral

the conclusion that the question of locality stamina are desirable characteristics and

for the first real eugenic colony is a secon- that they are largely hereditary. We

dary one; and it may usefully be founded know, too, that physical and mental

wherever most feasible; for it can keep defect, criminal tendencies, and general

always in touch with the metropolis and lassitude are undesirable, and that they are

with other colonies subsequently founded; quite as surely hereditary or due largely

while the example, wherever set, will to hereditary tendencies as are good quali-

sooner or later be followed in many places. ties. We know that figs are not gathered

I therefore determined, after my arrival from thorns, nor does poor stock breed

in Rio de Janeiro, to take an early oppor- sturdy humanity. That is all it is neces-

tunity of visiting the Parana and Santa sary to know in order to begin favouring

Catharina Plateau, of which I had often the multiplication of those stocks that have

heard as being so exceptionally favoured the desired qualities and discouraging that

by Nature that it is highly probable it may of the others.

one day become the seat of a great civiliza- At present, in England and in most

tion. In doing so I have had in view the democratic countries, we are, of course,

possibilities of a eugenic colony such as I doing exactly the opposite, since we have

described in my book The Survival of the family endowment for paupers and unem-

Unfittest, rather than a garden city.

ployables, and none for those working;

Before describing the places I have while, at the same time, we penalize pro-

visited or discussing their suitability for creation among the more effective sections

such a scheme as I have in mind, let me of the population by means of crushing

first go into the question of the desira- taxation. A wise old proverb says that

bility-nay the urgency-of beginning " God helps those who help themselves,"

some such practical work in positive but modern legislators have quite made up

eugenics at the present time.

their minds that, whatever God may do,

9I

92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

they, knowing better, will see to it that the Roman civilization had gone under;

help is not lacking for those who cannot and the farther off from Europe such

or will not help themselves, and that those colonies may be, the more likely, too, will

who do help themselves shall pay for it. they be to escape the general dgbdcle.

At the same time, medical science has for long been busy saving the weaklings and A PRACTICAL SCHEME OF EUGENICS

prolonging the lives of the unfit of every So much in justification of my enthusi-

description, that they may live to repro- asm in seeking a home for the first eugenic

duce their kind; and " christian " charity colony, and my boldness in putting before

has done perhaps even more than science the readers of this REVIEW, in the present

with, apparently, this same " charitable " article, a practical scheme, by which, as I

end in view. Under such circumstances it believe, the ideal can actually be realized

is hardly surprising that racial decay goes with comparatively small expense-and

on apace.

infinite possibilities for the future.

I may be accused of preaching to the In the plateau to which I have referred

converted in calling the attention of are to be found vast tracts of the most

readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW to such fertile land in the world, still covered with

facts as these. But it is just in these facts virgin forest-not tropical jungle, but

that the reason lies for urgent action in forests such as exist in the temperate zone,

positive eugenics, of which so many largely coniferous. There still flourish the

eugenists seem to be afraid. If we put cedars, walnut, cinnamon, mahogany, and

things off much longer it may be too late. other hardwoods that have been destroyed

Certainly it will be so if we wait until the in so many countries, as well as millions

science of genetics has found out all there of pines. The rainfall is abundant, the

is to know about human heredity, or until climate ideal-the height of the plateau

everybody is agreed upon what particular above sea level being from a thousand to

sorts of intelligence are most desirable or four thousand feet and the latitude from

what code of morals will bring about the the 24th to the 29th parallel South. There

greatest happiness. Moreover, as things is no disease and the people one meets are

are at present in the world, it will perhaps sturdy and well fed.

be easier to begin with positive eugenics The area of the plateau is about equal to

than negative, in the practical sphere. that of England and Wales, though it is

It is feared by many that civilization largely uninhabited. Even when the coast

itself will crash during the next world war; towns are taken into cdnsideration, the

and the failure of the League of Nations density is not more than eight persons to

(up to the time of writing) to effect any the square mile. The average winter

substantial disarmament or gain for us the temperature is about 52 degrees Fahren-

prospect of such in the near future, cer- heit and that of summer 6o degrees; the

tainly makes another great war more extremes being three or four degrees below

probable than it may have seemed when freezing point on the one hand and 95

the Disarmament Conference began its degrees in the shade on the other. The

sterile deliberations. Now if socialistic plateau is bounded on the east by the Serra

legislation or mutual extermination in war do Mar and on the west by the basin of

bring about the crash of civilization, sooner the great Parana river.

or later, then any eugenic colonies, founded In many parts there exist small and scat-

in our time, may eventually become the tered settlements, resulting from the activi-

refuge of civilization, of culture, and of ties of certain companies which buy up

human evolution-physical, intellectual, tracts of land and divide them into lots

and moral-just as Alexandria and Byzan- of, generally, twenty-five hectares each-

tium were the refuge of knowledge and that is, about 62 acres. These they sell

wisdom throughout the dark ages, when to German and Italian immigrants, who

A EUGENIC COLONY

generally do very well, or to people who concessionarios, and have come to the con-

speculate on a future rise in values, leav- clusion that it would be wiser to buy land

ing it therefore unused and unoccupied. I from them than to go to more inaccessible

have visited many of these settlements, and parts for the sake of greater cheapness.

wherever the colonists have worked, the From these settlements such products as

fertility of the soil has amply rewarded are not consumed locally can be sent to

them. During the first year or two they the seaports by road, rail, or water-way-

generally limit their operations to cutting some of the rivers being navigable. Those

down trees, selling the hardwood to the flowing eastwards are small, but are

saw-mills, which are to be found every- navigable sometimes for steam barges as

where, and, after burning the worthless far as the Serra do Mar, where roads or

trees, planting maize, potatoes, mandiocre railways connect up with the plateau.

and other easily raised crops. The sale Those flowing westwards are navigable for

of hardwood alone more than repays the hundreds of miles and eventually flow into

cost of the land. Later, they plant fruit the River Plate.

trees. Nearly all the fruits of sub-tropical

and temperate zones do well, especially CHEAP LAND AVAILABLE

grapes, apples, pears, peaches, apricots, One can buy as much as, say, four

plums, mangoes, pineapples, oranges, thousand hectares (ten thousand acres) in

lemons and-in the lowlands near the a single locality-all or mostly virgin

coast, though not, of course, in the high- forest-and enjoy all the advantages pro-

lands-bananas. These last flourish greatly vided for new-comers at anything from £25

wherever there is no fear of frosts. to £ioo per " lot " of 25 hectares (622

They also plant wheat and other cereals, acres). The price will vary according to

tobacco, beans, clover, sunflower, and an the part of the country chosen, the quality

infinity of other crops which by their of the land, the number of hectares taken,

wonderful exuberance prove eloquently the and the method of payment. At £25 per

great fertility of the soil. Pigs, chickens, " lot " one could buy io,ooo acres of the

cattle, and horses, are also reared with best land (virgin forest), in certain parts,

profit. for £4,000. But one thousand acres,

The concessionarios who plan these affording double-sized lots of I25 acres each

colonies and arrange for immigration, for eight families would perhaps be suffi-

generally provide many conveniences for cient, in the absence of ample funds, for

new-comers, such as roads, bridges, and making a beginning, and more could be

the means for arriving at their land, acquired later on. That would only cost

hostels where they can put up for a time £400 or a little more, on account of the

and where they can easily live for from one smaller quantity.

to two shillings a day per person, or, if One of the first towns I visited was

they cook for themselves, about sixpence Blumenau, in the State of Santa Catharina.

-hospitals, club-rooms, medical atten- This pretty place-the " city of flowers,"

dance, churches, schools, saw-mills, as its name indicates-is almost exclu-

pharmacies, general stores, etc. But the sively German. Many of tne inhabitants

inflow of German and Italian immigrants cannot speak Portuguese, which, of course,

which began about a century ago is now is the language of the country. I was

small on account of the state of things in received there with open arms when these

Europe, for few can now afford a passage good people heard that I had a scheme for

out or find the capital with which to buy bringing over English families. I don't

land, even at the attractive prices for which think we English quite appreciate the

good land may be had. And so there are kindly feeling Germans in most parts of

still vast regions quite untouched.

the world seem to entertain towards us,

I have priced the land with many of these even after the world war. They call them-

94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

selves Anglo-Saxons, and, historically tary of the Itajahy, I found the lands

speaking, they certainly have as good a which, taking into consideration their price,

right to the name as we have. Thus they their quality and the conveniences offered,

regard us as of their own kith and kin. pleased me more than any of those I saw

The war with England seemed to them later. At the time of my visit these lands

incredible; for they could not see how fellow could be had at £25 a lot or little more,

Anglo-Saxons could join the Latins in a provided one bought at least ten or twenty.

war whose object they believed to be the They consisted of virgin forest and were

extermination of the German Homeland- situated about twelve miles from Tayo, on

the Anglo-Saxon Homeland!

rising, well-watered ground, between the

Blumenau is a little model township of Serras. The altitude is about twelve

some six thousand souls, founded just fifty hundred feet and the whole country is

years ago. All its houses have gardens undulating and very beautiful. The plan-

which bloom throughout the year. Even tations I saw upon lots already sold and

the business premises are mostly in nearer to Tayo were exuberant, consisting

picturesque chalets. The streets are of maize, mandiocre, tobacco, fruit trees,

beautifully clean, and there are no poor. and pasture; but the settlers here were still

Living is very cheap, and well-built brick chiefly engaged upon clearing the ground

chalets with room for a large family can and exporting hardwoods.

be put up for about £250, for both labour

and material are cheap and good. The town has no prison, for there is no crime.

A GERMAN POPULATION

It is situated in the lowlands near the The colonists throughout Santa Catharina

mouth of the river Itajahy, which is are mostly Germans, and that is one of the

navigable to that point. At the mouth of reasons I prefer that State to the neigh-

the river is the little port of Itajahy, but bouring States of ParanA and Rio Grande

as large steamers cannot enter this port, do Sul, which are more cosmopolitan.

most of the exports from the settlements These Germans are a simple, hard-working

go by barge from Blumenau to Sao people, and would be excellent neighbours.

Francisco do Sul, the port of Joinville, It is a pleasure to see the pretty fair-haired

another German centre in Santa Catharina. children of the settlers, after one has been

They find insatiable markets in Santos (for used to meeting so many negroes and half-

Sao Paulo), Rio de Janeiro, and Buenos breeds in other parts of Brazil. They are

Aires.

proverbially honest, and police are un-

In Blumenau I stayed at an inn, where necessary and seldom met with. How

I paid about two shillings a day, all different from the Wild West of North

included. Life there was simple, but the America! Probably an excellent way to

bedrooms were clean and the food abun- begin organizing a eugenic colony here

dant. From there I went by rail to Lontra, would be to offer a few lots to German

at the head of the Serra do Mar. There settlers on the spot, choosing, of course,

one reaches the uplands which lie between those with the highest eugenic value and

the lowlands of the sea board and the high many sturdy children. These would even-

plateau. The height above sea level in tually blend excellently with British stock,

Lontra is about a thousand feet, and the and reinforce the Nordic blood of the latter,

ground then rises gradually, as one travels together with those qualities of honesty,

towards the interior, till the culminating orderliness, love of work, of family, of

point is reached with the Serra Geral, music, and of social life which are among

about a hundred miles inland.

the best characteristics of the Nordics

Going by motor-diligence to Trombudo wherever found. The proximity, too, of

and thence by private motor-car to Tayo, numerous Italian settlers would offer

situated on a river of that name, a tribu- opportunity for selecting, later on, some of

A EUGENIC COLONY

95

the best Mediterraneans, with their artistic Blumenau but also the powers that be in

temperament and physical charm.

Rio de Janeiro would welcome British

settlers of good stock. One of the problems

A MIXTURE OF RACES

Brazil has to face is the peopling of her

In Porto Alegre, the capital of Rio soil, and her rulers are alive to the fact

Grande do Sul, where I am now staying, that the country's future largely depends

the German, Italian, Spanish, and Portu- upon the sort of immigrant to come over.

guese elements have blended with very I have often heard it said, even by Luso-

happy results. Nearly 40 per cent. of the Brazilians, that Brazil's greatest misfor-

original settlers were German, which is tune was to be discovered and colonized by

just as well. The city is one of the most the Portuguese; for had it been peopled by

go-ahead places one can encounter nowa- Germanic stock-by the British or by the

days, and seems not to know what " world Dutch, as very nearly happened-it would

depression " means. Building operations to-day have rivalled the United States in

are going on everywhere, and business power and progress. But the Portuguese

seems very brisk. The population has imported slaves from Africa and freely

greatly increased during the past few years interbred with them; thus producing an

and is now about 350,000; so that if not indolent race which can only become pro-

already the third city of Brazil and one of gressive in so far as new and vigorous

the largest in South America, it soon will European blood can be infused.

be so. The men here are considerably

taller than elsewhere in Brazil and the THE BRITISH WANTED

women often very beautiful. In this latter At a time when all colonial lands are

fact Porto Alegre resembles Buenos Aires, shutting out the undesirable immigrant,

and is very different from Rio de Janeiro, for the sake of their own racial future,

where human beauty is extremely rare. Brazil will not be slow to recognize the

Among other admirable traits evinced is advantages of eugenic immigration, for Dr.

the love of music, which is very general, Renato Kehl and other Brazilian eugenists

and doubtless results directly from the are becoming daily more influential among

blend of German and Italian elements, the ruling classes here. At the present

since these are the two most musical races moment they are endeavouring to have cer-

in Europe.

tain eugenic principles incorporated within

In the little town of Santa Maria, in the the new Constitution which is being

hills, there is a curious custom to be noted elaborated.

on the evenings when the Municipal Band The Brazilian Dictator, Getulio Vargas,

plays in the Gardens (every town has its recently wrote:

Municipal Band and its Public Gardens). The marriageable young men walk solemnly two by two down the central avenue throughout the first part of the pro-

The authorities, in alliance with private initiative and guided by a careful scientific study of facts, have before them in the protection of the nation's children, especi-

gramme, while the marriageable young ally in the preservation of life and health

women walk in the opposite direction, so and in their mental and physical develop-

as to meet again. During the second half ment, a transcendental problem, the key to

the promenade continues, but the sexes are no longer separated. It is in this way that sweethearts are found and marriages effected in Santa Maria; and perhaps it is

our future wealth; more especially in this country, where more perhaps than in any
other, factors injurious to the formation of
a strong and healthy race have accumulated.

not a bad plan, for it has resulted in a rapid The ardent desire to better the race is

increase of population and a happy blend not wanting, but, as happens at present the

of the German and Italian elements.

world over, the really effective measures-

I know that not only the Germans of those of eugenic reform-are as yet hardly

96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

contemplated. But they will be so: it is from the ocean and from future sea ports

only a question of time.

of importance.

We now come to the practical question

OUR OBJECTIONS

as to how a Eugenic Colony can (and will, I believe) be organized in these parts; and

As to the possible objection, on the part the no less important question of its real

of British eugenists, to the draining away utility to the eugenic cause, which is the

from Britain of some of her best blood, to cause of humanity.

however small an extent, at a time when

she most needs it-and this for the benefit of lands outside the Empire-I venture to

READINESS TO BEGIN

predict that Britain would benefit by the If it is possible to arouse sufficient

carrying out of my scheme, for the greater interest in England to enable me to raise

the extent of the drainage and the greater from five hundred to a few thousand

its publicity, the surer would be the pounds, I am ready to begin at once

duplication or multiplication of such carrying out my scheme, by buying the

experiments within Britain herself and land. The next step will be to advertise

within the Empire. Once initiated, the in England for suitable families. These

movement for eugenic colonies may well should, in the first place, be farmers, with

become a world movement-and if that families-the more children the better, pro-

is so, the benefit to Humanity will be vided all are thoroughly sound mentally

incalculable.

and physically. Someone in England

I shall not have space here to describe in would have to be found willing and able to

any detail the other regions I visited. judge of the respective merits of such can-

Suffice it to say that those in the central didates as might offer, taking into con-

highlands are perhaps too difficult of access sideration, first and foremost, freedom from

at present to offer attractions to new- hereditary defect and such physical

comers, but could be taken up later as qualities as robust health, sound teeth,

opportunity arose. Those, again, in the hearing, eyesight, heart, and lungs,

hinterland, beyond the Sao Paulo-Rio together with some degree of physical

Grande Railway, which cuts the plateau in beauty. Proficiency in their callings and

two, from north to south, are either perfect normality in all other respects

inaccessible or unable to develop for want would be sine qua non. After the farmers,

of markets, since the freights charged by useful settlers would be carpenters, elec-

that railway are at present prohibitive. tricians, builders, mechanics, school-

The same applies to most of the State of masters, musicians, and men who had

Parana; while in that of Rio Grande the attained to eminence in any useful occupa-

price of land is, generally speaking, con- tion. But all would have to accept two

siderably higher than in Santa Catharina; conditions, namely: willingness to multi-

though there are grass lands suitable for ply as rapidly as Nature and their means

rearing cattle, which can be had for prices might permit, and readiness to obey one

perhaps even lower than those current in law only-Do unto others as ye would that

Santa Catharina. But these are entirely they should do unto you-but the word

devoid of trees, little raised above sea level others must be made to include future

and, in summer, the heat there is oppres- generations. For the Colony should be a

sive. Near the Rio Grande-Santa Catharina home of perfect freedom, and that is the

frontier, however, are lands which would only law a free community requires.

merit consideration on account of their The laws of the land would, of course,

great fertility, their cool climate, and their have to be respected, but little or no inter-

probable great value in the future, since ference need be feared from the authorities

many of the best of these lands are not far in such a colony as is proposed, so long

A EUGENIC COLONY

97

as taxes were paid-and they would be very I am, however, very sceptical about the

light indeed. The number of candidates to possibility of interesting even one moneyed

present themselves would, of course, person in England in a scheme of this sort.

depend upon the advantages offered. Per- Conventional channels are the only ones

haps the free grant of something over a through which the rich care to exercise

hundred acres in a far-off country would charity, and, as every eugenist knows, they

be insufficient to attract such numbers as generally succeed in doing more harm than

would be necessary if effective selection were good thereby; for, while palliating human

to be possible. The advantages one could suffering to-day, they may increase it a

offer would depend again upon the money thousandfold in future generations. It

raised, and might include a wooden chalet does not seem to have occurred yet to any

ready erected upon the property, or even wealthy man that the foundation of the

a well-built house, for labour and material first eugenic colony-for sooner or later

are extremely cheap, and, possibly, an there most certainly will be such colonies-

assisted passage out, but preferably a will secure deathless fame and the eternal

supply of seeds and instruments. Every gratitude of generations yet unborn. Be

candidate, however, would have to possess it so. I myself have six stalwart sons, and

some little capital, as a guarantee of inde- my hope is that, failing outside financial

pendence and a help toward success.

aid, if my present business enterprises

Once founded, the multiplication of the succeed, and life and strength last long

settlers through procreation, as also enough, I may secure to myself and them

through the arrival of new-comers, would, that honour which others reject.

in the course of time, secure the develop- For years now I have been as one crying

ment of a large and flourishing com- in the wilderness. I have also seen abler

munity, which would acquire new lands as men than myself suffer the same continual

required, being bound in honour to main- disappointment. Dr. Austin Freeman

tain always the eugenic ideals and avoid proposed the segregation of the fit, as an

the admixture of inferior blood. Eventu- alternative to that of the unfit, some ten

ally political power would come, with the
increase in numbers, and more rapid progress would then become possible.
Granted the foundation and initial success of the settlement, its ultimate importance as a centre of a new and better civilization almost follows as a corollary. The colony being in constant touch with such others as might be founded in other parts of the world, there would be interchange of ideas,

years ago, and has written since in the
REvIEw most convincing articles upon the necessity and the urgency of some such
action. But, so far as I have heard,
nothing at all has resulted. It is hard
indeed to stir up British conservatism and inertia-even among eugenists! There are always such excellent excuses for inaction and for delay. Amongst my most treasured possessions is a letter from the gifted author and undaunted paladin of

of products, of periodicals, and of visits. positive and practical eugenics to whom I

Intermarriages would also occur, and have just referred, in which, after lament-

though the different nuclei were separated ing his own advancing years, he says: " I

by great distances, they might be as one feel, however, that you, in the end, will

community with one common aim-the succeed in getting something done."

advancement of human evolution.

God grant it may be so !

Eugenics Review, -Vol. XXV, No. 2.

