THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS.
By LEWIS P. ORR, F.F.A., Secretary to the Scottish Life Assurance Company.
THE PRESENT POSITION.
WHEN the Society honoured me with an invitation to give an address on the subject of " Research in Life Assurance," I had considerable hesitation in accepting, as I feared that the material at disposal was not, at the present time, sufficient to enable one to treat the subject in such a satisfactory way as was desirable. But sympathy with the objects and aims of the Society overcame these scruples, and I have pleasure in contributing this paper with the prefatory remark that I am well aware that it must fail to fulfil the expectations of many of the members. It will, however, inform them of the present position of matters in the actuarial world, and may be a convenient reference for some one in the future who should be able to treat the subject in a more enlightening manner with the approaching increase of scientific material.
That there is a certain identity of interest between Eugenic and Actuarial Science goes without saying. Whatever truths the former may reveal in regard to heredity and other kindred matters must impress themselves on the latter science, and must affect it in working out the practical problems connected with life assurance. On the other hand, the Actuary has the command of a unique mass of records bearing upon some of the questions that the Eugenist is specially interested in, and is in the position-if he cares to take advantage of it-of being able to draw from them lessons of special value to both sciences.

332

EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr :

The problems which confront the Eugenist are largely matters of data and statistics, and the professional training and constant experience of the Actuary give him exceptional qualifications for dealing with them. In the Actuary the Eugenist will find at once a cold critic and a warm friend.
It may be well at the outset to make it clear that the Actuary, as such, looks upon human life, and the many problems which it presents, with a more restricted range of vision than the Eugenist. He has hitherto been mainly concerned with questions affecting the duration of human life; and those affecting the all-important matters of physical and mental well-being have come within his purview only so far as they have been
believed to affect longevity. Consequently his contributionsto other sciences-such as Medicine-partake largely of the form of tables of mortality illustrating the favourable or unfavourable death rates which take place in various groups of lives, which possess some special points distinguishing them from the normal. It does not follow that lives which are regarded by insurance companies as first class would be so regarded by the Eugenist; it is certain that a very considerable proportion of them would not, on account of their possessing certain points which to him would be unsatisfactory, but which have been deemed by the companies to be of insufficient importance to justify the penalizing of the lives.
It must also be remembered that the ordinary life assurance companies of Great Britain-I deal with these alone and not with the industrial companies-as well as of America, deal with people in a social position above that of the average of the country, and that there is a careful selection made of the lives that are accepted for assurance, so that those lives on their books who have unfavourable personal or family histories may, nevertheless, be regarded as the pick of their class, however unsatisfactory the class may be. Consequently it will not do to regard the statistics of insurance companies as being applicable to the community at large. Indeed, it might be said that the companies exclude from their business most of the cases which would be of the greatest interest to the Eugenist-as will be understood from the statement, which I think may be made, that

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

333

over go per cent. of the lives accepted are regarded as first class. It is evident, therefore, that the statistics of the companies must deal with certain problems in heredity in a very restricted manner.
To emphasise the great difference between statistics relating to the general population and those relating to the lives selected by life offices, I give the following table compiled by the Scottish Widows' Fund and Life Assurance Society.

Annual Mortality from Consumption in England and the Scottish Widows' Fund among io,ooo (Males) living at
each Group of Ages.

Groups of Ages.
Between Ages 20 and 25
25 ,, 35
35 ,, 45
45 ,, 55 55,, 65 65 ,, 75 75 ,, over

GeneraGl88PoI-p9u0l.ation,

Scottish Widows,
1874-94.

23.33

10-35

30-24

14-30

35'62

I6 29

34.88 1 I.51
291I6 I 67

i8-i6 11.53 6&88 5.50

Unless the fundamental difference thus illustrated between the general population and assured lives be kept constantly in mind, conclusions of a totally erroneous nature may be drawn from insurance statistics, especially in regard to the influence of heredity; and the Eugenist may be tempted to exclaim, " Save me from my actuarial friends I "
Particular allusion is made to these circumstances because I wish to leave you to draw your own deductions, and to learn any lessons that there may be from the data given in this paper; for I confess very frankly that my knowledge of the Science of Eugenics is not much deeper than that of " the man in the street," and I feel that it would be presumptuous on my part to do more than lay before you an account of the present position of research in life assurance, and of some of the data which have been obtained-such as they are.

334

EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr :

British Research.
In Great Britain, actuarial science is represented by two
bodies-the Institute of Actuaries, which has its headquarters in London, and the Faculty of Actuaries, whose headquarters are in Edinburgh. Although I happen to be a member of each of these bodies, I think that it can, without lack of modesty, be claimed for them that the work done by them in the past raised this country to the foremost place in Actuarial Science. A
monumental work has been the compiling and publishing of tables of mortality forming a standard of indisputable value. Two such tables in particular have been published; one made up for a period to I863; the other in respect of the period between that year and I893. The earlier of these is called the " HM " (Healthy Males) Table, and the later the " OM " (Offices -Males) Table, and there are in addition various other life tables, including Female and Annuity Tables. Some idea of the magnitude of the task may be got when it is stated that the "m" (I893) Table was based on the observation of 55I,838 first-class lives, and that the number of deaths recorded was I40,889. Large as the number of lives was, it will be noted that it was small in proportion to the population of the United Kingdom-a circumstance which of itself gives a certain indication of its selectness.
There has been much discussion in the past as to the question of the improvement in longevity, and it may not be amiss to compare the expectation of life as brought out by the two tables referred to, while admitting that the circumstances of the tables do not altogether tally. The technical term " Expectation of life " means the average after-lifetime or the average duration of life.

Expectation of Life.

Table.

Age. 20 30 40 50 6o 70 80 90

HM (1863) 42-I 34 7 27 4 20'3 I3-9 8 5 4 7 2.4
OM (I893) 43 7 35-6 27-9 206 14.I 8.7 4'8 2-4

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

335

At the International Congress of Actuaries held in Amsterdam in the summer, Mr. H. W. Manly, a past president of the Institute of Actuaries, gave us some interesting conclusions on the improvement in mortality which was shown by the records of the Equitable Life Assurance Society. He compared that Society's records of 1762-I829 with those of I863I893, and ended his paper as follows:
" The fact that there has been no improvement after the
age of 75 rather upsets our preconceived notions, because I think there is a general opinion that people now live to greater ages. If there has been any improvement in the rate of mor-
tality after age 75, it can only have been during the last 20 years.
" The effect of the improvement in the rate of mortality is that out of a fixed number of assured lives entering at the age of 20, there were about 35 per cent. more who reached the age of 75 at the end of the century than at the beginning of it; and consequently there will be about 35 per cent. more living and dying at each age after 75, although the rate of mortality at those ages is the same as one hundred years ago. It is probable that because we know of a greater number living at those ages now, we have been deceived into thinking that life at the older ages has been extended.
" These considerations seem to lead to the conclusion that it is not the 'vitality' which has changed or improved, but that the improvements in the modes of living, in sanitation and hygiene, and in the skill of the physician and surgeon, have diminished the causes of disease and enable us more effectually to battle with disease when it happens to attack us. Hence the rate of mortality is less; but the vital force, with its naturally diminishing power as extreme old age is approached, remains the same."
If we turn to the ranks of the annuitants where no medical selection comes into play, but largely the powerful element of self-selection, then we find that among them also there has been an improving longevity-especially in the female lives. The ever-recurring improvement in the case of the annuitants is, one regrets to say, not a cause of unalloyed satisfaction to the

336

EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr :

offices; and if the Chancellor of the Exchequer were to regard longevity as a symbol of national well-being, he might stimulate it by a large reduction in the pension age ! Thanks to the courtesy of the authorities of the National Debt Office, I am enabled to give the expectation of life of the Government annuitants as ascertained from their experience between I875 and I904, just published, and it can be compared with the same
experience for the period i808-i875.
Government Annuitants' Expectation of Life-at date of Purchase.

Age.
50 6o 70 80

Males { i88-I875
1875-1904
Females { 8o8-I875 F 875-1904

20'26 14.38 9'33 5 67
20o96 14'73 9*55 5*73
22-92 x6-26 1030 6,14
23 94 1I7-1 2 II*14 6`56

NOTE;-The above Table cannot be compared with the HM & OM Expectation as it is constructed on a different principle.
The improvement in longevity of selected lives may therefore be regarded as corroborated by the figures relating to the annuitants.
While the tables of the British Life Offices (OM I893) are the standard by which the companies form their judgment of risks, it has already been indicated that the standard is not altogether of the highest. It is not; because the tables-and this point is sometimes forgotten-were compiled from hundreds of thousands of lives selected by no less than sixty different companies, whose ideas of what is a first-class life varied very considerably. Incidentally it may be remarked that while the companies have had the benefit of a rising standard of medical experience which results in the extension of longevity, they have had to face an increasing keenness of competition, with the resulting tendency, among some companies, to accept lives who are not quite first-class, and who therefore tend to lower the standard of longevity. My own view of a mortality table to be taken as the standard of present perfection would be one

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

337

based upon a large number of lives, each of whom possessed an irreproachable personal and family history: and I think that in this view your Society will concur. I venture to predict that such a table will yet be produced by British Actuaries, although the date may be somewhat distant, and very valuable should it prove in scientific work.
To turn to research on less general lines, it may be said that the most interesting and valuable investigation which has been made into the effect of a particular occupation is that made by the Associated Scottish Life Offices into the mortality among persons engaged in the sale of intoxicating liquors, covering
the period I854-90. It included persons of all occupations
ranging from beer-sellers and publicans to licensed grocers. The total male lives numbered 8,4I8; the actual deaths were
I,624; and the deaths " expected " by the mortality tables were only I,I69. The annual mortality experienced was 205 per I,ooo; the " expected " mortality was 14'7 per I,ooo; and the excess was therefore 5-8 per i,ooo. In the class embracing publicans only, the actual deaths were 28-6 per i,ooo; the " expected " were I5'6 per i,ooo; and the excess thus amounted to 13 per i,ooo. One of the conclusions of the investigators was
that among those who sell liquor for consumption on the premises the extra mortality exceeds, on the average, i per cent. per annum, or io per i,ooo. Surely an interesting lesson in environment I And by " environment " I mean to speak from the insurance point of view. Eugenists are concerned with environment from the point of view of its effect on the next generation, and what that is, or if there be any at all, in the case of the children of such lives, I do not know; it would be an interesting subject for enquiry. Insurance companies do not go into the question of the environment of a proposer's
parents except in so far as that environment may be reflected by the causes of the deaths or the state of health of the parents.
Among lives presenting a tubercular family history, while there will doubtless be results of much importance to be revealed in the future through the work of the Bureau of Research hereafter referred to, at present the British Actuary has surprisingly little to report. In I892 Mr. H. W. Manly read a paper to the

338

EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr:

Institute of Actuaries on " An attempt to measure the extra risk

arising from a consumptive family history when the life pro-

posed for assurance is physically sound and healthy." It con-

sisted of the experience of the Mutual Life Assurance Society,

dated from I847, and applied only to first-class lives who had

been subject to strict examination, and who, in the judgment of

the examiners, were practically free from any extra risk of

consumption. The statistics therefore relate to a particularly

select class of good physique and perfect health-accepted as

first-class lives notwithstanding a history of consumption in the

family. The following table is the summary of his observa-

tions. It will be noticed that in it, and in all such investiga-

tions, the family history dealt with does not go back beyond the

parents; it is impracticable to get reliable data relating to grand-

parents in the vast majority of cases, and this is a matter of

regret from the insurance and especially from the eugenic

standpoint.

Summary of Observations.

Relations who died of Consumption. (or Childbirth)
_.~~~~~~~~~~~~ LINEALS.
I. Father only ... ... ... ... ... 2. Mother only-Consumption. ... 3. Mother only-Childbirth. 4. Father and Mother only-Consumption ...

No. of Lives.

No. of Dcaths.

No. of
Expactd

... 69 83
... 226 ... 9
387

20 I6o*9I 22 I7'570 68 53'o86 3 3-821
113 90-568

LINEALS AND COLLATERALS.

5. Father and Brother or Sister-Consumption..20

6. Mother and Brother or Sister-Consumption

... 37

7. Mother-Childbirth; and Sister-Childbirth ... 9

8. Mother-Childbirth Brother or Sister-Consumption ...

7

9. Father and Mother, and Sister or Brother-

Consumption ... ...

... ...

75

2 2-480

9 9-9I9

I 2.346

2

2.0.6
2 o56

0 *242
I4 17043

COLLATERALS.

IQ Sister-Childbirth ... ...

... ... 120

Ii. One Brother or Sister-Consumption

282...

...

12. Two or more Brothers or Sisters-Consumption ... 8i

33 29'569
73 71I510
22 22 620

483 128 123*699

TOTALS .945

255 |231-310

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

339

I give Mr. Manly's table without making any special comment upon it. Its interest lies in the circumstances that it illustrates practically the only serious attempt of the kind that has hitherto been made by one of our actuaries; that it indicates the lines on which future investigations will probably proceed; and that it shows very clearly the poverty of insurance statistics and research. The results are interesting, but the number of lives involved is too small to justify any definite conclusions being based on the results. It will also be noted that some of the data go back so far as I847. The insufficiency of numbers may be taken as applicable to most, if not all, of the statistics which have been produced by British actuaries in regard to special classes of lives.
It will, I presume, be a matter of interest to show to what an extent consumption has been a factor in building up the mortality table of life offices, and it is to " The Scottish Widows' Fund " that I am again indebted for the following table brought up to the most recent date for which the figures are presently available. It is a summary of their experience for four septennial periods:

Table of Consumptive Experience of " The Scottish Widows' Fund."

Septennium. NuDmebatehrs.of PerDceepntteasigne of AvrDgAe

1874-I880 I881-1887 I888-I894 1895-1901

249
275
282
249

I0i07 41 77
9-o7 41 8 I
7.7I 44 73
5 64 47-22

This shows that in I874-I880 the deaths from consumption were rather more than io per cent. of the total deaths occurring among the policyholders, and that by I895-I9O1 the deaths from that disease had fallen to nearly one-half of that percentage. Such percentages will differ in different life offices, and will vary with the incidence of the ages of the lives assured-but there can be no doubt that the fall in the ratios is general.

340

EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr :

In any investigation into the mortality of those who have either a family or personal history of a tubercular nature, I would urge that great importance should be attached to the weight (in relation to height) of the lives involved. I should be somewhat surprised if it did not turn out that, within limits of
course, the higher the weight the lower the death rate. It is, of course, unscientific and unreliable to found upon figures compiled from death claims alone, without relation to the numbers exposed to risk; but the large proportion of deaths coming under my own notice, which occurred among the lighter weights, caused me to give some attention to the matter. Among those who died of phthisis, and who had a family history thereof, those who had been over-average in weight at the time of assurance amounted to 7 per cent. of the total, average weights to 36 per cent., and under-average to 57 per cent. Among those who had no such family history the ratios were 15 per cent., 30 per cent., and 55 per cent. respectively. These figures are, I know, akin to those experienced in another company; otherwise I mlight not have cared to quote them, more especially as they are founded on small numbers: I do so merely to illustrate the desirability of the weight being taken into account in such investigations.
Possessing, as they do, records giving the medical and family histories of hundreds of thousands of lives-records containing data which scientifically extracted and dealt with would help to throw light on many important problems of medicine
and of life assurance-the insurance companies might be presumed to have made use of such material and to be in possession of a unique knowledge of the effect which various personal and family histories have upon the duration of life. This, however, is not so; it is the case that some offices have made a study of such points, but the results must necessarily be of limited value, as no single office-of the ordinary type-has a sufficiently large number of policyholders to yield results which would be reliable. Only through the collaboration of a large number of offices could a requisite number of lives be obtained to form a basis broad enough to give trustworthy results. The difficulties which beset the work of research on a large scale and the magni-

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

341

tude of the undertaking must be regarded as the reasons for the work not having been taken in hand. Actuaries of companies have hitherto paid more attention to other branches of their science, and they have been well occupied in the strenuous work of bringing British life assurance to the laudable position which it holds to-day in the world of finance. It must also be remembered that it is only in recent years that there have been avail-
able the remarkable mechanical appliances which enable exhaustive analysis of data to be made without the trouble which previously was practically prohibitive.
It was at a meeting in Edinburgh of the Faculty of Actuaries in I9IO that I ventured to call attention to the great desirability of research, and to advocate the establishment of a bureau to undertake it. Finding a considerable amount of support, I elaborated the views, and submitted them about a year ago to the Faculty in a paper entitled " Research in Life Assurance," urging that in the interests of life assurance, of medicine, and of the public, a permanent bureau of research should be established. By a fortunate coincidence a paper on " Some Recent Statistical Results," by Mr. W. Palin Elderton, F.I.A., was shortly afterwards read to the Institute of Actuaries
in London, and the combined effect of the two papers led to the matter being taken up in earnest. At the latter meeting the presence and speeches of Professor Karl Pearson and others well-known to this Society gave additional interest to the proceedings, and helped to stimulate in actuarial circles the desire for an extended acquaintance with the science of Eugenics. It is only fitting that acknowledgment should be made of the hearty support which the Press in general, and Mr. William Schooling in particular, have given to the movement. It is a pleasure to be able to report that the principle of the establishment of a Permanent Bureau of Research has received the approval of the Councils of both these actuarial bodies. More than this cannot at present be said, as the matter is still under consideration. But I am convinced that sooner or later some such bureau will be founded, and that it should in time produce results that will be of no little value to the Actuary, the Physician, the Eugenist, and the community at large.

.342 EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr :

Before closing the references to British Research, I would like to add that I think I am not committing any impropriety in saying that it is understood that at the present time an investigation is being made by the Prudential Assurance Company into various classes of lives which are insured in its ordinary -not industrial-department. The very large number of lives which that Company has on its books should cause the results to be both interesting and valuable, and the public spirit of the directors and officials makes one feel sure that the results will be made known to the actuarial profession and others interested.
Foreign Research. That insurance research is destined to become widespread is undoubted; and action by this country, when taken, is sure to have an encouraging effect upon other European countries. At more than one International Congress of Actuaries has the suggestion been made that an international investigation into the mortality of under-average lives should be undertaken. The attitude of British and American Actuaries towards this suggestion has been unfavourable; and rightly so, because the difficulties of a national investigation are such as to show that, at present, the difficulties of an international one would be insuperable. It may be feasible some day; but the time is not now. The movement, however, is significant; it indicates a healthy feeling of discontent with our limited knowledge; and I feel sure that ere long some of the Continental countries will take action. One sincerely hopes that our German friends will be among them; they have already done good work in individual offices, and one would look with confidence to them to produce results commensurate with that system of thoroughness which we associate with their nationality. It is to the credit of the Scandinavian companies that they have undertaken a combined investigation. Various papers have been published by them, which, however, would be, for the most part, of little interest to this Society. They, however, published in I907 figures provided by the records of one of their companies (the " Thule " Life Office) relating to cases where some connection with tuberculosis had been evidenced. This was done as preliminary work of an experimental nature, the

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

343

intention being to follow it up by a comprehensive investigation embracing the records of all the companies. When carried to maturity the work should yield good fruit. Probably the most striking figures of the preliminary investigation are those relating to the group of small-bodied and thin lives which
showed a very heavy rate of mortality. If we turn to America-to the United States and Canada-
we find that in I903 there was published the elaborate experience of thirty-four life companies. It contained the results of investigations into the mortality of men of varied occupations and of varied personal and family histories. It was pioneer work of the most praiseworthy kind; but being pioneer work it had its defects. These defects were quickly realised, and with characteristic energy our American brethren set themselves to
remedy them by undertaking a new investigation-also of a very elaborate nature. It was expected that the results would be published during the past summer, but the Chairman of the Committee has informed me that, owing to some difficult questions which arose, the anticipated date has not been realised. This has been a disappointment, as I had hoped to be in a position to submit a number of statistics which would be of no little interest to your Society.
We must to-day content ourselves with the results published in I903, and some of these will now be alluded to-but with the remark that they must be accepted with some little reservation on account of the methods adopted being open to some criticism. It must also be stated that all the lives included in the investigation had been regarded as first-class, and had been accepted for assurance at the ordinary rate of premium. We are therefore again dealing with statistics which concern the best lives of their kind. I wish to emphasise this point to prevent the Eugenist drawing erroneous deductions. The necessity for this will be apparent when one recalls the statement made recently as to an investigation into the mortality of an American company which catered for under-average lives and had over 6o per cent. of its business on such lives. The rate of mortality was reported as being double that of other offices which restricted their business to first-class lives.

344

EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr:

In a very large class of lives (numbering 94,276, with 5,382 deaths) made up of persons of average weight (i.e., between 20 per cent. overweight and 12 per cent. underweight) one of whose parents died below 70 of consumption, there is shown the low mortality rate of 87 per cent. of the expectation. In other words, in place of each I00 deaths that, according to the mortality table, were expected to occur, there were only 87-a
difference of I3 per cent. This result probably came as a surprise to the Committee in charge, for they made the following statement, with which I concur: " It is not conceivable " that among the general population those who have had at " least one parent dying from consumption are above the aver" age of the others in vitality. If this is found to be the case i as regards that particular class of insured lives, it indicates
only that such persons of that class as had actually been accepted for insurance have been selected so carefully that "on the whole those only have been selected who are par"ticularly good representatives of the class."
In the class of light weights (those of less weight than in the class just referred to) in which a parent had died before 70 of " lung disease " (embracing 24,69I lives and I,869 deaths) the mortality was IOO-3 per cent. of the expectation; in other words, the mortality was practically equal to the expectation. The definition of this class is " a parent dead below 70 of lung disease," and is rather unsatisfactory. The statistics would have been of much greater importance if there had been even a subsection relating solely to the cases in which a parent had died of phthisis; as the section stands it includes deaths from acute pneumonia and other causes not necessarily associated with phthisis. It may, however, be regarded as showing, as has already been stated, that there appears to be a considerably higher rate of mortality among such lives when the weight is light, and as tending to confirm the opinion that among those with a family history of a tubercular nature, the lighter the weight, the heavier the mortality. The difference between the
mortality of this section of light weights and that of the average weights just referred to is over 13 per cent., and it is believed that it would be more if the light weight section had, like the

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

345

other section, been restricted to those who had lost a parent by phthisis as apart from other lung affections.
If we wish to compare the light weights having the parental history of lung disease with other light weights having no such history, we find that the latter had a mortality of 915 per cent.
against the Ioo.3 per cent. of the former. In the very large section where the parents had not been
long-lived and had both died before attaining age 6o, the number of deaths was 2,8 per cent. above the expectation. On the other hand, in the section where the parents had been
long-lived-both having attained age 75-the deaths were Ii@5
per cent. below expectation. As regards cancer, the section contained those whose family
history showed one death in the family from this disease; it numbered 87,714 lives and 4,680 deaths, and showed a mortality of I IV3 per cent. under that expected. I do not attach importance to these cancer statistics at present, as they include cases where a parent died of the disease at the oldest of ages.
In this American investigation there were some remarkable figures given in regard to the corpulent. I do not know whether this Society has yet regarded corpulency as coming within its purview, but I assume that at least its attitude would be one of interest in that subject, as certainly the question of the well-being of the race is affected by it. I can testify that, in a very large number of instances, a plea for favourable treatment is put forward on the ground that the corpulency is " hereditary." If we accept these statements as to corpulency being a family characteristic, it opens up the question of heredity; but so far as the life offices are concerned, no attempt has been made to ascertain the mortality prevailing among those possessing the " hereditary " feature as compared with those not
possessing it. The American actuaries reported that in the class of corpulent lives where neither parent had died under age 70 (numbering I5,775 lives), and where therefore a satisfactory experience might have been looked for, the deaths were i8 per cent. above the number expected; where one parent had died below 70 (26,324 lives) the deaths were 47 per cent. above the number expected; where the abdominal measurement was greater

346

EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr:

than that of the chest (5,242 lives) the deaths were 52 per cent. above the expectation. Even admitting a margin for criticism, the results are significant. It must be remembered, also, that all these lives were regarded as being so good that any objections on the ground of weight were put aside, and the lives were accepted as first-class. What the mortality must be among lives whose corpulency has revealed its inherent adverse effects to such an extent as to result in declinature for insurance, one can hardly conjecture-but it seems safe to say that it must be alarming. It may be said that the statistics do not apply to
Great Britain; they do not: but I regret to say that such information as I possess leads me to believe that British statistics would also be somewhat disquieting. It seems to me-but I speak with limited knowledge-that corpulency might be divided into two sections: one in which it was due to hereditary causes, the other in which it may be said to have been acquired. If this be so, then I would leave the Eugenist to deal with the first, and the Physician to deal with the second. In any event, I have no hesitation in saying that a campaign against corpulency would prove to be of inestimable value to the com-
munity, and if I may be permitted to add the remark, I look forward to the day when the fat man will be largely extinctoutside of the showman's booth I
I have already expressed regret that the figures relating to the New American Investigation are not yet ready for submission to you, as they are sure to be of much more value than those which were published in I903. It may be well to record here some of the sections in which your Society will be particularly interested. They are as follows:

Personal History.
Tuberculosis of the lungs, with or without blood-spitting, history of.
Tuberculosis of glands, including scrofulous glands of neck, history of.
Tuberculosis of bone (hip, spine, and other joints), history of. Exposure to tuberculosis, history of, with date of last exposure.
(Living in house with tubercular person).

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

347

Family History.

(Limited to parents, brothers, and sisters.) Tuberculosis in family record, both parents and one or more
brothers or sisters dead of. Tuberculosis in family record, one parent and two or more
brothers or sisters dead of. Tuberculosis in family record, one parent and a brother or
sister dead of. Tuberculosis in family record, two or more brothers or sisters
dead of. Tuberculosis in family record, one brother or sister dead of. Tuberculosis in family record, two parents dead of. Tuberculosis in family record, one parent dead of. Apoplexy or paralysis in family record, two or more cases. Insanity in family record, two or more cases. Epilepsy in family record, two or more cases. Diabetes in family record, two or more cases. Cancer in family record, two or more cases. Heart disease in family record, two or more cases.

General Conclusions.
There has now been passed briefly in review the present position of insurance research throughout the world. It will be recognised that the movement has, hitherto, not yielded much more than the earnest of what it will yet accomplish. No one can doubt that, sooner or later, it will result in contributions to medical and eugenic science which will be of unique value.
As regards the statistics which one has been able to place before you to-day, I leave it to others, wiser than I, to draw any conclusions from the eugenic point of view, if any of importance are at present possible. But, as has been said already, it must always be kept in mind, in considering the statistics of insurance companies, that the companies seek to select the best cases of the kind, and therefore deal largely with those lives who present the least unfavourable aspects, or who, at least, have so many favourable points that such points are regarded as to some extent a set-off against the adverse features. There could

348

EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr :

be nothing easier-or more foolish-than to draw inferences from such statistics which would pretend to diminish the enormous importance of heredity. It has, however, I think, been shown to be possible by careful consideration, to select a body of lives, each possessed of a similar unfavourable feature, such as the death of a parent from phthisis, whose mortality will compare not unfavourably with that of the general body of policy-holders: but further statistics are required before one could give an unchallengeable opinion. What the mortality must be in the worst sections of lives with a consumptive family history the Actuary may not care to contemplate; it does not come under his notice, as the lives are practically uninsurable. Yet it is, I should think, among these worst sections that some
of the most important lessons in heredity are to be found. The conclusions which at present may reasonably be formed
from the results of insurance research, which have been submitted in this paper, may be broadly stated as follows:
(I) The difference between assured lives and the general population is so great that the statistics of the former are inapplicable to the latter.
(2) The longevity of assured lives has increased. (3) Consumption as the actual cause of death has enor-
mously decreased.
(4) It is possible by careful consideration to select cer-
tain lives with a consumptive family history who may reasonably be regarded as fair average lives for assurance on ordinary terms.

" Appearances and Impressions."
"The work of science," said Ruskin, " is to substitute facts for appearances, and demonstrations for impressions. " Bearing this in mind, I would say that my contribution to your Society ends here, for I have nothing more to contribute which is based upon facts or demonstrations. But perhaps a few reflections and opinions may be given, to which you are asked to extend a kindly indulgence.
From the life assurance companies' point of view the con-
servation of life and the extension of longevity in their clientele

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

349

are all important. The longer the lives endure, the more satisfactory is it to the companies. The fool and the philosopher, the man who is a source of strength to the community and the man who is not, are alike regarded from the point of view of probable longevity and of potential profit. The Eugenist's point of view is of course distinctly different-one of noble and high ideals-beside which the other seems to assume a somewhat mercenary aspect. But while he may be in full accord with these eugenic ideals, the Actuary, when he looks at matters mainly from the more restricted point of view of the insurance companies, may plead that he is more concerned with the present generation than with succeeding ones, and that everything that will tend to the promotion of the longevity of his policy-holders is worthy of support. Certainly this is the view which would be taken by his Board of Directors.
Consequently various reflections may come to one whose duty it is to examine week by week the various claims arising through death. One sees a very large percentage of the deaths which are caused by phthisis arising among policy-holders whose papers show that at the time of insuring there was no record of tuberculosis in the family history. It may be that a careful search into the family history would show that there really was a record of this disease in a number of cases; this is probably so. But even making allowance for misrepresentation, intentional and unintentional, one feels compelled to attribute at least a large proportion of such deaths to causes lying apparently outside those of heredity, and to surmise, not without reasonable grounds, that mode of living, occupation, surroundings, and negligence of the laws of health have frequently been determining factors in the mortality.
Then it appears to me that the experience of insurance companies holds out both hope and encouragement to a large class of the community-a class that requires them because so many of its members have approached the life offices in dread that their family history would seriously prejudice them. It indicates that those whose family record is tainted with phthisis to a limited extent, who have passed successfully through the probationary period of not less than 30 years of life, and whose

350

EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr:

physique and weight are fully equal to the normal, have their future largely within their own control; and that with the exercise of care in regard to health, habits, surroundings, and open-air recreation, they would form a reasonably satisfactory
body of lives from the insurance point of view. One would hardly be a Scotsman if he did not believe and preach that thie devotee of the Royal and ancient game of golf is one of the most successful competitors against the dreaded " Bogey " of tuberculosis.
Pondering over such matters, the Actuary, whose interest in human life is not quite the same as that of the Eugenist, may be pardoned if he attaches somewhat more importance than the latter to the great efforts which are being made on all sides for the improvement and conservation of public and private health. From his point of view every forward step in medicine, surgery, temperance and hygiene must be welcomed
as a factor in reducing the death rate experienced by his office. While in full sympathy with the eugenic ideals, although not necessarily with all the methods suggested for their attainment, he may regard some of these ideals as likely to be realised only in the somewhat distant future, and may consider it to be practical wisdom to encourage in every way all these efforts tending to promote longevity.
These reflections are, of course, made from the insurance standpoint, and are purely personal. The Eugenist's reflections will be somewhat different; for example, he will urge that the elongation of life has too largely meant the lengthening of the lifetime of the less healthy among the general population, with the probability of unsatisfactory results in the succeeding generation. On the eugenic aspect of matters touched upon in this paper, I do not profess to give an opinion, but it was with much interest that one read lately in the report of an address by one of your ex-presidents, Sir James CrichtonBrowne, the remark that " he was a profound believer in "heredity, but he was a profound believer also in variation,
not only inborn, but created and selected by environment, and it seemed to him dangerous doctrine to deny either the one or the other."

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

351

At this stage, when we are referring to impressions, I may add the reflections of one or two who have written on the subject of the selection for assurance of lives with a consumptive family history. They are interesting as showing the opinions held by
some on both sides of the Atlantic-but to what extent I cannot say-and I again remind you that they refer to lives of a selected nature. Mr. Burn, now the Actuary of the Prudential Assur-
ance Company, said at the Berlin Congress of Actuaries in I9o6: " In the past any taint of consumption in the family " history was considered all important, but in the light of recent
" medical research it is, I think, quite certain that the physical condition of the assured, their occupation and immediate sur-
"roundings, are of far greater importance. If, as now seems "probable, the great majority of deaths from consumption are "due to direct infection or acquired vulnerability, then it would "seem to follow that we can safely accept many cases with re"ported consumptive family history, provided that the physical
condition is satisfactory." Dr. Oscar H. Rogers, Medical Director of the New York
Life Insurance Company, writing also in I9o6, said: " I am " confident that consumption in the family history has an im" portant bearing upon the value of risks for insurance, but " only so when taken in connection with the elements of age 'and build. I believe that it bears a direct relation to build
and to the age of the applicant, and that at the younger ages and the lighter weights we must expect a high mortality, "while at the older ages and among the heavy weights we may regard consumption in the family history as of almost no "significance. Moreover, when a further investigation is made of this important factor, I should suggest that it be made up "to include the influence of consumption in the applicant's "own generation. Personally I have very good reason to "believe that the death of a brother or sister of tubercular "disease is of as great significance as the death of a parent."
But I would not advise any one to draw too hasty conclusions, in regard to the practical view of heredity taken in every-day work by the life offices in general. The first thing considered is, as often as not, the " heredity " aspect, and the

352

EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr:.

proposer with a bad family history finds it no easy matter to obtain acceptance-at least, on terms which he approves. I recall the grievance, recently expressed, of a well-known Eugenist, who had given an address to a medical society, and
stated that he found that none of the experienced medical men present had a good word to say for the idea of the hereditary factor in phthisis, but who, when he subsequently saw a medical officer for the purpose of life assurance, discovered that the fact of his mother having died of phthisis meant a loading of ten years to his age.
But however interesting or uninteresting, convincing or unconvincing personal opinions may be, they are of value only so far as they are based on the solid ground of statistical re-
search conducted on principles which are not open to challenge. One ounce of scientific fact outweighs in value a pound of scientific opinion; and a vast amount of information and statistics has yet to be collected, sifted, and analysed before we can speak with authority on these and other questions in which both the Eugenist and the Actuary are interested.
The last impression I shall refer to is that it seems to me that any one dealing with insurance research, particularly in regard to phthisis, will find it difficult to avoid conveying to others the idea that he is depreciating the importance of heredity. Such an idea can be entertained only by those who take a superficial view of the matter, and ignore-what has been pointed out perhaps ad nauseam-that it deals with lives who had originally been selected in the belief that an adverse hereditv would in their specially favourable circumstances not be likely to show a marked effect. Were it not impossible in practice, I, for one, would like to dig more deeply into the ancestral history of each proposer, so as to get authenticated data instead of the limited information with which we generally have to be content. It may not be uninteresting to mention
that at present a very large amount of deferred assurances are being granted on the lives of very young children, and that the main factor in adjudicating upon the lives is the family history which in their cases is carried back beyond the parents to the grandparents.

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

353

The Actuary is so accustomed to regard heredity-favourable or unfavourable-as one of the all-important matters that he is apt to take its importance as granted by all, and to surmise that (as an unfavourable factor) its influence will disappear only with the advent of the Eugenic Golden Age!

THE FUTURE. It is in the spirit of the words of Ruskin that the Actuary and the Eugenist must each maintain his pursuit of knowledge, laying aside all d priori opinions and prejudices, prepared to follow the truth wheresoever it may lead. Faced in this way problem after problem must yield up its solution, and difficulty after difficulty will be surmounted. The future is rich with promise of the harvest which re-
search will reap. The world of insurance science will yield its quota-and that of no insignificant value. While insurance companies are neither scientific nor benevolent societies, but commercial undertakings, the fact remains that science, benevolence, and commerce have all been the factors that have led to their success. In encouraging the work of actuarial research, the directors and principal officers of the companies will be in the pleasant position of being able to confer benefits not only upon their own companies, but upon sciences such as those of Eugenics and Medicine with resultant benefits to the whole nation. In return your own science will more than repay any such benefits; youthful as it is, it now commands an influence that is both great and widespread-an influence that affects not only great national questions, but is telling upon humbler problems such as those of life assurance. The impression made by the more moderate of eugenic views is bound to increase year by year, and may be the means of opening up wider avenues of research than are at present available. The public spirit of those in charge of the companies will not be appealed to in vain, if they become educated, in the course of time, to realise the importance of the principles advocated by your Society. Nor after the similar education of the upper and middle classes, who are the policy-holders in these companies, will there likely be opposition to a tactful request for any data that may be desired for any special investigation of undoubted

354

EUGENICS REVIEW

L. P. Orr :

value. The development of insurance places the companies from time to time in possession of new data. One feature of importance in recent years, already alluded to, has been the large number of insurances (deferred till age 2I) granted on the lives of children, in connection with which many of the companies call for detailed records of the family history going back to the grandparents. Here may be found, in the future, material for research, embracing, perhaps, problems connected with fertility.
It will thus be seen that by bringing the educative influence of your Society to bear on those holding the chief positions in insurance companies, much may be done in the way of stimulating that work of research which is now being considered.
Here it may not be amiss if I recapitulate the sources from which one anticipates in the more immediate future, results which should have valuable lessons for your Society. They are the American investigation, the Scandinavian investigation, the Prudential Assurance Company's investigation, and subsequently, let us hope, a British Bureau of Research.
Conclusion. I can only repeat my regret that there is such a dearth of material that one cannot pretend to have contributed anything of value to your proceedings. I wished, however, to give an indication of the reciprocal interest taken by the two sciences, an interest destined to increase year by year. In the " questions of the day and of the fray," in which you are engaged, we of the insurance profession shall be interested both as onlookers and as partakers. The services of our Actuaries-men trained to the critical analysis of intricate figures-will be more and more at your disposal as your science grows towards maturity; and they in turn should learn and profit much from the part which they must take in seeking to be of help to you in realising some of the ideals which you have set before yourselves. From the insurance profession, generally, " the study of agencies under social control that may " improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations,"' which is your raison d'etre, is sure to receive the most sympathetic encouragement. But restricted as that profession

INSURANCE RESEARCH AND EUGENICS

355

mainly is to an interest in lives of the better type, to lives who have passed through a probationary period of existence, it must form its own views in regard to its own particular interests, and must be prepared to alter or modify them as the advance of eugenic, medical and actuarial knowledge directs.
The efficacy of the many remedies which are put forward for the improvement of the present and future generations will be a subject of discussion and dissension for many a year to come, and those of us who deem it desirable to maintain an unbiassed mind pending the development of a wider knowledge can plead for tolerance from the controversialists if, for the present, we unite in welcoming cordially as matters of prime importance the Heredity of the Eugenist, the Hygiene of the Physician, the Schemes of the Social Reformer, the Suasion of the Moralist, and the Regeneration of the Archbishop of York.

