REPORTS.

RECONSTRUCTION PROBLEMS. NO. 33, CHILD WELFARE. Ministry of Reconstruction; I919; price 2d.

THE infant mortality rate for I899 was 163 a thousand births. In I9I8 it was 97.

The Medical Report of the Board of Education for i9i6 showed that
out of the six million chilidren who are under medical inspection io per cent. are unc.lean and Io pe:r cent. ill-nourished. About thTee million have
decaying teeth, more than half a million have poor eyesight, about a
quarter of a million are suffering from diseases of the ear, throat and lymphatic glands; and a good many are afflicted with skin diseases, disorders of the heart, tuberculosis and infectious mal,adies of different kinds. Quite a msillion are unable, by reason of their health, -to profit by their schooling.

The welfare movement dates from I892 in France and about 1904 in England. Just befoTe the war the State guaranteed to pay at least half of the expenses of -the centres. Tihe latest advances have been secured by the Education Act and the Maternity and Child Welfare Act of I9I8. The former gave the Board of Education power to subsidise nursery schools, compelled local authorities to extend medical inspection to secondary and continuation schools, forbade the employment of children under twelve years of age, imposed on the education authorities the duty of educating all the defective children in their district, empowered the committees to maintan holi-day and school camps, gymnasia, swimming baths, playing fields, and day and evening centres for recreative physical training; and made many other provisions for health. Among the advances made by the latter were the payment of grants to municipal nurseries, and the permission given to the Local Government Board to aid schemes for
improving *the midwifery service, accommodating delicate mothers and children in hospitals and convalescent homes, keeping up the health of expectant mothers an-d securing satisfactory conditions of home or institu-
tion life. These and all other health functions were transferred, in I9I9. to the Ministry of Health.

At the present time there are many open-air schools, I5 of them resi-

dential, at which baths, good meals, special clothing and other means of

promoting -health are provided; 62 schools for cripples; so schools for

deaf and So for blind childTen; for epileptic children; six day

igi schools for sanatoria and

mentally defective a-nd
I3 residential schools

six for

tuberculous children; and 17 residential schools for tuberculous children

who need surgical treatment.

The spirit in which the welfare work is done is that which was ex-

pressed by Mr. John Burns, in I9o6, in the words: " First concentrate on

the mother. Wlhiat the mother is the children are. Let us glorfy, dignify,

purify motherhood by every means in our power.

REPORTS OF THE INDUSTRIAL FATIGUE RESEARCH BOARD. No. 2. THE OUTPUT OF WOMEN WORKERS IN RELATION TO HOURS OF WORK IN SHELL-MAKING. His Majesty's Stationery Office; I9I9; 6d. net.
THE noteworthy facts revealed by this enquiry are, that by a change from twelve-hours ito eight-hours periods of daily work (i) the output of shells per hour was raised by 6.5 per cent., (2) the full efficiency of the worker was maintained throughout the daily period. Night employment did not prove to be harmful to the workers.

REPORTS.

157

THE TRAINING OF HEALTH VISITORS, ESPECIALLY FOR MATERNITY AND CHILD WELFARE WORK. Circular 4. Local Authorities. M. and C. W. io. His Majesty's Stationery Office; 19I9; id.
BOARD OF EDUCATION. DRAFT REGULATIONS FOR THE TRAINING OF HEALTH VISITORS. His Majesty's Stationery Office; I919; id.
THE appointment of health visitors was begun in I908. Their chief duty consists in home visiting for the pu;rpose of giving advice with regard to the nurture of young children. Their sphere is different from that of sanitary i-nspectoTrs, district nurs-es, midwives, inspectors of midwives, tuberculosis visitors and school nurses, although they have worked in all these capacities in the past, and will probably be employed in the two last-mentioned ones more and more in the future. They will have to undergo a two years' training, which need not include a full course in midwifery, but must emibrace elementary physiology, artisan cookery and household management, hygiene, the treatment of communicable diseases,
maternity and infant welfare, and elementary economics and sociology.
BULLETIN OF THE LEAGUE OF RED CROSS SOCIETIES. Vol. I, No. 2. Geneva; June, I9I9.
As readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW .may already be aware, an important step has recently been taken in the arganisation of an interational campaagn against preventable disease, by the formation of the League,of Red Cross Societies, inaugurated at P.aris last May. The admirable idea of
maintain.ing a-nd applying to the problems of peace the machinery which
has proved so efficacious in mitigating the evils of w.ar, originated with the authorities of the American Red Cross, and the proposals made on
thei,r behalf by Mr. H. P. Davison weTe enthusiatically adopted by the
Red Cross Societies and by the Governments of the other Great Powers Great Britain, France, Italy and Japan. Definite shape was given to the project at a Conferenoe of representatives of the Red Cross Societies of the Five Powers held at Cann-es last April, when an extensive programme of international work was drawn up. The June number of the Bulletin of
the League contains a summarised report of the proceedings at 'this Confe-rence, together with the general -resolutions and the resolutions of the
several sections constituted to report on specific subjects, viz., the sections on preventive medicine, on child welfare, on tuberculosis, on malaria a-nd on venereal disease.
The League proposes to establish an International Bureau of Health, which is to serve as a ce-ntral organisation for stimulating and coordinating the activities of the Red Cross Societies and similar voluntary agencies in the different countries which can assist in this crusade against disease. It was recognised 'by the Conference that in the initial stages of the scheme it would be inexpedient, and perhaps, indeed, impossible, to go beyond the assertion of general principles; and the resolutions adopted were accordingly confined for the most part to the acceptance of certain broad lines of policy as to which there is virtually universal agreement, the details of thei;r practical application being reserved for later
elaboration.
It is satisfactory to note that the League gives a prominent place in i'ts pogramrme -to the advocacy of a reformed and standardised system of vital statistics, as giving the necessary basis for a definite and permanent improvement of health conditions; and that it is justly insistent on the vital importance of encouaging research in hygiene and
saniitary sciences.
Th,ese a-re matters of immediate urgency, ip regard to which an inter-
national organisation such as the League of Red Cross Societies can do much to educaite public opinion, and to arouse Governments to a sense of their responsibilities in relation to the health of the people.
W. C. S.

