122 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

page 126 which is at least as important as any other pronouncement of the Commission:
The general considerations which .the Committee on Empire Migration had in mind seem to us to be at least as cogent now as they were in

1932, and *eighing the advantages and disadvantages of emigration, we have no doubt that it is in the long-run interests of Great Britain
and the Commonwealth as a whole to mainta,in the flow of emigrants from Great Britain to the
other parts of the Commonwealth at as high a
level as'possible.

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION AND THE SOCIETY'S AIMS

By C. P. BLACKER

O N April I3th, I945, oral evidence was
given on behalf of the Society to the
Royal Commission by Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts, Professor A. J. Lewis and
myself. Previously, a memorandum prepared at the request of the Royal Commission had been submitted, and it was mainly about the contents of this document that we were questioned. The memorandum was published in the October I945 issue of the
EUGENICS REVIEW.
Now that the Royal Commission's report
has been published we may profitably turn back to our memorandum, to-day more than four years old, and ask ourselves how far our
points have been met. We have many grounds for satisfaction.
Indeed, the report of the Royal Commission compares well with the Brock Committee's report as a document almost completely vindicating the Society's policy as presented to these two bodies. Let us compare our written evidence with the relevant recommendations of the Commission.
Our memorandum consisted of eleven sections. It begins by quoting Galton, whose conception of what eugenics is, and what it aims at, has been partially lost sight of in the controversies of later years. Galton contended
that the inborn qualities of future generations should resemble the better rather than the worse moiety of the nation to-day; and that our im-

perial and world responsibilities impose on us a special obligation to foster the valuable inborn qualities of our people.
Much attention has been paid by eugenists in the past to the question of differential fertility; and a chart, specially prepared from the report of the I9II census, of the standardized fertility of each of the eight social classes into which the population of the country was
then divided, was included in our memorandum. Less attention, we said, was paid to-day than formerly to differences between classes, and more to those between intelligence. Perversions of eugenics such as the doctrines of race superiority had somewhat spoiled the word eugenics, which stands in need of rehabilitation. We compared the liberal and authoritarian conception of eugenics, the essential difference lying in the use made of the expert. In the authoritarian system the expert is vested with powers whereas, in the liberal, his function is never
more than advisory. The word eugenics contains a challenge-
to define the particle"' eu." Each person is entitled to his own views which will reflect his private system of values. We advanced
five standards:
(a) Sound physical and mental health and good physique;
(b) Intelligence; (c) Social usefulness; (d) Freedom from genetic taints;

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION AND THE SOCIETY'S AIMS I23

(e) Philoprogenitiveness.
Of these five traits only the second, intelligence, is quantitatively measurable. The memorandum went on to examine how far these five qualities could be combined in a biological index of eugenic merit. It concluded
Eugenic merit is thus a difficult matter to evaluate accurately. Different qualities, some valuable, others neutral, others harmful, have to be balanced against each other: There is no simple biological index.
But there is a social index.
The five qualities above considered have, as their confluent and resultant expression the couple who, in a community which provides good prospects for the future welfare of children, which encourages family life and inculcates a sense of its responsibilities, produce by intention and design a large family and provide for it a happy and a healthy home.
The memorandum points out how essential a part the environment plays in a voluntary system of eugenics.
Sir William Beveridge's five " giants "disease, ignorance, squalor, idleness and wantsterilize parenthood in large masses of the population. Where these evils prevail the improvident and feckless contribute freely to the next generation; those who cannot use the prevailing birth-control methods beget large families; and sexual, dissociated from parental, instincts determine the course of reproduction. A voluntary system of eugenics cannot work successfully under conditions of extreme poverty, malnutrition, ill health and isolation.
We went on to specify four characteristics of an environment which was " favourable " from the standpoint of a voluntary system of eugenics. They are:
(a) The removal of social and economic deterrents from parenthood. " We advocate equalizing as far as possible the social and economic status of parents and non-parents."
(b) The inculcation of a eugenic conscience. " Every adolescent should be taught and every parent should realize that he has a social and a national obligation to have enough children to replace the generation to which he belongs, provided (the eugenist's proviso to the demographer's purely quantitative formula) that the children are likely to be normal, healthy and useful members of the community."
(c) The establishment of facilities by which every engaged or married couple can obtain the most

up-to-date scientific guidance on genetic problems. (d) Universal accessibility of knowledge as to how pregnancies can be regulated. Here we said: " Information about birth control should be
in accordance with the family's religious beliefs, and these should be taken into
account by those v)ho advise."
These four points will be examined below
in the light of the Royal Commission's recommendations.
Our memorandum next posed the question: How far could parental instincts, dissociated from their sexual precursors, effect replacement. It cannot, we said, at present be proved that they could. If it turns out that they could not, it might be -necessary to reinforce them with incentiveg which appeal to self-interest. It might prove necessary to resort to measures which would go so far as
to make it economically advantageous to parents to have children. (An example of how this might be done is given by the Royal Commission (para. 446), which quotes recent French practice. " Under the law of August I946," says the Royal Commission, " a French worker, who is the sole breadwinner in his family, receives allowances under one heading or another, amounting for the first
child in the family to 20 per cent of the average Departmental wage, to 6o per cent of this average wage for two dependent children, to ioo per cent for three children, plus a further 30 per cent for each additional child. Thus, on the average, a worker in a single-income family with three children receives in allowances as much as the wage he earns.")
We went on to specify the social and economic changes needed to equalize the position of parents and childless persons; and we mentioned family allowances, encouragement of early marriage, childbearing (the cost of which should be as low as possible), education and housing. I need not recapitulate what we said under these headings.
There followed some miscellaneous observations dealing with the social problem group, the provision of guidance for persons who seek genetic advice, health examinations before marriage, and the establishment

I24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of an Imperial Institute of Demographic that it is part of a national policy for the

Studies.

promotion of family welfare. Its aim is

Let us now consider how far the suggestions we put before the Royal Commission

positive, not negative; it is designed primarily to secure that the children come when the parents want them. It should therefore be

have been met in their report.

linked as closely as possible in administration

The Commission's report (apart from its with other services for family welfare. (Para.

appendices) only once refers to the Society by name. The reference appears in paragraph 4I3, and mentions us as having subsidized, together with the Population Investigation Committee and the Nuffield Foundation, the committee set up by the Scottish Council for Research in Education, of which Sir Godfrey Thomson is chairman ; as most readers of the REVIEW will know, this committee promoted a large-scale inquiry into the intelligence of Scottish children. But against this single reference we can record the fact that the Commission's report is among the few official documents of major importance which has publicly recognized the place of qualitative considerations in social or demographic policy. This standpoint, which is reflected throughout the Commission's recommendations, finds explicit expression in the report's Chapter I5, entitled " Differential Fertility "; indeed this chapter might appropriately be reproduced exactly as it stands as one of our "Occasional Pamphlets." Discussing the role of education in shaping the results of intelligence tests, the report says:
Bad nurture and inadequate education may mask innate intelligence or prevent its full development, but heredity puts a definite limit

537.)
Thus the Commission have unreservedly met the fourth of the points raised in our memorandum as characterizing an environment which was favourable to a voluntary system of eugenics-the universal accessibility of knowledge as to how pregnancies can be regulated. They have done little less for the other three points, which may be briefly considered.
Our memorandum's first point was concerned with the removal of social and economic deterrents from parenthood. The Commission's recommendations, as is more than once stressed, are designed in part to promote fertility but also and no less, to provide social justice to the family which " until recently ... has been overlooked or given only a minor place in social policy" (para. 406). These recommendations can be grouped under four main headings, corresponding to the titles of chapters in the report's Part III, namely financial issues and proposals, family services, health services and housing. Under each of these four headings constructive recommendations are advanced which would ease the position of parents of more than two children.

to what can be achieved in intelligence even with (i) The financial proposals include larger

the best of nurture, education and good fortune. family allowances and a scheme of income-

The Commission

tax rebates which should prove helpful to

sees no reason to doubt that in general intelligent parents in the middle as well as the lower-

persons in all social groups limit the size of their income brackets. These proposals are dis-

families more than the unintelligent

cussed at some length in paragraphs 479-go.

and their recommendations are mainly de- The Commission suggests that a sum amount-

signed to induce all elements of the popula- ing to one-tenth of earned income up to

tion to replace themselves with the same £I,ooo, with smaller exemptions for incomes

intention and deliberation as, in the past, over this figure, which sum should in no

was applied to restricting fertility. Indeed, circumstances exceed £I50, should be ex-

the Commission's recommendations about empted from income tax in respect of each

birth control are perhaps the most note- dependent child.

worthy feature of the report; at least they (ii) The family services include domiciliary

have been treated as such by the Press. help of various kinds to be provided in the

The duty to give contraceptive advice should home, and also help through various kinds of

be discharged in such a way as to make clear nurseries (residential nurseries, nursery

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION AND THE SOCIETY'S AIMS I25

schools and day nurseries) ; and the Commis- Taken together, the recommendations

sion further recommends that these services made by the Commission under the four

be made available not only in emergencies, headings of financial proposals, family ser-

as has been the rule hitherto, but also as a vices, health services and housing make up

normal routine. " Our view," say the Com- an impressive contribution to the problem

mission, " is that these services should be of removing social and economic deterrents

developed so as to cater as much for the needs from parenthood.

of mothers of young children for occasional help and relief in normal circumstances as for help in emergencies" (para. 507). This change in orientation, if effectively translated into practice, might lead to a big development of miscellaneous family services.
(iii) In respect of health services, the main

The second and third points contained in the Society's memorandum related to the inculcation of a eugenic conscience and to the establishment of facilities by which every engaged or married couple could obtain the most up-to-date scientific guidance on genetic problems. Such guidance would be

recommendation is the one already noted, obtainable through the establishment, as

that guidance on contraception be made part part of the health services of the five-pur-

of the national health services. But contra- poses clinic with which the Commission would

ception should be linked with facilities for like to see an experiment made. It is much

advice and treatment of infecundity.

to be hoped that the experiment will soon be

We have received, says the Commission instituted, perhaps through the agency of

(para. 539), evidence of a small but growing some grant-giving body. Such five-purposes

demand for advice on suitability, from the eugenic point of view, for parenthood. The evidence does not justify us in recommending

clinics, if they become widely adopted, would doubtless be organized, together with

any comprehensive provision at this stage, but the rest of the health services, on a regional

we would like to see experiments made where basis. Each region is centred on a university

circumstances are suitable. A clinic which embraced facilities for advice on infecundity and on birth control could develop naturally as the needs emerged to include premarital examina-

and each university should contain departments of social medicine and of biology. Human genetics is a subject common both to

tions and other services of direct relevance to biology and to social medicine, and we may

family welfare. This branch of the National
Health Service might well play an important part in family welfare in the future.
The Commission, in effect, recommends that a two-purposes clinic (to deal with contraception and infecundity) be built into the National Health Service; and it suggests that experiments be made with a five-purposes clinic (to deal, in addition, with eugenic prognosis, pre-marital examinations, and marriage guidance). The Royal Commission deals rather more cautiously with this issue than did P.E.P., which forthrightly advocated the five-purposes clinic. The Commis-

allow ourselves to visualize the development of departments of genetics to which the proposed five-purposes clinic could turn for help with its genetic problems. Such departments could usefully establish connections with the Galton Laboratory, whose influence could thus be enlarged.
With the Society's point about the inculcation of a eugenic conscience, the Commission has dealt in its Chapter 2I which is entitled " Public Opinion and the Family." The contents of this chapter are epitomized (para. 594) by the Commission as follows:

sion recommends improvements in the maternity and child welfare services designed to assist the family.

Preparation for family life should be given a
more prominent place in the educational system. This should be achieved by: (I) a wide development of sex education in schools; (2) adjust-

(iv) In respect of housing, the Commission ments of the curricula to raise the status of the

draws attention, among other things, to the superfluity of five-roomed houses containing three bedrooms, and to the lack of both
smaller and larger houses.

practical crafts of home-making and subjects relating to married life; and (3) by the development of special courses at county colleges and
centres of adult education for the psychological
aspects of marriage as well as the ordinary

I26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

domestic subjects. Outside the school the tions they specially promoted-such as the

co-operation of the churches and voluntary organizations would be essential.

fertility census of I946 and the inquiry into fertility carried out by Dr. Lewis Faning

Thus it will be seen that though the for the Royal College of Obstetricians and

Eugenics Society is little mentioned in the Gynecologists; it also takes account of the

Royal Commission's report, and though written evidence submitted by thirty-six

eugenic issues (apart from those arising from organizations and numerous individuals and

the discussion of intelligence and fertility) of the oral evidence which they heard. The

are not specifically designated as such, the pleasing nature of the report testifies

report as a whole is, from the Society's rather to the fact, stressed by General

standpoint, a most satisfactory document. Frederick Osborn in his informal talk to our

In making this statement I am-not advancing Fellows and Members on November 23rd,

any special claims for the memorandum I948, and also commented on in the editorial

which we placed before the Commission or for notes of the January 1948 issue, that, after

the part which our representatives played in blowing contrarily throughout most of the

their oral evidence. The Commission's report inter-war period, the winds of public

is based on the findings of the investiga- opinion are now veering in our favour.

POPULATION STUDIES

Vol. III, No. 1

A Quarterly Journal of Demography
Editor: D. V. GLASS
CONTENTS

June 1949

H. GILLE. The Demographic JAistory of the Northern European Countries in the Eighteenth
Century
KARE OFSTAD. Population Statistics and Population Registration in Norway. Part 3: Population Censuses
E. LESSOF. Mortality in New Zealand and England and Wales
CHUA-LIN PAN. The Population of Libya
NOTICE. The International Union for the Scientific Study of Population

Subscription: 308. net per volume. Singl Parts ios. net
Published for the POPULATION INVETIGATION ComnTTEE by the CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS, 200 EUSTON RoAD, LONDON, N.W.i

EugenicsReview, VOL MI. No. 8

