EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW*
By CECIL BINNEY, M.A., Barrister-at-Law

IT may be a convenient introduction to but rather on the practical question how far

my subject to explain how I came to it is eugenic or dysgenic in its effect.

write this paper. About a year ago I I was particularly led to produce 'this

had the pleasure of listening to an interesting paper because for several years I had been

paper read to this Society; the subject, meditating one on the far more interesting

except that it was connected with eugenics, question how far the law concerning the

was entirely remote from my present subject inheritance of property-not only English

and the reader was not a lawyer-but in the law but other systems of law-had a eugenic

discussion which followed the criminal law or dysgenic effect. I reluctantly abandoned

was introduced and I noticed that he was this project, not only because I doubted my

under the impression that such parts of the own competence to deal with this difficult

criminal law as were relevant not only could branch of law, but because I came to the

be justified on eugenic grounds, but might conclusion that, though the effect of the law

be supposed to have been enacted on those of property is important and extensive, it

grounds. This strange error might, I thought, is social rather than in a strict sense eugenic.

be sufficiently widespread to require refuta-

tion. The truth is that the criminal law of Laws Affecting Immigration

England originated with the Courts punishing It is indeed obvious that a great part of the

certain obvious gross violations of person law cannot have any effect which is directly

and property-murder, robbery and so forth either eugenic or dysgenic. It is generally

-which in still earlier times would have recognized that the Bills of Exchange Act,

given rise to a blood feud. Apart from I882, and the Partnership Act, I890, are

certain alterations which reflected and en- two of the most successful of modern statutes.

forced the growing power of the Crown, the Neither in substance nor in language is

development of the criminal law for centuries either in need of amendment-which cannot

consisted in its gradual extension to protect be said of many Acts of Parliament passed

person and property from invasions more with far higher aims and more general public

subtle or less violent than those prohibited interest. But legislation of this type, how-

by our simple Anglo-Saxon ancestors. Ques- ever valuable, is not eugenic-except in

tions involving marriage or sexual morality, this very general sense that a good commer-

being within the jurisdiction of the Church cial law will not only help the most intelligent

Courts, entered little into the criminal law and industrious to flourish and bring up

before the Reformation, and not greatly families, but will attract desirable elements

thereafter till the Victorian age, and the to this country. The development of London

extensive sexual legislation of that period to be the world's commercial and financial

was based almost entirely on moral rather centre was partly due to the excellence of

than eugenic considerations. With this in our commercial law, and this commercial

mind, it seemed to me that it might be of development caused the settlement in Eng-

interest to this Society if I were to embark, land and the gradual absorption into the

not on the barren historical enquiry, how population of the best type of alien. This has

far our criminal law is eugenic in its origin, enriched England in every sense. One has

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on January i6th, 1945.

only to open any periodical interested in the doings of English high society to come

105

io6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
across the names of families now well known any attraction to our undesirables have been and Anglicized which originated in this way. the United States and the Dominions, and
It is unfortunate that at the present time they have protected themselves with the the feebleness of the English criminal law strictest laws as to immigration and deportaand its administration is likely to produce tion. None of the bad characters who the opposite effect by landing us with all arrive here will have hesitation in producing the bad characters of the world. Fraudulent children, which will be British subjects by bankrupts from Eastern Europe, share- birth and will be irremovable. pushers from across the Atlantic, prostitutes There are two separate branches of the law who would not be tolerated in any capital involved, the law as to aliens, their immigrabut London, crooks who know that cheques tion, control and expulsion, and the general can be cashed in England with impunity law against crime, which applies to everyone not enjoyed on the Riviera-in fact, un- in this country, Englishman and alien alike. desirables of every description are entitled The law as to aliens is not a branch of the to look upon England as their special para- criminal law, although breaches of it are dise. There may be some slight difficulty punishable in the criminal courts; nor is in getting here, but once arrived they know any amendment of it particularly necessary. that the law will be lenient to them and, if The Home Secretary possesses the widest they can establish that there is no country possible powers, and an order for the deportato which they can be deported or that the tion of an alien cannot be questioned in any country to which they belong will execute way in the law courts; but the use he makes them on arrival, they can remain here of these powers is entirely within his disindefinitely, subject only to occasional short cretion. If the fullest use was made of sentences on the rare occasions when a con- them to keep out of this country aliens of viction is obtained against them. The fact dubious character or antecedents, and to that England has obtained in recent years, deport forthwith those reasonably suspected particularly since the Nazis seized power in of bad behaviour, it would make no difference Germany, a number of immigrants of a whether our criminal law was severe or lax valuable type, and very many others whose as compared with those of other countries;
presence may at least be argued to be bene- but, so long as it'is practicable for undesirable
ficial to us, need not blind us to the fact aliens to come to this country and to remain that reformation of criminals and elimination here, they will be encouraged to do so by of bad types by eugenic measures is inade- the laxity of our criminal law and the lightquate, while our stock is being poisoned by ness of the sentences imposed. Moreover, the continual immigration of undesirables. British subjects with criminal records are My remarks are not intended to refer entitled to return to England and their specially to immigrants from Germany, willingness to do so will be largely affected though it is obvious that among the first to by the severity or leniency of our criminal leave must have been those who were wishing law. to escape from the police, and whom the It is fair to point out that one's view may German government did not wish to retain. be distorted by listening in law courts to Many of them before their arrival in Ger- the police giving accounts of alien criminals many had left Poland or Hungary or other or criminals who have returned here after countries in similar circumstances. That serving sentences abroad, while one has not we do not like them in England is no argu- the same facilities for listening to proceedings ment against-Germany, Poland or Hungary, in foreign courts. Further, the leniency of or against Jews. If Hungary had by its our criminal law is confined to offences of wealth and the leniency of its criminal law dishonesty. It is severe in dealing with been equally attractive, it would no doubt breaches of sexual morality, and, on the have been filled with criminals from England. other side of the balance sheet to the thieves In fact, the only countries which have offered and swindlers who come here for refuge, one

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW

I07

should put the number of Englishmen- and poisoning contained in the Offences

they are necessarily persons of some social Against the Person Act, i86i, are not

position or financial resources to be able to eugenic in their effect, except in the very

do it-who find it safer to live abroad. The general sense that any law which is beneficial

respective value to the countries where they in its effect is eugenic, and it is obviously

resided of Oscar Wilde, D. H. Lawrence or desirable that the criminal law should pro-

Lord Byron, on the one hand, and Steinie hibit violence and poisoning. On the other

Morrison and Eddie Guerin, on the other, hand, some of these sections of the Act may

is, of course, a matter of opinion.

act dysgenically in forbidding a sterilizing

operation which may be eugenically desir-

Offences Against the Person Act, 1861 able. Some years ago this Society was kind

But all this is in the nature of a digression, enough to entrust me with the task of pro-

for the purpose of this paper is to consider ducing a pamphlet on the law on this sub-

the more direct effects of our criminal law, ject, so I will add nothing to what I then

and this, like our civil law, is for the most said, except that the -opinion which I then

part not directly either eugenic or dysgenic, expressed that sterilizing was illegal under

since it is concerned, at least if one limits the i86i Act has been confirmed by the

oneself to the consideration of crime of any decision in Rex v. Donovan (I934) 2 K.B.

gravity, with the protection of property. 498, and the possibility of sterilization being

It is likely to remain so, notwithstanding declared by the Judges to be punishable

the advance of Socialism; for the property under the Common Law has been made more

which exists becomes, if anything, in greater real by the decision in Rex v. Manley (I933)

need of legal protection than before, when i K.B. 529, that it is a Common Law mis-

it comes to be owned by the community. demeanour to tell lies to the police about

As eugenists, we are more likely to be imaginary crimes, the first example for a

interested in such parts of the criminal law long time of a new crime being, in effect,

as exist to protect the person or are con- created by the Judges.

cerned in one way or another with sex, But though the legal prohibition of

marriage and the procreation of children. sterilization-assuming that it is observed

It will be more useful to consider individual by medical men-may prevent operations

crimes or groups of crimes in their eugenic eugenically desirable, we cannot, as eugenists,

aspect rather than attempt to formulate advocate that it should be unconditionally

general principles of an abstract character. legalized. To repeat an example I have

I will only make one generalization: that previously given to this Society, one can

we shall have to approach the problem from imagine a dubious doctor establishing him-

two different points of view-one might call self in a shop in a Midland town and adver-

them positive and negative, but it is tising sterilization to the local factory girls

probably more accurate to speak of them as a greater attraction to the male sex and

as the points of view of the prosecution and a more durable one than permanent waving

of the defence. We shall have to consider and offering to do it for £&5, payable by
the dysgenic effect of the criminal law in instalments. One would not be either sur-

forbidding what we as eugenists may prised or distressed if .under the present law

advocate; but it is gratifying to add that such a person found himself in the dock. If

in a far larger number of cases we shall have sterilization is to be legalized it must be for

no particular sympathy with the crimes definite purposes and subject to proper safe-

under consideration-to that extent we guards, and if it is to be of much eugenic

shall be on the side of the angels, or, at importance, it will have to be legalized; for

least, of the police-but shall be considering it is principally required in the case of- men-

.how far the law against them and its prac- tally defective persons, whom no doctor is

tical application is eugenic or the reverse. likely to take the risk of sterilizing in the

The various provisions against wounding present state of the law, since, apart from

io8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

other legal objections, they may not have of any prosecution being brought under it,

the necessary intelligence to consent to the but this does not mean that it is unnecessary

operation.

or ineffective. A self-constituted healer of

venereal diseases is not likely to flourish

Contraception

in competition with genuine doctors and

I need only briefly remark that I do not hospitals except by a good deal of advertise-

think that artificial insemination (of a willing ment, and an Act making any advertisement

woman, of course) can possibly be an offence a penal offence is likely to put him out of

against the criminal law on either of the business.

grounds on which sterilization may be But the analogy between the cure of

illegal, before passing on from it to other venereal diseases and the sale of contracep-

acts intended to prevent the birth of child- tives is not a close one. Everyone desires

ren. Neither the use of contraceptives nor the cure and prevention of venereal disease

their sale is contrary to the law, though this unless there still exist any obscure fanatics

may be rather because they have gradually who think it should remain as a divine

come into tise without Parliament having punishment of the children for the sins of

thought fit to legislate on the subject than the parents; and everyone except those with

as a result of any conscious policy. We an irrational and violent prejudice against

may yet see efforts to make their sale illegal, the medical profession will agree that

but a law to this effect would be eugenically doctors are the people to cure it. From a

calamitous. Its principal results would be eugenic point of view the suppression of

an enormous increase in abortion, blackmail, venereal disease is vital.

fraud, profiteering and unnatural vices of The sale of contraceptives raises more

every description. It might or might not controversial issues, and if it is to be made

increase morality, if that is the word for it; a State monopoly or something of the kind,

demographically it would add slightly to we shall naturally want to know by whom

the population; eugenically, though it and on what principles it would be run.

might produce some children who were of Other than purely eugenic considerations

a desirable character in spite of the unfor- may weigh with us, but it is clear that as

tunate circumstances in which they had eugenists we could not approve any scheme

come into the world, it would tend rather of control if it had the effect of withholding

to increase the number of unwanted or providing contraceptives without con-

illegitimate children as well as upsetting sideration of the suitability for parenthood

the lives of otherwise contented and regu- of the persons concerned. So far as such a

lated families. As has been pointed out by measure was intended to prevent the sale

this Society, it is a prerequisite of producing of bogus or harmful contraoeptives, it would

children eugenically that parents should obviously be welcomed by eugenists; and

have it in their power to decide whether, there can be no doubt where our sympathies

when, and at what intervals they are to lie in the prosecutions which are already

have children at all.

brought under the general law against fraud,

Many persons who are not opposed to the occasionally in respect of worthless contra-

use of contraceptives have expressed their ceptives, but more frequently against the

support of some measure to control their fraudulent vendors of supposed aborti-

sale or restrict it in various ways, and rely faicients. In many of these cases the charge

on the analogy of the Act passed in I9I7, of fraud is an alternative to a charge of

which makes it an offence punishable by supplying drugs for the purpose of inducing

two years' hard labour to advertise any abortion.

kind of treatment for venereal disease or for

anyone but a qualified medical practitioner Abortion

to treat it. The value of this measure is Abortion is a crime which is widely pre-

beyond question. I have no recollection valent in fact and the subject of a good deal

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW

of confusion of thought in controversy, on right to commit infanticide-a right well

tlk part both of its bitterest opponents and recognized in antiquity and among many

of its defenders. The former stress the primitive peoples-after the child is born.

point that its possibility is an encourage- (The modern statutory crime of infanticide

ment to immorality, which is no doubt is another matter, being an amelioration

true. The advocates of legalizing what is of the law caused by the popular revulsion

now known in popular speech as an " illegal at sentences of death being pronounced with

operation" and which is, in fact, the one no prospect of their being executed on

operation commonly performed which is unfortunate girls who had killed their

specifically forbidden by statute, point out illegitimate babies.).

that it is merely doing on one occasion It was formerly an anomaly of the law

what sterilization would effect for good that, though abortion was a crime and the

and all.

killing of a newly born child was murder,

Both these points of view omit a most there was an intermediate period during

vital consideration, the rights of the unborn which it might be destroyed with impunity.

child. Such a phrase may seem inapplicable I have never discovered whether this was a

to the first weeks after conception, and it mere legal curiosity or a defect which per-

may be argued metaphysically that a being mitted a number of unwanted children to

which is not yet conscious cannot have be got rid of: the Infant Life (Preservation)

rights, just as it is maintained by some Act has been on the statute book since

theologians that animals can have no rights. I929, and I have no recollection of any pro-

But this is a mere matter of words, for the secution being brought under it.

duties of individuals are not necessarily Although the law of England may seem

dependent on the existence of some cor- logical in fixing the moment of conception

relative rights possessed by other indivi- as that from which any attempt to produce

duals. An illegal operation, that is to say, a miscarriage is unlawful, it was anciently

an offence against section 58 of the Offences only from the time that a child became

Against the Person Act, i86i, does destroy viable orwas quickened that it was against

a physically existing thing which in the the law to interfere with it, since this was

ordinary course of nature would develop the point at which it was believed to receive

into a baby. It- is entirely different from an immortal soul and thus become a human

the imaginary children-which might exist being. It was doubtless for this reason

but for the use of contraceptives by their that until I93I sentence of death could be

possible parents. They are a mere figment passed on an expectant mother unless she

of the imagination and are metaphysically could show that she was " quick with child,"

in the same position as the unborn children that is to say, the child had reached a

which figure in Chancery proceedings for certain stage in its development; mere

the interpretation of wills, not because they pregnancy was not sufficient. She could, in

have rights but because it is necessary to fact, be sufficiently pregnant to be liable to

ascertain what rights they would have if penal servitude for life if she took steps to

they were to come into existence. No one terminate this condition, but not sufficiently

can logically oppose contraception in the pregnant to save herself from execution if

interests of children, uinless, like the Mor- she were found guilty of murder. She was

mons or the Hindus, he believes that it is also, in theory, liable to be brought back

a moral duty to bring into the world as and hanged after her child was born.

many children as possible. On the other On this point the law has been brought

hand, few people would maintain that more into accord with civilized ideas. So far

parents have a moral right up to the moment as the prohibition of abortion is concerned,

before its birth to destroy the organism the suggestion has often been made that

which they have originated, any more than we should readopt, though for other reasons,

they would maintain that parents have a the mediaeval law that it should not be an

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

offence to procure a woman's miscarriage
until the expected child has become quickened. It is impossible to say whether such an alteration in the law would be eugenic or dysgenic. Although it would make it permissible to terminate the preg-
nancy of women unlikely to produce sane
and healthy children, this would be equally legal in other cases; it would, presumably,
be for the mother, not the doctor, to decide whether it was to be. done, and it does not necessarily follow that the most dysgenic parents would be the most unwilling to have children. On the contrary, the worst children are likely to come into the world anyhow (unless compulsory powers are given to the doctors or the State to terminate
pregnancy in the interests of the State), for if their mothers are of a sufficiently low type, neither they nor anyone else will be concerned to procure their miscarriage.
There are more limited proposals for alteration in the abortion laws which are more obviously eugenic in their tendencies. There is, for example, the proposal sponsored by this Society that abortion should be permitted in the case of children begotten as the result of rape or incest. This proposal
came into prominence some years ago as the result of the trial of Mr. Aleck Bourne at the Old Bailey-a case which, despite the publicity it received, does not appear to have made any great alteration in the law
and certainly none of direct importance to eugenists, since the question at issue was how far dangerous a pregnancy need be to a woman's health to warrant a doctor in terminating it.
Nobody can think it desirable that children should be brought into the world as the result of rape or incest; but that such pregnancies should be terminated does not necessarily follow. In a sense the two cases
are dissimilar. The child which results from incest is likely to start life ill-endowed, but there is no reason why its mother should
necessarily feel antipathy for its father or
a desire to get rid of it. The woman who is pregnant as a result of rape may well desire to destroy her unborn child; but, so far as I know, there is no reason why the circum-

stances of its conception should prevent its
flourishing and there is not necessarily any
reason why the father should be a person whose children would be of a dysgenic type. Nevertheless, as a practical question, almost
everyone will sympathize with any effort
made to terminate the pregnancy of a woman
in this condition, if she so desires it. Personally, I do not believe this proposed
alteration in the law is workable. None of
its advocates have suggested who is to decide,
or how, whether the woman has in fact been raped; it will clearly be impossible to wait
for the result of a prosecution, if one can be brought, and it would be very hard on the woman if she were to be bound by its result. The problem of women who have been
raped and become pregnant is one that, like many others, can be left to the good sense of doctors and policemen. No one is likely to prosecute a doctor for terminating the pregnancy of a girl who has been raped,
unless he asks for it, as Mr. Bourne almost literally did.
Another proposed amendment in the
law which cannot be ignored in a paper
dealing with eugenics is that which would permit the termination of pregnancy in the case of the issue of completely dysgenic parents. That such a measure would be eugenic in its effects goes without saying, and one supposes that almost any doctor, unless he had strong religious opinions to the contrary, would feel himself justified in practice in doing this, for no one can wish to help to bring into the world a child which is mentally defective or hopelessly deformed. But to frame such a measure is a practical task of considerable difficulty. Assuming that abortion is to remain a 'crime, we cannot enact a measure which would provide a
defence in any case where the woman was
prepared to swear she had become pregnant by a man who was defective or otherwise undesirable. Even if we found it necessary
to confine the inquiry to the female-and in
practice the number of women who allow themselves to become pregnant by mentally defective men is not large-we cannot give what in a sense is a privileged status to women who, while perfectly responsible for

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW

III

their actions, can allege that they have in the ordinary sense defective, for they

heritable defects which stop them having must be capable of exercising some attrac-

desirable children. It would appear, there- tion on normal women. But it is idle to

fore, that the only practicable alteration in consider the antecedents of children irrespec-

the law in this direction would be a per- tive of the circumstances in which they are

mission to medical men to terminate preg- brought up and it cannot be good that

nancy in the case of mentally defective children should be born of irregular unions.

women. That such women would not become But much that is. said about bigamy shows

pregnant if the present law were observed a. considerable confusion of thought. As

is an irrelevant consideration, but it may be long as a man is encouraged and subsidized

generally agreed that it would be better to by the State to divorce his wife in order to

permit, and arrange for, the sterilization of start a family with another woman, and as

such women than to legalize the termination long as he is allowed to leave his wife and

of each pregnancy as it occurred. In any family without a divorce and have children

case, legalization of abortion in mental by a woman to whom he is not married, I

defectives would require elaborate safeguards cannot see that he makes it much worse by

such as have been suggested by this Society going through a bogus marriage with the

in respect of the sterilization of mental second woman. One would not think much

defectives. It would obviously be insuffi- of the hypothetical woman who would

cient to enact that it was to be permissible marry a man who had deserted his wife and

with the patient's consent when in many family and been divorced, but would not

cases it would be doubtful whether she was live with the same man in identical circum-

capable of giving a rational consent.

stances, except for no*ehaving been married

I have spent a long time on the subject of at the register office. Circumstances alter

abortion. Everyone must dislike it; every- cases and bigamy varies in gravity from a

one must regard it, apart from anything mere technical breach of law to an offence

else, as the result of a failure in contraceptive of real gravity-though it is an exaggeration

methods. But it is immensely prevalent, for judges to say it is equivalent to rape.

since in numberless cases the only alternative Some of the biggest blackguards one ever

appears to be something worse. The object sees in a dock are bigamists among other

of the authorities seems to be generally -to things. But most bigamists are fairly harm-

punish those who do it as an occupation less people; the troubles in which they are

rather than those who resort to them, and actors are not soluble by alterations in the

to punish with particular severity those who criminal law. Female bigamists raise less

perform the operation badly; indeed, in problems than male ones, for the quantity

many such cases they are convicted of man- or quality of a woman's children are not

slaughter, the unfortunate woman having likely to be affected by the question whether

died. they are begotten by one or more husbands.

Bigamy
Another crime which cannot fail to in-
terest us as eugenists is bigamy, though, in the strictest sense of the word, it has nothing to do with eugenics. A woman is as likely to bear desirable children to a bigamous husband as to her lawful husband, and bigamy is therefore neither eugenic nor dysgenic. It is true that there are many bigamists who ought not to have a family of children, let alone two or three families, though they are unlikely to be deformed or

Sexual Offences
I now come to sexual offences in the strict sense of the word, and if I should seem to devote considerable time to them, I should point out, besides their obvious eugenic significance, that of all the persons charged with offences of sufficient gravity to be tried at Assizes, about one quarter are accused of sexual offences. The acts with which they are charged can be put into three groups: those which constitute a wrong to some individual, those which are

112 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

punished by the State on the ground that the same practices which he would other-

they are grossly immoral, and those which wise have given up. Nearly twenty years

there is some reasonable ground for making ago I saw two young men standing in the

penal, though they do no physical harm to dock at Bury Assizes. They were working-

any existing individual. The first group class lads of good character: one was a

may be briefly dealt with. Acts of violence serving soldier, one was happily married.

must be suppressed in any civilized state, After they had committed one act of im-

whether they are concerned, or not, with morality together, one chose for some

sex. Rape and indecent assault are part unexplained reason to confess to the police;

of the general law against crime. Only in the other was questioned and admitted it;

a very few cases of rape is there any direct both were charged, both pleaded guilty and

effect on posterity, and with this problem were sent to gaol. I have often pondered

I have already dealt, though all such crimes over this sentence, which cannot conceivably

are likely to have a deleterious effect on have done anything but harm to everyone

the victims by producing in them a definite concerned, though it may have done some-

repugnance to marriage and parenthood. thing to deter the people of Suffolk from

This is an additional reason, if any were confessing their sins to the local police.

required, for their suppression.

Many of the men one has seen charged

with these offences had been long married;

Homosexuality

others were young men of the kind I have

Turning to the second group, the English just mentioned. With a very few exceptions,

law regarding what are often called " un- those brought up on this kind of charge are

natural offences" (though the phrase is not of a peculiar or advancedly effeminate

obviously inaccurate) is not in its entirety type. Even though one knows the offences

defensible by any rational person, for it with which they are charged, it is impossible

has no consistent basis. By this I do not to see anything in their appearance to dis-

mean merely that it is not the function of tinguish them from the others in the dock

the criminal law to suppress immorality, or, indeed, in the jury-box.

but that there is no rational basis on which Even if we are to have a law against

the particular acts in question are made homosexuality there is no reason why it

crimes. Shortly, it may be said that any should depend on the exact physical act

sexual acts between males are crimes;. that done and on nothing else, whether it is

no sexual acts between females are; and punishable with penal servitude for life or

that of sexual acts between persons of oppo- merely two years' hard labour; nor is there

site sexes, the vast majority are not crimes, any reason, eugenic or otherwise, why it

but a few are. The distinction between the should be possible to charge homosexuals

sexes is not necessarily illogical, for the with the special offence of importuning for

physical difference between the sexes may an immoral purpose rather than under the

be said to justify it. I am, however, certain general law against homosexuality, except

that the penalizing of homosexuality between that this enables the police to get men sent

males is bad eugenically and in every other to gaol by the magistrate, instead of being

way. The argument is sometimes advanced tried by a jury which would probably let

that but for this law men would take to them off-importuning being the only offence

homosexual practices and not marry or known to the law and subject to serious

have children. This seems to me an punishment for which there is no right of

absurdity. The number of men who could trial by jury. This appears to be due to a

be affected in this way by the criminal law ,historical accident. A Royal Commission,

is negligible. On the other hand, a convic- to whose attention it was brought, made the

tion for homosexuality is the one thing fatuous recommendation that as there were

likely to brand a man for ever and, especially not many cases-which is untrue-nothing

if he is sent to prison, to confirm him in need be done.

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW

I do not suggest that lesbianism, which There are a number of prosecutions. In

was fairly recently discussed in the law most of them the accused is the father of

courts in a slander action, should be made the girl, occasionally the grandfather. There

criminal. I would only point out that there is generally very little to be said for such

is more ground for doing this on eugenic defendants. The girls are often fairly young

grounds than for punishing male homo- and there is often a considerable element of

sexuals, for I think it is generally accepted intimidation, though there may be no

that women who adopt these practices are possibility of getting a conviction for rape,

unlikely to get married or have children. and the girl may be over the statutory age

Not only is this ignored by the criminal of consent. I do not ever remember a case

law, but a married man whose wife is taken in which the woman was also charged, nor

away from him by another woman is left any case in which it would have been right

practically without redress in the divorce that she should be charged. Of the other

court.

relationships prohibited by the statute, I

Considering the importance which the know of no prosecution for incest between

English law attaches to exact physical details a mother and her son. There are a fair

in matters of sex-I have in mind not only number of cases of incest between brother

the criminal law but the law as to divorce and sister, in some cases both being charged.

and nullity of marriage-it is not surprising It is generally accepted that such unions

that while, generally speaking, an adult must be dysgenic, but I do not know whether

man and woman are permitted to have this is scientifically established. Assuming

sexual intercourse as much as they like and that it is true as a general proposition, there

in any way they like without interference is nothing inherently improbable in the argu-

by the State, one particular form of sexual ment that, since in very few cases brother

connection is punishable with penal servi- and sister feel any sexual desire for one

tude for life. It is immaterial whether the another, it may well be that in the few

woman is the man's wife or a prostitute or cases where this exists there must be in-

anyone else. There are few prosecutions for dividual factors which might also operate

this astonishing offence, though at one time to prevent the children being abnormal. So

it showed signs of becoming popular as a far as I know, the only real evidence is to

blackmailing weapon in society divorces. be derived either from poor law or criminal

It is an obvious absurdity and the law is records, or from the history of certain famous

only not a public laughing-stock, because families. Several royal lines are instanced

good taste, the Lord Chamberlain's depart- as showing defects due to inbreeding. On

ment, and our very strict laws against the other hand, there is the notable example

indecent publications prevent it from being of the Ptolemies, among whom it was usual

brought to the attention 'of the public. for the reigning monarch to marry his sister.

We may not have adequate information as

Ineest

to their capabilities, but since they retained

As a lawyer concerned to defend the for three centuries, against foreign and

system which he is paid to administer, I domestic enemies, a throne to which their

turn more gladly to the third group of sexual founder had no title whatever, and during

offences, some of which are, indeed, the only this period Egypt led the world not only in

offences on the statute book which can be commerce but in art and literature, it is

regarded as having a eugenic origin or impossible to suppose that they were de-

purpose.

generates. One cannot, however, instance

Principal among these is incest. It is Cleopatra, who was the last of the line to

,surprising and, indeed, it is really a his- reign and who was a woman of incontestable

torical accident that this was not made ability and strength of character, since she

criminal till I908, and I believe that the was not, so far as I have been able to ascer-

Act was passed largely on eugenic grounds. tain, herself seriously inbred. Evidence from

II4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

police and poor law authorities is misleading, decision than fornication, or that marriage

since many of the persons accused of incest is so excellent a state that it does not matter

are of very poor stock and likely in any by whom or in what circumstances it is

event to have inferior children; equally, undertaken. For the benefit of those who

one must discount statements to the effect have not attended criminal courts, I should

that the child born was normal, since the mention that the culprits charged with this

standard adopted is probably not high. It crime are not the wealthy roues of sensa-

may be added that many actual cases of tional fiction; occasionally they are elderly

incest between brother and sister are due villagers who ought to know better, but in

less to any special attraction between them the majority of cases they are village lads

than to close proximity in slum conditions. who were possibly quite unaware that there

Certainly, as a practical question, no eugenist is an age of consent. Quite often they are

would wish to amend the law against incest genuinely fond of the girls and anxious to

except by strengthening it. The most obvious marry them. The latter also are not the

alteration would be to prohibit sexual connec- innocent little victims of seduction, but

tion between uncle and niece, which is not strapping young country girls who have

at present a crime. The Act of Parliament thoroughly enjoyed themselves. It is fair

is concerned strictly with blood relationship: to say that the judges administer this branch

it takes no account of the incestuous adultery of the law in a reasonable and sympathetic

-for example, between a man and his sister- spirit.

in-law-which was so important in canon It is difficult to say what, as eugenists,

law and English divorce law, but is, I sup- we should make of this crime. Presumably,

pose, quite unimportant eugenically, since by the time a girl is capable of having a

it is only by a theological fiction that it is baby she is physically old enough to do so

incestuous.

and there is no reason to suppose that the

babies, the occurrence of which generally

Offences Against Young Girls

brings these cases to light, are worse than

I -can pass -briefly over offences against other babies; but taking eugenics in the

girls under the age of consent, which are so broad sense in which I have already used

important to Assize Court practitioners. the word, it is deplorable that a girl should-

Actually, there are two ages of consent. have an illegitimate child before she has had

Connection with a girl under the age of a chance of getting married. The difficulty

thirteen is a crime punishable as heavily as arises from the fact that women are

rape, to which, indeed, it closely approxi- physically able to have children before they

mates. No one will sympathize with men are capable, quite apart from possible

found guilty of this crime, and the effect on economic difficulties, of maintaining the

the girls is likely to be deplorable. It is position of a married woman in a modern

otherwise with the offence, a much less state. In the Victorian age public opinion

serious one, of having carnal knowledge of a saw nothing wrong in the marriage of girls

girl between the ages of thirteen and sixteen. of sixteen, and this was not inconsistent with

The almost incredible badness of the drafts- the little that was then expected of women

manship of the statutes relating to this in the way of intellectual capacity or

offence has given rise to so many problems responsibility. It is certainly desirable that

and absurdities that it is difficult for a prac- the age of consent should be observed, but

tising barrister not to approach a discussion it is obvious that in many cases it is not;

of it in a spirit of buffoonery. It is also a prosecution cannot ever improve matters,

somewhat curious that for many years after except as a deterrent to others, and a sen-

sixteen had become the age of consent, and, tence of imprisonment is likely to make

in fact, till I929, girls could be legally married things worse for everyone concerned. To

at the age of twelve, an anomaly only rational raise the age of consent-which is sometimes

on the basis that marriage is a less important advocated-would be calamitous, however

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF THE ENGLISH CRIMINAL LAW

II5

strongly we may feel that sixteen and nine children of such unions start life under very

months is in practice too low an age for a unfavourable auspices. There is no country

girl to start having children.

to which they can go but England and in

this country they generally sink to the lowest

Intercourse With Mental Defectives

level of the population; the men are likely

More important to eugenists, but far less to take to crime, the girls will almost

important to practising lawyers, is the offence certainly become prostitutes. It has been

of having connection with a mentally defec- remarked that the half-caste children of

tive woman. I do not know how prevalent yellow men have a better chance in life

this crime is, but there are few prosecutions owing to their appearance less obviously

and still fewer convictions. Probably this marking them off from their fellow-citizens.

law, like many laws about sex, is not I remember once seeing one of them giving

generally enforced, and the difficulties of evidence at the Old Bailey. If she had not

doing so are obvious. This is much to be curled her hair and painted her face in the

regretted. If this offence were to be stamped vain attempt to look European, she would

out, there would be no real need, except in have been a very pretty girl of a Mongolian

order to permit them to marry one another, type: nevertheless, she was an East-End

for the sterilization of mental defectives prostitute. Of course no such disadvantages

which this Society has so persistently advo- attend persons of mixed origin but of

cated, for the number of cases in which European stock who, having white skins,

normal women allow themselves to become can pass as ordinary Englishmen if necessary.

pregnant by mentally defective men must They are not particularly likely to get into

be negligble.

trouble with the police unless the outbreak

of a European war puts them in the unfor-

Conclusion

tunate position of having a foot in both

I must not embark on a disquisition on the camps. My remarks are applicable only to

alterations in the law of sexual offences the children of those who can fairly be

which we may expect or wish to see. I will described as coloured people.

only say this: that, as eugenists, we should I am far from saying that I advocate the

like to see the end of two evils-persons who passing of penal laws on these subjects.

to their knowledge have venereal disease Apart from the difficulty of proving the

having connection with other persons and offences and a general unwillingness to create

thus spreading the disease, and coloured men new crimes, it will be readily seen that either

having children by white women. (The proposal would provoke acute controversy

opposite form of miscegenation is prac- on other than eugenic grounds. One would

tically unknown in England.) It is interesting not be surprised at either proposal being

to note that an attempt was made in the put forward; but from past experience of

Victorian era to secure a conviction for an the legislature I believe that it is more

act of the former type, but it was held not likely, if it strengthens the existing laws

to be an offence under the existing law. against sexual crime, to do so on what are

I should point out that of racial miscegena- regarded as moral grounds and probably

tion I am speaking rather as a criminal with bad results.

lawyer than a eugenist. It is not scientifically I have now touched upon all the serious

established that children so produced are of crimes which can be regarded as having

an inferiQr type, but as a practical matter any direct eugenic significance. They are

one cannot wish to see their number in- only a few of the crimes upon the statute

creased in modem England. Apart from book and the charges brought in respect of

offences of other kinds, such as living on them are not numerous compared with the

prostitution, infanticide and crimes of vio- total number of criminal prosecutions; but

lence, which arise from black men living they are for -the most part offences which

with white women, it is obvious that the loom large in the eyes of a practising law7er,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
because the law, rightly or wrongly, treats involving money or property. It thus comes them with greater gravity, though it does about that they form a large proportion of not necessarily punish them with heavier the business of the most important criminal penalties, than the general run of cases courts.

CURRENT NOTES ON DEMOGRAPHY
By D. V. GLASS

1. Population Movements in France during the War.
D-\ URING the occupation of France,
the customary annual publication
of current vital statistics (the volumes entitled Statistique du Mouvement de la Population) was abandoned. Instead, statisticians turned their attention to historical demography and produced, under the auspices of the Statistique Ge'nerale, a series of admirable studies on the historical aspects of fertility, mortality, naturalization and migration.* Now, however, the French Statistical Office is endeavouring to make up for lost time, and the new volume of Statistique du Mouvement de la Populationt provides comprehensive data for the years 1939-42 inclusive. The object of this note is to draw attention to some of the more important points brought out by the new statistics.
The general trend of replacement is shown by the following table (Table I) of official reproduction rates.+ From I935 to I939 these rates follow a course similar to that
* These studies are [P. Depoid], Reproduction Nette en Europe depuis l'Origine des Statistiques de l'ltat Civil, Paris, 1941; [P. Delaporte], Evolution de la Mortal4t en Europe depuis l'Origine des Statistiques de 1'Atat Civil, Paris, 1941; [P. Depoid], Les Naturalisations en France (x870-Z940), Paris 1942; and [?] Mouvements Migratoires entre la France et l'ttranger, Paris, 1943.
t Paris, 1945. Unless otherwise stated, references are to this publication. The present notes were actually written on the basis of the corrected page proofs. At the time of going to press, the published volh,me itself had not yet been received.
I P. 1I.

TABLE I

G.R.R. N.R.R.

1935-7

... I*00

1936... ... I*OI

0.87 o*88

1937 ...
1938 ..-.,
I1939 ...
1940...

... 1P02
... 1.04
... 1i*o6
... 0°97

o'8g
O-9Iv
0-93
0o82

194I ...
1942 ...

... 0-90
... 0o98

0.77
o085

shown by many other Western countries, a

general upswing which may have been con-

nected with increases in employment. The

fal in I940 and I94I is comparable with,
that experienced in England and Wales, and

so is the rise in I942, though the fall is

greater and the- rise less in France. It will

be remembered that both the fall and the

rise in France after I940 took place while

the male population was substantially de-

pleted. In the 87 Departments, according to

the official estimate, the male population

fell by just over 2 millions between January

Ist, I939, and December 3ISt, I942, the

bulk of the fall occurring in the first half of

I940.* Thus, as Gasc pointed out (cf.

EUGENICS REVIEW, I945, 37, p. 62), the fall in fertility in 194I was really less, and the rise

in I942 greater, than the figures suggest.

It is officially estimated that about 8oo,ooo

married men were out of France in I940,

and more than 6oo,ooo in I94I. The folow-

ing table shows the comparative legitimate

fertility rates (per I,OOO married women

aged I5-49 years) calculated on all married

women as well as on those married women

* P. 5. This includes a net figure of 1.03 million
prisoners of war and 0-31 million French workers in

Germany as of December 31st, 1942.

