THE TREASURER'S PAGE, No. 3

I CONCLUDED the Treasurer's Page in researches which the Society would promote

the April issue with the words:

if funds were available, I find myself con-

" In the next article, I propose to
outline briefly the problems whose urgency the Council has thought to justify the expenditure of capital, and I would briefly review some other problems the elucidation of which calls for financial help from the Society as funds become avail-
able."

fronted with a very serious difficulty because
of their number and range. To extend the principle of the Darwin Research Scholar-
ships alone might absorb very considerable sums, greatly to the advantage of eugenic knowledge, and I have before me, kindly prepared by our resourceful and energetic
general secretary, a full memorandum on the subject which has occupied fifteen

The first part of my task-that of de- closely typewritten pages. I am delighted to

scribing the problems upon which most of the find that he is so impressed by the scope and

£2,200 per annum of the Society's capital is scale of the subjects which should be tackled

being spent-was accomplished for me by were funds available that he has persuaded

the admirable statement in the Annual the Council to appoint a special sub-

Report set out on pages 7, 8 and 9; but as committee to prepare in printed form an

it may well be that some reader whose eyes outline of the more urgent, so that the facts

fall on this page has not by them a copy of of the situation may be laid before a.wider

that report, the following is a brief sum- public than the Fellows and Members of the

mary:

Eugenics Society alone. As a copy of this

document, when produced, will be available

Two Darwin Research Fellowships,

for every Fellow and Member of the Society,

value £300 per annum each includ-

I do not propose to trouble you further with

ing expenses

... ... ... 6oo any statement on this aspect of the question

The Population Investigation Com-

at the present time.

mittee

... ... ... ... 500 I propose in the next issue of the EUGENICS

Research on contraceptive methods 560 REVIEW to occupy the Treasurer's Page by a

Annals of Eugenics ... ... ... 300 comparison of the support given to the Society

by Fellows and Members with that given to

WVhen we turn to the problems which similar Societies by their members.

the Society would like to tackle and the

C. F. CHANCE.

I25

