320 EUGENICS REVIEW.

cipal enterprise and particularly in school meals. Miss Bulkley is strong

both in theory and in experience, and though others equally strong may

disagree with her defence of the meals, she deserves to make many

converts.

A. COCKBURN.

EldePton, ETHEL M. The Declining Birth-rate: Report on the English Birth-rate. Part I., England North of the Humber. London.
Dulau and Co.; 1914; price gs. net; pp. 246.
So many of the works devoted to a discussion of the birth-rate are illconstructed that the systematic plan of Miss Elderton's treatise at once commands the approval of any serious reader. In an introduction the nature and limitations of the material are described and methods for its analysis indicated, briefly, but in a sufficiently intelligible manner. Each of the registration counties of England north of the Humber is then passed in review and its constituent units studied in detail. In the case of each district the changes in the birth-rate are displayed both diagramatically and with the help of statistical constants. In all cases a comparison is instituted between the actual birth-rate, in terms of married women at ages 15-55, and their potential fertility estimated by Tait's method; wherever possible, statistics of housing and industrial pursuits are furnished, while verbal accounts of local conditions have often been supplied by residents. In the final sections, the relation between the fall of the birth-rate on the one side and industrial and social variations on the other are examined with the help of the calculus of correlations, the last chapter setting forth the general conclusions to be drawn.
Any work planned on so large a scale and yet affording so much specialised information must be liable to attack at various points. One statistician may object that some measure of social conditions other than those adopted by the authoress would have been superior; another may dissent from the particular choice of constants; a third may hold that the influence of increasingly stringent registration in the earlier period (birth registration was not enforced under penalty until I873) has not been enough emphasised, and so on. This sort of thing is the small change of criticism, and we desire to pass at once to Miss Elderton's general conclusions, only pausing to record our sense of the obligation under which all votaries of statistical science must labour in respect of her valuable and painstaking inquiry, the publication of which would have done credit to a Government department, and is worthy of still greater praise as the effort of a private worker.
Miss Elderton's first conclusion is that there has been an immense fall in the birth-rate of England north of the Humber, a fall only to a slight extent dependent upon changes in age constitution. We cannot suppose that anyone who has paid attention to Miss Elderton's work or to the publications of the General Register Office will dispute this conclusion, and need not enlarge upon its importance.
The second conclusion is that the fall is due not to any physiological decrease of fertility, but to widespread and nearly universal voluntary restriction.
This conclusion will also be accepted by a majority of students. So far as we know, Dr. John Brownlee is the only statistician of the first rank who entertains a different opinion. Dr. Brownlee rests his belief partly on certain general historico-statistical considerations and partly upon a particular study of Scottish data from which he infers that " the whole distribution of the birth-rate figures seems to disprove that any but natural causes are at work in the production of the change."'
The evidence upon which Miss Elderton relies is first the information as to the employment of contra-conceptive devices supplied by certain of her correspondents, and secondly, the fact that the fall has, on the whole, been more marked among those classes or in those districts in
I Brownlee, Proc. Roy. Philosophical Soc. of Glasgow, April 29th, I9o8.

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

321

which a higher standard of intelligence or living is found. Miss Elderton seems to think, an opinion which we share, that the former class of
evidence is of doubtful value in establishing the extent, although it may be of weight in testifying to the existence of a custom. The second class of evidence is more cogent; if, as we think Dr. Brownlee holds, the declining birth-rate is part and parcel of some periodic variation of germinal vitality, it is singular that its manifestations should be so discriminating. We may be permitted briefly to refer to some attempts we have incidentally made to throw light upon the point, although they must appear trivial in comparison with those of Miss Elderton. If the declining birth-rate be artificial, then we ought to find that in districts
which have, when we compare the first and last years of a long series,
fallen equally far, those specially open to influences favouring artificial restriction should lead the way chronologically. We chose for comparison ten districts in the south-west of England and ten in Kent and Surrey, the latter being old-established outer suburban residential areas. From I89I to I9II the decline in the birth-rate was sensibly the same in the two samples, a fact which might appear to support Dr. Brownlee's view, since the social circumstances were very different in the two cases. But between I88i and I89I the decline proceeded twice as fast in the suburban sample as in the remote rural one. Such a result points, we think, to the gradual dissemination of a custom. We have not, however, been able to confirm this in all cases. For instance, the course of the decline in Norwich and Yarmouth, the only two large towns in Norfolk, has, since i88i, not differed markedly from that seen in the rest of the registration county. Another result which is strongly confirmatory of Miss Elderton's view is the remarkable difference between the state of affairs in Shoreditch, a typically poor, and Hampstead, a typically rich, London borough. We find that the birth-rate (corrected by Newsholme and Stevenson's method) in i88i in Hampstead was 30-0I, and in Shoreditch 3I-32, no very great difference. In I9II the figures were I7-55 and 30-I6. The regression coefficient measuring the decline in Hampstead is six times as large as that of Shoreditch, being in the latter case hardly sensible. Similar results have, of course, been obtained in Berlin and other large cities, and we do not see how they can be interpreted except as consquences of artificial limitation.
Miss Elderton's next conclusion is that the decline has been associated both with increasing discussion and dissemination of means to prevent conception or destroy its fruits and with further restrictions upon the economic exploitation of children. In other words, prevention has become easier and the economic value of the child less. Lastly, Miss Elderton holds that the fall is differential in the sense that the ostensibly fitter parents have been precisely those who have limited the numbers of their offspring.
With respect to these two conclusions, we think that the former is fully substantiated both by the evidence Miss Elderton presents and that published by other members of the Galton Laboratory staff. The second conclusion also seems to us established in a general way. We think, indeed, that in some cases it is doubtful which is the cart and which the horse of the statistical equipage Miss Elderton drives. To take an illustration, we are told that the correlation between health of mother and size of family for constant age and employment is -*25+'oI2, but the fact that "health " is, to some extent, a heritable character, is not sufficient to prove that it is really the horse, it might be the cart. Perhaps the good health of mothers with small families is due to their having small families, it may not be that, ab initio healthy, they decide to bear few children; after all, child-bearing under unfavourable conditions is a fairly common source of ill-health. But this is a minor point; that, in a general way, Miss Elderton has established her case seems hardly doubtful.

322 EUGENICS REVIEW. This brings us to the practical applications Miss Elderton makes of
her store of scientific results. She thinks that the nation needs two small things and one great one.
The two small things are repression of the sale of abortifacients and increasing police vigilance with regard to shops vending preventive appliances. The great thing is best described in her own words. " But the one great thing we want is a real statesman, a man who will see whither the present movement for the limitation of the family is inevitably leading the nation. We need a man who will grasp clearly the economic course of the whole evil, who is able to awake the nation and who, gaining its support, will make the well-born child again an economic asset. We want a leader who will convince the workers, both with the head and with the hand, that, however costly, the well-born child is now as it was in the past, the basis of national greatness and the price of empire; we need above all a statesman who will make this child once more a welcome possibility. He will have a task, such as only those can realise who have plumbed even the shallows of this swamp which is threatening to rise and engulf the nation."
We confess that this seems to us, as Bagehot would have put it, a
trifle eloquent. There is a half suggestion, contained in the phrase beginning " however costly," that even in the absence of economic relief it is the duty of fit parents to pay "the price of empire." We would submit, by no means as a final argument, but still as one deserving refutation, the following reply which might, we fancy, be made by a Neo-Malthusian and shall look forward to the rejoinder which it may
provoke.
If the price to be paid for the maintenance of English or even European predominance is a succession of thwarted lives among the many, that the few may prosper and revel in the vanity of leadership, the price is too high and the present order of society hardly worth preserving. We shall be told that this is unpatriotic; that all good men should be prepared to make sacrifices for the common weal. We cordially agree that patriotism is one of the high virtues and that for the sake of his country and her traditions a man should cheerfully lay down his own life. But we do not know that he is ethically justified in sacrificing the lives of others. One of our most penetrating psychologists, Nathaniel Hawthorne, in a novel, perhaps less studied than it deserves, showed how narrow is the boundary which divides public spirit from selfishness. "They have an idol to which they consecrate themselves high-priest, and deem it holy work to offer sacrifices of whatever is most precious, and never once seem to suspect-so cunning has the devil been with them-that this false deity, in whose iron features, immitigable to all the rest of mankind, they see only benignity and love, is but a spectrum of the very priest himself, projected upon the surrounding darkness. And the higher and purer the original object, and the more unselfishly it may have been
taken up, the slighter is the probability that they can be led to recognise
the process by which godlike benevolence has been debased into alldevouring egotism." It is vain to say that the sacrifices entailed in the rearing of a large family fall upon the parents exclusively; the children
suffer at least as greatly. In the world in which we live, as distinguished from some collectivist or eugenist Utopia, a small family can be better
clothed, fed and educated than a large one, and this is the central fact in the situation. Before an honest man devotes himself to the rearing of a large family, the members of which will, so far as he can see, all be
destined to the same weary round of toil and the same limited opportunities he himself endured, he must be informed precis,ely what economic
measures will be undertaken to secure the liberties of the coming race and must receive some guarantees that they will really be put into operation. He will not be stirred by rhetorical phrases such as "the price of empire," " race suicide," and the like. We have no doubt that the

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

323

Roman pontiffs exhorted the sibyl most eloquently to lower her price

and enlarged upon the danger to the State involved in her exorbitant

demands. Although our governing classes receive a classical education

they have still not assimilated the teaching of that instructive fable, thev

still believe that catchwords are legal tender.

M. GREENWOOD, JNR.

Mott, F. W., M.D., F.R.S. Nature and Nurture in Mental Development. London: John Murray; 1914; pp. 151.; price 3s. 6d.
THIS small volume is an amplification of three Chadwick Trust lectures delivered by Dr. Mott, than whom no better man to treat this subject in a popular way could have been found. The author's chief life-work has been neuro-pathology on its mental and brain side, his experience in that department being corrected and enlarged by his position as a physician to a general hospital.
To write effectively on Nature and Nurture, social, educational, psychological and eugenic knowledge and interests are needed, as well as the purely medical qualifications, which Dr. Mott so eminently possesses. He modestly claims to throw " only a little ray of light " on his vast theme, but hopes that his book "may stimulate the reader to further enquiries regarding the respective parts played by environment and heredity in mental hygiene "-an end which will certainly be attained. Strictly speaking, there is not much new or original work in the book. Dr. Mott himself and others have trodden the same ground before. It is through the way things are put by the author that the public will be interested and impressed and a certain rousing of the public mind and conscience in regard to those questions will result.
Dr. Mott brings together and correlates the latest facts in regard to his subject, but he has found, as so many of us who have tried to get at the public in regard to scientific matters, that it is difficult to avoid the use of technical expressions that are unintelligible to even educated people. What could an ordinary reader of these lectures be expected to gather from these two sentences ? " The neurone is a complex cell behaving like a living organism; it nourishes itself and is not nourished. Now the neurones forming the grey matter of the cortex are the most complex and latest developed ontogenetically and phylogenetically, consequently the germinal determinants of those cells are less fixed and stable, therefore more likely to undergo pathological mutations than other cells of the body under the influence of chronic poisoned conditions of the blood of the parents." These sentences express scientific facts, but what do they convey to the lay understanding? We do not say this to discourage Dr. Mott or other scientific educators, but to show lay readers the difficulties of their task. Dr. Mott first treats of mental hygiene from a physiological standpoint and the causes of mental deficiency. He goes on to speak of the "raw material of character" in relation to heredity and the inheritance of pathological and individual characters. The old question of the respective parts played by inheritance, nutrition, education and environment on the work and life of man and woman are discussed. Then come interesting psychological studies of Laura Bridgeman, Helen
Keller and Marie Heurton., and what they teach in regard to mental
development. What the author says about sleep, feeding, the association of eye and hand and the senses in education are all most practical. The fourteen pedigrees given by him, and the beautiful diagrams, will greatly instruct the ordinary reader; without them the book would not be of half as much value. The last subject treated by Dr. Mott is self-control, that king of all the mental faculties and prince of all the virtues, the general practice of which would revolutionise human society. A short account of the medical inspection of school children by Miss Agnes Mott forms an appendix to the book. The volume really endeavours to put in
zi5 pages what it would require many treatises to exhaust.
T. CLOUSTON.

