THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to beg the question for the choice of institutions But this line of criticism may not merely seem

in the world of reality" (p. 235). But when he rather carping, it is also premature. One will not

adds that "many features of the real world be able adequately to judge the -emphasis of

which are particularly relevant to the choice of Professor Meade's work until further instalments

the best institutional mixture have been assumed are unfolded. One should certainly look forward

away throughout this volume", one is inclined to to these confident that, as with the present

suggest that "many" should be amended to "all". volume, one will be treated to a masterly and

A Pareto-optimum is simply a Pareto-optimum, instructive example of detached, lucid and

and can be described in terms of a highly simpli- precise analysis.

fied competitive economy of omniscient in-

T. W. HUTCHISON

dividuals, or of an economy organized by an

omniscient central authority, or of various

mixtures of the two. The significant problems of

CONTRACEPTION

economic policy and of the choice of appropriate institutions are not problems of how to calculate or compute "optima" from complete data, known and predictable with certainty, as

Mears, Eleanor. Handbook on Oral Contra-
ception. London, 1965. Churchill. Pp. xv+107. Price 20s.

represented in textbook and blackboard dia- DESCRIBING ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES, Dr.

grams. They are problems of how best to Mears writes "it is probably true to say that no

provide against ignorance and uncertainty, how other group of drugs in general use has been

to cope with "externalities", which are not subjected to so much careful investigation on a

exceptions, or curiosa, but the very stuff of a world-wide basis". This handbook is a remark-

modern economy in which motor-cars and more ably compact and efficiently constructed summary

spacious housing are the main desiderata. of all the work which has gone into studying

Professor Meade is, of course, perfectly well oral contraceptives up to the beginning of 1965.

aware of these points, but hardly seems to give In a mere 100 pages it covers the clinical usage of

them due weight in his conception of the "the pill" and sets it in its correct biological

relationship between his highly abstract analysis context, and includes, in addition, chapters on

and policy conclusions.

very recent advances, such as sequential therapy.

It might be dangerous if undergraduate The book has arisen out of the work of the

students get the distorted impression of the Oral Advisory Group of the IPPF Medical

nature of policy problems that, given the Committee. To a large extent it gets the best of

necessary value judgements, wise and realistic two different worlds. On the one hand, it

decisions are, or can be, reached by calculations benefits from a single authorship which leads to

or computations from complete data known with continuity and avoids the excessive length (and

certainty; and that they should therefore devote a price) of volumes that attempt to cover a large

large part of their time and energy to the field by calling on several authors. On the other

cultivation of purely analytical, logical or hand, it has the advantages of a symposium in

geometrical analysis. The belief in the supreme that many distinguished authorities on oral

importance of precise and subtle, but highly contraception have been closely associated and

abstract, analysis rather resembles that of the partly responsible for large sections of the book.

senior Guards officer's belief that the best In summarizing the scientific aspects of the

training for the battlefield was for the soldier to subject all the most significant work on both man

spend much of his time performing meticulously and animals is adequately covered. All the

precise drill-movements on the barrack-square; controversial issues that have arisen around oral

or the belief of the classics masters that devoting contraception are faced squarely and honestly:

much of one's time to Latin and Greek com- possible effects on the pituitary, on blood

position was the best training in clear thinking clotting mechanisms and on liver function, and

and expression (admittedly not nearly as bad an any long-term risk of carcinogenesis are closely

idea as some of those which have superseded it). discussed. Perhaps one of the most useful

104

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

aspects of this handbook will be as an answer to those biologists and doctors who are over cautious in the large-scale use of oral contraceptives. At the same time Dr. Mears does not overstate her case and is careful to underline those areas where doubts remain. It is interesting that in certain physiological fields knowledge of the action of "the pill" has outstripped our basic knowledge of the normal.
Under the clinical usage of oral contraceptives the Handbook surveys their use, effectiveness, possible side effects and their action on lactation and the menopause. The least satisfactory part of the book is a chapter of practical advice to doctors which is clumsily set out as a series of questions and answers.
Not all reviews of the Handbook have been as eulogistic as the above. It has been described as "hastily put together" and over enthusiastic in its advocacy of oral contraception, that socalled "violent incursion into the endocrine physiology of the woman". For my part, I find it a most valuable book on an exceedingly important topic.
MALCOLM POTTS
SCIENCE AND RELIGION
Thorpe, W. H. Science, Man and Morals.
London, 1965. Methuen. Pp. 155. Price 25s.
THIS BOOK IS the outcome of a course of endowed lectures delivered by Dr. Thorpe at Balliol College in 1963. When it is known that the purpose of the lectures is to discuss the relation of science to Christianity with particular reference to the "sympathetic explanation of differences . . ." the general trend will be apparent. Indeed, it would not be unfair-if perhaps a little unkind-to say that it is an heroic endeavour to get Paley's watch going again after its century-long retirement. But the emphasis is shifted from the design of the actual parts ofthe watch to the materials from which the parts were fashioned-the shape and purpose of the parts having been inherent in the materials from Creation. Such a bald statement as this, however, does less than justice to the full and learned argument and Dr. Thorpe is clearly as highly qualified in philosophical as he is in scientific matters; moreover he is a noted
ER-H

authority on animal behaviour and many original and fascinating examples are given,
accompanied by enlightened interpretations and inferences.
Eugenics receives measured approval, more
particularly "when it comes to be based, as we
hope it will, on foundations of knowledge
incomparably greater than at present" (p. 123).
Several possible future techniques-such as AID
with preserved semen, or perfecting a method by which, to implant "nuclei of somatic cells into
enucleated eggs, and then force them to develop
parthogenetically" (p. 123) are mentioned. But some will demur at the author's disagreement with the example quoted (p. 123) of the laboratory rat becoming decadent in the absence of natural selection; Dr. Thorpe argues that such
absence does not produce decadence because the rat becomes admirably adapted to the protected
environment of the laboratory. But surely this is to confuse the "decadence" within an environment where natural selection is operating and "decadence" outside such a society. Carried to the human parallel we have the words of the late Sir Charles Darwin, while President of The Eugenics Society: "The most efficient way for a man to survive in Britain is to be almost halfwitted, completely irresponsible and spending a lot of time in prison, where his health is far better looked after than outside; on coming out with restored health he is ready to beget many further children quite promiscuously, and these 'problem children' are then beautifully cared for ... until such time as they have grown old enough to carry on the good work",* which well describes an admirable adaptation to Welfare State conditions yet still deserves the appellation "decadent".
Differing interpretations by individual physicists of the physical (author's italics) universe receives attention and mention is made of the
fact that as more and more physical considerations are taken into account, fewer features of the universe remain accidental (p. 134). But such thoughts could only be written in the absence of a valid definition of an accident itself. To a Determinist the mention of the word "accident" can only bring a wan smile.

* The Next Million Years, p. 94.

105

