tbe Suoenfcs _&uication Zocfety.

Drestoent: MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN.

iceolDrestbents :

SIR JAMEs BARR, M.D. SIR JAMBS CRICHTON-BROWNE, F.R.S. MR. MONTAGUE CRACKANTHORPE, K.C. BISHOP D'ARCY.

HON. SIR J. FINDLAY, K.C.M.G. PROF. STARR JORDAN. DR. A. PLORTZ. PROF. SEWARD, F.R.S.

MR. W. C. MARSHALL.

zeimberI of Counct[:

MR. CROFTON BLACK.

SIR E. BRABROOK, C.B.

MRS. THEODORE CHAMBERS.

HON. SIR JOHN COCKBURN, K.C.M.G.

MR. R. NEWTON-CRANE.

MR. A. E. CRAWLEY.

SIR H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.I.E.

DR. LANGDON DOWN.

MR. HAVELOCK ELLIS.

d l&X

PROF. J. FINDLAY.

DR. GREENWOOD.

I

DR. W. HADLEY.

MRS. H. C. HEATH.

ADMIRAL HENDERSON.

MAJOR HILLS.

Dr. INGE, THE VERY REV. THE DEAN OF

ST. PAUL'S.

MR, HOPE-JONES.

MISS KIRBY.

MR. ERNEST LANE, F.R.C.S.

MR. W. C. MARSHALL.

LADY OWEN-MACKENZIE. DR. F. W. MOTT, F.R.S. MR. G. P. MUDGE. MRs. G. POOLEY.
PROF. E. B. POULTON. MR. W. REA, M. P. DR. A. REID.
Ra. JOHN RUSSELL. aR. ETTIE SAYER. F. C. S. SCHILLER, D.Sc.
PROF. A. SCHUSTER, F.R.S. EDGAR SCHUSTER, D.Sc. DR. C. G. SELIGMANN. MRS. SYMONDS.
PROF. J. A. THOMSON. DR. TREDGOLD. MRS. ALEC TWEEDIE.'
MR. W. C. D. WHETHAM, F.R.S.
MR. ARNOLD WHITE. DR. DOUGLAS WHITE. DR. A. GORDON WILSON.

Hon. Treasuret: MR. P. VON FLEISCHL.

ffon. Secretary: MRS. A. C. GOTTo.

Members representing Branch Councils are nominated by the Branches.

MR. CAREY GILSON. MR. R. T. BODEY.

Virmingbani:

MR. HUMPHREY HUMPHREYS.

MRS. JORDAN LLOYD.

lAierpoo[:

MR. D. LAURIE. DR. W. B. WARRINGTON

l azlemere:
MR. E. NETTLESHIP, F.R.S.

:3elfastt:
PROF. J. H. LINDSAY.

0lazow:
(To be appointed.)

MRew Zeatan :
THz HIGH COMMISSIONER OF NEW ZEALAND. ADMIRAL HENDERSON.

"Eugenics is the study of agenaes under social control that may improve or impir
the racal qualities off_uture generations either physicall or mentally."

I

Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public opinion, and create a sense of responsibility in the respect of bringing all matters pertaining to human

parenthood

under

the

domination

of

Eugenic

ideals. II.

To spread a knowledge of the Laws of heredity so far as they are surely known, and so far as

that knowledge may affect the improvement of the race. III.

To further Eugenic Teaching, at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.

Membership Associate Membership

SUBSCRIPTION.
One Guinea per Annum. Five Shillinss per Annum.

PRIVILEGES.
Attendance at Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Library. Members only receive THE EUGENICS REVIEW free.
Fo ms o1 Aippliation for Membership and Associate Membership and full particulars o#f the Society can be obtained of the Hon. Secretary.

OFFICE:SI Kingsway Houe, Kin y W.C. OFFICEC HOURS: 10.80 am. to 5 p.m, Satuvdays 10.80 &.m. to 1 p.m.

THE
EUGENICS
REVIEW
Vol. V.
APRIL, 1913-JANUARY, 1914.
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY BY THE EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY,
KINGSWAY HOUSE, KINGSWAY, W.C.

CONTENTS.

ARTICLES.

PAGE

CARR-SAUNDERS, A. M.: A Ciiticism of Eugenics

. . 214

DARWIN, MAJOR L.: The Cost of Degeneracy. Being Part of

the Annual Presidential Address . . . .93

FISHER, R. A.: Some Hopes of a Eugenist

. . 309

GOTTO, MRS.: Eugenics and Public Health. Report of the Public

Health Conference, Paris, 1913

....

HANSEN, S.: The Inferior Quality of the First-born Children

157

(Translated by H. M. Kyle) . . . . . 252

JORDAN, D. STARR: The Eugenics of War . . . .97

LANGDON-DOWN, R.: The Mental Deficiency Bill

. . i66

LINDSAY, J. A., M.D., F.R.C.P. : The Influence of Disease upon

Racial Efficiency and Survival . . . . . 101

MCDOUGALL, W., M.B., F.R.C.S.: Psychology in the Service of

Eugenics

.. . . .

. 295

frjMARCH, L.: Depopulation and Eugenics (Translated by Hon. H.

Onslow) . . . . Part I., 234; Part II. 343

MARSHALL) W. C., M.A.: The Effect of Economic Conditions on

the Birth-rate . . . . . . . 114

ONSLOW, HON. H.: The French Commission on Depopulation . I30

OUR CRITIC CRITICISED

I.-DARWIN} MAJOR L. . .

..

3I6

II.-SCHILLER, F.C.S., D.Sc. . . . .

325

III.-BOND, C. J., F.R.C.S. . . . . . 333

SCHUSTER, E.: Eugenics as a Branch of Medical Sociology.

Report of Discussion at Meeting of British Association,

Brighton, 1913 . . . .

. . 270

11WHITE, D.: Eugenics and Venereal Disease

. . 264

CORRESPONDENCE.

Alleged Inferiority, The, of the First-Born. J. A. COBB

Depopulation. DEAN W. R. INGE . . . .

Eugenics and the Sunday School Teacher. K. B. BAMFIELD

Heredity and Environment.

MAJOR L. DARWIN

I.

E. SCHUSTER . . .

.

Informatioin on Adopted Persons. L. F. RICHARDSON

Inheritance of Fecundity. TERENCE CONNOR

2I,4ReedciecnatlEuMgarerniiacgeLegCierstliaftiicoantesi.n

JESSIE FIELD the United States.

.. L. J. COLE

Standardisation of Pedigrees.

E. NETTLESHIP and - MARSHALL . . . .

357 . 26I . 262
53, 260
260
. 67
154 263 . 354
. 66

EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE.

Morning Session.

Papers.

,ABadley, J. H.: How the Difficulties in Teaching Eugenics

may be Overcome . . . . . .

Darwin, Major L.: The Eugenic Ideal . . .

,Faithfull, Miss: How the Difficulties in Teaching Eugenics

,01 in Schools had been Met .

...

12 2
8

iv CONTENTS.

EUGENICS EDUCATION CONFERENCE (continued).

PAGE

Nicholls, W. A.: The Difficulties in Introducing the Subject

of Eugenics into the Elementary Schools

9

Speakers in Discussion.

Bonwick, Miss

. . 27

Edgar, Professor

. . 31

Haywood, Dr.

....

23

March, Miss

.

.

. . . 31

Murrell, Dr. Christine

. . 24

Plum, H. V . .

.

. . 26

Russell, J.

. . 32

Wood, Miss

.

Afternoon Session.

Papers.

Lyttelton, Rev. and Hon. E., DD.: Racial Responsibility as

a Factor in the Formation of Character . . . 34

Thomson, Prof. J. A.: The Method of Introducing the

Eugenic Ideals into Schools . . . . 47

Tuke, Miss: The Eugenic Ideal as a Factor in the Formation

of Character

.

. . . . 43

Speakers in Discussion.

Broome, Miss

..

..

Darwin, Major L.

..

6i,62, 64

de Burgh, Colonel

. . . . 57

Golledge, Mr.

.

. . 59

Graham, Mr.

.

. . . . . 58

Grant, Rev. C. . . . . . . . 57

Kimmins, Mr., Proposing Vote ofi Thanks to Chairman . 64

Lewis, G. . . . . . . . . 6I

Low, Miss

.

. . . . 62, 64

Macnutt, Mr. . . . . . . .6I

Mortimer, Mr. .

. . . . . 63, 64

Sawtell, W.

. . . . . . . 6o

Thomson, Prof. J. A. . . . . . . 62

Resolution passed at . . . . . . 63,64

Deputation subsequent to, to Board of Education.

Speakers,

Darwin, Major L.

...

. . 65

Bonwick, Miss

...

. . 65

Lyttelton, Rev. and Hon. E., DD.

. . .65

Nicholls, Mr. (N.U.T.)

..

. . 65

Tuke, Miss

...

. . .65

Trevelyan, M.P., Reply for Board of Education . .65

GALTON DAY

.

....

351

NO'rES AND NOTICES.

American Genetic Association, The . . . .

387

Aphorisms on Marriage, from the Indian Sages . . . 386

Assistance to Large Families in France . . .I

Biological Training of Medical Students . . . 192

Birmingham Meeting, The, of the British Association for

the Advancement of Science . . .

. 289

Birth-Rate Commission, The

...

. 386

Dean, The, of St. Paul's (Dr. Inge), on Medical Influence in

Social Reform . . . . . . . 288

Debate, The, on Eugenics, at the Oxford Union .

. 385

Depopulation in France . . .

. 290

CONTENTS.

v

NOTES AND NOTICES (continued).

PAGE

Eugenics in Austria

387

Eugenics at the International Congress of Medicine

287

Eugenics and Public Health

..

. . 290

Family Investigations

86

Family Records

...

.

290

Formation of Continental Eugenics Societies in France, Italy

and Denmark . . . . .

. 86-7

Formation, The, of a Dutch Eugenics Society . . .192

Groundwork, The, of Eugenics, Lecture Courses

. .II

Health Declarations before Marriage .

. . 289

Italian Eugenics Committee, An . .

. 387

Lectures on the Groundwork of Eugenics

. 385

Letters of the late Dr. Alfred Russel Wallace . . . 387

Marriage Regulations in Ontario, as to Defective Persons . 385

Mental Deficiency Act, 1913 . . . .

. 290

New Branches at Edinburgh, Oxford and Brighton'

. 384

New Vice-Presidents and Honorary Members . . . 383

Permanent International Eugenics Committee, The, Meeting of 286

Poor Law Conference, The . . . .

87

Present State, The, of the Science of Eugenics .

. 383

Professor Weismann's Letter on Election as Honorary Member of

the Society

. . . . . . . 383

Proposed Bibliography of Literature dealing with Eugenics . 86

Psychological Laboratory, The, at Kingsway House .

287

Royal Institute of Public Health, Congress of, in Paris

. 87

Rules for the Use of the Library by Members and Associates

of Branches

....

. I90

Statistical Methods in Relation to Eugenics

.II

Wanted, Eugenics Review, Vol. I., No. 2 . . . . 387

OBITUARY.

Crackanthorpe, Montague, K.C. . . . . . 352

Nettleship, Edward, F.R.S., by W. C. Marshall .

. 353

OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS . . . . . 179, 293

PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY (Quarterly Chronicle) I, 87, 193:
291, 387

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED

.

90, 194) 294, 390

REVIEWS.

ANON.: Mental Deficiency . . . . . .

ASHLEY, ANNIE: Birmingham Studies in Social Economics;

III. The Social Policy of Bismarck

..

BAKER, HELEN: Race Improvement or Eugenics . * .

BOAZ, F.: Changes in the Bodily Form of Descendants of

Immigrants

.......

BUTTEL-REEPEN, H. VON.: Man and His Forerunners . .

CHATTERTON-HILL, G.: The Philosophy of Nietzsche: An Exposi-

tion and an Appreciation . . . . .

CLOUSTON, SIR T., M.D., LL.D.: Morals and Brains (New Tracts

for the Times) . . . . . . .

DANIELSON, FLORENCE H., M.A., and C. B. DAVENPORT: The

Hill Folk: Report on a Rural Community of Hereditary

Defectives. Memoir No. I, Eugenics Record Office . .

73
73
178
76 367 72 178
172

Vi CONTTNTS.

REVIEWS (continued).

PAGE

EDDLEASDNVtEDEaYRNt,TPeOOPRLoNERfTauO,gwEFEes..unCgi.ALMec..ins,:miBic.RtA:sOei.ucntgolBrTiAdhMnRaeeR. srOIrfNoFfiGfiaacTmgeEOeivN.lo,ylSeuHltHe.iicots..niGtao.ornr,yyJOBEBNi..xEooaSolm,koi,gnyEe.B...dulMli.enMtit.n..h. e

No. . 7
Light
.
de G.

72
372 i68

EENSGTEALB,ROOLFDieKAnRr,M.tCOi:aATl.ciTotETygH,eh.nieinHac.nEstd.lhJee.Cm.MeSLoenABctm.SiKsoaIDil,AorfVVKEaN.ClNohuP.iePOl.E2dR,A-TPR:AErSouOtgNCTee:ochn-teioiOcposeNnnraaRttmehicevo.FearCmdoSiOrltfryufe:dil.yacteiSotnud..oyfI73167294

EUCKEN, R.: Main Currents of Modern Thought: A Study of the

GFFIIONUEOFRTFS,TREIJRDbMSK.,Apy.u:RirUrFMsGiB.Pe.GtorEuoWoaRtdB.lbIheo:l,)roaetnm.hDAds)MnRatIo.nrhftrreoitVl.pha.l:eogelceotSugeaaHixnleeo..dsmMoot(vhTeerSmaaS...enpesinxeltnasstP,erod..o.fEbibtlnyhleeemMiDt.a..a(urTnyyrga(nSTzsarulf..aafnetoserilddna)etbem....dy

77 281
75
368

GODDARD, H. H.: Echelle Metrique de l'Intelligence de
HHHHHAEEAERMAMRBPIIOEELLNR,TT,TOO,WNNS,.D,iD.:m,RCoL.onOsDS:SR.Me.DSxo:c:.R:EeATs.nuhA:tleatMPgaFleIotiennsnravdisoetOsfllbmouPirttrseiitmnonhuncesipaYlnoeednusnAgo. mfetehrEerviGoeqlnuP.ueertroaiabo.tnliVeoimn.. neloafnd....

Binet.-
...
Mental

280
370
277
277 371

Defect. tions of

I. the

A Criticism
Day and of

of Recent
the Fray

Ame. rican.

Work..

Ques.-

385

HOBHOUSE, L. T.: Development and
a Philosophy of Evolution

P.urpose;.

an .Essay .towards.

I69

HKKKHHHIIOEOSEOUTRYAURFBSAC,RFRBCLH,MAWSEEEARIOYNMLNDCN,,RLN,v,HSE,o,S.RANnE..E:I.GGV.B:.JN....:o:LH:Vro.JTO.d,vhTNATaee.WhhmP:e.HeheaMi.r:nasPiFDdltaakDitotta.HehErhe:utyoRshowoiaifoIfacsfmsnSsCEmoeDrmicniiLpgimhvi..iarioymlranrgietacitPsilereosonnge...raaeriesnn.sdMdeaLn.dabeVoeurrei.....nigI.ten.....

Staate....n . .

279 373 78 71
I7733 72
68

KUHLMANN, F.:

Minded

LLOOEDBG,E,J.S:IR

The 0.:

CMhTeMicholheddarneReirensnstuiwlPcittrshoCbootlnfhecemeGspBrtiaindoeintn-g.SoifTmhoLinirfteTeeesntsHu...ndred

. .

Feeble-...

287I0
77

LUNDBORG, DR. H. VON.: Medizinisch-biologie Familien Forschungen

RPPPMPNPIEOEIUEEGSPACNNPROoLERSScUOEIFSOTi,ROORNEOa,RNBlRTDO,AYtBotSiD,.,Ii,enEnSc.olCnKtRh:nlP.PeuAGPAAwi,..drRa,lgeLo,:ihOTpebfdeaFnEehiHeslM.z.rnWe.bn.aDLsieePo:AsIaCNsf.e.m(tEalaTe:PiPTrtnid:TrEtisTenedhoonueyLlRv-tTSslEcCiidMAaPehuShonoarnHeaoTzmnAoydIlanm2tUcPoDli2tBe,ceRg3Wtileucy2tteeEdnluelkaiidiaeifnninnn,agnd.K.eIgdrisonetedpo)ChIitff.oencrifdiaAgCurHe.h...stig.dnithlselreitldio.lU,acDaCBlSrooaHaaun.Dm...E.EncefifiydRsrefnt:inricrtgeiiheneebscn..A..u...ceczPhyirlooMeennc8one0hn,tt.......Po.der1ges8elr3lv,a'eIpn2inh8-n-.........3,

I27764
282
175
3I7730
374 275 372
173

CONTENTS.

vii

REVIEWS (continued).

PAGE

SALEEBY, DR. C. W.: Woman and Womanhood . . . 74

SCHUSTER, PROF. E.: Eugenics: A Science and an Ideal . . 170

SEMPLE, ELLEN C.: Influences of Geographic Enviionment: On

the Basis of Ratzel's System of Anthropo-geography

. 28I

SMITH, NELLIE M.: The Three Gifts of Life . .

177, 392

WALLACE, DR. A. R.: Social Environment and Moral Progress . 360

WALLIN, J. E. W.: Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives:

A Critique of the Binet-Simon Tests and a Contribution to

the Psychology of Epilepsy . .

. 363

WALLING, W. E.: The Larger Aspects of Socialism

368

WARD, PROF. J., Sc. D. : Heredity in Man . . . . 371

WHETHAM, W. C., and C. D. : Science and the Human Mind:

A Critical and Historical Account of the Development of

Natural Knowledge . . . . 78

WOODS, F. A.: The Influence of Monarchs: Steps in a New Science

of History

....

362

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
SCIENCE PROGRESS IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY, January, 1913. The
Mechanism of Infection in Tuberculosis. R. R. Armstrong, B.A. The
author points out the universal distribution of tuberculosis throughout
the animal world. He emphasises the fact that there is a great variation of relative susceptibility to tuberculosis in different races of man. The Jewish race is now possessed of a high degree of natural immunity. The diagnosis of tuberculosis, the nature of tuberculosis, human and bovine sources of infection are described.
LONDON QUARTERLY REVIEW, January, 1913. The Hidden Secret of
Life. J. Arthur Thomson. This essay deals with the Presidential
Address delivered before British Association, at Dundee, September,
1912, by Professor E. A. Schafer. The search after the " origin of life" has led to great discoveries for the benefit of mankind, but in Professor Thomson's opinion modern work has tended to accentuate rather than diminish the " apartness " of living organisms, and has increased the difficulties of thinking of the possible synthesis of living matter. The mechanistic hypothesis is useful for chemical, physical, and medical work, but it does not give satisfactory answers to the more fundamental biological questions.
THE DUBLIN REVIEW, January, 1913. The Mental Deficiency Bill.
Thomas J. Gerrard. An attack on eugenic principles as expressed in the Mental Deficiency Bill.-
JOURNAL OF MENTAL SCIENCE, January, 1913. Care of the Defective
in America. Winifred Muirhead, L.R.C.P., Edin. An account of visits to institutions for the care of the feeble-minded in various parts -of America, and a description of the methods of segregating the defective.
Presidential Address, delivered at the opening meeting of the section of Psychiatry of the Royal Society of Medicine, October 22nd, 19I2, by Sir George Savage, M.D. A large part of the address is devoted to the question of heredity and insanity. Sir George Savage confirms the statement that one-third of all the patients admitted to asylums have insane blood relations, and he touches on the law of anticipation and the subject of " Masked Inheritance " in connection with the transmission of insanity. He refers to the importance of recognising the eugenic principle in dealing with defectives.
EDINBURGH REVIEW, January, 1913. Marriage, Divorce, and thi Divorce Commission.
SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW, January, 1913. Is Insanity on the Increase! F. W. Mott, F. R. S. Dr. Mott admits the great increase of registered insanity-since I864 the registered insane in all classes have risen from 44,795 to I35,66I-but he thinks this increase may be partly explained by a diminution of unregistered insanity and by the accumulation of patients detained for life in asylums. The relationship of pauperism and registered lunacy, heredity and insanity, and the causes of insanity and mental deficiency are discussed.
Mythology and Life. An Interpretation of Olympus: With Applications to Eugenics and Civics. Professor Geddes. Abstract of a paper
read before the Sociological Society, October, 1912.
BEDROCK, January, 1913. The Warfare against Tuberctulosis, by
Elie Metchnikoff. This article is a translation of the Priestley lecture recently delivered by Professor Metchnikoff before the National Health Society. The distinguished author sketches the history of opinion respecting the nature of tuberculosis, and very clearly describes the essential facts of pathology as now understood. He passes in review the various expedients which have been adopted in the war against tuberculosis, and his estimate of their results is not very flattering. Professor Metchnikoff holds that there is some truth in the belief that

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

8Xr

a predisposition to the disease may be innate or, under certain condi-

tions, acquired, and thinks that immunity is attained by natural pro-

cesses of which man is unconscious. These processes may, perhaps, be

a sort of natural "vaccination," the organism acquiring immunity as a

consequence of repeated slight infections. We think this paper should

be of much service to the eugenic movement. Professor Metchnikoff

can hardly be accused of a bias in the direction of eugenic propaganda,

yet his judgment on the claims of modern "conquerors " of consumption

closely resembles the utterances of those who are regarded by popular

medical authorities as mere fanatics unworthy of serious consideration.

It remains to be seen whether Professor Metchnikoff's views will fare

bet*er than those of less distinguished inquirers.

M. G.

JOURNAL ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY, LXXVI., 1913, p. I65. On

the Use of the Theory of Probabilities in Statistics Relating to Society.

(Presidential address to the Royal Statistical Society, delivered on De-

thiscember i7th, 1912, by Professor F. Y. Edgeworth.) In

address

Professor Edgeworth discusses some of the conceptions upon which the

theory of statistics is based. With the help of ingenious illustrations ht

indicates the genesis of a " normal" frequency distribution, and notes

the conditions which must be fulfilled by actual data before we can con-

fidently apply to them methods founded on the classical theory. Some

of the modern developments associated with the name of Professor Karl

Pearson are also touched on, and the views expressed well deserve con-

sideration. Professor Edgeworth's general conclusions do not, perhaps,

contain much which is actually novel, but his treatment is striking and

relieved by welcome touches of humour. Those eugenists who employ

statistical methods should certainly not neglect to read the paper. M. G.

BULLETIN DE LA STATISTIQUE GENERALE DE LA FRANCE, Tome II., fasc. ii., Janvier, 1913, contains a statement of the births, deaths, and
marriages in France for the first half-year of 19I2. The fact that a slight natural increase is shown during this period instead of an actual loss as in the corresponding six months of I9II is due to a decrease in
the death-rate, for the birth-rate appears still to be falling. Another interesting feature of this number is the publication of tables of mortality for Sweden and Japan, and a comparison of the percentage of survivors
Aautstdriifaf,ereHnut naggaersy,inGetrhemsaenyc,ounHtorlileasnda,ndBeilngiEunmg,lanFdr,ancDeenamnadrkI,talNy.orwTahye,
Scandinavian countries occupy the first places for all ages; Germany, Austria, and Hungary the three last.

L'ANNEE PSYCHOLOGIQUE, Tome XVIII., 1912. La Mesure du
DSveloppement Intellectuel chez les leunes De'liquantes, by Dr. Sullivan.
This paper records the results of applying Binet-Simon tests to girls between the ages of i6 and 25 years who, for one reason or another, were detained at Holloway. These well-known tests are arranged in a series of groups according to their difficulty. Each group is devised to fit the intellectual level of normal children of a particular age, thus when it is found that any person can perform satisfactorily in the tests of a given group but not in those of the next most difficult group, his or her degree of mental development can be expressed as being that of a child of so and so many years old. Dr. Sullivan divided the girls he examined
into six classes: (i) Non-criminal; (2) prostitutes; (3) habitual criminals; (4) occasional criminals; (5) impulsive criminals; (6) moral imbeciles.
He found a considerable range of variation in each class, and the numbers he examined were not sufficient to enable him to make a satisfactory statistical comparison between the different classes. In spite of this his results are very interesting and suggestive, and have enabled him to reach the conclusion that " Mental deficiency, at least in the intellectual
sphere, has not the importance as a source of crime that has sometimes
been attributed to it."

82 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Work of this kind is of the utmost importance for the advance of

criminology, and has a direct bearing on eugenics, as it may help to throw light on the relative influence of " nature " and " nurture " in the genesis of the criminal, and on the innate qualities of different sections of the community. It is difficult and laborious and much

patience, tact, and skill on the part of the observer are requisite

conditions of success.

EDGAR SCHUSTER.

CHICAGO MEDICAL RECORDER, January, 1913. The Development of Child Study, by Dr. D. P. MacMillan, giving

the history of the origin and development of the child study movement

in

the United States The Suppression

of of

America. Vice Diseases

through

Personal

Prophylaxis

and

Municipal Control of the Saloon and Courtesan, by Colonel L. Mervin

Maus, Medical Corps, U.A. Army. The Medical Reserve Corps-its

Duties

and

Relations

to

the

Army

in

Peace and War, by W. B. Bannister.

THE CHICAGO MEDICAL RECORDER, February, 1913, contains, among other matter, an interesting series of papers on the social evil and an

account of the work of the Vice Commission of Chicago.

NATIONAL TEMPERANCE QUARTERLY, December, 19I2. The Social Economics of Abstinence. John Longden. An essay on economics of

abstinence which won a prize in a competition by students of Ruskin

College, Oxford.

REVIEW OF REVIEWS, November, 1912. The Life Blood and the

Empire, by Colonel Rawson, Chairman of the R. C. I. Commission on Child Emigration. He strongly advocates the sending of Poor Law children

to the Colonies, but mentions that Canada is at present the only dominion

where a scheme for child emigration has been organised. He thinks

that the regulation which allows guardians to contribute a sum up to

Z13 for outfit, passage, etc.,
Kingdom, should be altered.

but not for maintenance out of the United By this regulation a society is prevented

from taking a child at the age of seven or eight, considered to be the most eligible age for child emigration, as no emigration society can

entirely maintain the child for six or seven years until it is self-supporting.

ARCHIV FUR RASSEN-U. GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE IX., Heft 4. July-

August, 1912 (published December 24th).
G. P. Zeliony (St. Petersburg): Uber die
A paper read before the Philosophical Society

zoufkuSti.nfPteigteerSsobsuirogp,hyMsairolcohgiie9.,

I909. The author recognises that at the present time there is a general

tendency, especially among German sociologists, to lay too much stress

on social psychology and too little on the physical and physiological side

of social phenomena. His own position is diametrically opposed to the

psychological or subjective method, for which he would substitute a

purely objective "physiological sociology " or "sociophysiology." The

paper, although one-sided, is of considerable interest; but, as A. Norden-

holz, one of the editors of the Archiv, points out in a footnote, in reality

a combination of both methods must be used if one expects to make a

thorough study of the subject. J. Grassl (Kempten): Die

Wanderunzgen

der

bayrischen

Bevolk-

erung und ihre Einflusse auf die Rasse. A study in statistics. Among

other interesting data, Grassl finds that almost one-half of the populations of Munich and Niirnberg are the children (first generation) of people wuho were born in the country. The losses to the country districts
through migration to the towns vary from 8 to 40 per cent. according to the district. In I900, 320,000, or 64 per cent., of the population of Munich had not been born there, and at the end of the nineties and
beginning of this century, of every IOO brides, 66 were from the

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

83

country, 5 from other parts of Germany, 4 of foreign birth, and 25 born in Munich. The corresponding figures for bridegroonis
wvere 65, 9, 5, and 20 per cent. Of persons under i6 years
of age born in Munich, at the most 22 per cent. are the children of Munich parents; the parents of 65 per cent. are from the country, and of io per cent. from other parts of Germany, or foreigners. In z882, 50'9 per cent. and 36-6 per cent. of the Bavarian population were employed respectively in agriculture and industry; in 1907 the figures were 403 per cent. and 45 9 per cent. Grassl arrives at the following conclusions :-I. The Bavarian people have been for centuries predominantly agricultural, and although the marriage-rate has been comparatively low, the birthrate has been very high, yielding an almost maximum number of children to each household. By adhering to this social system Bavaria has succeeded in surmounting all the perils to which it has been exposed both by war and pestilence. An increase in the birth-rate has always followed a sudden decrease in the population. The losses suffered during the Napoleonic wars were made good in two generations. 2. In the middle of the thirties of the last century the younger generation in the agricultural districts, esp-ecially the children of the peasants, found that there was no longer sufficient room for them at h,ome and began to migrate. 3. These migrations have now been continuing for 8o years and have taken a very characteristic course. 4. The movement of the population began with migrations from village to village and from district to district. A preference was as a rule shown for the chief district towns. As time went on, the boundaries of the provinces were passed, and the stream of migration directed itself mainly to the centres of industry, although a certain proportion of the emigrants left the country altogether, either for other parts of Germany or beyond the sea. 5. In whatever direction the stream of migration poured, industry, commerce and wealth arose, and vice versd, in the districts where trade and industry flourished, the people gathered together in masses. 6. The causes of -the local movements of the people are twofold, that is to say, active, a direct result of the surplus of children born in the country districts who are drawn by the greater attractions of life to the towns, and therefore seek industrial or commercial employment, and passive, a result of the fact that in Germany and Bavaria the number of available hands has not kept pace with the rapid expansion of trade and industry. The country population is absotbed by this vacuum. 7. During the process of migration the country people lose characteristics which have been bred into them, as it were, by centuries of stationary life. The loss of these characteristics is often accomplished in so short a time that it is evident that they cannot have been permanent racecharacters, but simply habits or customs acquired through tradition and conscious imitation. 8. Of all the characteristics that are lost, the most important is the tendency to have large families. The habit of voluntarily limiting the number of one's children which is acquired in its place is, no less than the former tendency, a result of economic motives. The original union of sexual impulse and parental instinct is destroyed. The parental instinct falls under the control of the will and deteriorates. The sexual impulse degenerates into love without marriage. 9. While in the originally agricultural condition of life, bodily strength and dexterity were qualities of the greatest importance to the individual, the tendency is for these characters to recede more and more into a subordinate position among the people who have migrated to the towns, with whom intellectual capacity and education have become the most highly desirable characteristics. io. There are also changes in physical characters. The body becomes taller and more slender, the development of fatty tissue is increased, the muscles, bones, and especially the skin, become more delicate. The capacity of the body to withstand the effects

84 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of the climate is diminished, as well as the power to bear hunger, thirst

and want of sleep. The work of rendering the environment hygienic

becomes of relatively greater importance, and sometimes more than com-

pensates for the unhealthy conditions of life and labour in the manu-

facturing centres. Since it is mainly the more intelligent and capable

and physically stronger country-people who migrate to the towns, there

is an unmistakeable tendency for the more efficient stocks to be lost

to the rural districts. It is only because life in the country is a powerful

factor of regeneration that the agricultural population is still able to

maintain itself. i i. The original religious conc-eption of a direct or

indirect intervention of a personal God in the human affairs becomes

transformed first into a belief in the creation of natural laws by a deity,

later into the rejection of the idea of a personal God in favour of a divine

principle, and finally into a purely mechanistic conception of life. I2.

The further the individual is removed from "nature " the stronger becomes

his belief in the ability of man to control the world of phenomena. I3. A

rapid rise of i-ndustry and commerce, such as has taken place in Germany,

is possible only among a people that has been employed for centuries

in agriculture and has a very large supply of "hands " to draw upon.

I4. Further progress in industry and commerce will depend upon the

capacity of the rural districts to supply the towns with labour-power. 15.

The supplying of labour-power by the country districts will be possible

if the generative power of the peasants, including the agricultural workers

is carefully fostered and protected, and if the endeavour to introduce the

sexual habits of the towns into the country is suppressed. i6. A further,

but only temporarily, effective means of enabling the rural districts to

continue to supply workers to the towns would result from the introduc-

tion of machinery as a substitute for human labour into agriculture.

17. The more equal the proportions of the inhabitants dwelling in town

and country, the smaller becomes the relative percentage of country-born

people in the annual increase of population in the towns. i8. For this

reason also, for opportunities for employment in the country should be

carefully preserved (domestic colonisation, v. Gruber). I9. The attrac-

tiveness of the towns for the country population can be decreased by

assimilating the conditions of life in the country, so far as is possible,

to those of the towns. 20. Contemporaneous with the domestic migrations, is a stream of foreign immigration from countries of a lower level of

civilisation. The latter consists for the most part of economically and

genetically unproductive classes, who are of permanent value neither

from the economic nor generative point of view. Agnes Bluhm: Zur Frage nach der generativen

Tucktigkeit

der

deutschen Frauen und der rassenhygienischen Bedeutunzg der drztlichen Geburtshilfe. The concluding part of a paper begun in the last number

of the Archiv. Continuing her discussion of the capacity for child-bearing,

Dr. Bluhm's final conclusion is that although there is still a great

lack of trustworthy statistical material, nevertheless, it is the capacity for child-bearing of German women is not inferior to that of the women of primitive races, but also to

certain that
only greatly
that of other

European signs of a women.

peoples, the women further deterioration

of in

Norway, for the capacity

example; and that there are for child-bearing of German

The trouble is due in part to the unhygienic manner of life of

to-day, in part to the advance in obstetrics, in so far as the latter favours

the hereditary transmission of incapacity for child-bearing. Although

this department of medicine has been of great advantage to the race

from the quantitative standpoint (fall in rate of infant mortality), it is

unquestionably a source of danger to the quality of the race. Since the

chief cause of incapacity for child-bearing is narrow pelvis, and since

narrow pelvis is usually a result of rickets, an energetic endeavour to

stamp out this disease would be the best protection against an increase

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

8S

of the incapacity in question. Even if the result of improved obstetrical methods is to increase the number of individuals who are tainted with rickets, much may be done to check the development of the disease by a hygienic manner of life combined with breast-feeding and sunny, airy dwellings. In regard to the capacity for resistance to diseases during, and immediately following, confinement (4), we have no statistical material and consequently can draw no conclusions. On the other hand, Dr. Bluhm is of the opinion that there are as yet no absolutely certain proofs that the capacity for breast-feeding (5) is declining, and that as yet thr most that can be said is that " one has the impression that it is declining.' As is well-known, Dr. Bluhm (comp. Die Stillungsnot, etc., Leipzig, I909, and various articles in the IV. and VII. volumes of the Archiv) does not agree with the views which have been expressed on this subject by v. Bunge and Claassen.
F. Siebert (Miinchen): Der Neumalthusianismus und die offentliche Ankundigung der Verhutungsmittel.
Siebert hardly touches upon the question of the prevention of conception for purely medical reasons (where no public advertisement of Neomalthusian appliances is necessary), and is apparently inclined to ignore the eugenic standpoint, as, for example, when he says that, " When one's attention is drawn to the waste of strength and money of the people that results from women having to go through so many periods of pregnancy in vain-such a large proportion of the infants born dying sooner or later-one can reply that in Bavaria the districts that have actually the highest birth and death rates also succeed in bringing the greatest number of offspring to maturity." His paper is, in fact, an attack on Neomalthusianism as such, and especially when considered as a means of social reform. He asks, " Ought we not to look upon it as a misfortune if the increase of population is no longer a result of the growth of the native element (in Germany), but merely of the immigration of foreigners of greater generative capacity? " " If the nation were really over-populated to-day, and the misery in which large groups of our people live were actually a result of over-population, the
effect of Neomalthusian practice would only be that the descendants of aliens would live in the same misery and owing to the tsame causes." He considers the Neomalthusian movement to be a sign of degeneration. His argument is, that the sexual impulse is an offshoot of the instinct of self-preservation projected beyond the individual to the species. An important part of the reproductive life is the care of the young. The family is in last instance an institution for the care of the young; and since the family is the foundation of the State, the State itself is an enlarged institution for the care of the young. It is our instinct of self-preservation that renders the State so significant in our eyes; but as soon as the instinct of self-preservation is weakened, its component parts begin to disintegrate: the feeling for family and State is gradually lost, and the reproductive instinct, deprived of several of its integral characters, becomes wholly identified with the sexual impulse. Hence, he says, a frequent accompanying feature of degeneration is the endeavour to do away with the inhibitions which now tend to restrain the sexual impulse. The feeling of pity for the unfortunate, which is so often shown by Neomalthusians, like the compassion which can be considered as one of the motives underlying the peace movement, is, according to Siebert, a sign of degeneration and weakness, for the reason that it prefers to subordinate the interests of the race to those of the individual, just as the peace movement prefers the economic struggle with its strikes, lock-outs, and revolutions to the sharp brief conflicts of war. It is, he says, a sign of weakness, rather to suffer a long and tedious illness than submit to a swift if painful operation..F e seems, however, to forget that the economic

86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

misery is that,

ofaltouhrougthimeNeoismaqlutihtuesiianndiespemndiesnta

of warfare. useful means

His great fear of eliminating

undesirable individuals, it may, if legally recognised, act contagiously

on the sound. Here, again, his reasoning is apparently false, if we

assume that on the whole the well-to-do classes contain a larger pro-

portion of sound individuals than the very poor. As we all know, it is

the well-to-do who least need to be informed of how to limit the number

of their offspring. Siebert proposes as remedies for the fall in the birth-

rate, the improvement of the conditions of life of the poor-better dwel-

lings and conditions of labour-the encouragement of co-operation, the

effective prevention of speculation in land and food products, an im-

proved colonial policy, the encouragement of emigration (to the German

colonies?), and the taxation of people who have no children and of the

unmarried. His article, although interesting, is marred by a vulgarity

of expression to which one is not accustomed in the Archiv.

HENRY BERGEN.

NOTES

Family Investigations.-The Research Committee of the Eugenics

Education Society have planned a statistical research into fertility and

the incidence of mortality in early life. It is earnestly hoped that many

members of the Society may be willing to assist by filling in "Family

Investigations: Schedule A." This schedule asks for information,

obtainable without excessive labour, concerning married couples and

their children, information of a kind which people should not be un-

willing to furnish. In order that the research may be carried to a

successful issue, it is necessary that at least io,ooo schedules should be

filled in, in spite of the fact that the inquiry is to be limited in the first

instance to marriages which had lasted at least six years and to the

"educated classes."

Members willing to help would probably each be able to fill in

several forms, dealing with themselves and their own children, with

their parents and brothers and sisters, and with the families of remote

relatives and friends. It is also hoped that they may be able to interest

as

mBalnaynkpeoscphleedualses,posswihbilcehin

the are

inquiry. self-explanatory,

may be obtained

on

application to the Chairman of the Research Committee, Eugenics Educa-

tion Society, Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C.

Proposed Bibliography of Literature dealing with Eugenies.-
In order that the Society may serve as an information bureau on Eugenics, it is proposed to start a classified bibliography on the subject, which shall, wherever possible, include brief indications of the nature of the books or memoirs dealt with, in addition to the usual information as to author, title, and date and place of publication. A large amount of work will necessarily be involved in its production, as it is important that all the references should be verified, in order to prevent the accumu-
lation of inaccuracies which result when dates and titles are taken at second and third hand. The Honorary Secretary will be pleased to hear from any member who will be willing to assist in this work.
* ***
The Formation of Continental Eugenies Soeieties. - It is with
great pleasure that we can announce the formation of the Soci6te
Francaise d'Eugenique. It was founded on January 29th, 1913, with the following officers:-President, M. Edmond Perrier; vice-presidents, M. le Dr. Landouzy, M. le Dr. Pinard, M. F. Houssay; general secretary,
M. le Dr. Apert; treasurer and librarian, M. Lucien March. The objects of the Society are defined as :-(i) The research into, and
the application of knowledge bearing on, the reproduction, conservation
and improvement of the species; particular attention being given to the

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

87

heredity and selection in their application to the human race, the questions of the effect of environment, economic conditions, legislation, and manners and customs on the quality of future generations, and on their physical, intellectual, and moral capacity. (2) To co-operate in the development of those branches of science which bear on the studies of the Society. (3) To encourage eventually the formation of branch societies having the same objects in view. (4) To disseminate among the general public ideas favourable to the improvement of future generations.

The Society projects the publication of a monthly or quarterly journal, which will be edited by the secretary under the general direction of the Council. The formation of the French Society may perhaps be justly counted as one of the indirect results of the International Eugenic Congress, especially in view of the fact that the original council is almost identical with the Consultative Committee formed to organise the French contributions.

We also hear from Professor Niceforo, of Rome, President of the Italian Consultative Committee of the Congress, that an Italian Eugenics Society is in process of formation, and will shortly be formally inaugurated.

In Denmark the Anthropological Committee, at the instigation of Dr. Soren Hansen, have organised a special Eugenic Section.

****

The Poor Law Conference.- The forty-first annual Central Poor

Law Conference met on February iith and 12th, at the Guildhall, under

the presidency of Mr. Morton Latham. The first day was devotqd to a

discussion on the eugenic aspect of the Mental Deficiency Bill. Major

Darwin delivered a paper on " The Mental Deficiency Bill from the

Eugenic Aspect," which was opposed by Miss Fortey, B.Sc., Poor Law

Guardian of Leicester. " The Administrative Side of the Bill " was

dealt with by the Rev. P. Propert, and a resolution finally passed

recommending the permanent care of the mentally defective, and that

for reasons of efficiency and accuracy the control of lunatics and all

mentally defective persons should be vested in one authority. (The

papers will be published (price 'I-) by G. Lewis, ioo, South Hill Park,

Ealing).

*

*

*

*

The Royal Institute of Publie Health.- The Congress will meet in Paris from May isth to igth. The Eugenic Section is under the presidency of M. Lucien March, Directeur de la Statistique Generale de la France. Papers have already been promised by M. March, Dr. Theodore Thomson, Dr. IHyslop, Professor J. A. Lindsey, Dr. D. White, Dr. Saleeby, and Professor Houssay. Two days only will be devoted to eugenics, as a subdivision of the section has also to provide for the discussion of school hygiene.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE
CENTRAL SOCIETY.
PROGRAMME.
February 6th.-Professor Geddes, at the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., on "The Course of Life, its Rises and Falls, a Standard and Notation for Eugenics." The President in the chair.
March 6th.-Mr. W. C. Marshall, M.A., at the Grafton Galleries, at 5.15 p.m., on " The Effect of Economic Conditions on the Birth-Rate." The President in the chair.
January I7th.-Mr. E. J. Lidbetter, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens, at 8.30 p.m., " The Social Application of Eugenics," No. IV., " Social Sanction versus State Control." Mr. Newton Crane in the chair.

88 EUGENICS REVIEW.

February 28th.-Professor J. Edgar, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens, at 8.30 p.m., on " Eugenics and Patriotism." The President in the chair.
March 14th.-Miss N. March, at the Theatre, Burlington Gardens, at 8.30 p.m., on " Methods of Introducing Eugenics into Education." The President in the chair.

A YEAR'S COURSE OF LECTURES ON THE GROUNDWORK OF EUGENICS.

SPRING TERM.

At the Imperial College of Science, South Kensington, from January
to December, 1913, on Tuesdays, at 5.30 p.m., by Mr. Clifford Dobell,
M.A.

I. January 14th

II. ,, 28th The General Anatomy and Physiology of a

IV. February 4th

Mammal.

V. ,, lith

VI. ,, i8th \ The General Anatomy and Physiology of VII. ,, 25th J a Flowering Plant.

VIII. March 4th.-Outlines of Cytology.

IX. ,, 6th Anatomy and Physiology of the Reproductive

X. ,, ith

Systems of Mammal and Flowering Plant;

XI. " z3th

Gametes, Fertilisation and Embryonic

XII. ,, 18th

Development.

MEETINGS.
January iith. -Mr. R. Dixon Kingham gave a lecture to the Children's Welfare Exhibition, at Olympia, on " Eugenics: the Patriotism of the Future."
January I7th.-Mr. A. H. Fenwick addressed the Shoreditch Public Welfare Association on " Eugenics."
January 2oth.-The Rev. Edward Clarke lectured on " Eugenics " at the Archway Road Baptist Guild.
January 2ISt.-Miss Miller lectured to the Margate Pioneer Society on " Woman's Responsibility to the Race."
January 31st.-Miss Trench lectured before the Haslemere Society -on " Eugenic Education in the Home."
February 4th.-Miss Trench lectured to the Margate Pioneer Society on " Eugenic Education in the Home."
February 17th.-Mrs. Gotto lectured on " Practical Eugenics " at the Foresters' Hall, Margate.
March 4th.-Miss Trench spoke at a debate on " The Methods of the Eugenics Society," at i6, Fellows Road, Hampstead.
March gth.-Mr. Rolleston Stables lectured at the Peel Institute,
Clerkenwell Green, on " Eugenics." March 12th.-Mr. R. Dixon Kingham lectured at Birmingham before
the Workers' Educational Association on " Eugenics and Social Progress."
April i5th.-Miss Trench lectured to the West Essex Women's
Franchise Society on " Eugenics in the Home."

COMMITTEES.
January ioth.-Executive Council Meeting, 4.30 p.m. ,, 17th.-Special Research Committee Meeting, 11.30 a.m. ,, 24th.-Research Committee Meeting, 5.30 p.m. ,, . 29th.-Education Conference Committee Meeting, 5.30 p.m. ,, 3ISt.-Research Committee Meeting, 10.30 a.m.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

89

February 7th.-Executive Council Meeting, 4.30 p.m. ,, 14th.-Research Committee Meeting, 10.30 a.m. 28th.-Research Committee Meeting, 10.30 a.m.
March ioth.-Education Conference Committee Meeting, 5.30 p.m. ,, 14th. Executive Council Meeting, 4.30 p.m.
,, Igth.-General Council Meeting, 3 p.m.

LIVERPOOL.
Council meetings were held on January 24th and February 12th. The annual meeting took place on January 3Ist in St. Andrew's Lecture Hall, when Dr. Nathan Raw, F.R.S.E., delivered an address on " The Influence of Environment upon the Individual." The report and accounts for 1912 were presented and received, and have since been circulated to the members. The three officers were unanimously reelected; Mr. G. Hall Neale and Mr. G. Chambers were elected to the Council vice Mrs. Lyle Rathbone and Professor Paterson, resigned.
Our very hearty thanks are due to Major Darwin for his kindness in coming down to Liverpool. He addressed a large and influential assembly, numbering over six hundred, in the Concert Room of St. George's Hall on the subject of "Large Families or Small?" Such a meeting should materially add to the power of the Society to effect public opinion in this neighbourhood.
The paper promised by Mr. D'Aeth has had to be postponed under his doctor's orders, but will be given later in the year.
The Secretary addressed the South Church Working Men's Club on February i8th upon " The Eugenic View of Some Modern Problems "; and opened a discussion on March 3rd in the Debating Society of the David Lewis Working Men's Club upon " Population Facts and Problems," which led to a vote strongly in favour of heredity as the best clue to the solution of social problemis.
R. T. BODEY, Hon. Sec.

MANCHESTER AND DISTRICT .

The Manchester Branch has held two very satisfactory meetings

during the last quarter. The first was addressed by Dr. Melland on

the subject of "Legislation for the Mentally Deficient," the chair being

taken by Mr. J. H. Reynolds, M.Sc. The attendance was very satis-

factory, and the discussion very suggestive of the misrepresentations

made so extensively concerning the Bill brought forward in the last

Session.

In March a second lecture, given by Dr. Sandiford on the " Inheri-

tance of Mental and Physical Qualities," was even better attended. The

President of the branch, Bishop Welldon, was in the chair, and em-

phasised the folly of the usual objections to the study of eugenics. The

questions asked were extremely good, and showed a very intelligent

interest in the subject.

J. D'EWART, Hon. Sec.

BELFAST. A meeting of this branch was held on November 27th, 1912, at which the Bishop of Down presided, and Dr. W. A. Potts, Birmingham, delivered a lecture, the subject being "The Feeble-minded." At the close of the address the following resolution was passed unanimously: " The Belfast Branch of the Eugenics Education Society very earnestly expresses its regret that the Government has abandoned the Mental Deficiency Bill, and zrges that the matter should be reconsidered. It also presses upon the Government the extreme importance of extending the provisions of the Bill to Ireland."

go EUGENICS REVIEW.

At a meeting held on 27th January, I913, in the Medical Institute,

the first annual reports of the Committee and of the Treasurer were

adopted. Six retiring members of Committee were re-elected, and Dr.

W. James Wilson was elected junior secretary in place of Professor

Gregg Wilson resigned. Subsequently a most instructive and illu-

minating lecture on " Heredity in relation to Eugenics " was delivered

by Professor Gregg Wilson, and a discussion followed.

On the 28th February, 1913, the Right Rev. C. F. D'Arcy, D.D.

(Bishop of Down), introduced a discussion on the " Moral Aspect of

Eugenics." There was a good audience, and the subject was ably dis-

cussed by a number of members, and at the end Bishop D'Arcy replied

to the critics.

M. ANDREWS, Hon. Sec.

HASLEMERE.

A course of three lectures has been given this quarter on the eugenic

education of children:-No. I. "Eugenic Education in the Home," bv

Miss Violet Trench. No. 2. " Eugenic Education for Girls in the School

and Training College," by Miss Norah March, B.Sc. No. 3. "Eugenic

Education for Boys in the School," by Mr. W. Hope-Jones, B.A.

L. E. MUIR, Hon. Sec.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.
Heterochromosomes in Mammals, by H. E. JORDAN. (Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine. Vol. io. No. i. October I6, I9I2).
The Need for Genetic Studies of Pulmonary Tuberculosis, by H. E. JORDAN, M.A., Ph.D., Professor of Histology and Embryology, University of Virginia. (The Journal of the American Medical Association, October 26, I9I2. Vol. lix.; pp. I518 and I5I9.) One or two pedigrees suggesting the Mendelian inheritance of the phthisical diathesis are recorded and discussed.
The Eugenical Aspect of Venereal Disease, by H. E. JORDAN, Ph.D. This is a paper which was read before the American Association for the Study and Prevention of Infant Mortality. Dr. Jordan emphasises the dysgenic influence of venereal disease, and advocates its compulsory notification, the isolation of afflicted persons and immediate efforts totally to eradicate prostitution.
Eugenics: The Rearing of the Human Thoroughbred, by H. E. JORDAN, Ph.D. This is an address which was delivered before the American Association for Study and Prevention of Infant Mortality, at Cleveland, on October 3rd, I9I2. A general introduction to the subject, which contains a plea for rather drastic legislation for eugenic purposes.
Cults, Myths, and Religions, by SALOMON REINACH. Translated by ELIZABETH FROST. (Publisher: David Nutt, I9I2. Price 7s.6d. net. Pp. 209.) This volume gives an account of some interesting customs of early European civilisation, and an especially interesting account of the religious cults in Asia and Europe at the dawn of the Christian era.
Pathological Inebriety: Its Causation and Treatment, by G. W. ASTLEYCOOPER. Introduction by SIR DAVID FERRIER, M.D., F.R.S. (Pub-
lishers : Bailliere, Tindall and Cox, 1913. Price 3S. 6d. PP. I5I.) Attempts to put in popular form a statement of the present legal,
social, and scientific position of the study of alcoholism and the inebriate. Several family histories are given showing the inheritance of the defect. A Catechism of Life, by ALICE M. BUCKTON. (Publishers: Methuen & Co. Price is. Pp. 46.) A suggested catechism to be given by parents to children on elementary physiology and ethics.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

9I

The Andrological Institute: Its Schedule and the Measurement of Perseveration. (Published by The Association of Standardised Know-
ledge, Ltd. Price 7s. 6d. net. Pp. 20.) Daughters of Ishmael, by REGINALD W. KAUFFMAN, with an introduction
by JOHN MASEFIELD. (Publishers: Stephen Swift & Co., 1913. Price 6s.) A powerful novel, exposing some of the evils of the white slave traffic in America. The White Slave Market, by MRS. ARCHIBALD MACKIRDY (Olive Christian Malvery) and W. N. WILLIS. (Publishers: Stanley Paul & Co. Price 6s. Pp. 290.) A book that should be read by all social workers in order that they may have some understanding of the methods employed by the procurer and procuress, and the far-reaching consequences of allowing the present state of affairs to continue unchecked. Perfect Health for Women and Children, by ELIZABETH SLOAN CHESSER, M.B. (Publishers: Methuen & Co., Ltd. Price 3s. 6d. net. Pp. 276.) This volume is primarily a handbook on hygiene in the home, but the whole subject of family life and the training of children is so admirably dealt with from the eugenic standpoint that it should be of real service to many parents. The chapters dealing with " Training for Motherhood " and " Health and Eugenics " being especially valuable. The Education of Women in India, by MINNA G. COWAN, M.A. (Publishers: Oliphant, Anderson, and Ferrier, I9I2. Price 3s. 6d. net. Pp. 256.) The author urges the need for an increase in the number of English women as educators of Indian girls. Short Study of Ethics, by CHARLES D'ARCY, D.D. (Bishop of Down).
(Publishers: Macmillan & Co., second edition, I9I2. Price 5s. net.)
A short but comprehensive introductory to ethics, treating the subject mainly from the philosophical standpoint. The author seems to share Mr. Balfour's view that there is no moral principal to be found in nature, as he answers in the negative the query, " Can the theory of evolution presented by Darwin, Spencer, and others be made the basis of a theory of ethics ? " In the chapter on " Evolutionary ethics " the whole question is fully considered and the evolutionary standpoint clearly and fairly stated, it leads the author to believe " that the less a man knows of ethical science the better for his morals ! " Four Epochs of Life, by ELIZABETH HAMILTON-MURIAL, M.D. (Published
by Munich Sanatorium, Brooklyn, U.S.A. Price $I.5o. PP. 272.)
The title in a measure describes the scope of the book. In narrative form it gives the history of a family, fixing attention on the four epochs of development-birth, childhood, adolescence, and marriage. Conscious Conttrol, by F. M. ALEXANDER. (Published by Methuen & Co. Price 2s. 6d.) Cancer: The Problem of its Genesis and Treatment, by F. W. FORBES Ross. (Published by Methuen & Co. Price 5s. Pp. 261.) (To be reviewed.) The Christian Powers and Weaker Races, by THE VENERABLE ARCHDEACON POmR. (Price is. Pp. I4.) The Winter of Our Discontent, by MRS. MACKENZIE KENEDY. (Published by Bodycot, Mussoorie. Pp. 126.)

