THE
EUGEN ICS REVIEW
HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.
A WARNING TO EUGENISTS.
By MIAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, Sc.D.
I.-INHERENT DIFFICULTIES CONNECTED WITH COMPARISONS BETWEEN HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.
THE main aim of the Eugenics Education Society is unquestionably to persuade the public of the necessity of Eugenic Reform, and our publications must, therefore, to a large extent, be addressed to the public generally. On this occasion it is, however, to eugenists only that I wish to speak, that is to those who hold as an unquestionable faith that by the utilisation of the knowledge of the laws of natural inheritance it is possible greatly to promote the progress of the human race as regards its inborn qualities. Those who do not believe that selection, acting through the agency of natural inheritance, has been the most potent force making for racial progress in the past, and that selection may now be made to produce effects of enormous value to the coming generations, are invited not to read another line; for the emphasis is here all on the wrong points for their edification. What I am desirous of suggesting on this occasion is that the keenest advocates of eugenics are in danger of urging their views in such a way as to produce false impressions; for by perpetually harping on the vastly greater importance of heredity as compared with environment, a false belief may and, I think, at times has been created that they are careless concerning many reforms intended to improve the lot of human beings by improving human surroundings. Scientific students of evolution, being intent on changes in the racial characteristics

94 EUGENICS REVIEW.
of the generations of the past and the future, are especially liable to be misunderstood; for their preoccupation in questions of heredity and in the welfare of posterity is mistaken by the inattentive reader for a want of interest in their neighbours. It is, therefore, as well for us to state from time to time in the most definite manner possible that we do not deny the great influence of environment, and that we " acknowledge freely the great power of education and social influences in developing the active powers of the mind."' And I venture earnestly to beg my colleagues in this campaign, with the object of avoiding quite unnecessary hostility on the part of social reformers, not only to admit but to publicly assert that in order to ensure the most rapid progress possible it is absolutely essential to take thought of both heredity and environment; for the world is not ruled by two hostile deities, " nature " and " nurture," so jealous of each other that to propitiate the one offends the other.
Certain general conclusions arrived at by the eugenist who accepts the prevalent scientific opinions may be formulated in the three following statements: By a change of environment alone no progress in racial qualities can be made. Without A change in racial qualities social progress beyond a fixed limit is impossible. And, finally, social progress can only manifest itself in changes of environment, mental or physical. These statements, which form the basis of the eugenic creed, sound somewhat paradoxical at first, but until they cease to seem mysterious to the eugenist he is not walking on solid ground. In these pages an attempt is made to clear away doubts by delving deep into the foundations of this controversy concerning heredity and environment so as to leave no corner quite unexposed.
The eugenist is constantly having his attention called to the fact that all the qualities which are innate in us form a legacy which has been handed down to us through innumerable generations by the agency of heredity. We see clearly that if the ape-like qualities of some of our remote forefathers had been
the natural inheritance thus received by us, our existing civilisation, such as it is, would have been utterly impossible. As man's innate mental qualities were improved in the process
1 Hereditary Genius. Galton. P. 12.

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

95

of evolution he gradually came to be more and more capable of exercising a control over his own environment or of moulding his surroundings in a manner beneficial to himself; and it is in this way that mankind has been slowly led up to its existing social position. Lastly, it is unquestionable that the breeders of animal stock can decide to a very large extent on both the bodily and mental qualities of the herds to be born in the future. Seeing all this the eugenist is tempted dogmatically to assert that our progress in the past has been, and that our progress in the future will be, absolutely dependent on heredity as the sole agent by which human characteristics are transmitted from one generation to another, and that heredity is, therefore, the one factor of supreme importance.
But is it not possible that in our enthusiastic advocacy of one great truth we have been led to overshoot the mark, and thus to pay too little attention to other truths? In the first place it must be noted that, since every effect must have a cause, where in the process of evolution one organism has given rise to other organisms which differ amongst themselves, these differences almost inevitably indicate or are correlated with differences in something external to the germ producing that organism.' But these external somethings must have been, it would seem, some elements in the total environments of the varying germs, and from this it follows that differences of environment have formed an essential feature of the evolutionary process in the past. However ignorant we may be of the nature of these differences, is it not, therefore, unwise to neglect the possible evoluntionary value of changes of environment? Turning to less philosophical and more practical aspects of the matter, it can hardly now be denied that one person can influence another person only by some method of affecting his surroundings,
1 It may no doubt possibly be part of the inherent nature of living organisms to throw off mutations in various directions; but the extraordinary persistence of certain forms of life seems to me to render this improbable. It may also be that all the existing forms of life were inherent in the first germ of life, and that the new forms which have since appeared have been merelv due to the omission of some of the original determinants or to some variations in their arrangements; but if so we only thus remove the difficulty one stage further back; for we still have to explain why a certain omission or arrangement took place in one case and not in another. Lastly, it may be urged that the whole evolutionary process was inherent in the first germ of life; but this is to banish all causal agency from the evolutionary process and to abandon all attempt at explanation.

96 EUGENICS REVIEW.
mental or physical; and from this it obviously follows that it is only through the agency of environment that we are able to affect either existing society as a whole, or any of the individuals of which it is composed. When we speak of reform we usually allude to effects to be produced on others, and in this sense all reform, whether it be social reform affecting our neighbours, or eugenic reform affecting posterity, is ultimately dependent on differences of environment. Ought we not, therefore, to be on our guard against indiscriminate expressions regarding the immensely greater relative importance of heredity as compared with environment ?
The foregoing remarks have merely been made to indicate that the questions involved in this controversy are far from simple. That the path of those who set out to discuss the contrast between nature and nurture is beset with pitfalls has, at times, been brought home to me in the most convincing manner; but as my own mistakes are not instructive, I venture to illustrate the difficulties in question by referring to that writer who naturally has had the most profound influence on my mind, and with regard to whom no one will accuse me of a desire to be disrespectful. Charles Darwin wrote that he was " inclined to agree with Francis Galton in believing that education and environment produce only a small effect on the mind of anyone, and that most of our qualities are innate."' But what is a " quality," or a " character," a term often used in much the same sense? May it be defined as an attribute by which different classes of things can be distinguished from each other? Accepting this definition, the wearing of a tall hat, or being close-shaven, may unquestionably be human qualities, a conclusion with which no biologist would agree. Should we then so narrow the definition of " quality " as to make it exclude all attributes except such as are both measurable and actually relate to the bodies or minds of the individuals in question? If so, certain attributes closely correlated with differences of environment, such as being sunburnt, and certain effects of education on the mind, such as knowing French,
would still have to be described as qualities or characters. But,
1 Life and Letters, I., p. 22.

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

97

in discussing such matters, do we not rather prefer to regard the human " qualities " in question as consisting in the
readiness or tendency of the skin to become sunburnt, or in the facility with which a foreign language can be acquired? The biologist, at all events, seems to desire to exclude from the meaning of these terms all reference to the effects of external circumstances. But if, in deference to this view, we still further narrow our definition, and if " qualities "
or " characters " are held only to comprise those attributes which are impressed by nature on the individual in question, then to argue that all qualities are inborn is to argue in a circle. Quality being thus defined, not only most of our qualities but every single one of them must be innate. In fact, the extent to which human qualities, or rather the differences in human qualities, may be said to depend on environment obviously depends on the extent to which we include within or exclude from the meaning of the word " quality " those attributes which are as a fact affected by
environment. It is, perhaps, unfair to subject to a rigid analysis a
sentence which was not intended for publication, as was the case with the words just quoted, an objection which, however, cannot be raised in the case of the following extract from the
Descent of Man " :" Important as the struggle for existence has been and
even still is, yet as far as the highest part of man's nature is concerned there are other agencies more important. For moral qualities are advanced, either directly or indirectly, much more through the effects of habit, the reasoning powers, instruction, religion, etc., than through natural
selection; though to this latter agency may be safely
attributed the social instincts, which afford the basis for
the development of the moral sense.'"'
But here, again, it is necessary to be careful as to the meaning that we attach to the words used. For instance, if we define religion as the cultivation of the moral sense, then it seems
hardly logical to assert that moral qualities are advanced more
1 Vol. II., p. 439, I888 edition.

98 EUGENICS REVIEW.
by their cultivation than by the agency which may safely be regarded as the basis for their development. This quotation is, however, to be noted, not because of any ambiguity of expression which it may possibly contain, but because of its unmistakable underlying meaning. And as these words form the conclusion of the passage in the works of Charles Darwin
which is most definitely and directly devoted to eugenics, they should not be omitted if ever his name is brought into this controversy.
II.-WHAT IS THE MEANING OF " THE RELATIVE INFLUENCE OF HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT."
Such expressions as the " relative influence of heredity and environment " are constantly being used by eugenists when emphasizing, as they must, the paramount necessity of adopting new methods of reform dependent on natural inheritance in order to ensure racial progress in the future. But if we are to avoid as far as possible the risk of misconceptions we ought to define the terms thus used, and to define them in such a way as to make the meanings given to them coincide as nearly as may be with those likely to be attached to them by our hearers. As to the word " relative," here the implication is that two things can be compared by measurement or numerically; and as man's inborn nature is the foundation on which his environmental habits are built, what we have to inquire is whether, and, if so, how we can compare quantitatively the importance of the foundations with that of the superstructure of the house we live in. The statistical methods of inquiry with which we are concerned may be said to have been originated by the genius of Sir Francis Galton, and to have been perfected by Professor Karl Pearson; and to their works we naturally turn in any endeavour to measure the relationships between heredity and environment. Statistical results of this nature are recorded by means of correlation coefficients, or numbers indicating th6 degrees of similarity in certain respects of the distributions of the .things being compared. For example, in ascertaining the way in which one human characteristic is associated with another characteristic in the individuals of any community, the correlation coefficient is said to be zero when there is no similarity

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

99

between the ways in which the qualities in question are distributed, and when, in consequence, a knowledge of the degree in which one of the qualities is found to be present in any given individual gives no indication whatever as to the degree in which he would be found to be possessed of the other. Where the correlation coefficient is said to be I o, or unity, it indicates that the distribution of the two qualities is exactly similar, and that to measure one of these qualities in any individual would afford at the same time an accurate knowledge concerning the measurement of the other quality in that individual. Now what we want to know with regard to these correlation coefficients for practical eugenic purposes is how they will help us in determining the amount of good which could be done by reforms of different kinds.
As regards the word " influence," it seems originally to have pointed to those astrological effects which were supposed
to have flowed from the stars on to the inhabitants of this earth,
and it still generally applies to such a connection between two things that it can be definitely stated which of the two is the influencing agent and which the object influenced. Now correlation coefficients record a relationship between two sets of things of such a nature that we do not obtain thereby necessarily any knowledge as to which is the influencing agent and which the thing influenced; and, if these coefficients are used as indications of " influence," this fact must be borne in mind. Then again, the associations to which the coefficients refer are often due to the action of several independent agents on the things measured, and we must separate out these different effects before we can thus ascertain the influence of any one of these agents. For example, in studying the correlation which may exist between the fertility of mothers and the amount of alcohol they drink or their alcoholism, we must note that the differences in their innate constitutions may affect or be related to both their fertility and their desire for alcohol. We must, therefore, eliminate the effect of the differences in the " natures " of the mothers before
we can ascertain to what extent any diminution in fertility is actually due to the consumption of alcohol. Again, the similarities between fathers and sons, as indicated by correlation

IOO EUGENICS REVIEW.
coefficients, may be due both to natural inheritance and to peculiarities of environment being handed down from one generation to the other. As regards many human qualities, such for example as the colour of the eyes, we may be certain that differences of environment can produce but a negligible effect, and in such cases the correlation coefficient is related to heredity only; whilst, as regards many mental peculiarities, we cannot so readily dismiss the environmental factor. If correlation coefficients are to be used as measures of heredity, we must, therefore, either eliminate the effects of differential environment by statistical enquiry-not an easy thing to do-or select qualities for measurement which are but little affected by differential environment. But if we are thus induced to eliminate by means of such a selection of qualities the effects of nurture in measuring heredity, we must not forget that we have' done so when using these measurements in any general comparison between the effects of heredity and environment. The conclusion here suggested is, however, that whilst correlation coefficients may indicate possible influences in the ordinary meaning of that word, they cannot at once be accepted as measures of actual influences.
As to the word " environment," there is but little difficulty in attaching a meaning suitable to it for ordinary conversation; for it is clearly understood to apply to all our surroundings, physical and mental. But is this sufficiently definite for the purposes of statistical enquiry? No doubt, if we like to define " environment " as the agency the influence of which is measured by environmental correlation coefficients, then we are entitled to say, ex hypothesi, that by these coefficients we obtain a means of actually measuring the influence of environment. But even if this definition be adopted, it must be remembered that for statistical purposes each character is measured in the unit of its own variability in the particular community in question; and consequently, even if all other things but the degrees of variability were exactly similar in two communities, equal changes of environment in the two, as measured by the ordinary standards of measurement, would not necessarily have equal " influences," a point to which further reference will be

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

IOI

made. Turning to heredity, the relationship between the measurements of the qualities of fathers and sons can, as we have also seen, in like manner be recorded by means of correlation coefficients, and these parental coefficients, as we may call them, have been found by Professor Pearson to amount to about 0o5 as regards many human characteristics. Here, again, if we decide to define heredity as the agent the " influence " of which on the character in question is measured by the parental correlation coefficient, we thus, ex hypothesi, obtain a means of measuring the " influence " of heredity, a proceeding against which no objection can be raised provided we select characters little affected by differential environment, and provided we retain in our minds a clear conception of the meaning attached to the words used. But the relationship between the qualities of grandfathers and grandsons can also be indicated by correlation coefficients; and these grand-parental coefficients, which as regards many human characters approximate to 0o3, could, by adopting a suitable definition of the word "heredity " in the same way be made to measure the " influence" of that factor. Or, again, the average of the weighted measurements of the qualities of all the ancestors might be used to obtain an ancestral correlation coefficient, a figure which there is reason to believe would often amount to about o07. Here, then, we have three different correlation coefficients giving three possible ways of measuring heredity. If we are studying the effects of selective breeding of one generation on the next generation, we should naturally desire to know the parental correlation coefficients of the qualities under consideration; if it was the effects on the second generation that we desired to ascertain, we should look to the grand-parental correlation; whilst the ancestral correlation would give us the best indication obtainable of the probable qualities of the offspring of given parents when a full knowledge of the ancestry was obtainable. All these correlation coefficients are, therefore, very valuable in solving different eugenic problems; but to which of them should we turn if we wish to know what, in general terms, is the relative influence of heredity as compared with environment? In fact, if correlation coefficients are accepted as the measures of the influence of heredity and

102 EUGENICS REVIEW.
environment, a somewhat technical meaning must be given to the word " influence "; and even then it remains to be decided which hereditary correlation coefficient shall be adopted for
this purpose.
As regards the fact that in quoting an environmental correlation coefficient we are only pointing to a figure relating to an existing range of differentiation in an actual community, other important considerations have to be borne in mind. When, other things remaining the same, an environmental condition is changing and becoming more uniform, the correlation coefficients connected with it will continuously decrease until, when the limit of absolute uniformity has been reached, they will become zero.1 Now when comparing two communities where all things are similar, except that one is more advanced and more diverse as regards some one element of environment, whilst the other is more backward as well as more uniform in that respect, as is often the case, it would certainly not necessarily be true, nor even at all probable, that the need for reform would be less urgent in the more backward community. But in these circumstances the environmental correlation coefficient would certainly be less in the more backward community; from which it follows that comparisons between environmental correlation coefficients in such communities would give little, if any, indication of the relative need for attention being paid to the element of environment in question. Moreover, if environmental correlation coefficients do not necessarily indicate the need for environmental reform, it can be seen that the ratio between hereditary and environmental correlation coefficients are not certain indications of the relative need for attending to heredity and environment. Again, correlation, according to Professor Pearson, " measures for us the extent to which one variate is determined by a second."2 But the word variation will bring to some minds the idea of change, whereas the " variates " here alluded to do not necessarily imply any change whatever; and without change progress is impossible. Moreover, where there is change in some part of our surroundings
X See note at end of Paper. 2 The relative strength of Nature and Nurture, p. 39.

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

103

we can conceive that it may be proceeding at any rate slow or quick, but in such a uniform manner as to leave the statistical differentiation and consequently the correlation coefficients relating to this part of our surroundings wholly unaffected. It follows that though a study of environmental correlation coefficients may be of great value when considering the raising of the worst existing environments up to the level of the best, yet we cannot rule out the possibility of small environmental coefficients occurring where substantial progress is being made. This last consideration is, indeed, one of considerable importance
as regards mental environment; for if we judge by the amount of change taking place in a given period of time, then mental environment is seen to be more uniform than physical environment. Reforms in mental surroundings in large measure take the form of steady and uniform advances of the whole community, or of general upliftings of the moral and intellectual acquirements of the people; and, consequently, mental environmental correlation coefficients will often be small, and will generally give far less reliable indications as to the possibilities of social reform than in the case of physical matters. The point here maintained is, however, that for the foregoing reasons the ratios between hereditary and environmental correlation coefficients should not be quoted as sure indications of the relative benefits to be derived from reforms intended to affect mankind through the agency of heredity and reforms intended to affect human surroundings.
The expression " relative importance " is used, perhaps,
quite as often as " relative influence " in these discussions, and
some attempt ought, therefore, also to be made to define the word " importance." Though the amount of good which might be done by any reform if it were successfully accomplished is the main consideration when deciding on its advisability, yet there are many other questions which have to be taken into account before embarking on a campaign in its favour; and to say that what we want to know is the " importance " of a reform would, perhaps, express our desires in fewest words. We thus get, however, but a vague indication of its meaning. The energy existing in the electrons forming the atoms of a pound

104 EUGENICS REVIEW.
of lead is enormously greater than the energy which can be obtained by burning a pound of coal; yet it would generally be asserted that the available energy of the coal is of great importance, whilst that firmly locked up in the lead is of no importance to us whatever at present. The importance of a factor is, in fact, usually regarded as being dependent on the actual probability of its affecting human destinies; and, in the case of a reform, this depends on the difficulties connected with its accomplishment. Should we not therefore ask to what extent correlation coefficients can be regarded as measures or indications of relative importance in this sense? Let it be assumed that a study of a certain element of environment and of a certain human quality indicates a correlation coefficient
between them of o o5, and that the parental correlation
coefficient for the human quality in question is ten times as great or o 5; provided that these correlations have been ascertained in such a manner as to avoid mutual interference. Now this would render it probable that if by any eugenic reformthat is by any cause producing a selective influence-the average measurements of the fathers of to-day were to be altered by a given amount as regards this quality, this would produce ten times more effect on the next generation as regards that quality than would be produced by making a corresponding change in the element of environment in question, and that it would, therefore, do ten times as much good in that respect. But the expression " corresponding changes " here means changes which bear the same relationship to the ranges of distribution of the things being compared, or to the degrees of their variability. Though this is unquestionably a convenient and correct method of comparison for statistical purposes, yet
it must be remembered that the fact that changes correspond
with each other in this sense gives almost no indication whatever as to their equality as regards either the possibility of their accomplishment or the amount of human energy necessary to produce the desired results. The environmental correlation
coefficient might be only one-tenth of the parental correlation coefficient, and yet the probability of being able to accomplish the social reform necessary to make a given change in the

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

IO5

environment might be one hundred times greater than the probability of effecting the eugenic reform necessary to produce a corresponding change in parental qualities. In fact we get by this means but an uncertain indication as to the relative importance of eugenic and environmental reforms; for to take a single example, whatever the statistical records might prove, educational reform might be more important than any eugenic reform in a primitive community, both as being more possible of accomplishment and as being needed to lay a foundation for progress in all directions. This we may believe whilst holding that popular prejudice should now only whet our appetites to fight for a cause we know to be of such vital importance for mankind.
Even if a somewhat technical meaning should be attached to the word " influence " in order to justify its use in connection with these statistical enquiries, yet in social questions it is generally one only of the two correlated things that we regard as the final object of our endeavours. If the definition above discussed were adopted it would be correct to speak of the father's qualities being " influenced " by those of his unborn son; though it is only in the case of sons, or rather of descendants generally, that we can hope in any way to affect their inborn qualities. As to all human beings now on earth, their inherited natural tendencies form, ex hypothesi, an element which is unalterable, being locked up even more securely than the energy in lead; for our " nature " is a gift we have received once for all. We cannot now alter our ancestry or change a natural legacy as received from them; and however large the heredity correlation coefficients may be, it is difficult to see in what sense heredity can be said to have any influence whatever over us in so far as we may be considering possible improvements in our natural qualities. A knowledge of our own nature, or of the way in which our natural tendencies are likely to differ from those of our neighbours, may, no doubt, be of value to us as a warning concerning either the special dangers to which we are likely to be exposed, or the special opportunities likely to be afforded to us. In no other respect can our knowledge of the science of heredity in man have any useful influence

I06 EUGENICS REVIEW.
except on the generations who will succeed us. Moreover, though low environmental correlation coefficients might indicate that little good could come from changes of environment, yet no excuse whatever for not attempting to do this little good to the living in this, the only available way, would be afforded by the existence of high hereditary correlation coefficients, provided that posterity would not be injured by such environmental reforms.
Though we cannot alter the legacies which we have received from our ancestors yet we have great control over our powers of bequest; and these bequests may be of two different kinds. Our actions may either affect the inborn qualities of the individuals composing the coming generations, or they may make their surroundings different from what they otherwise would have been. No reference will here be made to the long-standing dispute concerning the inheritance of acquired characters, except to point out that the balance of scientific opinion to-day tells heavily against the possibility of ensuring racial progress within any reasonable period of time by modifying human surroundings to-day. The practical eugenist is right in being guided to a great extent by expert advice, and he should not therefore at present look to purely environmental reform as a means of improving the innate qualities of future generations, however much he may intend to advocate them because of their immediate beneficial consequences. Accepting this view as to the non-inheritance of acquired characters, not as a perfectly established truth, but as a practical guide for to-day, we must assume that there are only two ways by which we can beneficially affect posterity; that is by methods dependent either on the agency of selection, natural and artificial, or on the amount to which our present-day improvements in surroundings will endure or be transmitted to posterity by various means. The results of both these methods of affecting future generations will certainly tend to diminish as time goes on. As regards natural inheritance, when selection ceases, the progeny of a selected stock may tend to lose their selected
qualities, though the believer in the efficacy of natural selection as a factor in evolution must hold that some residue, great or

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

107

small, of the beneficial effects produced on any one generation is often or always passed on to all succeeding generations as a perpetual legacy. On the other hand, as to the benefits to posterity resulting from the environmental changes now being made, the influence produced by all the books written to-day, and by the present current thought when transmitted by
tradition, will be felt by our descendants, though to a diminishing extent, for a very long time to come. As to the improvements now being made in physical environment, though they will as a rule produce far less lasting results, yet their influence may be felt for several centuries. Thus as to both methods of reform, hereditary and environmental, if we look only to the effects actually being produced to-day, we see that they will produce results which will diminish as time goes on, though it is certain that they will not diminish at the same rate; and from this it follows that it is impossible to express by a single ratio the relationship between their future effects.
Another point which may, perhaps, be worth mentioning in connection with the measurement of hereditary influences is that, if we take a broad survey of the animal kingdom, the belief that like produces like seems to emerge with greater certainty than if we study a single race or variety of man or animals; or, in other words, in aggregates of various groups between which breeding is limited or debarred, the correlation coefficients are certainly higher than in the case of races of purer breed where there is little selective mating. In this connection it is as well to remember that Johannsen, in his work on pure lines of descent in plants-plants self-fertilised for many generations-came to the conclusion that no variations then observed were inherited, or, in other words, that the hereditary correlation coefficients were then zero. Though how far this conclusion will stand the test of time it is impossible now to say, yet such experiments do strengthen the belief that purity of
breed does influence the magnitude of hereditary coefficients. In fact, in my opinion, it will have to be acknowledged that hereditary correlation coefficients increase with an increase in the amount of selective or debarred mating, with an increase in the impurity of the breed, and with a decrease in the differential

I08 EUGENICS REVIEW.
effects of environment.' If these views are correct it follows that though a knowledge of hereditary correlation coefficients is of great value from many points of view, yet they cannot be regarded as directly measuring the influence of any one factor.
The words " nature " and " nuture " are constantly met with in this controversy, and it may, therefore, be as well to consider whether they may be regarded as being freely interchangeable with the terms " heredity " and "environment." In this connection we should first enquire whether there may not be certain elements of human environment over which we have no control, and as to which we have no knowledge; elements which, therefore, produce differential results, even when the individuals in question seem to have been exposed to exactly the same surroundings. For example, may not very early pre-natal external influences fulfil these conditions? If so a person might be born into the world with certain fixed tendencies over which no human being could have had any control whatever, and in that case it would be questionable whether such tendencies should be classed under the heading of " nurture," or under that of " nature."2 Nurture seems to imply education, training, or, at all events, the bestowal of care of some sort; and, such being the case, tendencies which are unalterable by us hardly seem to fall within its meaning. On the other hand, if we include any such tendencies due to such uncontrollable pre-natal environmental causes under the heading of nature, then we must admit that nature may include factors which have no connection with natural heredity. That this is no mere academic question may be illustrated by a reference to Sir Francis Galton's classical researches concerning the characters of twins. If differences of environment imperceptible to us can produce differential effects on the germ before, but not after, it has divided in the formation of twins, and if it should be shown that such effects do cause variations of the kind which Johannsen believes to exist, then
1 It should perhaps be added that I believe that where environment produces no differential effects dependent on the qualities of the individuals, the differences between the magnitudes of these coefficients in any one species will depend almost entirely on differences in the amount of the restrictions on mating.
2 See Galton's Natural Inheritance, p. 5.

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

log

identical twins might closely resemble each other, whilst ordinary brothers might differ materially, without our having to call in natural heredity to explain these differences. Galton was, no doubt, fully justified in regarding his enquiries concerning twins as helping to solve "the question whether a continual improvement in education " would " compensate for a stationary or even retrograde condition of natural gifts''l; though they do not give us certain information as to the possibility of improving the natural qualities of future generations by selective breeding. To make the best possible use of the study of twins for eugenic problems we ought also to enquire into the relative differences between first cousins who are descended from identical twins and first cousins who are not, an investigation not yet made; for to whatever extent the contrast between the similarity of twins and the dissimilarity of brothers who are not twins is due to heritable influences, to that extent only will that similarity and dissimilarity affect the next generation.
Those who attempt to weigh the relative influence of heredity and environment on man sometimes give the impression that they believe themselves to be dealing with entities, each of which can be regarded as a concrete whole. It may, perhaps, be worth while to consider for a moment to what extent this is justifiable. As regards environment, we may conceive the idea of studying all existing differences of environment in connection with the differences in any one character in man, of thus obtaining an innumerable array of correlation coefficients, and of combining them by suitable methods so as to get a figure representing what might possibly be called the influence of environment as a whole on this one character. Again, when quoting ancestral correlation coefficients, we do seem to get as nearly
as we can by means of correlation coefficients to dealing with heredity as a whole. But can we by any stretch of imagination conceive taking all the different characters of man into account, and combining the coefficients so as to measure the influence of either heredity or environment on man as a whole? Any such result would obviously depend, as already suggested, on the
1 Enquiries into Human Faculties. Cheap Edition, pp. 2I6-7.

I IO EUGENICS REVIEW.
extent to which we excluded from the list of " characters " those attributes which seem to be closely correlated with external conditions. Then again, if a list of all human characters could be drawn up it would be necessary to weight them in some way to allow for their different values. In fact, even if in imagination we indulge in speculations on heredity and environments as wholes, we must only consider their influences on the characters of man taken separately, and not on man as a whole.
Another point to be noted in connection with the possibility
of regarding environment as a whole, is that statistical enquiries on which correlation coefficients must be based necessarily only take account of differences which actually exist at any one time, with the result that certain important considerations are apt to
receive inadequate attention from the statistician. In the first place for social purposes, not only differences of environment which do exist but differences which might exist have to be considered. In studying the probable effects of reforms of various kinds before their introduction, estimates often have
to be made of the effects of differences of environment on mankind when no measurable examples exist of such differences; and the environment which must be studied for practical purposes ought, therefore, to include such hypothetical surroundings. In measuring the influence of hospital accommodation on the death-rate, for example, the figures obtainable before the days of Pasteur and Lister would have been very different from those resulting from any enquiry if now made; and in like manner we can only vaguely guess at the future influences of various environmental factors. Then again, there are many changes in environment which are desirable in themselves without any reference whatever to any measurable changes in human characters. Improvements in housing may be advocated, not
only on account of the effects which it is rightly or wrongly believed such reforms would have on human physique or on
the death-rate, but also because of the consequent actual increase
in comfort likely to be felt by their inhabitants; and it is hardly possible to measure comfort statistically. Lastly, and as before remarked, we cannot in the manner above suggested deal with differences between the present and the past surroundings of

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

III

mankind when the improvements in environment have affected large areas, and. when ihey have been gradually introduced; as is generally the case with such changes as those in public opinion, in the prices of necessaries, in improvements of communications, in sanitation, etc., etc.
III.-THE METHODS OF CONDUCTING THE EUGENIC PROPAGANDA IN FUTURE.
An endeavour has been made in the foregoing paragraphs to indicate, in the first place, that the prejudice which certainly exists against eugenics has probably been increased by a misunderstanding as to the attitude which eugenists have adopted towards social reforms affecting environment. My object has also been to show how complicated are the problems underlying many apparently simple statements bearing on the relative influence of heredity and environment, and how difficult or even impossible it is to devise any method of measuring numerically the ratio between the importance of these two factors; and the question here asked is whether we cannot simplify our statements in such a manner as to lessen the risk of such misunderstandings in future? May it not be that we are attempting to force too much significance into single phrases, and that we should attack the prejudices arising from ignorance more effectively in a less concentrated formation ?
A century ago it was widely held that all men were equal in the sense of their having been given the same start in life by nature; or, in other words, that the differences between individuals was perfectly correlated with the differences between their environments. This fundamental error had to be combated before social progress could be made by any methods other than those dependent on immediate changes in environment; and Sir Francis Galton may have been right in the first onset of this difficult contest in saying that there was no need to be " hypercritical about distinctions " in regard to the " respective provinces of nature and nurture.''' But we are now winning in this fight, and coincident with the great changes in public opinion which are taking place, may it not be wise to change our methods of controversy somewhat also?
1 Enquiries into Human Faculties. Cheap Edition, p. 131.

I1I2 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Just as in science greater accuracy of thought has been obtained by the substitution of the conception of correlation for vaguer ideas concerning association, so in ordinary speech we ought to take more and more care concerning the meanings which we intend should be conveyed by our words. Do not these thoughts give rise to doubts as to whether it would not be wiser at present to devote more attention to the separate study of heredity and environment and less to comparisons between these two factors; and, when they are compared quantitatively whether we should not, as far as possible, employ scientific terms rather than words as difficult to define as " influence,9" " importance," " nature," and " nurture "? We must keep harping on the inequality of men as regards their inborn qualities, and we must keep repudiating environmental reform as a practical method of ensuring racial progress in the future; but if we do so in this spirit much harmful misunderstanding which now delays the progress of eugenic reform will be avoided. With this object in view, the following four lines of enquiry, broadly outlined in the following four questions, are suggested as the foundations on which our propaganda should be built.
(i) What effect would a given change of environment have on the different characters of existing individuals and on their well-being generally?
Since eugenists are concerned with the racial qualities of future generations, this is not directly a eugenic question; though when such enquiries proved, as they often would, that greatly exaggerated hopes had been entertained as to the benefits tlhus to be obtained, the public would become more ready to consider the eugenic methods of securing these same benefits for the coming generations. Obviously, however, we should here be dealing with subjects of very great importance, including the direct effects of education, social legislation, the administration of justice, sanitation, etc., etc.-in fact, with all the methods and with almost the only methods of benefiting our
own generation. Where human characters are now being measurably affected by human surroundings, the determination of correlation coefficients by methods so largely associated with

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

11I3

the name of Professor Pearson, is the correct scientific method of solving such problems, and is, therefore, of great utility. Moreover, in cases where there is no actual past experience to guide us, such statistical enquiries will be useful in affording information by analogy when dealing with environmental reforms and their probable effects. The further these enquiries are pushed, the better it will be for the nation; for without them we shall often be marching in an entirely wrong direction.
(2) What effects would changes of environment, if now made, have on the characters and the well-being of future generations ?
Changes in mental environment, such as a wider adoption of the belief in evolution, certainly may facilitate eugenic reform; and such changes, and even changes in physical environment, may react on selection. For example, the widespread increase in the social condemnation of drunkenness has probably increased the difficulty of the young drunkard in finding a mate, and has thus tended by selection to eliminate the desire for alcohol. Even where there is no immediate loss of fertility, the separation of the goats and the sheep into groups between which inter-marriage is limited, facilitates eugenic reform in many ways; and, for all these reasons, environment must never be neglected as a possible factor in racial progress. As regards any direct effects on the inborn qualities of future generations, it is true that only the believers in the inheritance of acquired characters will regard this as being a eugenic question. As to the non-eugenic problems involved, environmental correlation coefficients, when disentangled from hereditary effects, will indicate the probable effects of changes of environment on the human beings now in existence: but to estimate the effects of present day reforms on future generations, many other considerations must be held in view. As already remarked, it is necessary to estimate the duration of any environmental improvement in order to estimate its future effects. In such enquiries, historical research is needed; though it must be confessed that it is exceedingly difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish in the records of the growth of civilisation in the past those effects which are

I114 EUGENICS REVIEW.
independent of changes in the inborn qualities of a nation from those which are associated with actual racial improvement.
(3) What beneficial effects could be produced on posterity by
now attending to questions affecting the selection of the ancestry of the coming generations?
Under this heading the main, if not all the lines of eugenic enquiry, can be included; for it comprises the investigation of all the causes which tend either to diminish the production of the unfit or to increase the production of the fit, whether as the result of moral persuasion, education, legislation, or compulsion. The possibility of solving such problems must depend, amongst other things, on our knowledge of the effect which a given change in the fertility of a section of the community, distinguished by a given average excess or defect of any quality, would have on future generations in regard to that quality; and correlation coefficients form the scientific statistical basis of any such enquiry. Certain general genetic questions must also be considered, particularly when dealing with individuals separately; and both the probability of being able to accomplish the necessary reforms and their colateral effects must be investigated, when we shall, as a rule, be dealing with problems which cannot as yet be treated numerically.
(4) By which method can each one of us do most good, by endeavouring to improve man's surroundings, or by endeavouring to improve the ancestry of the coming generations ?
There is no necessary antagonism between eugenic reforms intended to benefit future generations and environmental reforms intended more especially to benefit our neighbours, and in many cases they can be promotea simultaneously. Indeed, in order to secure the greatest possible advantages from any improvements in the inborn qualities of man, which might result from reforms now introduced, it would often be necessary in future to devote not less but more attention than at present to his surroundings. To decide which of these two lines of advance can most profitably be followed by any individual necessitates a consideration of his personal aptitudes; for example, no one will regret that Florence Nightingale devoted

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

I I5

her whole energies to the improvement of hospital environment, or will wish that Francis Galton had devoted more of his eminently practical genius to that splendid work instead of to the study of heredity. We want all fields thoroughly laboured,
and some labourers must go in one direction and some in another. We can, however, make a strong plea in favour of especial attention being devoted to eugenic reforms, both on account of their importance to posterity, and because they form a less attractive subject than the betterment of our own environment. We can win both gratitude and votes by attending to
our neighbours' interests, whilst the unborn of the future will know us not.
As regard the contrast between the effects of environmental
and eugenic reforms, it cannot be denied, however, that in many respects our social policy, even when it undoubtedly benefits our neighbours, will yet, nevertheless, injure posterity by increasing the fertility of the unfit or diminishing the fertility of the fit. When this is the case with regard to any reform, a balance ought to be struck between all its good and evil consequences, taking into account, as far as may be, their relative probabilities. At present we can often only speak of probabilities in regard to these eugenic problems; for concerning
many scientific and other questions involved we are as yet very ignorant. But, difficult as these problems are, we must try to solve them. And in solving them we have to make the best
estimate we can of the immediate and of the ultimate consequences of what is now being done or is now proposed, including a forecast of the durability of the physical results first produced, and of the diminishing extent to which the consequential racial effects will continue to be felt by our
descendants; together with some estimate of the probable truth of our predictions. No doubt the strongest argument in favour of those environmental reforms which seem likely to injure the racial qualities of the nation of the future-such, for example, as any increase in the care bestowed on the unfit-is that suffering would thus be immediately alleviated, and that the sense of the duty owed to others would thus be stimulated. We can, in fact, hardly hope to develop a regard for the welfare of

I I6 EUGENICS REVIEW.
posterity if at the same time we advocate a deaf ear being turned to the cries of our neighbours. Then, again, our power of improving the lot of posterity through the agency of natural inheritance is more problematical than is our power of benefiting our neighbours immediately, and on this fact a logical argument in favour of these environmental reforms can be based. But, turning to the other side of the picture, the further our scientific enquiries are pushed the more- clear does it become that by paying attention to the science of heredity far wider possibilities for benefiting our descendants are opened out than by the study of possible changes of environment. Then, again, we know that the benefits resulting from those improvements in human surroundings which are now being made will continually diminish as time goes on, until ultimately for the most part they will vanish altogether; whilst, on the other hand, evolutionary science indicates the probability that by now selecting the ancestry of the coming generations, though the benefit conferred on mankind would be most felt in the generations immediately succeeding us, yet some remnant of the good done would remain as long as the human race existed. Lastly, the improvements in human surroundings as a rule not only entail a never-ending strain and effort to prevent the nation slipping back from the position won, but with every step taken in advance further progress in such matters generally becomes more difficult; whereas, on the other hand, every increase in the natural gifts conferred on man by natural inheritance tends to facilitate his further advance. Eugenic reform will become less difficult as men become more inherently capable, because it is man's weakness of character which is the greatest bar to his progress in this direction. Moreover, if we turn from this balancing of probabilities and look at the world around us, what
do we see? Vast strides have unquestionably been made in recent years in physical science, and great material benefits have ensued. But who can contemplate our hospitals, our prisons, our slums, our law courts, our wasteful extravagance, or the war now being waged, and yet assert with confidence his belief in the progress of man in regard to the highest parts of his nature? Do we even know that we are not degenerating?

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

11I7

Does not a general survey of our western civilisation leave grave doubts in our minds whether all this asserted improvement in our environment is being accompanied by any progress in the directions where progress is most needed ? Our hope of further advancement in many matters of supreme importance rests mainly, we believe, on the possibility of so changing man's inborn tendencies in the coming generations as to make him more capable of benefiting by his surroundings. We cannot kill the weak and the wicked. On the contrary, we are bound to aid them; though we are even more imperatively bound to find some method of preventing our good works from acting as a hindrance to the future progress of the race.
We may be asked whether the foregoing remarks do not indicate that our scientific knowledge is yet hardly sufficiently advanced to supply us with definite practical rules concerning man's duties in regard to all questions connected with human fertility. As regards statistical enquiries, though this is a question for the statistician to answer, yet we may safely assert that Galton's pioneer work in this field gave the initial impulse to the eugenic movement-a movement which is certain, sooner or later, to bear good fruit, even if considerable benefits have not already been reaped. Moreover, those of us who hold that eugenic progress in practical affairs is now possible in many directions do not doubt the practical importance of the scientific results already obtained; for the discoveries already made prove that hereditary descent is not a matter of chance but is subject to definite natural laws. Once it is admitted that our knowledge of the laws of nature does enable us to make forecasts of future events with considerable assurance in certain directions, then it follows as an undeniable consequence that the utilisation of this knowledge in framing our social policy is a moral duty imperatively thrown on us. But as regards those questions on which statisticians are not yet in a position to give us the needed practical guidance, it still may be asked whether we are not now without any scientific basis on which to build our eugenic policy. Genetics and Mendelism indicate, it is true, the same great truth concerning the subjection of man to the laws of natural inheritance; but beyond that they now give us but slender

I I8 EUGENICS REVIEW.
practical guidance. The broad study of evolutionary science teaches us, however, that selective breeding has been a potent agency in the past; whilst a scientific study of the domestication of animals proves that marvels have often been accomplished by the breeder in modifying both the bodies and the minds of the stocks he has dealt with. We know a great deal concerning the practical rules adopted by these breeders of animals; rules resulting from much thought of many men through many centuries; and as the natural laws applicable to the lower animals are applicable to man also, we know that these rules have an important bearing on human affairs. Recent investigations, no doubt, indicate the possibility of great improvements in the methods of dealing with animals being forthcoming in the future; but they give no justification whatever for neglecting the guidance of practical men as regards either man or animals when that guidance does not run counter to the dictates of science. Our moral sense will, no doubt, rightly prohibit us from adopting many of the breeder's methods, and our deficiency in knowledge will, for long, if not for ever, make us unwilling to apply compulsion in order to secure the ends desired. But our existing practical knowledge, confirmed as it largely is by scientific study, not only gives us an ample basis for our advocacy of the course of action which we hold that men ought in many respects voluntarily to adopt in order to ensure the continued progress of the nation, but it fully justifies us in taking the responsibility of actually prohibiting parenthood in cases where the danger of injury to posterity is very flagrant.
The broad conclusions arrived at in the foregoing discussion may, perhaps, be illustrated by an allegory in which ships and men are compared. In an existing ship we see that there are some things which can be changed for better or for worse, and some things which are unalterable. Once a ship is built, no alteration in its general design is possible; just as in man, after he is born, no change can be made in his " nature" or his hereditary tendencies. The study of the theory of the design of ships is of no value to the sailor at sea, except as giving him warning as to the special dangers to which his ship may be exposed; though it is of immense practical importance in so far

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

I I9

as the ships not yet built are concerned; just as the study of heredity does not enable those now living to improve their own inborn qualities, whilst it is of immense practical importance in regard to eugenic reform. All through the life of a ship, however, improvements can often be made in the intelligence displayed in command, in the materials supplied, in the quality of the coal burnt, in the dock accommodation, and in the care given generally; just as we see that during a man's life improvements may be made in his environment, including his education, food, housing, and a hundred other things. The directors of a steamship company have, therefore, the double duty thrown on them of caring for their existing fleet and of considering what kind of ships should be built in future; of, as it were, looking to the welfare both of the born and of the unborn. As to their existing ships, their performances can, no doubt, in many cases be materially improved; though looking only to their best vessels they see that but very little better results can be expected from them, their design being what it is; much in the same way as we see that improved environment can do but very little for the healthy and successful in every rank of life, who are anyhow making nearly the best of their opportunities. The docks and lighthouses now being built for the repair and safety of our ships will last for several centuries; the good management of our fleets to-day will be passed on as a tradition to the fleets of to-morrow; a knowledge of the laws of navigation, without which shipwreck cannot long be avoided, is a legacy received from our ancestors, which we shall pass on to posterity; and all such present-day improvements will bear good fruit in the future provided there is no relaxation of effort; just as in like conditions improvements now made in mental and physical environment will benefit many future generations even though their inborn characters should be unaffected thereby. The directors will not discuss whether it is better to devote their time to the care of their existing fleet or to the design of fleets of the future; for in both directions their full energy will be put forth. Indeed, they see that the increasing compexity of the machinery of the future may necessitate even more care being devoted to it, and a bald statement that the design of their ships

120 EUGENICS REVIEW.
has more influence in ensuring success than has the care bestowed on them might, they would fear, lead to a slackening in the attention now paid to their existing fleet; just as there is some risk in the assertion that heredity has a greater influence on the lot of man than environment, lest it should hinder our best efforts being devoted to the study of both factors. But the directors know that the highly complex vessel of to-day is the result of a slow evolutionary process tracing back, perhaps, to a man sitting on a log and paddling with his feet; and they are thus led to believe that vast improvements in design, as yet wholly unknown to them, resulting in feats of commerce now utterly unattainable, will be seen in the fleets of the future if they keep improving the make of their ships little by little as they launch them one after another. In one respect the foregoing analogy is defective, for the probability of the directors introducing new designs would not increase with each forward step taken, whereas an improvement in the innate moral and mental qualities of a race would increase the probability of reforms being adopted for the purpose of securing further advances both in racial qualities and in physical surroundings. We must, no doubt, strive to utilise and to improve our environment to the utmost; but we are blind to what is going on around us if we do not see both that the road to far the greatest attainable progress in the moral and material welfare of mankind in the future lies in now taking such steps as will cause the coming generations, as they are launched into the world one after the other, to be, as it were, better and better designed, or to be endowed with steadily improving natural capabilities, and that the neglect of the opportunities now open to us of ensuring this result may lead to our nation slowly sliding down that ascent
up which the human race has been so painfully toiling for long
ages past.
NOTE.
I am here in large measure repeating a statement which I made in Vol. V., p. 154, of this REVIEW, to the following effect:-
" Imagine an ideal republic, in some respects similar to that designed by Plato, where not only were all the children removed from their parents, but where they were all treated exactly alike. In these circumstances none of the differences between the adults could have anything to do with the differences of environments, and all must be due to some differences in inherent factors. In

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT.

121

fact the environment correlation coefficient would be nil, whilst the hereditary correlation coefficient might be high."
Shortly after its publication I received a letter from Professor Pearson indicating that in his opinion I had made a mistake in this matter; and relying
on his great authority, and being at the time convinced by his arguments, I
wrote in the next issue of this REVIEW to confess my error, a confession I now wish to retract. In Biometrika, Vol. X., pp. i8i-i87, and in "The Relative Strength of Nature and Nurture," Professor Pearson subsequently published his opinions on my views in terms upon which I will not comment. It is no doubt obviously true that where an environment is absolutely uniform, the environmental
correlation coefficients cannot be directly determined. But limiting considerations nevertheless indicate that the environmental correlation is diminished when the environment is made more uniform, and is reduced to zero when the environment
is made absolutely uniform, provided of course, as in the Republic, that it is not
correlated with other causes of variation, such as differences of heredity; and of this conclusion I now propose to give a diagrammatical proof. Let it be
assumed that before the introduction of the methods of the Platonic Republic there were considerable differences between the amount of food consumed by
the young in the different households, and that this did affect the stature of the adult population. Let the measurements on OY represent the height of the
adults in inches, and those on OX the food supply of these adults when children in suitable units as described below. Then if the population were plotted in these two respects by means of these co-ordinates, and if a line were drawn through the means of the dots thus made as distributed in vertical arrays, its slope would repre-
sent the environmental correlation coefficient in regard to these particulars of environ. ment and phyiscal character, that is, assuming the regression to be linear. Cer.
tain conditions must, however, be fulfilled in the plotting. It is first to be noted that if the coefficient were unity, or the slope one in one, or 45 degrees, the line representing it must pass through m at that angle; and, in order that this may be the case, the positions of the standard deviations of the two variables must be represented by lines of equal length on the two axes, as shown on the diagram. This condition being fulfilled, it does not signify what scales are adopted; and, if one scale be arbitrarily chosen, the
other can be ascertained, granted a knowledge of the facts of the case. Let the
line mb represent the actual correlation at first existing, the coefficient being 0.25, a large figure being selected merely for diagrammatical purposes. Next let the
methods of the Platonic Republic be gradually introduced, the children's food supply gradually becoming more uniform, this change always being made by the ill-fed becoming better fed, and the well-fed becoming worse fed, the mean food supply always remaining the same. This would mean that the height as adults of the children receiving the mean food supply, being chosen at random from the population, is unchanged, and consequently that the position of the dots on the line md would remain unaffected. The line representing the correlation coefficient would therefore continue always to pass through m, the mean of the dots on that line. But what will happen at the line abc for example? The individuals represented as being plotted on that line would continue always to receive a food supply measured by Oc; and, as this ex hypothesi means a larger and larger supply of food, the scale on this axis would have to be continuously changed and adjusted to the new conditions. But the food supply getting larger, the adults ex hypothesi would become taller, and the dots on this line, and consequently the mean of those dots, would continuously move upwards. Assuming that the groups which are highly or under-fed are in other respects identical,
this would go on until the food supply Oc had so increased as to be infinitely nearly equal to Od, or, in other words, until the food supply became uniform; and then the mean of the dots on this line would approach infinitely nearly to the line Mm. The slope of this line Mm would then represent the correlation coefficient, a coefficient represented by zero. Q.E.D. It is true that just as the scale on the axis OX had to be altered with each change in the food supply, so the scale of the height of the adults on the axis OY would have to be altered

122 EUGENICS REVIEW.
continuously also, the mean height alone remaining unchanged; though the alteration would be much less, the factor of nature remaining unaffected whilst
the factor of nurture was apparently obliterated. Whether Sir Francis Galton
" would have smiled at the notion that the coefficient of correlation must be nil " in these circumstances, no man living can say; but those who agree that I have established my case will doubt it.
y

Md
s^;/1

A$e .

sd sd -

