INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS FEDERATION

Report of the Annual MeetinB

FOR the first time since the last Con- The Report for the year presented by the

gress the International Federation of Administrative Secretary showed the de-

Eugenics Organizations met under a cease of Professor Johannsen of Denmark,

new President, Dr. Charles B. Davenport- and the retirement of Dr. Lucien March of

Major Darwin having retired at the Amster- France, who has been a member since I921.

dam meeting in I927.

It was also reported that the President had

Especial interest attaches to this meeting, attended the Pan-American Congress in

held in Munich, from the fact that amongst Havana. He gave an account of the

the scientists entertaining the Federation proceedings and of the formation of the

was Dr. Ploetz (vice-President), who founded Pan-American Union for Eugenics and

not only the first Race Hygiene Society in Homiculture.

Germany (some years before the Eugenics It was agreed to amend the constitution of

Society had its birth) but who also initiated the Federation so as to allow of representa-

international work long before the first tion on the Federation of Unions formed for

International Congress in London I912. analogous studies, and for work of an inter-

The President was the only representative national character. An invitation will be

from the United States. Cuba sent as dele- sent to the Union as well as to the States

gate Dr. J. E. de Sandoval, Secretaria de who have joined it, to maintain membership.

Sanidad, Havana, who is representing in Sir Bernard Mallet described the organi-

Europe the newly formed office of Eugenics zation of the International Union for the

and Homiculture established in December Scientific Study of Population Problems, of

last year as the centre of the Pan-American which he is a vice-President, and proposed

Union. In addition to Dr. A. Ploetz, Ger- that future co-operation with this Union

many was also represented by Professor should be realized when possible.

Dr. Lenz (acting as delegate for Dr. Otto The members for Italy elected in 1925

Krohne). For Great Britain Sir Bernard were re-elected for a further term of three

Mallet, K.C.B., and Dr. Schiller (repre- years, as was also Dr. Frets. Two further

senting Professor MacBride) attended. Dr. additions to the Federation are the Genetical

Gini from Italy and the two Netherlands Institute of Helsingfors for Finland, and the

delegates, Dr. van Herwerden and Dr. Frets, Eugenics Society of Esthonia. A new

were present. Dr. Jon Alfred Mjoen came member was elected for a term of three years

from Norway, and the Polish Society was for Norway in the person of Dr. Halfdan

represented by Dr. Victor Borkowski, Bryn, President of the Royal Academy of

bringing credentials from the Polish Science at Trondhjem, surgeon in the

Government, whose courtesy in thus honour- Army, well-known for his work in physical

ing the Federation is gratefully recorded. anthropology.

Dr. Otto Schlaginhaufen, Director of the Swiss Institute of Race Biology in Zurich,

MEETING IN ROME

vice-President for the past year, represented The President took the advice of the meet-

Switzerland. The first meeting was held at ing on the question of future assemblies,

the Hygiene Institute. The election of accepting an invitation from Italy to hold the

Austria as a co-operating country was pro- Federation in Rome simultaneously with the

posed by the President, and Dr. Reichel, one Italian National Eugenics Congress at the

of the promoters of the Vienna Society for end of September, I929, and in Zurich in

Race Hygiene, took his place on the I930. He also announced that in 1932 the

Federation.

International Genetical Congress will be

i85

i86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

held in Ithaca, New York. The American manuscript of which has been sent in by

members were empowered to attempt to ar- Dr. Govaerts.

range that the sections on Eugenics and (d) Dr. Mjoen reported that the work of

Heredity of Man should be organized in con- the Programme Committee was nearly com-

junction with the International Federation pleted, as all the original members of that

in lieu of a yearly Eugenics Congress. Committee have now approved of the Pro-

The Federation having accepted the resig- gramme with the exception of Professor

nation of Dr. Govaerts from the Scientific Nilsson-Ehle, whose reply has been de-

Secretaryship, he, together with Dr. Gini, layed through illness. Dr. Mjoen is also

were elected vice-Presidents for the ensuing collecting comments from a number of

year. It had been hoped that Dr. van specialists and from some Societies, and has

Herwerden would take over the secretary- published those already received in book

ship given up by Dr. Govaerts; but as she form from the Winderen Laboratory.

was unable to accept his post owing to pressure of other work, it was agreed to allow WAR AND EUGENICS

the secretaryship to lapse until the next The International Committee on the

meeting.

eugenic or dysgenic effects of war.-This

On the presentation of the financial state- Committee, initiated last year, will be under

ment by the Administrative Secretary the direction of Dr. Gini, and the following

(audited by Dr. Gini), the Italian and Swiss have already agreed to take part in the

delegates (commenting on the fact that five work:

countries had failed to make contributions General Harrison Hunt (Michigan) and

in the past year), suggested that the consti- Lieutenant-Colonel A. G. Love, U.S.

tution and work of the Federation should be Army; Surgeon-General Jungblut (Berlin);

revised. A decision was deferred, all coun- Dr. W. Winkler (Vienna); Count Yana-

tries being asked to suggest whether thq gisawa (Tokyo); Dr. Govaerts (Belgium);

work of the Federation should be reduced or Professor Carr-Saunders and Dr. Stevenson

increased.

(England).

Reports were presented on other inter- The Federation agreed to Dr. Gini's pro-

national activities.

posal to secure two members, one from the

(a) An International Congress on Tuberculosis is being held in Rome during the autumn and Dr. Ensch (who was prevented
from attendance at Munich because he is
going to Rome) was appointed as delegate from the Federation.

army and one scientist, from each of the
belligerent countries, and also to inclule inquiries in neutral countries which had
been considerably affected by war conditions, having one representative for each of these latter.
(f) The President reported progress in the

(b) The President reported that the prize formation of the Committee on Race-crossknown as the " Draper Prize " is being ing, and in view of the fact that Professor offered both in the States and in Europe Lundborg, although willing to serve on the

for a work (to be completed by next May) committee will not undertake the chairman-

on " The relative fertility of Nordic and ship, it was agreed that he should himself other peoples in any region of Europe or the fill that post. The first work of this Com-

States."

mittee will be the ascertainment of areas in

(c) Dr. Gini announced that the Biblio- which studies of human hybrids can be most

theque Internationale would probably not usefully undertaken, and a further objec-

be continued beyond the first two volumes, tive will be the standardization of methods,

as the Society in Rome, which had proposed anthropometrical, psychological, and phy-

to give financial assistance, had been dis- siological, in the hope of so co-ordinating

solved: it is hoped, however, to publish the work as to secure comparable results in

volume for Italy and one for Belgium, a different fields. The members are Pro-

INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION

I87

fessor Hermann Lundborg, Professor Nils- score higher than the less intelligent

son-Ehle, Dr. Mjoen, Dr. Eugen Fischer, parental group, the hybrids also contain the

and Dr. Rodenwaldt.

largest number of least well endowed (all

The Federation asked that as further three groups being considered).

details in the programmes of others of the To those who read or heard Dr.

foregoing Committee are available, they Nilsson-Ehle's interesting discourse at

may be brought before them for discussion, Amsterdam on crosses these data gave strik-

together with further objectives included in ing corroboration of the plant phenomena

research programmes.

which he had described.

A small sub-committee investigated the A further interesting survey of race-

question of future finance, and the Federa- mixture (sent by Professor Lundborg) was

tion finally approved a proposal to assess read by Dr. Lenz, and Dr. Davenport read a

each Society or Institute maintaining mem- careful paper sent by Dr. Laughlin survey-

bership, instead of making an assessment ing sterilization in the United States to

of annual contributions from the States to date.

which these Societies belong, such assess- On the afternoon of Thursday the whole

ment to be revised annually and for the party went out to the fine new Kaiser Wil-

current year to stand at fifty shillings helm Institute (built partly by the Rocke-

(English).

feller Foundation) in which the work of

THE MIGRATION PROBLEM
The most lively discussion of the assembly was aroused by the resolution deferred

Kraepelin is being carried on. Dr. Ruidint
who will soon take up residence in Munich as Director, came all the way from Basle to explain the work to the visiting members.

last year and standing in the name of Dr. On Friday afternoon Dr. and Mrs.

Frets, on the desirability of immigrant re- Ploetz, with their family, entertained the

ceiving countries making inquiries into the Federation and Conference visitors at their

family histories of intending immigrants house in Herrsching.

as well as into their personal performances. The Federation and visiting scientists

Finally a vote was taken in which Dr. Frets,
Dr. van Herwerden, Dr. Lenz, Dr. Ploetz, Dr. Reichl, and Dr. Schlaginhaufen, voted

were entertained at dinner on Friday night in the Bayrischehof by Dr. and Mrs. Ploetz. Dr. Davenport delivered the greetings sent

in favour-while Dr. Gini, Sir Bernard by the Honorary President, Major Leonard

Mallet, Dr. Mjoen, and Dr. Schiller voted Darwin, to the Federation and their German

against. A public meeting was organized by the

entertainers, in response to which (on the
proposal of Miss van Herwerden), the tele-

Munich Eugenic Society on Thursday even- gram of greeting was dispatched.-" Affec-

ing, Professor Riidin gave an hour's tionate greetings of Federation and guests

address, in which he surveyed eugenic assembled at Ploetz dinner." 1

aspects of recent psychiatric work.

It is hoped that the papers read at the

Dr. Davenport opened the proceedings by giving a brief and comprehensive account of

Conference will be published in the German or English journals so that they will be

his work on F.i.hybrids in Jamaica. In available to general readers.

particular, the mental tests taken on this group showed a much wider range of variation than that which obtains in either the

A bstract from the A dministrative Secretary's Report.

white or black parental races, and although in intelligence tests some of the hybrids

1 Major Darwin's reply was, " Warmly appreciate kind greeting, and with every success to
Federation."

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.

