HEREDITY AND EDUCATION.'
A PLEA FOR A NATIONAL POLICY.
By R. T. BODEY, M.A.
IT is recorded of a certain Archduke, proud of the perfection with which his men performed their military evolutions, and of their smart appearance on parade, that he once exclaimed, "I don't like war; it spoils the soldiers, dirties their uniforms, and destroys discipline." To forget the end in contemplation of the means is perhaps always a grotesque absurdity, but it is not confined to Archdukes or to military matters. Those, who for professional reasons or from personal interest are accustomed to read some of our endless addresses, discussions, and articles upon education must often have been struck with the feeling that they are animated by a spirit not unlike the Archduke's. There is immense zeal about the means, but a lack of clearness about the end; or more frequently, perhaps, a confused assumption that all this ceaseless activity throughout the country, from the heart of London to the remotest village of Cornwall and Northumberland, this personnel and bill of charges, so numerous and so lengthy, must somehow, because it is so huge, be considered as an end unto itself, and therefore freed from any necessity of justifying itself outwardly as a whole. But this is insufficient; it is as though we were to take the roar and grinding of a large machine as evidence that it was working satisfactorily, whereas that can only be judged by taking into account the design of the machine and the motive energy consumed, in relation to the utility of the article produced and the perfection of its finish. The Archduke's soldiers existed primarily for war-war, which has scant respect for uniforms, and is the sternest examiner of the manhood of a Nation; soldiers are for war or for nothing; he would have been
1 Read at the first Annual Meeting of the Liverpool Branch of the Eugenics Education Society, Nov. 8th, igII.

HEREDITY AND EDUCATION

3.13

wiser if, instead of desiring an unreal world for the sake of keeping his lines straight and uniforms neat, he had thought more of the real workaday world, and aspired rather that the men inside those beautiful tunics might have strength, resource, and courage to emerge from the rough test of battle, unconquered though ragged in dress. And similarly, we who are concerned in education might do well to remember more often that the whole enormous apparatus of teachers, and committees, and buildings, and officials, and treasury grants, and local education rates, and what not, exist, not for the sake of their own mutual interactions and evolutions, but for large, adult, and National ends, and for the rough, hard test of man's work at mature age in this England of ours, ringed with rivals as she is, and confronted with problems more varied and more severally complex than have ever been presented to any Nation since the Empire of ancient Rome.
Performance is more than promise which may or may not be fulfilled, just as the opened flower and ripened seed are more than the bud of March. And therefore I would not go to the school to learn from the child, and then expect the world to adjust itself to the school product, for this is to imitate the Archduke. It is saner wisdom to consider the grown men and women of the Nation, as they toil, and sorrow, and bear upon their broad shoulders the burden of these Islands and of England beyond the seas, and try to learn from them what it is the schools should supply. Success or failure must be measured, not inside school walls, but in this broader way, by the skill and spirit with which the men and women who have spent their childhood in our schools discharge their several shares of their country's work.
And there is a second reason why it becomes increasingly necessary to consider the subject from the National standpoint, and not with reference to whatever private advantage the child may derive from his training. People in the boroughs grumble at their own education rate, but have a vague idea that as a setoff the counties are much cheaper. Yet the rate for the whole of England and Wales already exceeds is. in the pound; the local authorities are already in debt to the extent of about £40,000,0o0

3I4 R. T. Bodey, M.A.:
on educational loans; and there are annual treasury education
grants to the extent of nearly ,20,000,000, drawn, as we are too
prone to forget, from the pockets of the same men who pay the local rates, and not from any extraneous source. It is manifestly quite improper to spend public money for the purpose of furthering the private advancement of anyone, however rich, or however poor, he may be; public money and public effort should be reserved for public ends, while it is only from private sources that private benefits can properly be received. On the principle that those who pay the piper have the right to call the tune, it must be conceded that the Nation, acting through its authorised channels, has bought up a claim upon the child. The public disbursements upon education are in fact made upon the assumption that the instruction given in our schools and other places of education is, or at least can be made, such that the human assets of the Nation are enlarged and enriched by the process in ways and to an extent that cannot be brought about better by any other agency. For if there were any better way, it would clearly be the duty of our statesmen to abolish the existing school machinery in favour of this better way.
What then, speaking broadly, are the needs of the Nation, to which a system of public education should be subservient and subordinate. They become evident if we consider its structure. It is no mere fortuitous concourse of individuals, living in tbe same territory, but separate in their individual aims and interests, except in so far as each may feel the pressure and limitation of the common boundary, like lead shot in a glass bottle. Rather, it is a vast living and growing organism, with its men and women for unit cells. The essential life conditions for every organism are differentiation of the parts and of their several functions, and the continual adaptation of part to function. To use an illustration consonant to our mechanical age, it is like the "Mauretania," built for war as well as for peace, in which deliberate forethought and design are manifest from stem to stern in the size, the moulding, the material, the distribution, and the subordination of its various parts. We recognise how absurd it would be to build it all of one material throughout; not economy alone, but efficiency also, is consulted

HEREDITY AND EDUCATION

3r15

by using here a finer and there a coarser substance, according to the purpose of the various parts. It is just the same with the band of men who work the ship. The qualities that make the best captain on the bridge are not the same as those that make the best look-out at the masthead, or the best stoker in the furnace room, or the best hand upon the engine levers; some are more important than others, because they carry more responsibility and are the less easy to replace; yet all are alike necessary, and the success of the voyage depends as much upon their differences as it does upon their ordered and graded co-operation. That larger community, the Nation, owes its strength, and endurance, and effectiveness, whether for offence and defence, or as manifested in the arts of peaceful life, to precisely the same conditions as the ship's company,-to variety of function among its citizens, and to their orderly and graded co-operation with each other. Growth, adaptability, and permanence are only possible so long as these conditions are observed. In Shakespearean language, there must be degrees, "the ladder to all high designs."
I do not think any apology need be made for dwelling upon the point, because either a national system of education can, or it cannot, produce an effect of some determinate kind upon the attitude of the citizen towards the Nation. If it cannot, then, logically, all aid from public funds should be withdrawn at once; but if it can, then it is mere folly to design and run the machine without some clear conception as to what the nature of its output is intended to be, for this should obviously determine the design, condition the working, and supply the one test of efficiency. If you hold this organic view of the constitution of a great modern State, you will naturally wish for forms and methods of education, designed with reference to the various salient relationships within the organism, and will thereby further the more perfect adaptation of specific part to specific function, and the more effective co-operation of the whole. And this is statesmanship.
Year by year the children enter our schools in their thousands. How are the administrator and the teacher to secure that when the child leaves school, and goes to take up

3I6 R. T. Bodey, M.A.:
his share of the duty and the burden of Life, he shall be so placed as to satisfy the Nation's needs on thc one hand, and on the other his own powers and potentialities, which are often extremely limited ?
Ask any teacher about the promise of a pupil, and he will tell you about the child's abilities, and then is almost certain to add something about the good or the bad home influences to which he is subjected. Reduced to two words, he says that it all depends upon the Nature and the Nurture of the child. The full implication of these terms and of the relationship subsisting between them is too little considered in dealing with educational problems; current school text-books, training and administrative systems, furnish little evidence that the imminent importance and the practical bearing of the researches of Galton and Pearson, Mendel, Darwin, Bateson and others has been realised. Perhaps I may be excused therefore for recalling Galton's address on " The Possible Improvement of the Human Breed," delivered just ten years ago before the Anthropological Institute. In considering the figures which I have borrowed from it you will remember that they represent generalisations, and are not to be upset by individual cases. While it is not possible in our present state of knowledge to represent these matters with absolute numerical accuracy, the principle illustrated by the general run of the figures is undoubted, and does not rest upon the particular unit which he assigned.
When we consider a large series of determinations of minutely fluctuating variations (such as, for example, the heights of all Army recruits in a twelvemonth) they are found to follow very closely what mathematicians call the Normal Law of Frequency. Numerically, it is given in a special form in the top lines of figures in the following diagram. (Fig. I.)
A quarter, or 25 per cent., of the people concerned will necessarily exceed the general average of the values recorded for the whole lot up to some amount; this amount, whatever it may be, Galton called one normal talent. Then i6 per cent. more exceed up to twice this value, or have two talents, 7 per cent. have three, 2 per cent. have four or more. On the other hand, some people fall short of the average in just the same

HEREDITY AND EDUCATION

317

proportions; their talents are negative. The classes or grades above the general average are lettered in ascending order with the large letters R, S, T, U, V; those below it descend in the corresponding order with small letters r, s, t, u, v. The proportion of the various grades is set out on a larger scale in the second row of figures, in parts per io,ooo.

Gat tons SSlandard Tate of DSscEnt.

Pw 00
Ptn tono

/.hit(.M1h* t1

rYarnms . Classis -Crad.s

35s

s

7
671

16/64.fSaSoo

25 16 50016/4

7 672

/180

35,

too
I1300

un tS

rR S T U V

3S
*- 180
67*
. 614 a500
L500
* 2 6 14
67/ no 3s
oZSao?Xn .j 'o~0O f..d1oN/.th 1;
100

fCl =
UT S3R

__

6 _ to 6 35

L 20 5-2 i 33 '0 IO

7 LL 150 233I 70 57 t0 672.

6 57 I5-3 512. 5o9 224 47 5 ,63

3 42 9Ls 678860i50 '40 g83505

r_ 3

140 5#o0 860 678 L2.8 3

A. - 5 47 22L s509 2- 25S3 57 6

2350 2
i161 3

t - l0 57 170 234 150 44 7

672.

UeO10 33 61 52 20 4

880

v - 6 lo 12 6 _

3S'

- 3L 168 6(55 1623 5225. a62 655 '68 34 JOOOL
2. 7 I) 23 25 /6 7 x .QO

FIG. I

Now let this notation be applied to the distribution of the qualities that make public value in a Nation as between one generation and the next, and we get the rest of the table, which is constructed for the sake of simplicity on the assumption that the fathers are normally distributed, and have each married into the same grade; the family is taken to be the same in total number and in distribution as the parents. This is Galton's Standard Table of Descent, the hastiest glance at which reveals how closely parentage affects the powers of the children, for the figures are not distributed evenly, but the whole block slopes upwards to the right.
Take a single line, the children of 2,500 fathers of class R, who are, as you will remember, one grade in excess of the general average of the whole; being nearest to the mean, it is the largest class, and has the most widely distributed range of offspring,

3I8 R. T. Bodey, M.A.:
running from 3 in the fourth grade to a maximum of 86o in class R, and onward to 3 only in class U (50). Again, the 35 parents of the lowest grade v, 50 or more below the mean, have offspring ranging, up from the same low level to i in the grade-Io, and none better than this. Conversely, if we want to know the source of the 34 children of the very lowest type, the table tells us; they all come from parents below the average, 6 being from the same lowest grade, io from each of the next two grades, 5 from the next, and 3 from the next, which is I0 below the norm. These children are the main source of our criminal and semi-criminal classes, the hooligans, loafers, idlers, improvident, and shiftless, the despair of the police and the city magistrate, the occasion for all our charitable organisation and much of our poor law relief; the latter alone costing annually £I5,000,000, or half the money we spend upon the Army.
At the other end of the scale, consider the children belonging to the highest grade V; out of 34 such, 6 are from the same high grade, I0 from U, I0 from T, 5 from S, 3 from R, which is io above the general mean, and none at all from any lower grade. It is the same lesson over again; you get the highest type of child from the highest type of parent, jnst as you get the lowest type of child from the lowest type of parent. Further, as Galton pointed out, the 35 V fathers provided 6 of the V children, whereas it took no less than 2,500 fathers of the inferior grade R to provide only 3; that is, the productiveness of class V is about I40 times greater than that of class R for children of this high order of merit. " If then," said Galton, " we desire to increase the output of V-class offspring, by far the most profitable parents to work upon would be those of the V-class."
The school aspect of all this is that bywatching the parentage of your scholars you know fairly well what the average of the children are likely to become, and can treat them accordingly. The national aspect is the insistent need of this Nation for men of the highest powers, as its pioneers of all vital progress, its great men of action at home and abroad, its thinkers and men of inspiration. No Nation has such a need as ours, for no other Empire contains within its borders the same complex variety of government, of social and climatic conditions, and the same

HEREDITY AND EDUCATION

319

measure of contact with savage and half-civilised races, and accordingly no other has call to replace so great a consumption of its higher types. It is evident from Galton's Tables, and the large amount of corroborative experimental and statistical work upon which I have no time to touch, that you are considerably more likely to get them, and can train them for such high tasks at far less total cost, and with far less wastage in the process, if they are drawn from the comparatively small number of families of high grade of civic worth, than you can by attempting to make up the same number of the same adult efficiency from large numbers of middle grade or low grade families. It is therefore a National economy to keep the highest grades of ability as unmixed as possible, for admixture with a lower grade very materially lowers the average level of the next generation. For the opposite reason, it is also desirable to keep the lowest grade to itself as much as possible, in order to facilitate its disappearance; for the rise of a Nation depends on continued development at one end of the scale, and the gradual removal of the unsatisfactory sections of Society at the other.
There is another point of a less obvious character. An extended intellectual training subjects a lad to a very considerable mental strain during those very years of adolescence when the equilibrium of the system is least assured, and may break down those who are not of vigorous stock. At any rate, the following data of suicide are significant. The annual rate permillion of the population is in England and Wales I03, but in Ireland only 33; in Germany it is 2i2, rising in Saxony, the best educated part, to no less than 325, but in ignorant Spain it is only 22. Surely these figures show that the violent dragging up of children into regions of higher culture sometimes subjects them to a breaking strain, and more frequently to obscure but permanently injurious effects upon the brain and nervous system. We pay a heavy penalty for unduly hurrying development in disregard of Nature's own vital laws.
Man, however, is a social animal; above all others he has the faculties of memory and association, whereby he has developed what Professor Arthur Thomson calls " an external heritage," a great and complex structure of social tradition, social custom,
3

320 R. T. Bodey, M.A.:
-social and national laws, a national art and a national literature,
which he may consciously appreciate, or of which he may be blindly ignorant, but the influence of which lies upon him constantly. It is another, though less personal, birthright; it tends to imbue a man with the customary thought and ways of the circle in which he first lives, makes them familiar and home-like
to him, and anchors him there. His marriage is prompted by contiguity as well as by community of interests, and therefore
he marries more often than not into his own class. While physical heredity marks out a population in grades of different national worth, social heredity tends to give those grades some measure of permanence, so aiding the process of race
development. This leads us to the second great factor in evolution, Nurture.
We know that seed from the same stock will develop differently in different circumstances. The sweet pea will grow taller and more fragrant, the child will become heavier and taller, if grown under more favourable conditions. We must be careful, however, about what we understand by better conditions, for those which are favourable to one plant may be disadvantageous to another. On an enriched soil, sweet peas, it is true, will give better blossoms, but wall-flowers and nasturtiums will only run to leaf, and disappoint the too zealous gardener. It does not follow, then, that you can raise the national worth of children of every grade by improving their domestic and social conditions; you may only succeed in making them luxurious without refinement, comfort-loving instead of hardy, grasping instead of industrious. Another point too often forgotten is that much of the natural home environment is only the physical heritage made manifest and externalised, and in such cases Nurture is almost identical in its real significance with Nature. In these latter days, however, legislation enters the sphere of the home and produces there an artificial environment; the point of view of a vast army of social workers, in and out of public office, is that by lavish expenditure upon the surroundings of the lowest grades of the population, the initial disadvantage of their stock may be made
up to them. If this were fully possible, it might yet be objected that a far more advantageous return for so large an investment

HEREDITY AND EDUCATION

32I

of the National funds would be obtained by encouraging and en-

larging the higher grades of capacity than by dragging up the

lower ones. But it is not posssible in any large sense. As

Galton puts it in his book on " Natural Inheritance,"-" If one

couple consists of two gifted members of a poor stock, and the

other of two ordinary members of a gifted stock, the difference

between them will betray itself in their offspring. The children

of the former will tend to regress; those of the latter will not.

The value of a good stock to the well-being of future generations

is therefore obvious."

Surely the most natural process is so far as possible to leave

the help of the individual as such to the exercise of private aid,

properly organised and freed from waste and overlapping, and to

spend public money only upon promoting the welfare of the

Nation in mass. There is no apparent reason why school

finance should not be subject to this general condition. On the

contrary, as the whole of education is only one form of Nurture,

it would appear particularly desirable to settle what it might and

might not fairly be expected to accomplish, in order to determine

how to finance it to the best advantage, and this whether we are

going to spend five or fifty millions a year upon it. Here the

men of science speak with some clearness. Darwin writes, for

example: " I am inclined to agree with Francis Galton in

thinking that education and environment exert only a small

effect on the mind of anyone, and that most of our qualities are

innate." " If the philanthropist," says Bateson, " is seeking for

some external application by which to ameliorate the course of

descent, knowledge of heredity cannot help him. The answer to

his question is, No, almost without qualification. We have no

experience of any means by which transmission may be made to

deviate from its course.

From seeds in the same

pod may come sweet peas climbing five feet high, while their

own brothers lie prone upon the ground. The stick will not

make the dwarf pea climb, though without it the tall can never

rise. Education, sanitation, and the rest are but the giving or

withholding of opportunity." And Karl Pearson, in the Huxley

Lecture of 1903, speaks still more definitely: " It is the stock

itself which makes the home environment; the education is of

322 R. T. Bodey, M.A.:

small service, unless it be applied to an intelligent race of men.

I believe we have a paucity, just now, of the better intelligences

to guide us, and of the moderate intelligences to be successfully

guided. The only account we can give of this . . . . is,

that we are ceasing as a Nation to breed intelligence, as we did

fifty to a hundred years ago.

No scheme of wider

or more thorough education will bring up, in the scale of

intelligence, hereditary weakness to the level of hereditary

strength. . . . We have failed to realise that the physical

characters which are, in the modern struggle of nations, the

backbone of a State, are not manufactured by home, and school,

and college,-they are bred in the bone, and for the last forty

years the intellectual classes of the Nation have ceased to give us

in due proportion the men we want to carry on the ever-growing

work of our Empire, to battle in the fore-rank of the ever-

intensified struggle of the nations.

The remedy lies first, in getting the intellectual section

of our Nation to realise that intelligence can be aided and

trained, but no training or education can create it. You must

breed it."

In the light of such weighty opinions it would be well

if we laid aside all sounding rhetoric and came down to

sober facts. Realising the limitations within which we have

to work, let us be the more careful to direct our money

and our efforts into the most profitable channels. Let

us provide sticks for our climbing peas, a modest yet most

necessary task; but let us not squander these and other

advantages upon any and every plant in the garden, regardless of

its own proper nature. And this I say, not for economic reasons

only, although no Nation could hope to stand for long the

strain of the present British expenditure at its present rate of

increase; but because few forms of inconsiderate cruelty to a

child are worse than to educate him in such a way that he

becomes dissatisfied with and unfitted for his own section of the

social life, without becoming really adapted to another for which

it is sought to train him. Who can reckon, for example, the

harm done to the artisan class by an educational system which

has tended to remove to clerkly occupations the best young

HEREDITY AND EDUCATION

323

blood of that class, the children who should have been deliberately trained to remain in it, and would have grown up into its natural leaders and examples? And who can forgive the injury done to our rural areas by the general neglect of
the opportunity which has lain ready to hand for forty years, of using the village schools in such a way as to check and not to quicken the drift of "a bold peasantry, their country's pride," from heathful labours in the pleasant sunshot fields to the sordid slums of our crowded industrial towns ?
Keeping these considerations in mind, the basal problem of a National system may now be presented in this formgiven the masses of child life that yearly enter our schools, dyed through and through as they are with this vital and social inheritance from past generations, whose influence they cannot get rid of if they would, how can we best and most economically apply the forces and use the machinery at our disposal, so as to form the adult masses, varied in function but co-operative in action, which form the organism of the Nation ?
It is obvious that if we could, somehow, sort out in kind and amount the various useful activities of the Nation, and if we could simultaneously sort out the children according to the likelihood of their possessing the qualities best fitted to fulfil those activities, then the task of the teacher would be enormously simplified. He would know on the one hand what kind of human product his school had to turn out, and on the other hand he would be provided with the most appropriate raw child material for making it without needless waste of lives, or money, or effort. His courses of study and methods of treatment could be designed accordingly, and thus he would have done his share towards making the school one of the great bridges between child life and the service of the full grown man.
At present, every teacher knows how great are the difficulties
that arise from the lack of any clear aim set definitely before a school, and arising in a spontaneous and uniforced way out of its own circumstances, and the needs of the community at large. The result is a perpetuial riot of changes, a violent effort in one direction followed by an equally violent effort in another, the whole destructive to any real progress. One might grant for

324 R. T. Bodey, M.A.:
the purpose of the argument all that could possibly be urged in favour of the predominance of singing, or handwork, or geography, or any other subject taught in schools. But consider the distraction of mind, the discontinuity of purpose, the dissatisfaction that arise from the attempt to follow up these kaleidoscopic changes, and the lack of any rewarding sense of definite, lasting, useful achievement; the increase of cost in the provision of actual material, and the far more serious loss of money, and of things more valuable than money, which results from turning out children into the world less fitly adapted than they might have been to enter that particular sphere of the Nation's work which lies within the limits of their own inherited capacity, and in which, therefore, they have the greatest chance of becoming happy as well as useful members of the community. For if happiness means, as I take it, having plenty of work of the kind that you can do, and like doing, and a reasonable opportunity of doing it well, then it is certainly not promoted by any comprehensive scheme for teaching every child the complete circle of the arts and sciences.
If, then, we want to train children to become the professional men, the thinkers, inventors, and leaders of the next generation, the first question we should ask is, which are the most suitable children to start with? Galton's Tables show that it is best to draw them from the families of the same high class. It is quite true that there is no absolute certainty that the child of a brilliant barrister will not turn out a fool; but, equally, you have no certainty that the child of a blacksmith will not also prove a fool. We must think of these things in masses and averages, leaving the exceptional child to be treated as an exception; nearly all the practical affairs of life are solved by the exercise of judgment in the balance of probabilities, and putting it so, you are far more likely to succeed if vou start with children of the higher grade of parental capacity than if you take those of the lower grade. Just in the same way, if we want to have as fine a set of craftsmen as possible in the next generation, it would be unwise to choose children out of the families of
shopkeepers and those in clerical avocations; rather, let us take them from our present engineers, and masons, and plumbers, and

HEREDITY AND EDUCATION

325

carpenters. In this way physical and social heredity both act with the teacher instead of against him, and his work is partly prepared beforehand.
From these considerations it would appear that the one really scientific basis for a complete National system of education would be a survey, on the basis of heredity, of the whole population concerned, taken in relation to the existing schools. To accomplish this minutely now would be too herculean a task, although when School Medical Inspection has run for another ten
years or so we may be almost ready to confront it. Fortunately, it is possible to secure at once many of its advantages by a first step in this direction of far greater simplicity. We have seen that social and physical heredity go together to a very large
extent, and we know that, although there may be some square pegs in round holes, a man's trade or profession is usually an intimate expression of the man himself, and one of the best indices of the reaction of his natural powers to his environment. As the poet says, our

"nature is subdu'd To what it works in, like the dyer's hand."

An occupational survey may serve, therefore, as a first approximation, and is capable of yielding at once results of very considerable value. If, for example, 8o per cent. of the fathers in a certain elementary school are engaged in some form of skilled labour, as weavers, engine fitters, cardmill hands, joiners, and the like, we should have, it is true, very little ground for expecting that the sons would severally follow the identical trades of their respective fathers, but very strong grounds for expecting that approximately the same percentage of the sons would be found in the ranks of skilled labour in some form or other. In this broad way the occupational distribution of the fathers is an indication of the most probable occupational distribution of the sons, and, therefore, maps out the naturally assigned task of the various schools. That is the cardinal fact of the situation,
and to design the courses of study, the methods of presentment, and the means of illustration upon that basis is, it seems to me, the first step towards the solution of the whole problem. Such

326 R. T. Bodey, M.A.:
,a policy would bring order out of chaos, for a heterogeneous collection of schools is no more a National system than a heap of cogwheels is a machine, no matter how beautifully you may cut and polish your cogs. It would be more scientific, because it would be in harmony with and governed bv investigated vital laws; more statesmanlike, because it would be directly designed to meet the working requirements of the National life. It would be elastic, because it would be self-adjusting to the gradually changing industrial, rural, or commercial conditions of a school neighbourhood, or of the area of a Local Education Authority, or of the country as a whole. It would tend to perpetuate and improve itself by its own working, for it would systematically recruit the ranks of brain workers, craftsmen, agriculturists, and traders from those portions of the Nation that appeared best adapted to brain work, craft, agriculture and trade respectively. Like all good systems, it would tend to improve its own agents in their work, and thereby steadily raise the level of power and achievement within those ranks. It would render our schools more efficient engines of real and lasting progress, because each would have a defined task set before it, and the most suitable child-material at disposal for doing it well; because this material would be more homogeneous in type in each school than it now is; and because the moment you fix the aim and purpose of a school, it becomes more feasible to staff it with the right men and women for carrying out that particular purpose. It would strictly proportion the educational output of various kinds to the national requirements, and so discourage educational dumping; while as the special function of each particular school became known and recognised, it would become all the easier to place out its pupils in suitable life occupations, and to reduce, if we could not entirely avoid, the choice of the blind-alley. Not only would the Nation profit through the general increase of efficiency, but there would also be an initial and current economy in teaching appliances, and a second and more subtle saving, because schools so established in a settled
purpose would thereby be protected'to some extent against those
amiable amateurs who wish to introduce all their own special whimsies everywhere, and at the public expense.

HEREDITY AND EDUCATION

327

Let us now endeavour briefly to apply these principles to a few of the larger problems of National education.
The elementary schools contain the greatest proportion of the school population, and partly for this reason they are the most susceptible to the law of averages; partly also because they serve that portion of the community which coincides most closely with the general average of the whole. As it seemed unfair to urge classification without offering you some definite example of how the problem might be attacked, I have prepared from my own notes, taken at intervals throughout the past seven or eight years, the diagram of our own elementary schools which you see before you. I take Liverpool, not merely for the very obvious reason that it is the area within which it is most easy for me to collect data, but rather because this city lends itself particularly well to the purpose of illustration. For although its chief repute is as a world-port, it is also, like London, a great home of small and varied industries. In my own lists I find over 700 paternal occupations set down as represented in these schools, ranging from Architects, Doctors, and Army Officers down to a Professional Agitator. Thus, except for the exclusion of the rural element, it is an exceedingly

e~~~~

ee

ow a

ea

e

e

-....e*~0~~~~~ ~*~~. ~~''.~~~*~~' ~~av ~~*Li~vXe:-~po7ol lm^4I

O*..e e*e* ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~S~p

~~~~

* U U~~~~~~~~~~~~S

7-0Ao~m.~

|

328 R. T. Bodey, M.A.:
representative population. The map then is an attempt to plot out a survey of the school population of Liverpool, not, as in Mr. Booth's London notes, on an economic basis, but with reference to the kind of aptitude by which the father mainly gets his living. Working single-handed and at odd times, I have not
been able to collect data on as large a scale as is desirable; the results too are not strictly comparable with each other, because there is an interval of about five years between the earliest and the latest notes embodied, and also because I did not set down
the earlier facts in quite the same form as that which was finally adopted. But everything must have a beginning, and, so far as I know, nothing quite of this kind has been done by any other investigator, or by any Education Authority. Perhaps, therefore, you will charitably forgive its imperfections and regard it as tentative only. The occupations recorded in each school were classed into buying and selling, skilled manual labour, casual and unskilled labour, and a professional and semiprofessional class too small to be predominant in any school. Upon the foregoing principles, it seemed that the need of the City for skilled labour might best be met by drawing from the corresponding section of the existing population, and providing for these children a suitable training in which the preparation of the eye, hand, intelligence and disposition for a life of skilled labour was the central feature, and where practical work of various kinds occupied nearly half the time at disposal, and counted largely for such rewards as were given. Out of these schools would come most of the workmen needed in Liverpool's present industries, and in those others which might so well be built up here. So, too, trade might be fed from trade, by schools where preparation for commercial service and for buying and selling was the great and final purpose, and where I should like to see conspicuously displayed the first commercial utterance of Venice, discovered by Ruskin in her earliest church: " Around this temple, let the Merchant's law be just, his weights true, and his contracts guileless." The casual and unskilled labourer's life no one would desire to prepare for, but rather to provide some economic and moral antidote against its disastrous effects, and this is best provided, so far as school life is concerned,

HEREDITY AND EDUCATION

329!1

by a disciplinary training in handicraft. For this reason, skilled and unskilled labour were lumped together, and the schools are marked in the diagram Fig. II. according to the joint percentage of the two.
There is no time to dwell upon a number of purely educa-tional considerations, but I think you will see that, besides the general advantages previously pointed out, a survey of this description might be of great service to any large County or Borough Authority in dealing with many important problems. For example, wherever it may be desired to introduce Higher Elementary Schools, or in any way to carry the work of the Elementary School farther along its own proper path, a chart of this description provides the necessary base on which to build up such a development, and indicates where these institutions could. best be placed, and whence fed. So, too, in drawing the plans of new schools, it might help to settle beforehand whether to build with workshops or without.
Next let us consider another vexed question, the position of the secondary schools.
Just as no civilised power trains its officers and its common soldiers in the same way, so it is undesirable to educate the functionally richer human material for the widerrangesof responsibilityin the same way as the poorer human material for its more limited functions. The difference is not one of extent of training only; it lies inherently in the children, coming to them out of their own family past, and it cannot be disregarded without disastrous. results. It is not desirable, therefore, from the standpoint of heredity to flood secondary schools with free place scholars, although Committees have to follow the Government policy in this respect, for to do so is to fly in the face of all biological principles; it despoils the elementary schools and their asso-ciated population of their moving spirits, and spoils the secondary schools by compelling them to handle material made unnaturally heterogeneous by the forced introduction of another type of child. Keep the secondary schools from the beginning to their own proper task of educating those who are to become the officers in that great army which we call the Nation, and see that they turn out men of broad minds and far vision,.

.330 R. T. Bodey, M.A.:
whose ability, probity, and sense of public duty will win them general confidence and respect. Keep the elementary schools to their own task of educating the Nation's rank and file, imbuing them with a sense of law, order and loyalty, and the will to execute the work entrusted to them with honesty and exactitude. Then you have left a defined field for the Higher Elementary School, which educates those quite invaluable people who play the part of the non-commissioned officer. But to mix up all kinds of education in a general melange is to spoil them all, and to multiply expense. We seem unable to understand with Tennyson that " Men are God's trees, and women are God's -lowers "; it is risky work transplanting them from their native soil, and results often only in a cruel and costly failure. When too shall we realise what is now almost always forgotten,-that every scholarship of transplantation is the attempt to rectify an initial error on our part in the classification of the child, and is therefore the confession of our own mistake? Classify your children on a scientific basis, and build up your National system aright, and there will be the fewer mistakes to remedy, and the less need for scholarships of this type. The true ideal towards which we can approximate, though we may never fully attain it, is so perfect a classification that none are necessary; the false ideal, towards which, with remissions of fees, bursaries, free places and what not, we seem to be moving fast, is scholarships for everybody.
There is, however, another kind of scholarship to which these considerations do not apply,-those which do not transplant the candidate, but enable him, if of proved capacity, to -go a little further along his own natural line of progress than his private means would allow. Such are Industrial Research Scholarships, and Travelling Studentships and Fellowships of the Universities and Art Schools, for which it is now so hard to *get funds; or entrance to Higher Elementary Classes from the Elementary School; or from schools of the industrial type to those Manual Training Schools which in the decay of apprenticeship might prove the best way of maintaining a high level of excellence and adaptability in all forms of craftsmanship. Aid of this kind is most needed at the higher levels of Education, where

HEREDITY AND EDUCATION

331

the age of independent wage-earning is necessarily delayed by prolonged study, and where assistance can be given with the greatest economic return to the Nation. For a first-class brain is a valuable public financial asset. The late Registrar General, Dr. Farr, attempted to estimate the purely economic value of the son of an Essex farm labourer, calculated as at birth, and taking into account childhood and old age as well as the years of labour; in the result, the baby was worth about £5 to the Nation. The men of Galton's upper grades, employed in adequate spheres of work would probably have a birth value of some hundreds or may-be thousands of pounds. Browning is right, more literally than he himself was aware, in saying:

"A people is but the attempt of many To rise to the completer life of one; And those who live as models for the mass Are singly of more value than they all."

There is sound reason therefore for removing to some extent the hindrance to early marriage which is a consequence of the. cost of training in such cases, and results in abnormally small families. I notice for example in Mr. Booth's London statistics, that the average size of family is relatively low in the learned professions, architects claiming 4-29 members, the religious. ministries 4-22, education 41II, law 4-05, literature and science 3-87, and medicine only 3'5I. On the other hand we find, starting at about the same level, that the costers and street sellers average out at 4 20, general labourers 4-48, general shopkeepers 4-57, carpenters and joiners 4-64, plasterers 4-88, and builders 4-99. Thus there is a marked deficiency in the contribution of the more intellectual occupations towards the total of the next generation.
If there appears some room for improvement from the eugenic standpoint in the delimitation and general purpose of secondary schools, the eugenist has also something to say about those institutions in which the physically and mentally defective are taught. The necessity of confining the unsoundest sections of the population within as narrow limits as possible has already been alluded to; no one who cares for the future can help interpreting the work of these schools by the way in which they satisfy or defeat this necessary aim. After making all possible

.332 R. T. Bodey, M.A.:
.allowances there remains a mass of degenerate children whose powers are so limited that we are as confident as men can ever
,expect to be in practical affairs that there is no hope of their ever becoming able to earn their own living, or to guard themselves .against the dangers of life. Many of these are in our special schools, taught at a cost per head three or four. times as great as the ordinary child, with results as pathetically small as they .are creditable to the patient zeal of their teachers in producing even so much from such poor material. They pass out from school into society: in some towns After Care Committees do what they can to find places for them, and to watch over the first few years after leaving, but they have little permanent hold upon the children, who are mainly left to blend with the general .mass of the population; many of them will undoubtedly fall into the ranks of the pauper lunatics, who have increased four-fold in the last fifty years, and now muster 8o,ooo or more, costing the ,community over two million pounds annually. Even during school life the good done by the special school in the daytime is largely undone when the children go back to their homes at night. The permanent curative effect upon the adult life of the pupils is distressingly small, for these degenerate types are often extremely prolific, and it is an open secret that weak-minded girls fall early and easy victims to seduction. It is by our own inter,ference that most of these children are brought to the adult stage at the expense of the larger interests of the community. Primitive tribes keep up the fighting power of their race by the exposure of the weakly child; we cannot adopt any cruel method, but England should be equally determined to prevent the degradation of the National physique. We, less than any other Nation, can afford to lose the strength, and nerve, and force of will by which we won our Empire; we are trustees of the future, and all history shows that what the strong hand won, the strong hand alone can keep. Surely it is possible to reconcile kindness and consideration towards these unfortunates with the broader duty towards the community as a whole. Segregation is most feasible and cheapest in the country; many of these cases are manifestations of nervous disease, for which the best doctors in the world are fresh air and sunshine, and

HEREDITY AND EDUCATION

333

manual work on the soil. It would be best conducted on a
large estate, containing a small farm in good fettle, with a good deal of unreclaimed land, to be gradually brought under cultivation on a self-supporting principle, as has been done in some of
the establishments for vicious criminals in Belgium and Holland. Why, for example, should not Liverpool and Manchester and the other boroughs of South Lancashire unite with the County in carrying out some such plan on cost defraying lines under a joint committee and officers, whose powers and instructions would strictly preclude the altogether extravagant outlay upon salaries and buildings which ruins so many schemes in England. Ordinary school subjects should not be taught, but manual work, not mere exercises but productive work, should form the greater portion of their training. Market gardening and poultry farming could surely be made to pay, with some of the great markets of the world so close at hand; the estate could be drained and roads opened up by its own labour; the market value of such farms, increased by the gradual addition of
the reclaimed areas, would steadily rise, especially as the general value of country properties promises under recent legislative changes to appreciate. If powers could be procured to permanently retain these children for a generation, they would be far happier than if sent out into town streets as they now are, while the reduction in the cost to the public purse of the next generation in dealing with a smaller number of defectives would alone justify the initial outlay, the capital value of which would appear in the improvement of the estate.
I have devoted no time to the discussion of any details of teaching, because it seemed of very little use to do so
while the foundations of the English school system are so illdefined, a mere marsh of conflicting opinions, without any firm basis upon natural law and investigated fact. And as the foundations are loose, so is the directing policy vacillating. " The misfortune of Scotland," wrote a certain French diplomatist of the sixteenth century, "is that the noble lords will not look beyond the points of their shoes. They care nothing for the future and less for the past." We need a definite educational policy, regardful both of the future and of the past,

334 R. T. Bodey, M.A..-
one firmly grounded, and yet containing within itself the necessary provision for adjustment to changing details and local surroundings. If this could be adopted and steadily adhered to, half the difficulties of our problems would disappear, and while efficiency would increase, expenditure would very materially diminish. In education, as in several other departments of social work, the time has come when it is necessary to throw off the vapid sentimentality which leads to indiscriminate giving, and pay more regard to the National as distinct from the individual result of our labours. The surest guides that have yet been found, and hitherto the least regarded, are the principles of hereditary transmission of characters, conjoined with that external social heritage which is in large measure its outward manifestation, and is the second great vital condition of the world in which we live. By their aid we might conquer Nature's laws in the field of education through obedience, just as we do in our chemical and electrical works, and obedience is the only way. Then our English system would start from and end in the brain workers and the hand workers of the Nation, improving every arm of the service, and deliberately fostering that spirit of co-operation between them all, and that feeling of responsibility and loyalty in the doing, without which no work, great or small, ever comes to a good end. And to secure all this the study of the parentage is everything.
" Bless not thyself," wrote old Sir Thomas Browne, " that thou wast born in Athens; but among thy multiplied acknowledgments, lift up one hand to Heaven that thou wast born of honest parents, that modesty, humility, and veracity lay in the same egg, and came into the world with thee."

