406 EUGENICS REVIEW
Transactions of the Second Annual Meeting of the American Association for Study and Prevention of Infant Mortality. (Chicago, November, 19I 1).
The papers included in this bulky volume are of very various interest and of somewhat unequal value. Those dealing with the statistical aspect of the question comment forcibly on the absence of a general and uniform system of registration of births in the United States, and also on the inadequate enforcement of such registration laws as exist. In the campaign against infant mortality in America it would appear that very great importance is attached to the education of girls in housewifery and the care of children, and the discussion of the various proposals for organising instruction in these matters contains much that is suggestive and interesting. The importance of eugenics in relation to the movement was recognised at the meeting by allotting to it a special section, in which several valuable papers were read, most of them dealing with the question from the Mendelian standpoint. In this section an interesting contribution was made by Mr. Roswell Johnson, who, on the basis of results obtained with the Binet-Simon tests of mental capacity, expressed some scepticism as to the value of efforts to instil the principles of intelligent motherhood into minds of naturally inferior quality.
Infantile Mortality. Report of the Special Committee appointed by the Couencil of the Royal Statistical Society to inquire into the systems adopted in different countries for the registration of births (including still-births) and deaths with reference to infantile mortality.
This report embodies a mass of detailed and authoritative information which from its character does not admit of being summarised further. The only point that can be specially singled out for notice here is that, with reference to still-births, the subject which in the first instance led to this inquiry, the Committee strongly recommend that such births be registered, and further that an international definition of " still-birth " should be adopted. The report includes a valuable memorandum prepared by the Chairman (Dr. Reginald Dudfield) dealing with the principles to be followed in framing such a definition.
EllJs, Haveloek. The Task of Social Hygiene. Constable and Co.,
19I2.
UNDER the term Social Hygiene, Mr. Havelock Ellis has included a wide range of subjects. Of this width we need not complain, so long as it is reasonable; but when we find the last Ioo pages taken up with discussions of war, an international language, and Socialism, we begin to wonder what hygiene means. It is indeed a pity that these last three essays were included at all in a volume which might, in its other parts, serve as an admirable introduction to eugenic methods of thought.
We may say at once that the book neither makes, nor claims to make, any original contribution to science. It is a series of essays from the pen of a sex-psychologist of high repute and wide mental range, in which he deals with the status of women and their emancipation, the problems connected with love and marriage, the significance of a falling birth-rate, and the bearing of legal enactments on the nation's morality; in the essay on " Religion and the Child " he makes an interesting excursus into child psychology.
Thus far the book should be read by anyone who wishes to appreciate the complexity of the problems with which eugenics has to deal. Hitherto, he shows, social reform has dealt mainly with environment; we have attempted to clean up the banks of the stream of life; now we have to purify the stream itself. Reform of the living organism must work from

