A BIOLOGIST IN A NEW ENVIRONMENT.
By F. A. E. CREW.
ONE had time to think in, Flanders, an.d reason too; but all the world seemed mad, an,d on-e's previous education failed to offer any explanation of the acts and thoughts of men. Time has sieved the happenings of those days and now iit is possible to collect the scattered pictures that remain, and, in fitting them together, to realise how the war has reshaped one's opinions.
A biologist by inclination, education, and occupation; a territorial because I wa,s -a national and essayed to be a patriot; I was plucked from the calm contemplative atmosphere of the study and flung into the strange activities of an army life. Of Biritish ancestry, I was a Briton; by reason of my social inheritance I was heir to the traditions, the recorded knowledge, the ideas and ideals which were -the proud possession,s of my country. My education 'h.a,d dis-covered some of my capacities, an!d during this time 1 had absorbed much of my social inheritance and many of -the traditions of my own particular profession. I was, in consequence, a typical British citizen, although the dde.sire to accumulate property was not the mo.tive forc,e in my conduct, and a capaci,ty for altruism 'had remained with me and was not merely "enlightened egoism."
In the Army I was introduced to the traditions of the service and of my own regiment in particular. I was taught the history of my country from another poin,t of view, and i.ts history was one long story of homicide. The democrati.c ideas and the Christian ideals which had guided my thoughts were disregarded, and -the inequality of men and the impracticability of the Christi-an concept were emphasised. I became a sol-dier, an efficient fighting male, living in a herd of social vertebrates con,trolled by a bureaucracy whose actions were founded upon a purely biological conception of life, and who.se policies were essentially eugenic ideas, though not eugenic in their purpose.
My previous training and sympathies should have fitted me -to accept these new conditions wvi'th relish; but though I w.as very willing to subject myself to, discipline, I have to confess that I found myself out of sympathy with the efforts made to order my development.
I always was impressed by what to me was a fact-the German was
'the finest possible product of the school in which I was now being trained. He seemed to be possessed of a larger capacity of devotion, to an ideal. In every way he appeared to be ,the more efficient fighting animal, less sensitive to physical pain and more thorough in his methods. And yet 'he, i.n. my opinion the most efficient fighting man a-nd a unit of the most efficient miiilitary system the world has ever seen, was beaten, i.n the field.
The credit for th,e victory has been 'cl.aimed by many, among these the General Staffs of the Allied Forces, the Navy, the Americans. Be that as i.t may, there can be no doubt that it was the coming of the Americans that permitted the Allies to turn a stubborn defensive into an overwhelm-

120 EUGENICS REVIEW.
ing attack. And there is no doubt whatever that ,the American soldier
came "-to make -the wvoxrld safe for democracy." I have lived with many
of them, and it was obvious that each regarded himself as a c,rusader.
In them we saw the ghosts of our armies of 1914-15.
Theirs was our spirit of the earlier years before the dtreary dragging ye-airs had brought demoralisation. Their coming brought the sadly-
needed reinforcements, but above all, it meant a reappearance in the field
of ideals actively antagonistic to those that were spurring on the enemy. Throughout, it had been a struggle between a people reared in a school of nationalism, militarism and ma-terialism, and thoroughly efficient in wair, and rhe rest of the woirld, led by the peoples who were striving after the ideals of true democracy along the lines of the development of the characteristic western civilisation. And I choose to read in the defeat of
Germany a proof that the German conception of civilisation is false, and that thie fund.amental ideals of -the victors are nobler, more productive of benefit to humani,ty, and more in the direct line of the evolution of
civilisation, than tho,se which they opposed. If .this is true, then Britain must take heed; fox what Germany was,
we we-re in danger of becoming. The modem biological conception-s of civilisation had not been embodied in ithe policies of the State in Great Britain, as had occurred in Germany, but the speculations of the British philosophers had been marching abreast of those of the leaders of political and military opinion in Germany. Haeckel, Neitzsche, Karl Marx an.d T.reitschke were no -more darin-gly dogmatic than were Herbet Spencer, Galton, Karl Pearson and Bateson. And their doctrine was the samebiological predestination; biological justification for aggressive war in the spheres of international and domestic policy; the Darwinian standard of efficiency of the animal as the standard of fitness for survival of individuals -and races in a civilised world; the new conception of the nature of thie mental and moral characters and their transmission through heredity; supexior races and classes; and the absolute ri.ghts of the State founded in force and responsible to none.
Thus my masteers! I was persuaded ithat the aims of democracy were unsound and that the ideals of the Christian churches were impracticable.
But the war came, and now, at the end, I have to confess that I feel that
I was ipisled. I am convinced of three things:-(I) That the DaTwinian
standard of efficiency of the animal is not the standard of the individual as a member of society, and that the Darwinian science of the evolution of the individual is not the science of the evolution of society; (2) that the mental and moral qualities of the human are not at all comparable to the physical characters in .the degree of their heritability, and are more of
the naiture of acquirements than of inborn characters, and that the organic inheritance is always subordinated to the social inheritance, that environmental factor that consists of the recorded knowledge, the traditions, the characteristic ideas and ideals of a people; and (3) ,that it is possible to
change the psychology of a nation in a brief space of time. (I) The rise -and fall of Germany are my reasons for my conitention.
The German Empire. in 1914 was the perfect example of a State erected upon the Darwinian conception of efficiency, that of the individual

A BIOLOGIST IN A NEW ENVIRONMENT.

121

equipped for supremacy in the struggle -for means of subsistence and for the opportunities for reproduction,by the possession of superior force; and whose actions are guided solely by reasons of self-interest.
The State required absolute unquestioning obedience and service
from the individuals comprising it, whilsot the State itself, the highest thing in history, was responsible to none. Military power was the
standard of the nation's fitness for survival, and the means to acquire the justification of possession.
Germany fought and defeated Denmark, Austria, and Fra.nce, and it seemed that the practical application of this new doctrine of force was the proven w,ay of the further evolutio.n of civili,sation. Applied to in,dustrial competition the same principles, apparently, were making
German methods supreme, and were filling her war-chests with the sinews of modern war; whilst in the sphere of domestic poli-tics the military caste of Prussia was accepted as the dominant superior class.
And in 1914 the training was completed and the preparations finished,
and Germany flung the gauntlet in ,the face of the rest of the woTld, arrogantly confident of the issue. She must have won, had not the whole
of the rest of the world been convinced that her conceptions, her methods, and her ambitions were unworthy of civilised humanity. The doctrine of force lies buried in the stricken fields of Flanders, -and the world is eagerly awaiting the call of a Mazzini.
(2) I am convinced that the fac;tors of environment an.d function are responsible for fie exhibition of mental and moral qualities which cannot be regarded as having been, inborn. The capacity for such certainly was inborn bu.t not the quality as exhibited.
All the men passed into the Army were physically fitted to become soldiers. Modern warfare is so utterly unlike anything in the previous experience of mankind, that nothinug in the previous civil life had demanded those mental and moral qualities the possession of which makes the complete soldier. We were all introduced to an entirely n-ew set of conditions, and very soon it was obvious that thousands could not make the esseintial acquirements and could never become efficient fighting men. But under proper training and ia response to the appeal to our emotions, we all became soldiers i-n matters of behaviour, attitude of mind, and
motive. We accepted with the uniform all that it imlpLied, and became a
different people. In these new conditions, physically, we all became alike; mentally and morally, we differed greatly, according to the differences in our capacities for acquiring those qualities of use in war; but not one of us was the man he h;ad been. We had been reshaped, quickly aind thoroughly, and 'the outlooks and motives of -the civilian were discarded and forgotten. And in the behaviour of the demobilised, as in the methods of the political parties, it can be seen that this change was not merely a transient adaptation. The war conditions have changed us all.
(3) The conception of the inborn nature of the psychical charactiers
implies that such are, to a great extent, fixed and unchangeable. But in the recent history of Germany, as in that of modern Japan and of the Maoris of New Zealand, there can be traced an abrupt and complete

122 EUGENICS REVIEW.
change in the mental and moral qualities of a whole people. We h.ave seen lustily-growing Germany, embarrassed in her ambitions for expansion by the demands of the religion she professed, abandon the teachings of her churches and eagerly accept a doctrine which seemed to justify her proposed methods, and in accepting this, completely remove the
old-type German and in his place produce the man with whom we have
fought. It was Germany, a!bove all others, that hailed " The Origin of Species," and she quickly adapted the doctrine therein to the policies of the State. Haeckel, Neitzsche, and Treitschke provided the new creed, and the EmpeTor William, the Prussian Minister of Education, Falk, and the leaders of political and military thought, applied it. All attempts at compromise were dropped when Neitzsche launched his impeachment of "the religion tha-t has enchained and softened us," and the nation accepted Treitschke's powerful teaching. The idea of war became no longer a shame and a reproach -to civilisation., but a biological necessity. Nationalism, militarism and materialism were taught in the schools and in the universities, and within the lifetime of two generations a new German people had been produced. This was accomplished by the insistent p-resentation of a certain, ideal to the children and youth of the nation during their education.
We who have been through the turmoil are waiting for the birth of a new religion. We know full well that wve are capable of sacrifice in the cause of civilisation. We know that the mind can be swayed to a new and pemanent endeavour by an appeal to the emotio.n of the ideal. We know -that, properly led, we can bui-ld a new Britain., an,d that all that is needed is a new.social inheritance. We know that this already exists in the recorded knowledge and traditions of the Anglo-Saxon peoples, and in the ideals for which our country has stood. We know that there is no dearth of ability in ou!r ranks, but wve no longer accept t-he pre-war standards of efficiency as taught by our leaders. We believe that equality of op.portunity has discovered unsuspected capacity, and that the average man can acquire -the average mental attainments of the classes, up to this, termed the irtellectual. Of these matters, youth may know more than its masters, for it was youth that went through the fire in Flanders.
As a eugenist, I believe that this appeal should come from us. It will not comfe from the churches, or if it did', it would not be heard.
As a biologist, I .am awaiiting a creed of morality based upon our knowledge of the continuity of the germplasm and a biological justification of the institutions of our social life. I look for the final rejection of the Darwinian conception of t-he fittest animal as a standarxd of the individual as a member of society, and the Christ-like man set up again as a model-I speak not as a Christian but as a citizen. I am convinced that the greatest of " the agencies under social control that may improve or impair the racial qualities of futur-e generations, either .physically or mentally," is -that of .the social inheritance, an environmental factor consisting of all the gains of progress in the evolution of society, and acquired by the individuals of each gen,erat.ioni through the medium of the mind during education.

A BIOLOGIST IN A NEW ENVIRONMENT.

123

The League of Nations and the universal brotherhood of man will
remain idle dreams until they are taught as biologically sound conceptions
of the futuTe ev6olution of civilisation. It is for us to show that they are, and then to orga-nise public opinion to our point of view. And this can be effected in a generation, and a new Britain created. We look to our women for inspiration, for to these the Taoe is more than the individual; and they it is who are most likely to respond. to the rousing call to constructive effort which Mr. John Oxenham, as a revealer of their best selves to the people of his age, has uttered in the appeal:-
"Can't you see the signs and portents? Can't you feel them in the air? Can't you see-you unibeliever ? Can't you see ?-or don't you careThat the Past is gone for ever, Past your uttermost endeavourT-hat To-day is on the scrap-heap, And the Future-anywhere?
Where? A'h-,that's beyond me !But it lies with those who dare To think of the big To-morrows, And intend .to do their share."

