KENNETH HUTTON, M.A., D.Phil. The Hon. MICHAEL LAYTON, B.A., A.M.I.Mech.E. R. PEDDIE, B.A., C.A.
ALEC RODGER, M.A.
New Human Demands in Industry*

Mr. Alec Rodger:
Human demands in industry are determined, in the last resort, by economic pressures. These pressures have many origins and many outcomes. So we cannot speak on tonight's topic with any certainty at all. But there is some scope for intelligent hunching and discussion. That is no doubt what we shall all be trying to offer you. I have six points to make.
1. We need not panic about automation or any other development of the kind. For several reasons radical change is not likely to come upon us suddenly. British industry is not composed chiefly of organizations of the size of the United Steel Companies and the Steel Company of Wales. It is made up mainly of far smaller firms with far less capital. Wonderful transfer machines and automatic assembly equipments are not for them; nor are electronic computers. They cannot afford them, though some firms,will be able to hire time on computers. Anyway, even our big firms are usually slow to introduce change. And even if they were not, it is likely that, while we pursue a full-or "fairly full"-employment policy, our planners would try to see that changes did not take place with too disrupting rapidity. In short, I believe we have time for inquiry and reflection.
2. However, this is no excuse for setting the problem aside. Even now we are to some extent being taken unawares. New jobs are coming into being; old ones are being modified, partly through the breaking down of demarcation lines drawn between them and other jobs; and the proportion of skilled to unskilled workers in many industries is decreasing. (Almost everybody knows now about the Moscow factory
* A symposium at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on March 19th, 1958. Unfortunately the Hon. Michael Layton's contribution is not available for publication.

that has been making pistons for the whole of the Russian light car industry with a shift-team of nine, six of them skilled men.) Undoubtedly, substantial change is already in the air. If we do get caught, we shall no doubt find ourselves' developing tremendous feelings of insecurity; and then we shall be in trouble. As the Manchester Guardian said (March 11th, 1958), "It is the tendency to cling on, to resist the
natural process of industrial change, that may turn a recession in a few industries into a general slump."
3. If my first and second points are sound-
that is, putting them the other way round, if it is true that important changes are already taking place, but that we still have time to
organize ourselves properly-then surely our
task is clear. We must make use of our present opportunities to study thoughtfully the implications of these changes for our working population. Let me illustrate. At the present time great expansion is occurring in what is called "programming". Programmers, as many of you will know, are people who plan the work of electronic computers. Now, it is a plain fact that programmers are as assorted a bunch as
men ever were. They have come from an extraordinary variety of educational and occupational backgrounds. Take a sample of them, and you will find all kinds of improbable people doing well and badly in this new occupation. Here is a heaven-sent chance for us to do a simple, inexpensive, desirable and thoroughly useful "natural history" study in the occupational field. Why should we not, while we have time, find out what the earlier attainments, interests and circumstances of the programmers have been, with the object of relating the facts we discover to the degree of their success in programming? Then we should be able to say, with
far greater confidence than we ever could otherwise, that for programming we want people like

107 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1958, 50, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

this, not like that. What an advantage this would payment schemes for it-depends on the answers

be in, say, ten years' time, when the game has we give to these two questions.

lost its novelty and its attraction for the eager, 5. This contention is not as remote from

restless spirits who, in hope or despair, are genetics as might be suspected. For what I am

trying their hand at it now! By then, controllers after is the extensive as well as the intensive

of finance and directors of scientific research and study of occupational difficulties and distastes,

development will have become rather tired of so that we may accumulate knowledge of the

ad hoc-and sometimes rather expensive- most general and most persisting of them.

methods of finding and making programmers. Armed with this descriptive knowledge, we shall

They will want to have a reasonably clear be well placed to go forward with investigation

picture of the sort (or sorts) of people they of their genetic and other origins. For too long,

should be after, and of where to get them, how we who study occupational demands have been

to train them, how to supervise them and how content to apply notions worked out mainly in

to pay them. A few really good interviewers- the educational field. If we did research along

that is, in this case, interviewers who really know the lines I have suggested, we might well find

what questions to ask people about their something akin to the educationists's notion of

educational and occupational records and their general intelligence, on which we have for years

leisure interests-could do a great deal about been basing important conclusions; but I doubt

this quickly and at absurdly low cost.

very much whether it would turn out to be as

4. In adopting this approach, not only to similar to that notion as we have assumed.

programming but to other new occupations 6. A major obstacle to progress in matters of

gradually coming into being, we should have to the kind is, very often, a sort of conspiracy of

be careful about what has been called "criterion silence between employers' associations and

trouble". That is, in finding out what attain- trade unions. An illustration of this is to be

ments, interests and circumstances "go with" found in the report, published last month,

success in an occupation, and may be useful in called Training for Skill. It is a considerable feat

forecasting it, we have to take pains to see that to get representatives of the British Employers'

we have differentiated our more successful and Confederation and the Trades Union Congress

less successful workers properly. We cannot to sign anything jointly, and we should not be

afford to make serious mistakes on this funda- too critical if we find them recommending that

mental point. Now, it is my view that the only (for example) ". . . arrangements should be as

way in which we can do this differentiation flexible as possible", and ". . . the utmost

well is through the systematic study of what flexibility is desirable". But it is, I think, dis-

I call "errors and aversions", or "difficulties turbing to discover no frank acknowledgment

and distastes". This is not the place to whatever, in this report, of the existence of really

expound my thesis in detail. Let me say this, seriously restrictive practices in the entry and

however. In our attempts to guide people into training of apprentices and in the work of

suitable occupations, to select and train them, trained craftsmen. Everybody knows-employers

to devise suitable methods of work for them and and unions included-that these bedevil all

give them suitable equipment, to contrive planning in the matters we are discussing

working conditions which will satisfy them-in tonight. The sub-committee of the National

all these things, nothing is more basic than the Joint Advisory Council which produced the

study of difficulties and distastes actually ex- report was chaired by Mr. Robert Carr, the

perienced by workers in those occupations. Parliamentary Secretary of the Ministry of

These are the keys to our understanding or Labour, who must have known that the ex-

suitability for any occupation. Which aspects of perience of his own Department's Government

the work are often found to be difficult? What Training Centres had clearly demonstrated that

are the aspects of it that people tend to dislike? skilled men for many trades could be trained in

Everything about an occupation-from the a fraction of the time commonly laid down for

guidance of people into it to the arrangement of apprenticeship. So, in our consideration of new

io8

NEW HUMAN DEMANDS IN INDUSTRY

human demands in industry; of the genetics of As this development has been due to the

the characteristics we shall need, if we are going growth of mechanization, it has in turn created

to meet them; and of the education and training a demand for a much larger proportion of people

we shall have to have, if we are going to bring capable of servicing and maintaining machinery

them out-in our consideration of all these of every kind; the skilled craftsman who

things let us be realistic.

requires considerable training and the intelli-

In short, what I have been arguing is that, as gence to absorb and apply a fair degree of

we have a chance to study changes which are technical knowledge and the manual dexterity

now taking place fairly slowly, let us seize it and to execute his work.

accumulate systematically the information we In addition, the extension of the division of

need about new human demands in industry. labour, the growth of mass-production and

Employers, unions and scientists should get progress in mechanization and in technical

together on this, and they could do it quickly methods has greatly complicated the task of

and easily. Nobody has any excuse for supervising and organizing industrial activity.

mishandling the opportunity.

More highly skilled technical specialists and more

technical knowledge in supervisors has been

Mr. R. Peddie:

required. This has demanded a higher degree of technical training at different levels and also a

I am afraid I must disclaim any knowledge of practical ability to apply this knowledge to the

eugenics or of any pretence to being a scientist. living situation.

My training has been in accountancy and my I imagine that this has meant a demand for a

experience in industrial administration and I can higher level of intelligence in a greater part of

only give you, for what they are worth, the the population, or at any rate a more positive

results of my observations in industry as an development of the intelligence which is in-

administrator and also as one who has for some trinsically there. This demand has not been

years been responsible for the recruitment and confined to the technical side.

training of staff for my company.

The increased size of the working unit, the

There is, I think, no doubt that the qualities effects of education and of monotonous routine

which industry is demanding from its recruits work on the general mass of workers have

at all levels is changing and that the emphasis increased the need from management and super-

on different qualities is changing too.

visors of higher qualities of leadership and

This process has been a gradual one which has greater skill in handling human problems. One

been evolving ever since the industrial revolution hesitates to suggest what exactly are the qualities

took full effect, and has been due in the main to demanded for this work, but it seems to -be a

the progressive mechanization of industrial field in which the shortage is most acute.

processes. In the past this has been evident These developments have been so gradual that

chiefly in the elimination of much heavy physical their effects have not been immediately apparent,

effort, and, with the ever increasing division of but now it seems that we are on the threshold of

labour, in the introduction of routine repetitive a period of great and more rapid change.

manual work.

Scientists of all kinds seem to have broken

This has for a considerable time created a through many barriers.

situation in which the main requirement from The problem of supplies of fuel to permit the

the bulk of the working population has not been ever-increasing use of electric power seems to

a life of sweat and physical toil, but of mono- have been solved for all time, and the application

tonous routine work calling for detailed concen- of electricity for every kind of powered move-

tration and often for certain simple and easily ment will receive a great stimulus as a result.

acquired skills ofjudgement or manual dexterity. At the same time the development of elec-

I suppose this has demanded a somewhat higher tronics has introduced seemingly endless possi-

level of education and intelligence than pure bilities for the application of automatic

manual labour but not to any great extent. controls both for single machines and for whole

I09

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

processes and this may have a revolutionary
effect on manpower requirements.
One can visualize the production line of repetitive workers being replaced by transfer machines controlled by planned programmes built up and operated by electronic computers.
We must not exaggerate this possibility; there
are many fields of industrial and commercial activity where the unit is too small or the
activities too varied to permit the adoption of such methods. But even here there will be
progress.
As a nation we are being slowly educated by the general interest in scientific matters, by the gradual spread of such things as work study
and by advertisement and propaganda to more efficient working, to the use of labour-saving devices and so on. This should mean that efficiency and productivity will increase gradually, even though it will not mean that the need for large numbers of routine repetitive workers will be eliminated. There should, however, be a decline in the relative demand for them, particularly by large-scale industry.
What will be required in their place? We can assume that we shall need fewer, though different people for a given output, but by all economic history and logic this will mean an advance in productivity and the standard of living rather than under-employment. The advance of mechanization has already greatly increased the demand for those who
service machines rather than operate them. At a modem steel works, for instance, the number of production workers is already less than half
the number of hourly paid employees. This trend must continue. We shall want more skilled maintenance craftsmen and more designers and engineers for this purpose. This is a continuation of an existing trend to which I have already referred. There is likely, however, to be a growing emphasis on a sound knowledge of electricity and electronics.
In addition to the increased need for technicians, the development of automatic controls and the scientific planning and implementation of production programmes will create a demand for types of workers which are almost entirely new. The operation of the push button controls of a self-correcting automatic system may not

make great demands on intelligence or numbers, but there must be people about who understand
what is going on and why, and who can take action if matters go awry. We may not require a great many of these "safety men" if I may so
call them, but their job will be akin to the very important and complicated task of designing
the programmes by which the system will be
operated, of planning and organizing the productive flow and of producing the information on which the programmes will be built. Together, they seem likely to form a large and important class of highly skilled and specialized
staff. It is already clear that in many cases the most
important and difficult task in installing an automatic system is not the introduction and operation of the automatic equipment itself but in planning the flow of data to the system and modifying or eradicating existing procedures and we cannot limit this new group to system
programmers as such. One visualizes that they will have a number of
different but rather similar functions which will demand much the same basic qualities although in different degrees. How are we to train them? If we pass them all though the plant maintenance and development side we shall place a premium on detailed technical aptitudes which may have little relevance to the qualities of imagination, logical thinking and human leadership which may ultimately be needed.
Can we therefore develop this wider knowledge by theoretical studies, leaving the practical side to come with experience on the job?
If this is the answer it surely means that more emphasis will have to be placed on the standard of selection. We shall be saying firmly that leaders and also programmers and interpreters are born and not made, or at least can be developed by theoretical studies.
I find this a dangerous doctrine and wonder what the genetists, psychologists and educationists say about it.
The use of automatic controls and what is known as integrated data processing (i.e. the automatic collection and analysis of costing and production data) introduces another
complication. Mechanization or automation of perhaps

I 10

NEW HUMAN DEMANDS IN INDUSTRY

many production processes and of the pre- human agencies will be required, not only to

paration of the statistical information about plan and control these processes, but to perform

their performances will not eliminate the need some at any rate of the subsidiary operations

for managerial decisions, at any rate for a very required to feed the process or produce the

long time to come, although management may basic control data required. This new situation

have more accurate and prompter information appears to imply that although it will still be

on which to base its decisions. At present, most possible to start at the bottom, the early rungs

information has to be built up, summarized and of the ladder will be missing. The earlier steps

presented in a form suitable for managerial of widening technical experience and expanding

assessment by manual methods. In fact, the responsibility will not be there and the interpre-

preliminary work of interpretation is done by ters and controllers and planners will have to be

those who prepare it. This is work calling for introduced ready made.

experience and intelligence, but in practice it is What qualities will they need? I doubt if

a by-product of the actual work of analysis, the anyone is yet quite sure. But it seems that their

interpretation and familiarity with detail intellectual basis will be largely a mathematical

emerging as the work proceeds.

and logical one. Their work seems to call for

In future, the interpreters will have to work ingenuity and logic in planning, for thorough-

from completed analyses, but they will still ness in detail and for ability to visualize a com-

require experience and detailed knowledge to plicated problem as a whole, while many of the

make the correct interpretations, and still more techniques used are mathematical ones. I wonder

to instruct the programmers to design the system if I dare define much of this as the need for a

to produce the right information.

"crossword" mind. The standard of attainment

Management too may need training to under- needed is more doubtful. I have heard it said,

stand how the information is produced in order on the one hand, that a computer programmer,

that its value may be correctly assessed and the for example, should have a good degree in

best use made of the new tool at its demand. mathematics, and on the other that a pro-

All this means that the existing methods of grammer can be trained in a matter of months

training by the build-up of knowledge and judge- from a good "A" level boy. Doubtless, this is

ment through gradually expanding experience due to the wide range in the type of programme

will no longer be available in many cases. This required. At the one end is the solution of ad-

difficulty will, I think, arise not only on the office vanced and complicated mathematical equations.

side or with general management but on many At the other is the programming of routine

other sides as well.

but extensive works recording or pay roll

The old school still believes that a man should preparation.

have done the job he is to supervise and Whatever the standard, however, the qualities

although this is no longer generally possible in required will be similar and this new demand

practice, the conventional theory of training raises a number of questions.

behind most apprenticeship schemes is that a Does a sufficient supply of people of this

man should have some practical experience in kind exist?

as many fields of his future activities as possible If not, how can they be obtained?

in order to relate his theoretical knowledge to Will this new field of activity produce another

the actual situation and to appreciate the human category of "back room boys" or create a

factors involved.

"blind alley" career?

When the work is entirely mechanical and If this is a danger, how can it be avoided?

automatic, practical experience is hard to gain How can we develop in these people the

and human factors are presumably non-existent. qualities, and provide the training and ex-

Nevertheless we cannot expect that routine perience which will enable them later to move

work will be entirely eliminated. Many of the into the field of general management?

production processes and the analyses of per- It seems likely that the new developments in

formance will become entirely automatic but automation will add still further to the many

5-ER.

III

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

narrow specialisms that already exist, and make Or must the reverse be true and will the ball

the transition to general management a come back into industry's court for it to restrict

problem. Can solutions of the problem be development to the supply of human material

suggested?

available?

I am afraid I have not contributed much to

your knowledge on this question. I have ventured to speculate on developments in the future and

Dr. Kenneth Hutton:

to suggest some of the problems which I think There seems to be an insatiable demand for men

may arise, but I am afraid I must leave the and women possessing qualities of leadership

answers to you.

combined with a scientific outlook. What is the

May I summarize what I have said as follows. probable response of educationists to this

Historically, the human demands of industry may be likened graphically to a pyramid of increasing intellectual and personal qualities, the distribution of which seems to have coincided
with the supply of these qualities which were

demand? First we must try to ensure that those adults
with a scientific outlook (whether trained scientists or not) have their powers of leadership developed and properly utilized. Already

available in the population and also with the demands for the progressive extension of responsibility in the conventional industrial

there are examples of scientists doing outstandingly good jobs as heads of universities, training colleges and schools, although there is

hierarchy.

still prejudice against appointing them.

The pattern of distribution seems to have accommodated the switch in demand at the base

Secondly we must try to influence the unscientific thinking of our existing leaders, because

from purely physical qualities to the simpler no matter how good the output of our schools,

mental qualities required by routine repetitive our pupils will not be in positions of authority

work. Current developments suggest that the picture
of industrial requirements may change from a pyramid to an oval, a figure in which the middle
is broader than the base.

for another twenty years. Looking to the future, we must modify our
schools' curricula so that an inquisitive, experimental, practical approach to life is inculcated, rather than a slavish acceptance of things as

Is this a requirement which can be satisfied in practice? Or will these new developments fail for lack of satisfactory human material?
The primary demands seem to be:
1. A larger proportion of trained and skilled craftsmen and what I may call mechanics and electricians.
2. A larger supply of people with a bent for, and training in mathematics and logic.

they are. Too many of our leaders learn too little science and start too late to learn it.
If we are in earnest about this, we must encourage education authorities to allow
teachers the freedom which they have in an enlightened county like the one I am privileged to work for. Space, and time, are vitally necessary if science teaching is to be of adequate quality. Nearly all maintained schools have inadequate laboratory space and only a niggardly

3. The possibility that, while the managerial ration of laboratory assistance. Industry has

function with its demand for wide judge- given money to build laboratories for indepen-

ments and the ability to handle human dent schools, and it is a scandal that public

problems may become more complex and money is not forthcoming in a similar way for

more important, the opportunities for the maintained schools.

practical experience and gradual develop- Public opinion needs to be aroused to the

ment of these qualities may be reduced. iniquity of attempts to put back the educational

I am afraid I cannot say if or how these demands clock by schemes such as the "Block Grant"

will be met, or even in whose hands the answer which will enforce economy at all costs, whereas

lies. Is it in eugenics, psychology or education? on account of the "bulge" more spending is

That is, can supply be adjusted to the demand? essential if we are even to maintain standards.

I1 2

NEW HUMAN DEMANDS IN INDUSTRY
Finally, looking to the farther future, as "free education" but a means test for the intelligence is so largely inherited, why is every universities. Altruism is not enough for profinancial discouragement applied to intelligent ducing our future leaders, or for fulfilling new parents? Income tax on family allowances; demands in industry.
Population and Birth Control \
The only international journal concerned solely with the world-wide problems of population and birth control.
-requested by libraries, universities, and sociological organizations;
-quoted by public speakers and newspaper correspondents. Published ten times a year by the
INTERNATIONAL PLANNED PARENTHOOD FDERATION
The IPPF, a federation of voluntary associations for family planning and governmental agencies in twenty-two
countries, believes that
-family planning is a fundamental hwnan right; -a favourable balance between the populations and natural resources of the world is an indispensable condition of
lasting world peace; -that such a balance is unattainable unless knowledge of planned parenthood is extended. Annual subscription to the NEws, IO/-; $2.oo. For information and sample copy, write to: IPPF, 69 ECCLESON SQuARE, LONDON, ENGLAND.
''3

