NATURAL INFERTILITY

Factors Influencing the Results of Contraceptive Methods
By CECIL I. B. VOGE, B.Se.. Ph.D., F.R.S.E.
(From the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine)

D URING the course of an investigation into the chemistry of contraception I have been impressed with
the number of ' natural agencies ' which may be responsible for the successes
claimed for various methods of birth con-
trol; and the recent paper by WagnerManslau9 reinforces my opinion that genetic factors may play a part in the production of certain sterilities. These would be all the more in evidence amongst certain population groups where, owing to sociological conditions, inter-marrying within a group is encouraged-with the consequence that a fixation of characters will ultimately take place. This would result in a differential
birth rate, a factor which opens up the question as to whether contraceptive results,
obtained from one social group, can neces-
sarily be applied to another. Thus I might suggest that a part,
at least, of the low birth rate is due not to
contraceptives but to the natural sterility
of those who use them. Many factors are naturally at work, for if the users already
possess a low fecundity, chemical contracep-
tives of a certain class may act in a spermicidal manner, or it is possible (and evidence will later be brought forward in the elabora-
tion of this point) that others may actually increase the chance of pregnancy.
If this problem is worthy of elucidation,
then I would ask that scientific methods should be brought to bear upon it, and at the very commencement of this communication it will be as well to state that I do not wish to introduce any further uncertainty
into a subject which has already had more than its share of difficulties. I do desire, however, that clinical work now being
carried out should be undertaken with as complete a knowledge as possible of the

many factors which may influence the results. For example, contraceptive failures may be recorded which are due more to an upsetting of the biochemistry and bacteriology of the vagina, than to an actual failure of the method (although, naturally, this latter is indirectly to blame), and in this connection it is incumbent upon us to have accurate knowledge of the chemical constitution and reactions of the products which are employed. On the
other hand, successes are found which are
in reality due to the sterility, natural or acquired, of one of the marriage partners.
Many of these factors will not be of great actual importance nor intrinsically affect the value of the clinical results obtained with methods which possess a high degree of reliability. Those which will be
influenced are those which are at variance with the theoretical knowledge which we have obtained (discussed in The Chemistry and Physics of Contraceptives'). At the present time, if ioo couples use a contraceptive method for a period and five pregnancies are found, we record a 95 per cent. success. Now if it can be shown that within this same group there is a 25 per cent. sterility, it will be evident that these 25 cases would not have become pregnant even if no contraceptive had been employed. Hence an assessment of the value of the method can only be based upon 75 casesgiving a 93 4 per cent. success.
What are the factors which are likely to affect the results? Natural and acquired sterility of either the male or the female will act in this manner; and it must be
borne in mind that the fact that the woman has already had one or even more children does not signify that her reproductive period, or that of the husband, will con-

85

86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tinue. There are always the questions of malformation of the various reproductive

one-child sterility; of age, not only by organs.

itself, but with reference to the date of the Acquired sterility should also be placed

first pregnancy; of the time interval be- under this heading. Here we find hormonic

tween pregnancies; and finally of gonor- conditions, inflammation, displacements,

rhcea. The last in itself is a large and and various tumours.

difficult problem; and it must be realized Lastly there is secondary sterility, due

that a woman may have become pregnant at to the effects of labour and similar causes.

the same time as she became infected, and Figures relating to the incidence of

that this infection gave rise to the subse- sterility are obtainable from two main

quent sterility.

sources. Those which emanate from

gynoecologists are, in all probability, apt to

TWO GROUPS OF PATIENTS

be weighted, since the fact that they have sought a consultation postulates some

Patients can be divided into groups. In degree of dysfunction. On the other hand,

the first are those that might be described figures obtained from the Registrar-

as the hyper-fertile type, although nulli- General are naturally free from this taint

parae are more and more coming for advice and will provide a much closer approxima-

to a doctor or to a clinic, and will in all tion to the real state of affairs.

probability be fitted, or be advised to use Giles2 has collected together figures

one of the methods which offers a consider- which are representative, since they do not

able chance of success. The second group, necessarily refer to pathological states.

I consider, presents the real problem. These

employ contraceptive methods without any

TABLE I

guidance. They use a method because it

Frank and Burdach ... 2 per cent. (a)

is advertised, or circularized, or (and this may be a slightly more rational argument) because a friend has used it-notwithstanding that they would not, and in many cases could not, wear his eyeglasses! Condoms and chemical methods are mostly the

Ansell ... ... 8...
Oehren ... ... ... 8.4 Simpson (Town A) ... 99
,( ,, B) ... 13*0 D n (Aristocracy) ... I6
Duncan ...........1. 0
Stark ... ... ... I9*O Graham ... ... ... 20°O0

"
,,
,,
,,
,,

(b) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f)
(g)
(h)

methods which will be found in this second group; but if the basic principles could only be inculcated, there is no reason why

Marton ... ... ... 20-0 (i )

Chevin ...

... 20*0

,,

(j)

...Rochard ...

*020...

Goehlert ... ... ... 20.5

.(,j)
(k)

a certain degree of success should not be

(1)Giles ...

...

... 22*2

,,

attained even with purely chemical methods when used alone.
Sterility can be divided into several

(a) These figures would appear to be based upon vague and unsubstantial statements.
(b) Quotation from Kisch.
(c) The town of Bathgate, Scotland; 455 marriages,

types. In functional sterility the patients would, in all probability, have become

of which 4I0 were productive. (d) The town of Grangemouth, Scotland;
marrages, of which 182 were productive.

210

pregnant if circumstances were different. (e) These figures are based upon Sharpe's work on the

In this group we find impotence of the husband and abstinence. The latter may

British Peerage, I833. They refer to 495 marriages, of which 8i were sterile. (f) The registers of Edinburgh and Glasgow for I855.

be due to various causes, such as vaginis- These showed 4,372 marriages, of which 3,710 were

mus, dyspareunia. In the next we have primary sterility,

productive, but miscarriages and still-births were omitted. (g) Census of Scotland for i86i.

which includes certain conditions that either prevent or allow intercourse to take place, but are definitely associated with

(h) Census of England for I851 (i) Based on the population of Massachusetts. (j) Based on the population of France. (k) Based on the Dynasty of the Capets; 45I marriages;

permanent sterility. In this group we have such conditions as under-development or

I9 - 7 per cent. sterile. Based on the Dynasty of Wittelsbach; I77 marriages; 23.7 per cent. sterile.

NATURAL INFERTILITY

87

Based on both figures; 628 marriages; 20.5 per cent- sterile. (1) 4,500 cases; 3,367 married; I,I33 spinsters; 239 cases where there is no record as to children hence;

times a week. Davies shows that 71 per cent. of her cases fall into this category, upon either side of which are the two

3,I28 marriages; 2,435 productive. The original should be consulted for further details.

extremes given above. At one end of the scale (B) the frequency of coitus appears

Giles,2 criticizing his figures, points out to border upon abstention; and we must

that although the chance of pregnancy may realize that there is then a considerable

fall according to such factors as the age of chance that coitus may take place during the woman and the time which has elapsed one of the relatively infertile periods which

since her last pregnancy, a woman cannot exist during each month. At the other (A), be considered sterile until she has reached where sexual intercourse takes place daily

the age of forty; also, many of his patients or oftener, it would seem possible that the

have definitely come for advice relating to spermatoxins might be formed. The work sterility, and he consequently considers on this subject is as yet by no means really

that in a normal population I5 per cent. clear, although from a paper by Freeman

would be a more correct figure.

and Dreisbach' (as yet unpublished, sub-

Dickinson and Beam3 in their series give mitted to me by the Committee on Maternal

a figure of 35 per cent. for 965 cases, but
again their series is weighted by the inclu-
sion of cases which come to consult upon their sterility.
From our point of view it does not matter which of the partners is responsible for the sterility, but in passing we may note that these latter authors3 give a figure
of 44 per cent. for the female and 43 per

Health) it certainly would appear that sper-
matoxins can be and are successfully produced. Davies has correlated the number of pregnancies occurring with the frequency of
intercourse, and has shown that while in
the entire group i6-3 per cent. were never pregnant, amongst the 90 who had ititercourse daily or more frequently only 8*8 per cent. fell into this category. This

cent. for the male in the series which they appears to be an entire contradiction of the

present. Other workers give figures vary- hypothesis that spermatoxins are formed, ing from io to go per cent, but evidently and tends to support the belief that the

in such there are many fallacies.

greater the frequency of sexual intercourse

THE SEXUAL OUTLOOK
Under this heading we have two factors which will affect the chance of pregnancy occurring. The first is frigidity, and the second coitus of more than normal frequency, Dickinson and Beam3 and Davies4 give the following figures:

the greater the chance of pregnancy. Davies4 re-analyzes her figures so as to
show how, in this same group, the use of contraceptives affects the percentage of pregnancies. The figure is higher among
those who have used contraceptives than in
the group which has not. A knowledge of proprietary chemical contraceptives enables

TABLE II

one to visualize many conditions which

Frequency Dickinson and

Davies

might be produced within the vagina, and

Beam (526 cases) (971 cases) A. Daily or oftener 82 cases i6% go cases 9 2%

B. One to three times a month

I25 ases I2.8%

which are entirely capable of altering the biochemical and bacteriological reactions of
that organ. In this manner spermatozoa

Once in two to
six months ... 14 cases 2-6%
Seldom or infre-

which would normally die might survive, thus greatly increasing the chance of a

quently ...

38 cases 3-9% pregnancy. This is discussed later.

Less than once

We must also realize that many matters

a year ... 58cases II-o%

appertaining to the social state of the

The whole question is a very difficult one patient are of great importance, since, as

but, in general, it would appear as if the we all know, there are differences in the

normal incidence of coitus was about three number of children (per hundred married

88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

couples) in the various social classes. To the use of the condom plus another method

take the I9II figures, teachers, ministers, gave 98± 2 * 2 per cent. Now it would seem

physicians, and authors give an average of that this difference between the percentage of

99-8 children; policemen and postmen I56; success attained with the condom alone and

carmen, dock labourers, barmen, and that with another method can only be attri-

miners 230, while general labourers beget buted to a flaw in the condom-since, after

438 children.

all, the use of another method does not

Now many different reasons are assigned necessarily increase vaginal lubrication

in explanation of these figures, but the which might possibly prevent condoms

factors which seem most cogent are recrea- from bursting. If a large number of con-

tion and bedroom accommodation, since doms are examined at a wholesaler's, it

both of them will have repercussions, not will be found that about 20 per cent. con-

only on the frequency of coitus, but also tain flaws. A stock such as this is often

on the chance of a contraceptive, if it is sold to retailers as " untested," but these

used, being employed in the manner latter merely roll the condoms up, place

directed. The latter is not so cogent when them in envelopes and sell them. In this

a method such as the rubber pessary is manner a 20 per cent, possibility of failure

used, since that is inserted and removed at becomes evident. If condoms which have

leisure under conditions free from the been tested and have not aged are used,

disturbing influences of coitus, but it there is much evidence to show that the

becomes very urgent where chemical percentage of success should be much higher

methods are employed.

than the value given by Charles.

CONTRACEPTIVE METHODS

Scarcely any information is forthcoming concerning purely chemical methods,

Now it will be evident that, as far as the Charles only giving one series where

clinics go, the women who come to them quinine soluble suppositories have shown

have all been fertile and, in most cases, still a 54±5.9 success. Very many products

are. In general, therefore, successes from of this nature are to be found varying in

this source may, with certain reservations, size, in the quality of the cocoa butter, and

be accepted as being due to the contracep- in the concentration of spermicide; and

tive method employed, generally the more reliable information is therefore neces-

"Dutch Cap." On the other hand, we find sary before we can criticize this series.

that a great number of other methods are Stone has examined the clinical results

manufactured and sold by chemist shops obtainable with five jellies possessing dif-

or through other channels. There are sup- ferent formule, and it is interesting to note

positories, jellies, foam tablets, and con- that the expectation of success as evolved

doms; and with the exception of the figures upon this basis, runs parallel to that

given by Charles,5 referring to condoms actually attained.

and suppositories (no make stated), and by It has been stressed' that two problems

Stone6 with reference to jellies, we have no exist in chemical contraception. Firstly,

knowledge as to the success or otherwise of we have that associated with the erection of

these.

a chemical barrier in such a manner that

Before passing on to a discussion of the the spermatozoa cannot gain entry into the

chemical methods, there is one interesting cervical canal; and secondly, we have the

point in connection with the success one dealing with the choice of spermicides.

reported by the condom. Charles gives The latter is important, as was shown >"

82± 3 - 4 per cent. for the success of the Stone's series; but it is pre-eminently neces-

condom, and when it is reinforced by a sary that the barrier should be satisfactorily

chemical method the percentage of success formed and should remain in position until

rises to ioo (quinine) and to a figure of 92 ± all the spermatozoa are dead. I have already

7 * 8 when syringing was also employed. Thus pointed out that chemical methods are depen-

NATURAL INFERTILITY

89

dent upon certain variables for their success. changes which also take place, must play a

Foam tablets are dependent for their success most important part in the problem of con-

upon:

traception. These questions will naturally

(a) Their insertion into the sufficient time before
mencement of coitus.-
(b) The presence of moisture. (c) The absence of pressure.

vagina a.
the com-

arise in the discussion of certain forms of sterility; but to a great extent they become, I venture to suggest, more urgent where
some of the chemical methods which are
employed are considered. Doderlein7 in I892 investigated the

Suppositories are dependent for their suc- vaginal secretion of pregnant women with

cess upon:

special reference to puerperal fever, and his

(a) The time factor (as above).

work was later corroborated by others.

(b) The temperature factor. This is of Their observations led them to believe that

special importance where low- secretions of the vagina possessed a bacteri-

grade products are considered. cidal power associated with pronounced

(c) The volume of the vagina.

acidity; this was due to lactic acid which

Jellies are independent of most of these factors, but the volume of the vagina and the viscosity of the jelly must be considered.
Foam Jellies are mostly independent of the above factors. On account of their method of action they can exert their full
effect regardless of time,- temperature,
and moisture.

normally was present in a concentration of
o'4 per cent., but which rose during pregnancy to o *9 per cent. The presence of an acid in such concentrations would naturally be an important factor in inhibiting organisms which were incapable of survival at such a pH, and in favouring others.
Later work showed that the presence of lactic acid was due to the fermentable carbohydrate, glycogen. There would, however,

It will be evident that from the above an expectation of success can be evolved; and

appear to be considerable difference in the deposition of this substance in different

an elaboration of the original argument, correlated with clinical success and failure, would appear to justify the claim that these views are in keeping with actual fact.
It is upon methods which possess a low

species, or in the same species, according to the efficiency of ovarian function. As regards the former point, glycogen, which
is the source of lactic acid in the human and
the higher apes, is produced at the rate of

efficiency and which are dependent upon several of the above factors that we must focus our attention; for the successful
results which are often claimed for them would seem to be attributable to the previously discussed sterilities. These claims are entirely comparable to those that are put forward by some who state that they " have used coitus interruptus for ten years and have never become pregnant."
Yes! but are the users fertile?

I2 * I7 mgm in 24 hours, the pH being pro-
portional to the lactic acid produced; while in rats, cats, rabbits, and guinea-pigs glycogen is absent and the secretions are alkaline. Space, does not permit a fuller discussion of this matter, and further infor-
mation should be sought from A System of Bacteriology in Relation to Medicine (published by the Medical Research Council).8 But the above will serve to indicate that some of the experimentation which has been carried out upon the lower animals is

T4E BIOCHEMISTRY AND BACTERIOLOGY not capable of application in its entirety to

OF THE VAGINA

the human female; and it would appear that

The bacteriology of the vagina is a sub- much further work in this direction is

ject which has been much neglected as far necessary.

as contraceptive research is concerned; and In Table III the influence of pH upon the

yet it, together with the various biochemical life and vitality of spermatozoa and certain

B

90 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

forms of bacteria is shown. It must be the vagina; while a similar state might

remembered that the conditions within the easily be produced by the use of chemical

vagina may change three times:

contraceptives which allow such a condition

(a) The normal pH of the vagina.

to arise.

(b) The pH after the insertion of a It has also been shown that the reactions

chemical contraceptive.

of the vagina change during the menstrual

(c) The pH after ejaculation has taken cycle-which may explain the observations

place. of some workers, who suggest that certain

(" b" may naturally be omitted in preparations may be more efficacious at one

appropriate circumstances.)

period of the cycle than at another, and also

The seminal fluid is usually distinctly alkaline, a condition which will not only

that some are apt to give rise to irritation where normally no discomfort is experienced.

neutralize the normal vaginal acidity, but
will also ensure that the spermatozoa will
definitely survive a sufficient length of time to gain the shelter of the cervical canal. If the vagina has an abnormally high pH at

Many aspects of the problem have been discussed in this communication, and I greatly hope that a frank discussion and exchange of views will result therefrom, to the end that we may strive to obtain

the commencement, the chance of survival is increased; and if a chemical contraceptive which possesses a pH of about 6 or 7 is
used, it will be evident that the reaction of

accurate information and focus our attention upon such methods as are likely to be harmless to the user and successful in use.

the vagina will not return to normal for a REFERENCES

very considerable time. Thus the chance that 1 Voge, The Chemistry and Physics of Con-

a pregnancy will follow becomes greater.
Upon these lines one might suggest that there would be a correlation between fecundity

traceptives. Jonathan Cape. Pp. 288.
2 Giles, Sterility in Women. sity Press. I919. Pp. 227.

London, 1933. Oxford Univer-

and a heavy abnormal bacterial infection of 3 Dickinson and Beam, A Thousand Mar-

riages. Williams and Wilkins. Baltimore, 193I.

TABLE m

Pp. 482.

4 Davies, Factors in the Sex Life of Twenty-

Spermatozoa Spermatozoa become qui- Spermato- Two Hundred American Women. Harper. New

will die and escent if subjected to these zoa become York, 1929. Pp. 430.

revitalization conditions for a long progress- 5 Charles, The Practice of Birth Control.

is impossible enough period; if only for ively more a short time, they can be active revitalized

Williams and Norgate. London, I932. Pp. I90. 6 Stone, Therapeutic Contraception. Medical
Journal and Record. New York, March 2ISt,

1928.

Normal flora

-cocci

Sstrrepptoocooccci

I
3.0 3.l5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.l5 6-o

3.86 4.45 5*34

6.4

7 Doderlein, Das Scheidensekret und seine Bedeutung fur das Puerperal-fieber. Durr, Leipzig, I892. (Cited by: See reference 8.)
8 __ A System of Bacteriology in Relation to Medicine. Medical Research Council, Vol. VIII, page 363 et seq.
9 Wagner-Manslau, Human Fertility, EUGENICS

REVIEW, I932, Vol. XXIV, No. 3.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 2.

