HARRY L. SHAPIRO
Ph.D., President, American Eugenics Society

Eugenics and Future Society *

I SUSPECTT IT IS no accident in the intellectual by drawing public notice to the need for

history of Europe that eugenics was for- deliberate thought and action to preserve and

mulated in the nineteenth century. This was even to improve the quality of human popula-

the century of the Industrial Revolution, of tion. It was never a science in the sense that it

rapidly expanding urban centres, and of a public occupied academic seats in the universities

concern with the resulting human suffering. Its or had staked out a special restricted field

very beginning saw Malthus first focus serious of research for itself, although from its initiation

attention on the quantitative aspects of popula- it had always been supported by scientific

tion and the darkly looming problems associated workers who shared the fundamental beliefs

with its unregulated growth. And it was midway embodied in eugenics. Eugenics has always been

in its course when Darwin published The Origin a joint enterprise of scientists and laymen

of Species and thereby provided a theoretical interested in applying to population problems

basis for the evolution of man and human the best scientific knowledge of the time.

population. Only a little later, while Mendel One might have expected that a belief in

was analysing the hereditary behaviour of the possibility of improving the quality of

sweet peas in his monastic garden, Galton at human population and a faith that acceptably

about the same time in England was casting sound means could be found for doing so might

up statistical tables on the appearance of have attracted from the very beginning greater

hereditary genius in England and arriving at enthusiasm, particularly among men and women

conclusions bearing on genetic quality in human dedicated to science and aware of its varied

population. It was the century when Europe achievements. But, in fact, eugenics has never

was filled with confidence in the perfectibility been a widely popular movement. It encountered

of man and society.

opposition from the general public, unaware

In the context of this unprecedented and grow- of the basic problems to which eugenics was

ing concern with the problems and the future addressed and fearful of an invasion of their

of human population, the questions of quality private lives if eugenics were adopted as a

and its maintenance were bound to occur to public policy. It also met with doubt from

thoughtful men. Out of this emerged eugenics. academic circles, doubt that the need for a

As an organized movement or programme, population policy and action were pressing

however, it is typical of the traditions of Western or even necessary, and doubt that any of the

democracy, and its history can be understood suggested means were likely to be efficacious

best in that frame. Based on the conviction in any event. It is true that the zeal of early

that something could and should be done to eugenists not adequately grounded in science,

improve the quality of human population, or of eugenists who were operating in areas

it is important to remember that eugenics where science had nothing positive to say,

in the United States was established as an had in the past led to the advocacy of pro-

association of private citizens to further their grammes that subsequently were discredited and

views and philosophy. They sought to do this shown to be of little value. And this in some

circles did eugenics little or no good. This

* The Presidential Address at the Joint Dinner Meeting points up the difference between science and

of the American Society for Human Genetics and the American Eugenics Society at Montreal on August 22nd, 1958. Reprinted from Eugenics Quarterly, 1959, 6, 1.

a programme. The discredited theories of science have not discredited science. Instead,

89 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1959, 519, 2

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

they occupy an honourable place in its history But man has never been content merely

as preliminary and tentative approaches to to stabilize his environment. He has also through-

the truth. Science, moreover, takes pride in its out his history profoundly modified and deve-

ability to learn by its errors. Eugenics, unfor- loped the technological and other cultural

tunately, has not always been a beneficiary aspects of it. His confidence in shaping his

of the same tolerance.

environment and educating himself to manage

Eugenics, like such words as democracy in it successfully has never seemed to flag seriously

the international scene to-day, also had its or for any great length of time.

name used indiscriminately and sometimes for That society has been so successful in these

purposes of a distinctly biased character. efforts rests on the well-known adaptability of

And this too, I am afraid, did little to advance man and his accessibility to education. The very

its cause. But in the past generation it is possible range of social and cultural patterns demon-

to discern a considerable change both in the strates in itself the ability of the human species

attitude towards eugenics, at least on the part to respond to training and to the environment.

of students of population-both demographic And I need scarcely dwell on the highly signi-

and genetic, and in the closer rapprochement ficant value of this human trait in the evolution

of eugenics itself with scientific advances in the of mankind. For while human evolution, like

areas pertinent to its interests.

all other episodes of organic evolution, can be

Although these signs are encouraging, eugenics explained biologically as the consequence of

still has a long way to go in establishing the an interaction between the environment and

public attitude through which it can be effective. genetic variation, it also differs from all these

It is this I particularly want to discuss in relation others in having pursued its course under a

to the pressure of world conditions we are new kind of environment-a man-made en-

facing to-day and are likely to face in increasing vironment that we call culture. Although some

degree in the not too distant future.

other animals than man exhibit behaviour traits

The conviction that something can be done suggestive of culture, none of them aside from

to regulate, control and/or improve human man has developed this phenomenon in all its

population is a profound and ancient one. characteristic phases, especially those of lan-

To achieve these ends only two ways have ever guage and tool-making.

been suggested: one is by training, which means Cultural or social environment does not, of

in the last analysis a manipulation of the course, completely replace the natural environ-

cultural or social environment; the other ment. It is supplementary to it, but as culture

is by genetic selection. Mankind has long been becomes more developed and complex probably

deeply and more or less consciously committed exerts an increasing degree of selection on the

to the first. Every society, in fact, is based on the genetic variation presented to it. And, indeed,

premise that the values and standards it has many more human characteristics than we

created can be maintained only by conditioning commonly realize are adaptations to cultural

or training the young, and ultimately by pro- rather than natural environmental conditions.

viding the necessary environment to produce Hence human evolution can in a sense be viewed

the kind of individuals regarded as desirable. as the progress of the human species in acquiring

And society, generation after generation, has the ability to learn ever more and more complex

quite readily accepted the burdens and the types of cultural behaviour. And culture, the

responsibility of providing the environment specifically human environment, can in turn

and the corollary training to carry it on. And progress only as men become more adept at

indeed it is difficult, if not impossible, to see learning. Thus both culture and mankind have

how any society could long endure, preserve evolved more or less in an inter-dependent

the continuity of its traditions or adjust to fashion. One can to a certain degree compare

new conditions without some process of train- the process with a kind of feed-back system.

ing or education through the manifold ways open While it may be granted that any existing

to an organized community.

population has a greater potential of ability

9o

EUGENICS AND FUTURE SOCIETY

than society through inefficiency may actually of these principles of selection to human

utilize, and may therefore be capable at any breeding.

particular point of time of sustaining a more In the past, however, the cultural environ-

complex culture than it does in fact, nevertheless ment of man changed slowly. In the Paleolithic

it is difficult to see how culture can continue we know that technologically little or no change

to evolve very far without corresponding can be observed in human artifacts for periods

genetic adaptations in the population that ofthousands ofyears. In a general way, however,

carries it. I know that students of human evolu- the tempo of cultural change since then has

tion are reluctant to place limits on the innate been increasing at a steady rate. As knowledge

abilities of earlier types of men, and perhaps accumulated, the process of change and develop-

rightly. But the unavoidable inference of human ment became more rapid. Within our own

evolution is that mankind has continuously recent history we have seen how vertiginous

increased its genetic abilities for cultural this can be, and how profoundly our lives can

behaviour as culture itself has evolved. And this be affected by such radical alterations.

can only have occurred through the selective It becomes a serious question whether

pressure of culture becoming more and more the selective process, which obviously could

complex and demanding. For obviously selec- and did function in a slowly changing environ-

tion, one of the mechanisms of evolution, ment, can maintain the balance that has so

must also be operative in the cultural as it is in effectively advanced human evolution in an

a natural environment. Thus man by shaping age of rapidly changing culture. I would hesitate

his environment has effected his own evolution. to advance any serious estimates on the time

I do not, of course, mean to imply that this required for selection to function effectively

process has been a carefully thought-out one in either a primitive society or in an atomic

or that either man or his society have been age, but we must consider the possibility that

consciously aware of what they were doing. as the cultural environment of man develops

But in effect it has been man's development with increasing rapidity that the selective process

of his cultural environment that has kept the will be unable to keep pace with it. We have

ball rolling.

only to think of our society one hundred years

Selection, however, as an instrument for ago, with its relatively simple scientific technical

enhancing or supporting social or cultural requirements compared with the vastly higher

requirements has rarely, if ever, been adopted requirements of skill and training necessary

by society. In the few cases that are known of to maintain and advance our present society,

such practices, it is usually a kind of negative to become aware that the margin of safety

selection. Typical of most of them is pre- between the pressures of culture and population

European Tahiti where infants born with obvious potential may become dangerously narrow in

physical malformations or other anomalies the foreseeable future. This danger seems all

were allowed to die. Isolated instances are also the more inminent if our cultural environment

known of a more positive kind of selection continues steadily and with increased rapidity

within limited groups to reproduce traits con- to reach still higher levels of scientific and

sidered to be desirable.

technological demand. The pressure to find

I have no hypothesis to explain why society more and more people capable of the education

has so rarely adopted selective practices. This and training that modem society requires has

reluctance, if it can be given so active a con- already become a matter of public attention

notation, can scarcely be laid to ignorance of and concern, not only in the United States

their value. It must have been a matter of com- where such needs are probably maximal but

mon knowledge and of frequent use during in other countries as well where serious efforts

the thousands of years men have been selecting are being made to adopt the standards and

and improving plants and animals. And, in achievements of Western culture. I do not mean

fact, individuals from time to time have not to suggest for a minute that we have necessarily

hesitated to point out the obvious applications run out of sufficient talent. But I do mean that

9I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the time has obviously come when the careful widely held view. That cultural environmental

husbandry of whatever talent and quality a factors may continue to decide such issues in

population possesses is not only essential but the near future, I am certainly not prepared

that the adequacy of its supply will have to to deny. But it seems to me a distinct possibility

be taken into account. It is perhaps no longer that as the technological and scientific require-

possible to relax in an easy reliance that our ments of our rapidly evolving civilization con-

human resources will be sufficient indefinitely tinue to raise ever higher standards, the necessity

to the demands that may be laid upon them, for taking thought about the genetic potential

or to assume that the effectiveness of selective of our population may become a very real

processes left to themselves will take care of the issue in survival.

situation with a rapidity that will meet future Now I need not stress that in the tradition

requirements.

of democracy the problem of guarding and

The urgency of the problem of quality when even improving the genetic quality of our

seen in this light becomes increasingly significant population must be solved by a programme

for modern societies engaged in deadly competi- that has popular acceptance. Any solutions

tion with each other. Competition between that smell of force or duress cannot be admitted.

communities, tribes or nations is no new thing There is, therefore, a serious and heavy responsi-

in human history. Success of one over the other bility for those who believe in eugenics. They

in the past, of course, turned on a variety of must bend every effort to encourage investiga-

factors, mostly-according to current inter- tions of an impartial and scientific nature to

pretations-of such a nongenetic nature as determine what factors are affecting the quality

superior organization, more adequate resources, of our population and whether or not the

more advanced military techniques, superior balance between it and culture is sound. And

training or discipline, and other similar cultural based in such researches they must develop

or environmental conditions. If differences a programme of information and action that

in the innate qualities of contending populations will be acceptable to a free, democratic society.

played a decisive role, we have little or no The task is difficult, but it is worthy of our

evidence for it. At least, that would not be a best.

.2

