SOME PROBLEMS OF REPRODUCTIVE PHYSIOLOGY*

By A. S. PARKES, M.A., Ph.D., F.R.S.
National Institute for Medical Research, Hampstead, N.W.3

W E hear a great deal these days amount of involuntary sterility, which is

about reconstruction, but the set- often highly distressing to the individual,

ting up of the Royal Commission on and involves loss to the community. It is Population is bringing home to many people not my purpose on this occasion to talk what was already well known to a few, that about sterility; rather, I want to be more a long-term reconstruction of the population positive, and discuss some of the facts which

is necessary if other forms of reconstruction make up the biological background of are to be fully effective. The chief, though not fertility.

the only, cause of our threatened demographic Evolution of Parental Care

difficulty lies in the continuous decline which has taken place in the birth-rate over more than a generation. It. seems to me that three groups of people are involved in any remedial measures.

In all the higher animals the essential feature of the reproductive processes is the union of two germ cells, the ovum and the spermatozoon, to form a new individual. This process, comparatively simple so far

(a) The politician must see that conditions as the parents are concerned, has been

of life are such that people will feel greatly complicated by the introduction of

justified in implementing their natural devices by which the new individual is pro-

desire to have children;

tected and nourished for a longer or shorter

(b) The medical man and the biologist must period by the parent organism, that is, by

see that involuntary sterility is re- the introduction of parental care. I say

duced to the minimum;

parental care, rather than maternal care,

(c) The eugenist must urge, and if possible because in many species the male is actively

ensure, that replacement of the popula- concerned in the care of the young. The

tion is differentially from good stock degree of parental care is extremely variable.

rather than bad.

In many fish, for instance, it is almost

In these circumstances the Eugenics Society absent; masses of eggs and spermatozoa

obviously has a great responsibility and a are shed into the water, and fertilization is

great opportunity.

largely haphazard and the young fend for

It is impossible in our present state of themselves from the beginning. The sim-

knowledge to assess exactly the factors re- plest form of parental care is the provision

sponsible for the decline in the birth-rate. of a food store, the yolk, with the egg, upon

Most authorities, however, agree that the which the young animal can live for some

primary factor has been a decreasing desire time. A small food store is provided in the

to have children, coupled with increasing eggs of frogs and toads. A larger food store,

knowledge of how to avoid having them. involving a larger egg, is provided in some

It is unlikely that medical factors have been fish, in many reptiles, and in birds. In the

seriously involved in the decline, i.e. that latter the egg is incubated externally by

there has been a serious increase in involun- the parent or parents during the early

tary sterility. On the other hand, there has development of the new individual. In

always been, and still is, an appreciable some of the lower vertebrates, the large egg

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on Novem-
ber 2oth. I94A.

is incubated internally- -the beginning of viviparity. The laying of a large egg and

I9

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

its incubation by the parent is carried over egg is likely to be available; and the end

into the lower mammals, as with the duck- of the gestation period must be co-ordinated

billed platypus, but in this case the process with a birth mechanism, and with the start

is further complicated by the addition of of functioning of the mammary glands. In

specialized glands in the mother which pro- practice, a regular cycle of events is found

vide milk for the young animal after it is in the non-pregnant female, and a longer

hatched from the egg. The. most compli- and more profound cycle when pregnancy

*cated expression of maternal care is seen in occurs. The central feature of the cycle in

all the true mammals in which there is a the non-pregnant female is the liberation

period, usually prolonged, of internal gesta- from the ovary of a ripe egg, the act of

tion of the embryo, followed by a period of ovulation. In many animals there is some

suckling during which the young animal is externally visible sign of the occurrence of

wholly or partially nourished by the mother. ovulation, and in nearly all animals, man

The evolution of parental care has had a and monkeys being the main exceptions,

number of interesting consequences. In the sexual receptivity is restricted to this time.

first place, where the care devoted to the Following ovulation a small body known as

young by the parents is elaborate, the the corpus luteum develops from the remains

number of young must be greatly reduced. of the follicle which produced the egg.

In some fish, for instance, a single pair may Coincidently with the growth of this body

give rise potentially to millions of offspring the uterus undergoes development which is

in the course of a year. In some of the designed to facilitate the implantation of

higher mammals, on the other hand, the the fertilized egg. If fertilization is not

maximum capacity is perhaps one offspring effected the predecidual tissue of the uterus

in two years. The relative number sur- degenerates and is removed by absorption

viving, however, will not be very dissimilar, or hoemorrhage; then the cycle starts again

unless a species is rapidly increasing or by the growth of a new follicle to produce

decreasing in numbers. This means that an egg at the time of the next ovulation.

the evolution of parental care has cut down If the fertilized egg is received and embedded

the number of individuals upon which by the prepared uterus, cyclic activity ends

natural selection can work, and, moreover, for the time being, and the organism settles

by protecting the young from their environ- down to the gestation of the young animal.

ment, has cut down the chance of natural It is obvious that coitus can result in

selection coming into play.

conception only when an egg is available for

Mammalian Reproductive Cycle

fertilization. The existence of the cycle just described means that an egg is produced

From my present point of view, the only at fairly regular intervals; in the case

interesting thing about parental care is the of the human female, about every 28 days.

resulting complexity of the reproductive The length of time during the cycle when

mechanism in the higher mammals. Internal coitus can result in conception will therefore

gestation implies internal fertilization, and depend on the capacity of the egg and of

this in turn necessitates, among other the spermatozoon to survive in the female

devices, a mechanism for making the two reproductive tract. According to modern

sexes attractive to each other, at least biological knowledge, the time of survival

temporarily. Among other consequences, of the germ cells in the female tract, except

part of the reproductive tract must be in one or two odd species, is very short and

modified to form an organ in which gestation probably does not amount to more than

can be carried out, that is to say, to form 24 hours in the case of the ovum and three

a uterus; there must be a mechanism days or so in the case of the spermatozoon.

whereby the reproductive organs of the In each cycle, therefore, there will be a

female are ready for the reception of the fertile phase of only about four days.

fertilized egg at a time when the fertilized From what has been said it will be seen

SOME PROBLEMS OF REPRODUCTIVE PHYSIOLOGY

2I

that this phase must be somewhere about the middle of the intermenstrual period, but its accurate determination is a matter of
some difficulty. In women, the overt fixed point of the cycle is not ovulation but menstruation, which results from the failure to implant a fertilized egg, and only within
the last twenty years has it become generally
accepted that ovulation occurs at a fairly definite time in relation to menstruation. Moreover, since menstruation results from

obtained from the fallopian tube on their way down to the uterus. Thirdly, changes known to be associated with the time of ovulation or with the immediate postovulation phase occur in the reproductive tract and can be examined and assessed in relation to the occurrence of menstruation. Such investigations indicate that, on. the average, ovulation takes place some I3 to I5 days before the next menstruation is due or in a cycle of conventional length a similar

Time diring whiah intercourse can lead to fertilization

Menstruation

Ovulation

Life of spermatozoa

Life of ovum

Menstruation

65 10 15 20 25. 28 3
Days after the beginning 'f menstruation

failure to implant a fertilized egg, ovulation is related to the next menstruation rather than to the previous one. As the time of the next menstruation can only be prophesied on the basis of past cycles, obviously difficulties arise.
Time of Ovulation
However, several different lines of investigation point to the general time relations shown in Fig. i. In the first place, there have been extensive examination of the ovaries at operation or post mortem. .Secondly, newly ovulated eggs have been

time after the preceding menstruation. The time of ovulation, however, is subject to the variation which is inherent in all biological
material. Firstly, the time of ovulation
may. vary even in the conventional 28-day cycle. Secondly, the length of the cycle itself may vary within comparatively wide limits without any suggestion of real ab-
normality. Thus, in calculating the pre-
sumed time of ovulation in any particular cycle the previous variability in cycle length must be allowed for, and some authorities suggest that calculations should be based on the greatest variation over the preceding

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

year. Thus, a woman whose cycles had another organ, namely the anterior pituitary

varied in length during the preceding year body, which is situated in the base of the

from 27 to 30 days would have a calculated skull, and this mechanism forms a parti-

ovulation time I2 to I7 days after the begin- cularly interesting example of hormone con-

ning of the previous menstruation, or allow- trol. The basic facts may be shown readily

ing for the longevity of the germ cells, a by removing the pituitary body, in which

fertile period from 9 to i8 days. I need case all cyclic ovarian activity stops, and

hardly add that this information has a most by injecting extracts of the pituitary body,

important bearing on problems of fertility, in which case the ovary is stimulated to

and is likely to be most valuable to people abnormally great activity. The anterior

of low fertility. Unfortunately, the fertile pituitary body appears to produce at least

period seems mainly to have been studied two substances, one of which is concerned

from the point of view of contraception. with the growth of follicles in the ovary,

This is a totally wrong emphasis. No amount and the other with the subsequent develop-

of information concerning the normal time ment of the corpus luteum. It is not yet

of ovulation in women can provide a com- clear by what mechanism the pituitary body

plete basis for a system of contraception manages to produce alternating effects in

foolproof in all women at all times and in the ovary, and -the discovery of the gonado-

all circumstances, and failures have dis- trophic hormones of the pituitary body

tracted attention from the real value of the has only removed from one organ to tnother

information in promoting fertility.

the problem of how the periodicity is

achieved. It is evident, however, that

Regulation of Female Cycle

although the pituitary body has this pro-

I now want to discuss the regulation of found effect on events in the ovary, events

the cycle in the female reproductive organs. in the accessory reproductive organs must

The regulation is partly through the nervous in turn be able to influence the production

system-I shall give an example later-but of hormones by the pituitary body. For

for the most part the regulation is hormonal, instance, when a fertilized egg becomes im-

that is to say is effected by chemical -sub- planted, some message must be sent to the

stances which are produced in one organ, pituitary body so that the production of the

secreted into the blood stream, and carried appropriate hormone stimulating the corpus

to another organ which is thereby stimulated luteum may be continued. How this is

to activity.

effected is not known.

The control of the cycle in the uterus and A good example of a differefit kind of co-

vagina is comparatively simple: changes preceding and associated with ovulation are
regulated by a substance produced mainly by the follicle which liberates the egg. This substance, from its association with the period of cestrus (sexual receptivity) in
lower mammals, is known as an cestrogen.
Changes after ovulation, designed to facilitate implantation, are regulated by the
substance, known as progesterone, which is produced by the corpus luteum. The regulation of the ovarian cycle itself is a more complicated matter. For a long time it was thought that it arose from some in-

ordination is well demonstrated in the rabbit. This species is unusual among mammals in that there is no regular ovarian cycle in the non-pregnant animal. During the breeding season ripe follicles are always present in the ovary, but ovulation only occurs after the act of mating. If the
pituitary body is removed within one hour of mating ovulation does not take place. If the pituitary body is removed later than one hour after mating ovulation does take place. It is clear, therefore, that the act of mating causes the pituitary body to secrete

herent property of the ovary itself. It is rapidly the hormone required to produce

now known, however, that the ovarian cycle ovulation. This effect is known to work

is regulated largely by the activity of through the nervous system.

SOME PROBLEMS OF REPRODUCTIVE PHYSIOLOGY

23

Clinical Efects of Gonadotrophic Extracts
The discovery of the gonadotrophic hormones of the pituitary prompted the hope that it would be possible to remedy conditions of under-activity of the ovary by the injection of appropriate extracts. This hope has not been realized entirely as yet, and in most cases the injection of pituitary extracts causes ovarian activity of a rather chaotic nature. This is due partly to the difficulty of regulating dosage, but also to the fact that the different hormones of the pituitary body may be present in the extract at the same time, and the ovary is.therefore subjected to indiscrirminate stimulation in place of the regulated stimulation found in the normal animal. It may be anticipated, however, that further knowledge of the biological action of these substances, and of their preparation from the pituitary body, will in time overcome this difficulty. Even now it is possible to produce some extraordinary effects. For instance, it was early shown in the work on the anterior pituitary body that the implantation of glands from an adult mouse into an immature mouse would cause wholesale ovulation from the immature ovary. This same effect of super-ovulation can be shown very well in the rabbit, in which an injection of pituitary extract may cause dozens of eggs to be liberated from the ovary at one time. If such an animal is then artificially inseminated a very large number of fertilized eggs may implant in the uterus and start to undergo normal development. So far, however, it has not been possible to carry through such a superpregnancy to term. Degeneration of large numbers of the embryos takes place in the second or third week, and the size of litter may ultimately be less than normal.
Survival of Spermatozoa
I have just mentioned artificial insemination, and I want now to refer back to a statement I made earlier, namely that the length of life of the spermatozoon in the female reproductive tract is limited to a few days. This survival time is in marked contrast to that found in the male reproductive tract. In mammals large numbers

of spermatozoa are stored in the epididymis,
an organ attached to the testis, and it is
possible to remove the testis while leaving the epididymis intact. By mating animals at successive intervals after the testes but*
not the epididymides have been removed
one can find out how long the spermatozoa
retain their fertilizing power. In laboratory
animals, spermatozoa isolated in the male tract are known to retain their fertilizing
power for several weeks. This compara-
tively long survival, as compared with that
in the female reproductive tract, is pre-
sumably due to the existence of particularly
favourable conditions in the epididymis. A
somewhat similar explanation must apply to
the well-known. case of bats, in some species of which mating takes place in the autumn, but fertilization is delayed until the spring.
During the whole of the winter the sperma-
tozoa lie quiescent in the vagina or uterus, but retain their fertilizing power. This case,
so far as I know, is the sole exception to
the rule that the spermatozoa survive for only a very short period in the reproductive
tract of the female mammal.
These considerations lead to the question
of how long the spermatozoa can be maintained in vitro, a problem which has been much studied in farm animals in connection with -artificial insemination and which may become important in relation to the human.
The general rule is that spermatozoa kept
in vitro retain their fertilizing power for a
comparatively short time, for a few hours or a few days, depending on the conditions and the species of spermatozoa. The survival time is greatly affected by a number of factors such as nature of medium, temperature, and so on. The temperature must be kept well below body temperature to restrict activity, and the medium, if an artificial one, must be such as to allow for the physiological requirements of the spermatozoa. These facts all relate to spermatozoa kept above freezing point. The spermatozoa of most species will not survive at temperatures slightly below freezing point. Quite recently, however, some highly
suggestive experiments have been carried out on the vitrification of spermatozoa at

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the very low temperatures which can be obtained by the use of solid carbon dioxide
(t79° C.) or of liquid nitrogen (-I95° C.).
The spermatozoa of most species do not survive this treatment, but it has been found that the spermatozoa of fowl, if partially dehydrated, survive for an almost indefinite period at -79O C., and resume
motility on rapid thawing. Fertilizing power is also retained, but in the experiments so
far reported the development of the fertilized egg was abnormal, possibly owing to the preliminary dehydration of the spermatozoa. It is of considerable interest,
however, that human spermatozoa show a greater resistance to vitrification than those

of any other species yet examined. Human
spermatozoa show good motility, on rapid
thawing, even after prolonged vitrification
in liquid air. It is quite uncertain as yet
whether the power of fertilization will have been retained by such spermatozoa, and if so whether there will have been any inter-
ference with the genetic properties of the spermatozoa. It is not certain how information on these points can be obtained, but one should not overlook the fact that it may be possible, by the use of this technique, to overcome some of the limitations imposed by time and space on the propagation of the human species.

-PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
A rtickes appearing in forthcoming issues:
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE SILKWORM. I. GROWTH AND RESPIRATION OF BOMBYX MORI DURING ITS ENTIRE LIFE CYCLE. By T. Y. HSUEH and P. S. TANG, Hua University.
TOTAL AND TISSUE RESPIRATION IN RELATION TO BODY WEIGHT; A COMPARISON OF THE KELP CRAB WITH OTHER CRUSTACEANS AND MAMMALS. By F. W. WEYMOUTH, J. M. CRISMON, V. E. HALL, H. S. BELDING and JOHN FIELD II.
MORPHOGENIC FUNCTIONS OF PAPILLA IN FEATHER REGENERATION. By Hsi WANG, Whitman Laboratory of Experimental Zoology, University of Chicago.
OXIDATION-REDUCTION PATTERN IN DEVELOPMENT OF A TELEOST. By C. M. CHILD, Stanford University.
Edited by W. C. ALLEE, Professor of Zo6logy, The University of Chicago. Published
Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press. Subscription: 35S. 2d. per year.
English Agents: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS.
Eugenics Revew, Vol. XXXVM, No. I

