THE
EUGENICS SOCIETY
JUBIEE DNEwtrsrErwsrTuTur -n~~mww

THE fiftieth anniversary of the founding of causes which were to become crucial matters;

the Eugenics Society, under its first President, those present at the founding of the Eugenics

Sir Francis Galton, was marked by a dinner Society could not have foreseen the scientific'

at the Savoy Hotel, London, on December developments which had since taken place,

4th, I957.

it might be that by the time the one-

There were present some I46 people, hundredth anniversary of the Society was

including guests of the Eugenics Society, celebrated the ordinary man and woman

Fellows, Members and their friends, but a would take as a matter of course eugenic

number who had expected to attend were policies which were now controversial, and

prevented by illness, dense fog and the it was the duty of the Eugenics Society to give

serious railway accident that evening.

a lead in these matters.

After dinner, the toast of the Society's The toast of the Eugenics Society was then'

guests was proposed by SIR CHARLES GALTON proposedbySIRALEXANDERCARR-SAUNDERS,

DARWIN, K.B.E., M.C., Sc.D., F.R.S., the K.B.E., M.A., LL.D., HonoraryPast President'

President of the Eugenics Society, who said of the Eugenics Society and holder of the first

that although it meant omitting some of the Galton Medal. Sir Alexander said that the

most distinguished of them, he would, taking Society, in fifty years, had accomplished

the new edition of the Society's Statement of many specific things and influenced im-1

Aims as a guide, refer to a few of those whose portant legislation; the Mental Deficiency

work could be related to the various categor- Act of I9I2 was the result of successful'

ies enumerated therein. In the field of advocacy by the Eugenics Society and other

human genetics he spoke of Professor Egon bodies, as was the inclusion of Children's

Pearson, himself an authority on statistics, Allowances in the Finance Act of I928. Its*

whose father had been the chief successor of voluntary sterilization recommendations'

Galton in the study of statistics and of were to a large extent included in the Report

eugenics. Sir Charles then welcomed Mr. of the Brock Committee;.it had sponsored

Max Nicholson, referring to his brilliant and encouraged research and inquiries into

work on population as head of P E P, Colonel birth control methods, the social problem

Ahuja from India, where a difficult popula- group, morbid inheritance, and, more re-,

tion problem is now being attacked and Sir cently, promising families. The Society had

Clifford Heathcote-Smith who was active in called together the Population Investigation

the matter of Commonwealth migration. Committee in I936 and had co-operated'

Turning to the list of Policies in the Society's with Political and Economic Planning. Most

Aims, the President welcomed the many of these activities had been due to the energy

representatives of the various Societies with of Dr. C. P. Blacker, who was later to receive

which the Eugenics Society co-operates.

the Galton Medal-as he already held the

Mr. E. M. NICHOLSON, C.B., Chairman of George Medal, this would make him a

P E P, in reply, said that the Eutgenics "double G.M.'"' Sir Alexander looked for-

Society had shown foresight in picking on ward to future- specific action, and with Dr.

i63

i64 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

G. C. L. Bertram as General Secretary, he felt sure that no opportunities would be missed.
MRS. M. A. PYKE, President of the Family
Planning Association, who was to have
replied on behalf of the Society was unfortunately unable to be present, and MRS.
NANCY RAPHAEL was kind enough to read her speech for her. Mrs. Pyke acted in a
dual capacity: The Society's generosity to cognate societies was well known, and it was a splendid thing to be regarded as a cognate society. She knew that the Family Planning Association, the North Kensington Marriage Welfare Centre, the British Social Biology Council had greatly benefited, and through them the Eugenics Society had been the means of lightening the lives of many people. The Society would never forget what it owed to Dr. Blacker. Mrs. Pyke thanked Dr. Carter for his five years as General Secretary, she thanked the Society's staff for organising the dinner and all those present for coming
to it.
SIR CHARLES DARWIN then rose to present to Dr. C. P. Blacker the Galton Medal which, he said, had been unanimously voted to him
by the Council. It was hardly an exaggera-
tion to say that for more than twenty years Dr. Blacker had carried the whole Society on his shoulders, without becoming a tyrant but with the supreme quality of knowing how to get willing service out of many good men and true. For this occasion, he judged Dr. Blacker by the measure once given by Galton of what constituted good eugenic standards-health, energy, ability, manliness and courteous disposition. It might almost suffice to look at him to judge of his health, and in his day he had captained the Oxford boxing team; he had always been a runner, but the word energy referred not only; to physical but mental energy, and the latter had been of great value to the Eugenics Society. Many who were firm believers in eugenics were willing to sit back, holding those opinions but doing little about them, but Dr. Blacker had always been getting on with the business, seeing what practical action would be helpful and showing people what might be done about it. Ability overlapped

much with what had just been said about energy, but Sir Charles cited his various writings, and in particular the important book, Eugenics, Galton and After which had been written a' few years ago.
Manliness was rather a vague term, but in Dr. Blacker's case it was easily described by looking at his military career.
To illustrate a courteous disposition Sir Charles said that his Uncle Leonard retired from the presidency of the Society in I929 at the age of 79 and Dr. Blacker became secretary two years later. Nevertheless, he had recognized the deep interest which Major Leonard Darwin had in the Society, and every month or two he would travel down to a remote part of Sussex to tell him how things were going on. This was greatly valued by Major Darwin.
The President then handed the Galton Medal to Dr. Blacker, saying that he was sure that a worthier recipient for it co'uld not be found.
DR. C. P. BLACKER, M.C., G.M., M.A., M.D., said that the Medal had really been earned by the splendid people he had worked with since I93I, many of whom had become his best friends. He traced the Society's history which fell, he said, into three periods. It had originated in the fertile brain of Mrs. Gotto, and the first period covered her and Mrs. C. B. S. Hodson's secretaryships. The second period was marked by the receipt of a large legacy, and in spite of being deluged with applications for grants, Mr. Stanley Bramwell and Mr. Clinton Chance had agreed upon a'policy of conservation of funds; with Lord Horder they had formed a triumvirate which had guided the Society for many years. We were now in the third period, and many of the Society's officers were known to all present. Dr. Blacker mentioned many people who had helped the Eugenics Society during the past fifty years, both as officers and members of the staff, and thanked them for their support during his years as General Secretary.
A full report of the speeches, with a list of those present, will appear in the April 1958 number of THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

