BRITISH BIRTH CONTROL CLINICS
Some Results and Eugenic Aspects of their 'Work By NORMAN E. HIMES, M.A.

B IRTH control clinics in England are each clinic series) were the wives of un-

having, in some respects, a eugenic skilled or semi-skilled workers, the remain-

effect; but in other respects their in- der of the cases falling into miscellaneous

fluence would seem to be dysgenic. In so groups. Ninety per cent. of the clinic

far as they encourage family limitation by clientele came from the working classes.

those possessing foresight and intelligence The study shows that the average size of

-and it may be safely assumed (i) that family in 3,296 cases was 3.17, despite a

these qualities are more common in the surprisingly heavy rate of pregnancy loss,

skilled and professional economic groups chiefly owing to miscarriages. The correla-

than in the unskilled group, and (2) that in- tion coefficients for the relation between the

telligence (as measured by the current size of family and the number of years

tests) tends to be inherited-it is possible to married ranged in the various clinic groups

contend that their influence, from the from .54 to .79.

eugenic standpoint alone, is not for the best interests of the race.

TWELVE SHILLINGS PER PERSON

To the extent, however, that they are The Means of Support.-Two other

succeeding in causing family limitation points are impressive. Firstly, in great

among the dull normals and the definitely contrast to the incomes of American

unskilled I think we may say with reason- birth control clinic patients, the average

able certainty that the effect is good.' It is family income seems to range about £63 per

clear at any rate that the clinics have been week, on which it is necessary to support a

unable to reach the feeble-minded, the family of five. Secondly, the British clinics

insane and epileptic, the chronic paupers, serve almost exclusively the working class.

and persistent leaners upon the State. Very few professional people, students, and

Thus may be broadly summarized the main conclusions of a study based on the records of seven English and two Scottish clinics made in the summer of I927, when I visited them. Roughly, one-third of the clients of these clinics were the wives of unskilled workers. Approximately 40 to 50 per cent. of the clinic patients (varying with

individuals holding the more responsible business positions come to the British clinics. This situation is in contrast to that at Chicago. Data will also be presented tending to show that the New York patients come from a higher social and economic class.
I propose to show by a study of the occupational distribution of the husbands of

1 The assumption is that we have a plentiful supply of dull normals already. There are those who, overlooking the fact that these people must function as citizens of a democracy, contend that such individuals are needed in considerable numbers by modern, mechanized industry. It is not yet clear whether industry tends (i) to create a demand for such workers, or (2) whether, bv insisting upon a capacity for discipline, the duli normal and still duller workers tend to be crowded out by the competition of those possessing greater manual dexterity and planfulness and having quicker reaction times. If the former, industry may be creating a serious civic, not to say eugenic, problem; if the latter, the effect would seem to be beneficial to the race. Herein lies a fruitful field for further research.

patients attending the clinics, and by a survey of wage incomes, that the clinics are
reaching, to a modest degree, the wives of
the unskilled and the semi-skilled workers. To this will be added an analysis of the
size of family from which the patients and their husbands come, as compared with the size of family they are themselves
producing. Table I furnishes vital and social data on
3,296 cases which visited the nine clinics studied. It will be noted that only one, the

I57

iS8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

North Kensington clinic, is situated in Wolverhampton) to 5.67 (Aberdeen). The

London. The others are in the industrial figure for Aberdeen is probably higher

towns of Manchester, Wolverhampton, owing to the fact that until recently that

Liverpool, and Birmingham, in the univer- clinic has accepted as patients only those

sity town of Cambridge, and in the two women referred by physicians. Liverpool's

Scottish cities of Aberdeen and Glasgow. average is also high because that series

The clinic which served the Cannock miners contains a large proportion of dock

was open only a short time, in a worker's labourers. The means for the living

cottage, and has since been obliged to close children range from 2.86 (Cannock non-

on account of shortage of funds. For one miners) to 3.89 for Liverpool.

series at Glasgow the data on the clinic cards (the first cards) were inadequate, but summaries have been made for whatever they may be worth. The first Cannock series relates to miners only, while the second includes only patients whose husbands were not miners (strictly speaking) but who, none the less, were industrially associated with coal-mining.
Omitting the small series upon which no particular reliance is placed, the sizes of the

One finds, of course, wide ranges in the size of the family (0-4). Space is not available here for presenting distribution graphs. However, when one considers (i) the economic circumstances of the patients, (2) the average age of the mother (3I.5 years
for the whole group), (3) the average age of the father (34.3 years for all cases), (4) the mean number of years married (9.1 years),
these parents do not seem to have shirked the responsibilities of parenthood. On the

series vary from IO9 to iooo. Reading across Table I we have the following infor-

other hand, the clinic families are smaller than one would suppose after reading the

mation for pregnancies: the total in each series, the simple arithmetical mean, and its standard deviation. For the children now living the same information is given. The

propaganda issuing from some of the clinics and from similar quarters. But I hasten to add that the size of the family has very little to do with the right of these patients to

losses resulting from still-births, miscarriages, abortions, and deaths are summarized as a total. Columns 9 and io deal with the percentage of losses to pregnancies and
column ii with the percentage of miscarriages to losses. For the number of years married we have the arithmetical mean in each series with its standard deviation, as well as the correlation coefficient for the

contraceptive information. The pregnancy losses from all causes-
still-births, miscarriages, abortions, deaths -approximated one-fifth of all pregnancies. In two cases it was nearer to one-quarter (Liverpool, 24.2; and Glasgow, 25.8), Cambridge had the lowest rate of loss (I6.4) and Glasgow the highest (25.8).

relationship between the number of years married and the number of pregnancies, and

FIFTY PER CENT. MISCARRIAGES

the correlation coefficient for the relation- Perhaps even more significant are the per-

ship between the number of years married centages of losses due to miscarriages. The

and the number of living children. In the range is from 30.9 (Aberdeen) to 5I.9 for

last two columns are recorded the means North Kensington. From a third to a half

for the ages of each group of patients and of all pregnancy losses resulted from mis-

husbands.

carriages, natural or self-induced. The

figures on abortions-not presented here-

FOUR PREGNANCIES PER PATIENT

are an understatement, for the clinics do not

In a total of 3,296 cases the average press patients for this information. Quite

number of pregnancies was 4.00, while the rightly, the staffs of practically all the

average number of living children was 3.I7. clinics wish to avoid embarrassing patients

The means for pregnancies range from by inquiring into such delicate matters. I

approximately 3.5 (Cannock non-miners and should like to point out, however, that the

BIRTH CONTROL CLINICS

I59

0% u'sc0o0 m
el Ie1en01(1 enI, eefo

0o
(@) I co

~0

~, ,)1j1to I¢

I

i t eXne) f r j b@ | c Z |

0 LOa
.UC4U)%U4C)U U.4C).d. 0CU0CCaw

@4@12i 2

@12 0OC0400O 00 I ' I

cU Cd CU

CJ ti C

bM.;. 1C)QUv . . 0%n 0. . . .

.

...

00 O

@

00

4.4
:U03) II1Uu)

1P 0
6%
I p en
A-- --

00

0 .N O* bOr I Ibe@ IzH

0lo-C0400 0 h)00

N Ul Ul) 0

~

~
~10 %

Ie:4Ui

0;0n

n0e co
n

0 B o ta o X o o

U) 12) 0)
CUCUC
( On
PCQU

>4
3
cn

19

IV 0N4 N

00 14 11

0 N0H .4 1 I-I

H

H

0 O 0'-'Q

m b 010o e zto<l 1 JJ0 0 C)

H00

H (A)
V1)

V ~) cn144el -M

Ut lbOi%'0

0%

Gooi'UICUO|C1U00@r1m |4 I1'-. In C',

;&,t°| 1

|

^>N

lvI (1

W)(@)M%o.00C00 1HSo I lom . I *1H
o ' ;%ltotoX I en1 1 @C6^4; X { 6 t o;nEn

o bO ;

'O00 00 00 "I0
0'000% v) O m%tU'f%

t0l%% 0

I 1I0 @4
v

| k0oCc1N%%C(N2oo rN4i0 |~f a
cnC 4cne

in In
I| n IN

0

P- t900HD

00 0 01I|f INN10I|C-OIcN U) 4 140

mv

@1 cn0

CU

__

%

oIC
;4 Z

_D0c0o 0in0oCm00m 0I-0 O . I "ui Wo 000

crEC0%%

0 0t- I" 0 0-10

l co "v o

Hcn

z
0 . A I %oD 0% oIn%O i t-CO%O

H @1

C IIetIn->co In eeUi0o0>1*I4 NN1*NCo I etn-C 0Intl 1

010 ( U)
CU bCo cto cn
ce

Eo4
0

v U

S1

.CUM 0

I 000'0 m1m1 00oN- o 0I %O'kl00tlr ) O.

%o

R

e. 1- 'CU4C
Cd z

0 'd' @1 CU

U) QI I N N > &> In C 0 t%0%'"C1oo

z I0 I%0C14,'0 ¢%a 0C0hII eO'

I

cP '-4

I0

.mI.mO1.c@12

I
^, 1"

'0frf4
..en1*

C4'0W
4%

4)
* VI 0

.

U)

...

. C*

I....C.....

m co

H

0 %00 *CenfCU 4 1

C4-i-i I

¢140
m1-4 CU U2.4

PH:
0~~~ 0U)r cl 4J~~~~~~.

'0.
4,II,-vC4 O CA o Q Cd 0Cd 0a.

0
~o

I QcdI

(a

0

es

CU 0

3CUU00

C4--
W IIl ...-d
.
....cn

col
)CD
CU4)
0zz
z

4-) u)
-- 4)

> nto

9w Q

Z: : ::

i 6o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

clinics have a unique opportunity to gather occupational classification of the clinic hus-

this information.

bands in this community, as in some others,

The correlation studies tell us nothing offered many obstacles. In Cambridge 32

new, but they confirm the common assump- per cent. were unskilled, 17.2 semi-skilled,

tion of vital statisticians that there is a and 25.2 definitely skilled artisans. This

high degree of relationship between the series contains also a small but interesting

number of years married and the size of professional group. At Liverpool 46.8 per

family. The lowest correlation coefficient is cent. were unskilled, i6.2 per cent. semi-

.54 and the highest .79.

skilled, and I9.6 per cent. skilled. Bir-

Table II shows the occupational status of mingham ranged next to Wolverhampton in

the husbands of women who visited the serving a large proportion of skilled

clinics.' Table III is a summary of the workers. Glasgow, on the other hand,

occupational status of the husbands by served a substantially high proportion of

different clinic series, dividing each series unskilled. At Aberdeen 38.5 per cent. were

into four groups, viz., the unskilled, the definitely unskilled, 7.3 per cent. semi-

semi-skilled, the skilled, and all others. It skilled, and 20.2 per cent. definitely skilled.

will be observed from Table II that 37.9 per The four lowest occupational categories,

cent. of the husbands at North Kensington however, included 66 per cent. of all the

were definitely unskilled, while 32.8 per cases (Table II).

cent. were skilled or semi-skilled.' The

rather large number (go) of bus conductors
and drivers, motor mechanics, and

MOSTLY UNSKILLED AND SEMI-SKILLED

chauffeurs in this series is accounted for by Turning to the summary table (Table

the fact that one of the London 'bus routes III) one finds that if one omits the extreme

terminates near the clinic. The category exceptions of Wolverhampton (I2.6) and of

" higher business and professional " refers Cannock (ioo.o), from one-third to one-

to the more responsible business and profes- half of the clinic husbands were unskilled.

sional occupations. Quite obviously the From 7.3 to i8 per cent. were semi-skilled.

clinic served the wives of no industrial The skilled group ranged from 20 to 30 per

magnates.

cent. (in round numbers), with the excep-

Manchester-presents very much the same tion again of Wolverhampton, which had

picture. 32.6 per cent. of the patients' an extraordinarily high proportion of skilled

husbands were unskilled, while a much workers. I suppose that one would quite

lower proportion (ii. i per cent.) were semi- rightly consider the Cannock mining group

skilled. Curiously enough, at Wolverhamp- as almost entirely unskilled. The general

ton 77.9 per cent. of the husbands were trend in most of these series is for nearly

definitely skilled, while only I2.6 per cent. one-half of the patients' husbands to fall

were definitely unskilled. Owing to the either in the unskilled or the semi-skilled

difficulty of determining the degree of skill groups. The clinics aim to deal almost

and training required for the execution of exclusively with the working classes, and at

industrial tasks highly mechanized, the least go per cent. of their clientele come

1 Those with statistical inclinations will observe that the occupational classifications for the different

from this group. It may be of some interest to compare

clinics vary somewhat. While this is unfortunate, each community seemed to offer somewhat different problems in the distribution of the occupational groups served. The allocation of individuals to each

Tables III and IV, the latter compiled from the records of the first 492 cases to visit the first of the Chicago clinics (there are now

group is necessarily only approximate. There is not, nor can there be, sharp dividing lines. I have not thought it necessary to define here each group.

several). While the proportion of the unskilled at the British clinics ranges from

2In view of the fact that it was particularly diffi- one-third to one-half, the per cent. of un-

cult to allocate certain of the husbands of patients in this series to the skilled and semi-skilled groups, it was decided to place them all in the one category.

skilled at Chicago was I8.9 per cent. or approximately one-fifth. The skilled group

BIRTH CONTROL CLINICS

i6i

comprised nearly one-half (45 per cent.) of the whole series, while the " professional," CC managerial," and " student " categories included together I6.2 per cent. of the total number of cases. In 5.I per cent. of the cases there was unemployment-it is estimated as twice that for the English seriesand in 14.8 per cent. of the cases there was an absence of data. The socially more responsible group at Chicago-i.e., those in the professions, in managerial business positions, or students likely to achieve more than an average success in life-represented a much larger proportion of the total number of cases than is to be found in any British series. While this may result from several causes, I think the most important reason is to be found in the fact that the American " upper " classes (socially and economically) have not now, and have not had in the past, the same facilities for securing contraceptive information as the English it upper " classes.
The figures available in regard to wage incomes are very unreliable. Frequently
this figure on the original records represents the sum turned over to the wife for defraying household expenses rather than the husband's weekly wage. Many of the women of the working classes do not know what their husbands earn. An estimate, therefore, of incomes would probably be
more reliable than any attempt to sum-
marize the data available. A careful study of the records leads me to conclude that roughly go per cent. of the clinic husbands earn from two to three pounds per week. The arithmetical mean for Glasgow, for
example, was £62 15S. 8d. At Cambridge
the highest weekly wage recorded (there were some gaps in the records relating to the incomes of certain professional men) was five pounds. Taking the 3,296 cases as 4 whole, I believe that it is not far from the truth to say that a family of five-there was an average of three living children, it will be recalled-is supported on from two to three pounds per week. I am certain that it is not much in excess of three
pounds.

AMERICAN WAGES
The wage incomes of the British clinic patients are in striking contrast with a thousand cases visiting the New York clinic. It will be observed from Table V that 77.5 per cent. of the patients in this series have an average income of $30.52 (approximately
£6 2s.) per week, while I7.7 per cent. of the
same series had an average weekly income
of $61.2o (ZI2 4s. iod.). Although this
table has serious defects, it is obvious that the weekly income of husbands of New York patients is very much larger than the income of patients visiting the British clinics.
It is clear that money incomes (and real incomes, too) are higher in the United States than in England. Moreover, money incomes in New York are higher than in most other American cities. For these reasons one would expect a considerable difference between the incomes of the New York clientele and that of the English clientele. But this discrepancy is so great as to lead one to suspect that the New York clinic is reaching a higher economic group. It is also possible that it is reaching a more intelligent group than the English clinics; but of these matters we cannot be certain until a great deal more fact-collecting and fact-analysis has been carried on. Dr. James F. Cooper, the Medical Director of the New York clinic, seems to regard these i,ooo cases as representative of those " in the lowest social brackets " and those " whose infelligence is not of the highest order." 1 This conclusion does not impress
me as following from the data, this being especially true of the deduction that the foreign-born are necessarily of low intelligence.
Even if it be granted, for the sake of argument, that the American " foreign born " may be considered as belonging to the lowest social classes, I doubt the wisdom of implying that the foreign-born are necessarily of lower intelligence. In fact, if these people came to the clinic prompted chiefly by their own impulses-and only a small proportion were sent by hospitals, and social
1 James F. Cooper, M.D., Technique of Contracep-
tion. P. I95.

i62 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

service organizations '-I should, on the contrary, be inclined to believe that they possessed more than the ordinary gift of initiative, foresight, and intelligence. The oft-repeated statement, made by those connected with the clinic, that the great majority of the women find no difficulty in comprehending the instructions given them, suggests that only exceptionally does the clinic serve the really stupid. No clinic gives intelligence tests. If data on the intelligence of patients could somehow be secured, we should have a better basis for the discussion of some of these important but mooted points. Perhaps it should be stated that in New York one has a peculiar selective factor operating-the fact that only those patients may be accepted who need contraceptive advice for medical reasons. It must be shown that the information is needed for the prevention of disease.
ENGLISH FERTILITY FALL
In the case of only one British clinic (Birmingham) is it possible to compare the size of family from which the patients came with the size of family these patients are themselves producing. Although the clinic families are not completed, and although most of the patients' and their husbands' families were probably completed when these data were gathered by the clinic's officials, it is interesting to note that the clinic patients and their husbands came from families (meaning by families the children only, i.e., brothers and sisters) 2.64 times as large as the families the patients have produced to date. If the clinic families were completed, this figure would doubtless be reduced; but even after allowance is made for this factor, the difference is considerable. In only one case did the present generation produce a family larger than the past generation. The average
1 5.8 per cent. were referred by hospitals; II.8 by
physicians; I3.3 by social service organizations-a total of 30.9 per cent.-the rest presumably coming independently, perhaps on the suggestion of friends or relatives or as a result of the propaganda of the American Birth Control League which operates the clinic. [Cooper, p. x98.] It is interesting to observe that 38.8 per cent. were Protestant, 32.6 per cent. Jewish, and 26.2 per cent. Roman Catholic, 2.4 per
cent. representing " all others." [Ibid.]

number of children in the wives' families was 8.3, while the average number of chil-
dren in the husbands' families was 7.0. The average number of children in both the
husbands' and wives' families was 7.65.
Since it is not clear from the clinic records whether or not these data include the
patient or her husband (as the case may be),
it is not certain but that the figures should
be 9.3, 7.o, and 8.65 respectively. If so, this
would bring up the difference between the
present and past generation to more than
2.64 times. One would expect that the families from which the parents came would be larger because (i) these families are probably completed, (2) because more parents are available from larger families,
and (3) on account of the falling birth-rate.
Table VI is a summary by occupational status of the use of contraceptives by the
Liverpool patients previous to the wife's first visit to the clinic. It indicates that there is very little difference in the use or hon-use of contraceptives among the occupational groups here represented. Note the percentages. Among those who did not attempt to limit their families there is a slight-but only a slight-decline in the percentages as one progresses from the unskilled to the semi-skilled and skilled groups. Conversely, among those who declared that they had made attempts to limit their families before coming to the clinic, the percentages increase, as one progresses in the same direction, by only small increments. Note that coitus interruptus was the method most commonly employed, although even the unskilled labourers showed some knowledge of more up-to-date methods. The use of abortifacient pills and implements is known to be much more common than these figures suggest. Thus we see that even some casual and dock labourers, some hawkers, window-washers, car-cleaners, and other unskilled workers in England have, at the present time, a rudimentary knowledge of birth control. The methods commonly used are, however, so crude that they frequently fail. Hence the clinical visits of the wives in the hope of finding a more efficacious method.

BIRTH CONTROL CLINICS

I63

FIFTEEN MILLION BOOKS

these classes, and in so far as they are using

It is so easy to secure contraceptive infor- the technique for the purpose of limiting

mation in England that it would be strange their families, we may reasonably expect a

indeed if this knowledge had not, to a lower fertility in the future. If this

measure at least, percolated down to the happens, will the results be eugenic or

lowest occupational groups. In this process dysgenic? I do not believe the question can

the clinics, owing to the recency of their be answered categorically. A resume of my

origin, have played, comparatively speak- opinion has been suggested in the opening

ing, only a minor role. Shortly I hope to paragraphs of this paper. I plan to

substantiate the estimate that not less than amplify those observations at a later date in fifteen million books, pamphlets, brochures, a book on " The British Birth Control

leaflets, etc., giving actual contraceptive Clinics," but I have preferred, for the pre-

advice of a medical nature have been sold or sent, to emphasize facts rather than inter-

given away in England since the declaration pretations of them, in the hope of assisting

of peace in I9I8.

in forming a basis for discussion. Facts,

While it is difficult to weigh the eugenic rather than opinions, no matter how pro-

meaning of the data just presented, I think visional, are needed. Racial forces, even

one point is reasonably clear, namely, that more than social forces, are necessarily

we may expect a further decline in the complex in their operation, their mechanism

fertility and perhaps in the effective fer- and their effects. WVhen more space is

tility, of the unskilled, semi-skilled, and available, it will be possible to consider in

skilled groups in the working class. We greater detail those qualifications which are

know by the " Report on the Fertility of undoubtedly requisite for an accurate state-

Marriage " [Census of England and Wales, ment of the eugenic significance of the work

I9II, Vol. XIII] that the crude effective of the clinics. The conclusions presented

fertility of Class III (skilled labourers in here, therefore, should be viewed as tentathe transport service, in the building, metal, tive. Most assuredly I am not prepared to and paper trades) and of Class IV (labourers dogmatize on the subject.

of a lower grade of skill whose work required some physical strength) remained relatively constant throughout the period i85i-i9ii. For the end of this period the figures have less significance owing to the shorter duration of the marriages, but my work on the diffusion of contraceptive information leads me to believe that a further decline is probable. On the other hand, the crude effective fertility of miners rose very rapidly up to the period I89I-96, fell off even more rapidly between the interval I89I-96 and the interval I9OI-06, when there was again a slight rise (between the intervals I9OI-06 and I906-II). But while the significance of this also is in doubt, owing to the fact that these marriages were of short duration when the data were collected, my own small series of miners showed a fertility that was not high. The
families, however, are not completed. In so far as the clinics are spreading
reliable contraceptive information among

DEFECTWES NOT REACHED
Yet it may be said emphatically that the clinics have been powerless, so far at least, to reach the obviously inadequate-mentally, socially, and economically. Those institutional cases already confined are, of course, beyond the limits of the clinics' work, while those not already under care are, as a rule, problems in segregation or sterilization. It is not the business of private clinics, but of the State, to handle this problem. Necessarily, therefore, little work has been done with the insane and the definitely feeble-minded. Hence, when it is stated that the clinics have reached the limits of their functions before serving this group, I speak as a recorder of fact, not as a critic.
Some clinics have, however, succeeded in reaching a few families carrying a rather strong strain of epilepsy or feeble-minded-
ness.
At a later date I hope to be able to present

164 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

more specific information bearing on the question of the extensiveness with which the clinics are reaching those with racial, or presumably racial, taints. As regards un-
employment, it is not known at present exactly what proportion of the patients'
husbands were unemployed at the times of
the wives' first visits, but a provisional estimate-it varies, of course, with each locality-would place the figure at from IO to IS per cent. The group which one might describe as " chronic paupers " is

hardly- represented among the clinic patients.
Briefly, one can say (i) that the clinics are serving the unskilled; but that (2) they have been aiding the skilled to a consider-
able extent also; (3) that they have been
powerless so far to limit the reproduction
of those fertile individuals in the community who constitute a serious problem-the
feeble-minded, the insane, the chronic
paupers, and the persistent leaners on the State.

TABLE la

OCCUPATIONAL STATUS OF HUSBANDS.

NORTH KENSINGTON

CAMBRIDGE

Status.

Total Per cent. Unskilled ... ...

99 32.0

Unskilled ... ... ...

379 37.9

Labourers ... ... 60

I43Labourers ... . ..

...

Others

... 39

Porters.

... ...

so

Semi-skilled

.. ...

53 I7.2

Carmen.

... ...

26

Skilled artisans ... ...

78 25.2

Miscellaneous ... ... i6o

Tradesmen

... .5..2.. . I6 5 2

Skilled or semi-skilled ...

328 32.8 Professional

... ...

I7 55

Miscellaneous ... 238 Bus conductors or

Unclassifiable or unknown

46 I4.9

drivers, motor mech-

309 IOO.O

anics and chauffeurs go

Naval and military service

14 I.4

(mostly soldiers)

Police

.... . .

33 3.3

Clerks

... ...

57 5.7 LIVERPOOL

Petty tradesmen and

Unskilled 19...... ..

IO 46.8

assistants ... Higher business

...
and

pro..-.

70 7.0 Labourers 69... ...

Others.

40... ...

fessional ... ... ...

I7 1.7 Semi-skilled ... ...

38 i6.2

Unclassifiable or unknown

I02 10.2 Skilled

... ...

46 I9.6

MANCHESMTANECRHESTER

--O.OI'0-01,000

100.0

Miscellaneous ... Clerks and postmen ... ii

4I

4.7

~~~M~o~~r~eTradreessmpenonsible ... 6

2.1I 2.5

Unskilled ... ...

Labourers ... ... ... io6

Others o... ... ..9go

Semi-skilled

...

Skilled artisans ... ...

Clerks and postmen ...

Business and trade

More respo-nsible ..1.

Professional (teacher) ...

Unclassifiable or unknown

I96 32.6
67 MI.1
i86 3I.0 38 6.4 3I 5.2
2 2.0
I .2 69 11I.-55
6oo IOO.O

Unclassifiable or un-

known'

... ... I9

8. x 234 100.0

1 Includes a very few professional people such as
teachers and clergymen.
'Note on the Professional Group: This group included an assistant professor, i tutor, 2 universitv lecturers, i airman, i petty officer of the Royal Navy, 3 scientific instrument makers, i microscopic

WOLVERHAMPTON Maximum definitely un-
skilled ... ... ... Degree of skill uncertain
(mostly intermediate) Definitely skilled Unknown ...19..

mmaraatssittseet,rr,, ixanmmduasnaiacgPirtinemgaicthidevirer,ecMatenotor,htohdeIristtdeenamtciihnseitrs,,terii.scmhuToshoiilcs-

63 12.65 Cambridge series does not include one other pro-

fessor because the required data on the case were

28 S -65 not recorded on the clinic's card.

388 ig

77.9 3.8

.

Includes a master mariner, manager of an iron-
mongers, two shops assistants, a goods foreman, and

498 100.0 a wholesale news agent. ' Probably mostly unskilled or semi-skilled.

BIRTH CONTROL CLINICS

I6S

TABLE II-(Continued.)

BIRMINGHAM

Unskilled ... ...

Labourers ... ... ...

Others ... ... ...

Semi-skilled

... ...

Skilled

... ... ...

Ordinary skill ... ...

Highly skilled ... ...

Miscellaneous ... Clerks, tradesmen,

sho..p.

assistants Unclassifiable

...
or

un..-.

known ... ... ...

Professional ... ...

2I I9 62 4 17 Is 4

40 23 66 36

I65

24.2
I3.9
40.0 2I.9
I00.0

GLASGOW (Adequate Series)

Unskilled ... ...

Labourers ... ... ...

Miners ... ... ...

Others ... ... ...

Semi-skilled

...

Skilled

Tradesmen

... ...

Professional

Unclassifiable or unknown

24 12
I6

52 34.6
27 i8.o
37 24.6 20 I3.6
3 2.0 II 7.3
150 100.0

ABERDEEN Unskilled ... ... ...
Labourers ... ... ... Others ... ... ...

Fishermen, Seamen, etc..

Clerks

... ... ...

Semi-skilled ... ... ...

Skilled

... ... ...

Trade .. ... ... ...

Professional or more than

ordinarily responsible

Unclassifiable or unknown

28 I4

42 38.5

I8 i6.5 4 3.7 8 7.3 22
I 3
II

66.o
20.2 3.7 I0.I

I09 I00.0
1 This miscellaneous category should not be interpreted as referring to a social class above the working class. See the more detailed classifications for each series in Table II.
2 Compiled from figures in Dr. Rachelle S. Yarros's Birth Control and its Relation to Health and Welfare. Chicago: Illinois Birth Control League, 1925. P.6.

TABLE III

SUMMARY OF OCCUPATIONAL STATUS OF HUSBANDS

Location of Un- Semi-

All

Clinic. skilled, skilled. Skilled. Others'

North Kensington ... 37.9 32.8 29.3

Manchester ... ... 32.6 1I.1 31.0 25.3

Wolverhampton ... 12.6 5.6 77.9 3-9

Cambridge

... 32.0 17.2 25.2 25.6

Liverpool ... 46.8 16.2 ig.6 I7.4

Birmingham ... ... 24.2 I3.9 40.0 21.9

Glasgow ... ... 34.6 I8.0 24.6 22.8

Aberdeen ... ... 38.5 7.3 20.2 34.0

Cannock .. ... ioo.o

CHICAGO

TABLE IV2

OCCUPATIONAL STATUS OF HUSBANDS

Status.

Unskilled

Skilled

...

Professional

Managerial ...

Students

Unemployed

Not recorded

Total.

.... 93

22I...

. . 49

. ..
...

... ...

23 8

......

25

...

...

73

Per cent.
18.9 45.0
10.0
4.6 i.6
5. I
14.8

492 IOo.o

TABLE V

Economic and Social Data on i,ooo Cases at the

New York Clinic of the American Birth Control

League.'

Nationality

Per cent.

Foreign born

... 51.0..*.-

*- S1...

American born ... 49.0... ... ... ...

Weekly Income

$$580toto$I5iooo(A(vAevreargaegoefo$f30$.65I2.)20)...

.
...

... 77.5
... I7.7

$ioo or more ... ... ... ... ... 4.8

Age

25 years

... ... ... ...

25 to 30 ... * - *

*

30 to 35 ... ... ... ... ...

36 to 40 ... ... ... ... ...

40 to 45
Number of

... ...
Children per

F.a..mily...

...

Living

... ... ... ... ...

Dead

... ... ... ... ...

Abortions

...

...

...

...

Total pregnancies

...

...

... 19.5
4I.6...
... 15.7 ... I4-3
... 6.3
... 2.41
.3.3..
.73
3.47...

' James F. Cooper, M.D., Technique of Contraception. P.I95. These cases had an average of 3.47
pregnancies and 2.41 living children [Ibid, p. 1971.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.

