THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
THE FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS OF THE PROBLEMS OF
POPULATION AND MIGRATION.
BY SIR GEORGE H. KNIBBS, K.B., C.M.G., etc. HON. F.S.S.; Hon. Memb. Stat., Soc., Paris; Memb. Intern. Inst. of Stat; Hon. Memb. Amer. Stat. Assoc.; Hon. Memb. Stat. Soc.,
Hungary, etc.
I. THE GROWTH OF HUMAN POPULATIONS. II. FACTORS AFFECTING THE RATE OF POPULATION-
GROWTH. III. CONDITIONS OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF POPULATION. IV. ACTUAL RATES OF POPULATION GROWTH. V. PRESENT DENSITY OF POPULATIONS. VI. POSSIBLE POPULATION OF THE EARTH.
VII. THE QUESTION OF MIGRATION.
VIII. INHERENT DIFFICULTIES OF SOLUTION.
I. THE GROWTH OF HUMAN POPULATIONS. The whole earth, and each of its territorial divisions, have, in the tons of man's life thereon, seen his development to various degrees

268 EUGENICS REVIEW.
of civilisation. The progress of course has not been uniform, for the various stages of his evolution are still in evidence in one part of the earth or another. In the first and crudest stage, man lived mainly by hunting and fishing, and by eating plants and fruits immediately available. Australia, a century ago, and America a few centuries ago, were still largely in that stage of development and portions of these countries, of Africa, of Asia, and of Oceania, are still therein. The population-carrying possibility of a territory is then at its lowest.
Man next advanced to the pastoral stage, when he supervised and controlled the multiplication of certain animals. This increased his numbers, living in territories suitable for pastoral developments. Later again, man passed to the agricultural stage of his progress, and a still larger and more settled population became possible. And now that he has reached the industrial stage, in which he has learnt better how to avail himself of Natures' energies and her material resources, not only has the rapidity of his growth in numbers, relatively, enormously increased; but a vastly greater possible population has been attained. The history of past century has disclosed this in a very remnarkable way.
Unquestionably it is of course possible that a fuller knowledge of the energies and substance of the world, will enable the human race again to increase its numbers. At each stage of development, there have, however, been limnits, which could not be transcended except by the introduction of a new regime, or by progress to a new and more developed stage.
In order to get a clear mental picture of the nature of human increase, it is convenient to create a representation, which of course can be only of a schematic character. Assuming then that man's readiness to multiply is persistent, and that his environment is constant, the fundamental nature of his increase in numbers, depending
upon his power to exploit that environment, can be envisagred roughly
as follows:
Calling the stages of development mentioned, the hunting, the pastoral, the agricultural, the industrial, and the (future) higher stage, each is characterised by its own proper limit to the possibilities of increase. Postulatingthenforthe purpose in view, what adcnitte dly has never existed, a homogeneous world, if we denote the moments at which the successive stages were reached, by the epochs Ti, T2, T8, etc., man's progress in numbers from the beginning of any one stage, steadily increased till the numerical increase became a maximum for that stage; then it diminished, until ultimately the maximum population for that stage was reached. The ratio of his increase to the existing population was, of course, always diminishing.
The samne phenomenon recurred when he passed to the next stage of his development; a higher maximnum population was reached: and similarly for each subsequent stage of his advance. On the assumption, therefore, that a territory existed which constituted a homogeneous environment, and was occupied by a population in the one stage of civilisation, but which changed to a higher stage from time to time, the graph of its growth for successive stages would be as in Fig. 1.

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS.

.269

(1zpP32 T Ti

0TO Ti/me
FIG. 1.
The conceptions above indicated, probably do not accord exactly with any actual condition of the earth's population, or that of any territory therein; but the graph is of value, nevertheless, as illustrating what would be the growth of the world's people, had it conformned to such a state of things as that supposed. The form of the curve illustrating its increases, is deduced by recognising that the increase itself, at every stage, is creating difficulty for a continuence of the previous rate of increase. It is based upon the assumption that, at every instant, the rate of growth of the population then existing, is proportional to the ratio, which the further possibility of population bears to the total possible population for that stage of human development. This conception was formulated in 1844 by Verhulst, a professer in the Belgian military school, and a contemporary of Quetelet's: its consequences were mathematically developed by him. This mathematical development has recently been recast by Prof. Raymaond Pearl and Dr. Reed, and has been extended or generalised somewhat.
The facts, however, do not conform to the very simple awsumption above indicated. As a whole, the human race is not by any means a homogeneity. All the so-called stages of development have been inore or less in being, practically perhaps always. And further, man's environment is not constant. His power of surviving meteerological and similar vicissitudes of Nature, depends to some extent upon his success in the storing of foods, and upon his other self-protective actions. Again, he has been subject to decimation and even worse consequences, by epidemics and by plagues of various kinds, and

270 EUGENICS REVIEW.
some portions of the earth have been found to be practically uninhabitable, until quite recently, owing to menaces to human life from other living organisms.
It is self-evident that, given constancy in the human being, and in his environment regarded as unrestricted, if he meets with no obstacles to his increase in number, the law of that increase is, that it will be at a constant rate at every moment. That is mathematically, dy/dt=ry, in which y denotes the number of the population at the time t, and r denotes the rate of increase. By integration of this equation, we have
y%=yoet, that is we obtain what has been called the compound-interest
law. Thus, as long as his nature remains constant, and his environment is (virtually) unrestricted, man tends to increase at a constant rate. In other words, for equal intervals of time, his numbers constitute a geometrical progression. In the absence of statistics, this dictum cannot be confirmed by examples from olden times. It has, however, been wonderfully confirmed by the earlier population-growth of the United States of America. From 1790 to 1860, the percentages of increase in the successive decades were:
35'1; 86-4; 33-1; 33-5; 32-7; 35-9; and 35-6;
a very remarkable constancy of increase for so long a period as seventy years.
As already said, human increase in numbers may, however, itself create difficulties, and so operate as to render the rate of increase less and less, until at least some new factor supervenes, say for example, the attaining to another stage of civilisation, which stage advances man' s efficiency in exploiting the resources of his environment. These new stages are denoted on the graph, Fig. 1, by Ti, T2, T3, etc.
As far back as 1835, Quetelet, in his Physique sociale, basing his dictum on a number of unpublished researches, affirmed (a) that population tended to increase as a geometric progression; but also (b) that its free development was hindered as the square of the velocity with which it tended to increase. For small intervals of time (a) is correct, if conditions are constant. It may be mentioned that it had long been recognised that while it is difficult to stimulate the growth of population artificially, any diminution of its numbers, caused by various disturbances, such for example as by war, epidemics, etc., is soon apparently made good: vide Giovanni Botero, 1589, in his "Delle cause della grandezza della citta"; teste E. Krummeich. But selfevidently this is only a half-truth, immediately disposed of, if one measures issues by the total quantity of life lived, that is by the years of life which would have been experienced had the reduction of numbers not occurred.
Although not formally affirmed, it must have always been known that population is dependent upon the means of subsistence. As early as 1784, Cantillon had pointed out that the number of inhabitants in any State depended not merely upon the means of subsistence, but also upon their manner of life. Thus it is essential to remember that any population will tend to maintain that standard of living to which it has been accustomed. For this reason "the means of subsistence" for a human unit are very different for different peoples. There can be no doubt whatever, that, so long as the productive powers of a people

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS.

271

remain unimpaired, the more humbly they live, the larger is the total
possible population that a territory or the earth can carry. The point is important and later will be more fully considered.
In 1798, Malthus recognised clearly that there is a tendency among all forms of living things to increase more rapidly than their
means of subsistence. It is really a universal law. He accentuated the idea that the tendency to increase, was limited only by evils of various kinds. Primarily he thought that vice and poverty limited human increase. In the more mature edition of his work in 1803, he indicated that the character of the living exercised its influence, and also that the marriage-impulse was impaired by a certain degree of misery. While he gave no very definite reason for the proposition that the means of subsistence can increase only as an arithmetical progression, he saw clearly that the tendency to increase in a geometrical progression, can be hindered only by limitations imposed by ourselves, or imposed upon us by external conditions of a painful character. Whether it be possible for the arithmetical-progression idea to be vindicated, or for the food-supply to advance somewhat
more rapidly than Malthus thought possible, is really immaterial to the issue. It is quite certain that the physiological possibility of human increase is greater than any possibility of the increase of man's
food-supply. Incidentally it may be remarked that, in the period between 1790
and 1860, the population of the United States of America increased just over eight times (8.0028), which is equivalent to an overall increase of over three per cent. per annum (3 * 0157), that is to a doubling
of the population in about 23 years and four months. Malthus and others thought that, but for hindering elements, it was possible for populations to double in about twenty-five years. A consideration of the physiological factors, however, indicates that the rate of doubling even in twenty-three years could readily be exceeded, were there really no economic or traditional hindrances.
The defect of the conceptions which, mathematically developed, lead to the type of curve in Fig. 1, is that they are altogether too elementary to represent the material facts. Data, available recently, establishes this, as they did the possibility of uniform increase. The growth of the population of the United States of America before and since 1860,- affords by comparison, an almost ideal example of the potency of other factors. When in 1860 the numbers had reached 81,443,000, a change came in the general ideals of the people, and as a consequence the rate of increase fell off. This falling off was not due to a real exhaustion in the population-carrying power of the territory. As was pointed out in 1888 by Mr. F. A. Walker, American statistician and economist, in 1790 there were about 600,000 white families, few either very rich or very poor. Food was abundant; social traditions and religious beliefs encouraged fecundity; and domestic tranquillity prevailed. Up to 1850, instead of relying upon
mechanical power, farm labourers, at least in the north, consisted of young men who worked for a few years in order to acquire a little ready money in order to marry. It was these thrifty, economic, and social conditions that allowed population to increase with but little

-272 EUGENICS REVIEW.
restriction. But between 1840 and 1850 a change came. The population was modifying its conceptions as to the standard of living it desired. And notwithstanding enormous accessions of peasant blood fromn Europe, andthatthe immigrants bred with unprecedented rapidity, the high rate of increase was at once greatly reduced. The passing from simplicity of life to comparative luxury, the multiplication of artificial necessities, the extension of paid domestic service, the introduction of women into factory labour, in fact the changing ofthe standard of living, were then the main factors limiting the power of increase. Then from 1861 to 1865 came the war of secession, which was believed to have caused the figures for 1870 to fall short of what otherwise they would have been, by about 1,765,000 persons. The rates of increase per decennium for the six decennia from 1860 to 1920 were:
22-6; 30 1; 25-5; 20-7; 21-0; and 14-9; instead of averaging about 34-6 as from 1790 to 1860. America could now attain to its former rate only for a very limited time, if at all; and then only by passing to a very different regime from the existing one. The present standard of living greatly limits the otherwise possible rate of increase.
Economic conditions, we see, and any moral conditions which react upon them, are factors greatly affecting the rapidity of population increase; and there is abundant evidence, which it is not necessary to particularise, that marriage and birthrates, and consequently rates of natural increase, are affected by the efficiency of production, and other econcmic factors which characterise the life of a community, or are due to favourable or unfavourable natuiral events.
To generalise:-While in a large way it may perhaps be possible
for the curves representing the growth of population to be somnewhat of the form of a series of "logistic" curves, as in Fig. 1, even then there will be superadded fluctuations due to all things that influence the economic well-being of the earth's peoples. And it may further be added, that at present we know very little about cosmic influences. We do know that meteorological factors enter into the world' s population-carrying power. W9e owe our development to energiesthat have their origin in the sun (and perhaps more than we yet know to the cosmic or Millikan rays). To what vicissitudes they may lead is beyond our ken, because the necessary records have not been kept.
II. FACTORS AFFECTING THE RATE OF POPULATIONGROWTH.
As we have seen there is only one all-governing law affecting man's increase, that is the compound-interest law. Its application, however, leads practically to definite resuilts, only so long as the rate of increase remains constant, or sensibly so. For this reason inquiries into the future of the race, involve attention to the various factors which govern the rate of growth. Some consideration has previously been given by the writer to this matter in various publications. It will be now more systematically and thoroughly set out, hereunder. Restricting our attention to a community which grows by

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS.

278

natural increase alone, the power to increase is profoundly influenced
by four types of things, viz.:(a) The material resources,'including its utilisable energy, of the
territory occupied: These resources are both actual and potential. (b) The various cosmic energies which facilitate the satisfaction
of man's real needs, and those to which by habit he is committed. (c) i. Knowledge which enhances rnan's power to recognise
and to avail himself of natural resources: ii. Skill in inventiveness, enabling him to recognise his opportunity and to use effectively the possibilities of his situation: and iii. That insight which gives him
some measure of the power of prevision. (d) Those social and ethical standards, which reacting upon
human activities, upon man's intelligence, and his accumulations of knowledge of Nature, make his productiveness greater, and more
convenient to his purposes and needs, and avoid needless destruction. Even a superficial consideration of these matters (a) to (d) dis-
closes the fact that man is an active agent in creating factors which increase his own power of multiplying, and it is necessary, therefore,
to remember that the liriits of his numbers are not properly illustrated by the laws which have application to the multiplication of microorganisms and insects. It is of course not possible on the present occasion to do more than mention these aspects of the question of factors, which govern the rate of increase. By way of illustrating the significance of some of the matters touched upon, it may be noted that a territory may be prodigal of those forms of animal and vegetable life that provide immediately for human wants. Its climate and
meteorology may be propitious. It may be endowed with large
stores of readily available wealth, and of energy conveitible into
wealth. On the other hand, though even infertile in the state of Nature, it may respond well tC appropriately directed efforts to make it of
service. It may have considerable hidden resouirces, and the dis-
covery of these, and the application of considerable scientific and
technical knowledge, may so alter the economic situaticnfor the better, as tc make the territory able to increase the nuimbers which can thrive thereupc,n. It mnav contain types of wealth, which, though valueless, per se, to sustain life, contribute to human needs in general; and which, by the part they play in the world-economy, increase the possible
number that can be provided for. We see then that the population-
possibilities depend not only upon the natural fertility and resources of a territory, independent of human action and intervention, but also upon resources and wealth which owe their being to human activities and talents. In other words, the resources of 'Nature, as related to the human race, are in the main potential rather than actual; and much of the existing possibility of the earth to carry its present population, depends not upon what Nature has made immediately available, but
upon man turning her potentialities into actualities, by his insight, his ideas, his power to systematise' knowledge and apply it to his needs; his power to think in the field of mathematics and of science generally, and by such thought to profit in the efficiency of his effort to exploit his environment. For example, the part which the infinitesimal calculus has played in making various great constructions

274 EUGENICS REVIEW.
possible, such for instance as the great locomotive and the great steamship; the services which the theory of electricity has rendered in intercommunication, by telegraphy and wireless communication; and which other sciences have similarly rendered; in various ways these things even by the facilities for the transport of materials needed in human life, have enormously increased the numbers which can be
supplied with all that is essential to life. In short recent rapid
growth in the numbers of the human race is due, not to man' s environment being richer, but to the genius of the race in exploiting it.
Obviously the system of relations, which the members of a com-
munity entertain to one another, affect the efficiency of their activity
in providing for their requirements; and similarly, the relations which one community has to another, affect their joint efficiency. Thus the social, economic and political relations of human beings are factors in developing world-possibilities of population. In an analogous way, man is affected by his knowledge of the best modes of combatting disease and of maintaining his health. All these things imply intellectual achievements, and one sees that man's great advantage over the higher mammals is due, very largely, to his power of systematising and storing his knowledge. Thus the creation of language, though directly it added nothing to the store of material things, brought about conditions under which the numbers, for which the earth could provide, enormously increased. This is but an illustration of other factors which act in an analogous manner.
To restate the position briefly:-The population which the earth can carry is a function, not merely of its material resources, and its physical laws, but also of man's intellectual and moral attainments. Natural fertility and wealth, geographic and climatic advantages, resources that will become available when science has become more advanced, the appropriate control ofthe,powers of fecundity, a better national and international hygiene, greater and better trained intel-
lectual powers, a higher sense of communal and international justice, leading to improved relations between individuals and peoples, all
these are significant factors in determining both the possible rate at which human population can increase, and the ultimate magnitude to which it can attain. They affect fundamentally the consideration of the question, not only what numbers particular territories can carry, but consequently also what is the possible population of the whole earth.
From what has been outlined so far, it is clear that an elementary assumption, which does not take due cognisance of all the essential factors, will lead almost certainly to false results. And although one can fit a series of the numbers of a people at different dates, approximately to a curve of a particular type,-the "logistic" say-the doing of this does not necessarily justify its application of the correct representation of the facts, and the extrapelation of the curve does not necessarily give a true and authoritative indication of the future population. This has been shown by the writer; see Journ. Amer. Stat. Assoc. Dec. 1926, p. 889, and by A. B. Wolfe, In. Journ. Econ. Aug. 1927.
In this connection it is well to remember that, since the distance

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS.

275

between its asymptotes, and the number of years constituting it socalled normal time-unit, are modifiable in any way necessary, the
"logistic" curve may readily appear to have a better representing-
power than it really has. It will perhaps suffice to say that recent
discussions as to its applicability, have shewn that it does not truly reveal the nature of the actual progress of populations; see for example the discussions in the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, and by the writer in that of the American Statistical Association, as already
referred to.
It is eminently desirable that, in a discussion of the possibilities
of the earth's population, we should not rely upon deductions, which are based upon inadequate conceptions of the essential nature of the problem in hand. Those who know the value of mathematics in
attacking problems of the kind under review, will realise the import-
ance of this dictum. Mathematical method is an unrivalled handmaiden, if the assumptions are sound, but if they are not, the conclusions are unsound.
The development of the numbers of the human race can be envisaged as follows:-The whole human race consists to-day of under
2,000,000,000 persons, even now in all stages of development. In the first or hunting stage, primeval man, having exhausted the game of one region, wanderedon to another, involving, as till within say a
century ago in Australia, more or less collision with other tribes. His life in that stage was migratory within narrow limits. In the next or pastoral stage, the characteristics were somewhat similar; the pasture being exhausted in one region, a move had to be made to
another, or disaster would follow. This again involved not only
limited migrations, but also possible collisions. Obviously under such conditions both the vicissitudes of Nature and the growth of numbers compelled movement, but would not admit of the development of large communities. In the next, the agricultural stage, man depended so greatly upon the fertility of the soil of the occupied region, that regions where alluvium existed, or where the soil was good, neces-
arily became centres of permanent settlement, as exemplified by the developments in China, India, Assyria, etc., and by the extraordinary development in Egypt. In such centres as these often arose industrial
developments also; these tend even more strongly to secure permanent
settlement. Throughout this evolution, however, groups have remained in their original state, and in some cases groups have even retrograded thereunto. Thus to-day the world consists of hetero-
geneous peoples, living in all stages of development. It is not unimportant to note that whenever a people in a more
advanced stage become part possessors ofthe territoy of a people in a less advanced stage, the latter either become merged in the former, and pass into their stage of development, or, if not, die out or vanish.

III. CONDITIONS OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF POPULATION.
The conditions under which multiplication will take place, and the things which are inimical thereto, may be briefly indicated as follows

276 EUGENICS REVIEW.
(i) The fundamental element is the measure of the reproductive impulse, which is affected by heredity and health, but is doubtless always beyond the possibility of complete fulfilment.
(ii) In a new country, the resources of which are relatively large, a healthy population tends to increase, according to the measure of its normal reproductive impulse, provided that all factors influencing the effectiveness of this impulse remain constant. It is greatly influenced bv social traditions and prevailing beliefs.
(iii) So long as the reproductive impulse is constant, and the other factors rendering population possible are also constant, the population will tend to grow at the same rate, that is its numbers will be in arithmetic progression: it will grow according to the formula, P_Ae r
(iv) When in regard to the total available resources of a territorv the needs of the developed population are so great that the effectiveness of the reproductive impulse, or the impulse itself, is reduced; the possibilities of maintaining the earlier rate of increase are diminished. The ultimate effect is that the population will reach a point where further increase of numbers ceases to be possible. This limiting population is not reached ideally, i.e., asymptotically, because the vicissitu des of nature, and the economic conditions reacting upon any territory, are always oscillatory. The fact that the limit is reached is disclosed by the appearance of various evils and hardships in the corporate life of the population.
(v) The rate of increase can be reinforced in several ways, xiv. (a) by the discovery of hitherto unknown resources; (b) by the more skilful exploitation of known resources; (c) by reducing the standard of living, but not so as to interfere with the productive efficiency of occupation; (d) by intensifying the effective reproductive impulse so long as it is possible to do so with the resources at command, or with the possibilities of more thrifty or more efficient living.
(vi) All advancing of the standard of living, that is not necessary for increased productive efficiency tends, if general, to limit population.
(vii) Analyses which conform to a logistic law of populationincrease or to more complex laws which actually represent the growth of the numbers of existing populations, merely represent empirically the past modifications of the numbers with time. The legitimacy of their projection into the future depends wholly upon correct estimations as to whether the relevant conditions will continue or not.
(viii) With most populations of the western world, the existing growth of population has been collateral with the elaboration of an extraordinarily higher standard of living. The existing standard of many peoples is not only unessential for the maximum productive efficiency, but even makes it short of what is possible, and tends to limit population, being inconsistent with that type of thrift and earnestness of purpose, which, for example, enabled the United States of America to increase at the rate of three per cent. per annum for about seventy years.
(ix) Having regard to the impossibility of recent rates of increase continuing for any appreciable time, and to the fact that the question

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS.

277

of adequate food-supplies is rapidly becoming of serious momnent, the acute question of the near future will be, whether wQrld-policy should be directed to, the securing of larger numbers,, living according to a
more moderate standard than at present, or should aim at our being
satisfied with a smaller world-population-not necessarily than the existing one-living according to a more highly elaborated standard. This, it should be observed is a moral question, not merely an economic
one. (x) For anp satisfactory solution of the population-question, it is
desirable that an estimate should be made of the population possible
in each territory, considered in itself, according to some one or more standards of living. This estimate would require that the possibilities of food and other necessary production should be appraised, and the possibilities of limitations of unnecessary developments in the standard
of living should be taken into account. (xi) Since technical and scientific advances have enormously
increased the extent and rapidity of the power of destruction, and relatively thereto have but slightly advanced the power of ameliorating human conditions, world-increases of population make urgent all
studies of the adjustment of international conflicts of interest; that is world-politics have become of pressing mnoment.
(xii) In view of the fact that the issues of war between peoples involve not only population limitations, but also great economic losses, great hardship and great suffering, a consensus of opinion in regard to the fundamentals of the ideals of population-increase is even
now a world-need of the first order of importance.
*(xiii) Since we are apt to trust mathematical deductions, perhaps over much, it is desirable to bear in mind that no simple mathematical Formula can unequivocally define the characters of the curve which represents the world-growth of population: not only do the factors not lend themselves to unequivocal mathematical expression, but their fluctuations with time can not be predicted by mere extrapolation.
Recent increases in the numbers of human beings upon the earth are the consequence of a complex of favourable conditions, among which man's intellectual achievements figure largely, viz.,the formulation of the conceptions of Science, the extension of the knowledge of Nature, the genius of invention and of the application of knowledge to human needs.
We turn now to a consideration of the rate of increase.

IV. ACTUAL RATES OF POPULATION-GROWTH.
It is to be noted that the rate at which the world's population is growing, even at the present time, is not easily ascertained with great precision. The taking of a census is so recently a world-practice, that virtually nothing is known of the precise rise and fall of the world's peoples, or of the rate of their growth and fluctuations as a whole, in ancient times. A considerable number of estimates, about fifty-six, have been made between 1660 and 1914. An examination of them suggests that Michelot's estimate of 1009 millions for 1845 mnay be

278 EUGENICS REVIEW.

taken as perhaps as reliable as most of them. The measure of their

uncertainty is however very great. In the table hereunder, results are

given which afford at least some indication of the rapidity with which

the world's population is now growing, since some of the recent results

may be regarded as possessing a high degree of accuracy.

Recent growth of the World's Population.

Years to

Period

Millions

Years An. increase double

World

1741-1915 997-1664

World

1845-1914 1009-1649

19 countries. 1881-1910i 32163-440-59

26 Countries. 1906-1911

174 0 293* 237
69 0 714t 97.4 29i 1*082 64*4 5 1U159 60-1

World

1901-1924 1604'3-1852'7 23 0 628 110*7

* W. F. Willcox. t Michelot and Knibbs.

The last result is greatly affected by the actual losses during the Great War, the deaths in Russia, and the hindrances to the maintenance of the ordinary rate of increase. It would appear that if these be allowed for, the earth's population at present tends to double in somewhat less than 100 years. The significance of this for the future, we shall refer to shortly.
To appropriately realise the significance of the recent rate of increase of population, it is necessary first of all to consider at what rate, had it been regular, the increase would have been, in order to attain te the earth's present population in a given number of years. My recent estimate of the existing number is at least about 1888 millions for 1927. Let us suppose, arbitrarily perhaps, that if all the counts were all complete, the proper number would be about 1950 millions for that year. For a single pair to attain thereto in the present era, i.e. in 1927 years, the rate of increase over all would be only 1 07981 per cent. per annum. Human history however goes back perhaps
10,000 years. For a single pair to attain to the present number in that time, means an increase of only 0.20719 per cent. per annum: in 100,000 years, a percentage of only 0 0207: and in a million years of only 0 00207 per cent. per annum. That is, if man has been on the
earth for a million years, his average annual increase has been only 207 persons for every ten millions. We see from the traces that exist of early forms of the genus homo sapiens, that the rate of increase over all has been amazingly slow .
There is no doubt, however, that man's growth in numbers has been oscillatory. The momuments of earlier civilisations show that conditions were from time to time attained which permitted of the development of considerable populations locally. But though the numbers in certain regions increased rapidly, they fell away again. And universal history advises us that progress is not necessarily continuous. Conditions favourable to growth may develope, man will multiply: adverse conditions may then appear, and his numbers will dwindle. So far as the monuments of earlier civilisations justify inferences at all, one may conclude that at nottime in the world's history has there been a number as great as exists to-day. And yet that the world can carry more is certain, as we shall show later.

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS.

279

Accepting 1950 millions as the earth's entire population for 1927,

and as the rate of increase, 0'628 per cent. per annum, in a little over

four years its population will be 2,000 millions; that is in 1931. Then,

were it possible for the rate to be maintained, so that the population

would be doubled each century, the dates and corresponding popula-

tions would be as follows:-

Year 1931 2031 2131 2231 of the present era.

Population 2000 4000 8000 16000 millions of persons.

Density

88-1 76.2 152 4 304 8 persons per square mile.

That the last number is not a possible one, is readily realised if one considers for a moment that the density of distribution over the whole earth, excepting only part of the polar circles, would have to be about 305 per square mile. England and Wales at the present time has about 670 per square mile, but very few regions on the earth can be so densely populated. We shall now consider this aspect of the question in more detail.

V. PRESENT DENSITY OF POPULATIONS.
The distribution of human beings over the earth's surface, ranges between about 0 05 per square mile as in Spitsbergen, to about 18718 per square mile as in Macao, which however is only a very small territory. Very cold countries and desert countries range from about 0*05 to about 8 * 4, andfrom about 0 * 5 to about 5 *0 respectively, per square mile. Although discoveries of artesian supplies of water have here and there made settlement possible, where formerly the territories were quite uninhabitable, andhave also made possible the development of large tracts both in Africa, America and Australia, the total population effect relatively is very small.
Even for continents the population densities vary greatly: thus per square mile it is, for Europe about 128; for Asia about 64; for the United States of America, about 38; for the whole of North and Central America, about 18; for Africa, perhaps about 11; for South America perhaps 10; for Australia and Oceania generally, less than 8. The "scatter" on either side of these mean densities is also very wide. Thus some countries, even with large populations, have over five times the mean continental density, as for example countries in Europe, Asia and Africa. In North and Central America, the United States has over double the average, and Haiti over 11 times; in South America, for countries of over one million inhabitants, the divergence is much smaller.
This diversity in the density of population, is not always easily explained. It is to be noted that it cannot be taken to represent the difference in the population-carrying power of the countries in question. We do not, at the present time, know at all well, the potential wealth of different portions of the earth's surface. Nor can we be said to have coordinated our utilisation of the natural wealth of the various territories, so that the sum-total is as great as possible, or that it is really available for the earth's peoples, taken in their entirety. And, it may be added, that even if we did know the potential wealth, the quality of the human factor, and available accumulations of material

280 EUGENICS REVIEW.
wealth, are all necessary to change it from a potentiality to an actual -
ity. In view of the difficulties arising from increasing populations,
it is eminently desirable that a survey of the populatioii-carrying power of the earth's different regions, should be undertaken internationally, and at an early a date as possible. The difficulty of this, viz., the formulation of a basis of appraisement, will now be referred to. It is well to remind ourselves, moreover, that the question is not one of
mnere numbers. The quality of the humanfactor plays so great a part in the popula-
tion of territory, that the establishing of a basis for estimating how many humnan beings it will maintain, is not merely very difficult per
se, it depends also upon factors difficult to evaluate quantitatively. For example it depends upon the standard of living assumed to be essential; upon the hardships which people are willing to face; upon the ability to cope with local evils, such as a rigorous or a tropical climate, or as malaria, yellow-fever, cholera, etc., as well as those evils which attack the animals that man must have with him. Thus the general intelligence of those who are to populate any territory; their qualifi.. cation in respect of appropriate information and training for this pur-
pose; their physical stamina and firmness of purpose; their willingness to modify their former standards of living; and their insight in appraising the totality of the conditions appertaining to newly occupied country;-all these are factors of the first order of importance for pioneers in settlement. Moreover, be it said, that we are not interested in the multiplication of inferior peoples of whatever race or colour.
Where a country is already partially settled, collision of interest as between residents and new comers, or as between those who have aggregated in towns and villages-especially the former-and the settlers of new or back territory. Town aggregates may impose special difficulties, which under certain political systems, may have to be met and overcome, if success is to be attained. There is, for example, not unfrequently antagonism to immigrants where they are prepared to work harder and to live more humbly than existing residents. In countries where the main source of wealth depends upon primary industries, the promoters of secondary industries, may through the numnbers they can command, become politically more powerful, and may impose even intolerable tariff and excise burdens upon the former. And further, where Labour's demands take no adequate account of the world-economic position, and where Labour is politically able ,to the detriment of the primary producers, to force the issue for high "pro. tective tariffs," the issue may be pushed so far as to retard the general economic well-being, and hinder both the creation of wealth, and the -otherwise possible-rapid growth of population. It would be easy to cite examples of this.
The general history of colonisation has shown that attempts to people territory have often failed; and such failures reveal immediately, that judgments as to the possibility of peopling a region, at a particular time, with a particular people, and under particular conditions, may be quite erroneous; even when those who assess the possibility have mnore than an academic interest in being careful. It is

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS.

easy to see that more or less perfunctory appraisements of the population-carrying power of unsettled or sparsely settled territories, are subject to a very large measure of uncertainty, and need to be used with great caution.
Countries like Africa, North, Central and South America, Northern Asia, and Australia can of course support muchgreater populations than they now carry. There are however certain facts which one does well to take into account in this connection. For example, Australia, as large as the United States of America, and nearly as large as the whole of Europe, including Russia, and with somewhat more than half the world's population in countries immediately to the north and close thereto, had only a small population of aborigines, living in a very. elementary stage, and without a written language. In New Zealand to the east thereof, a much finer race existed, the Maoris: the former are disappearing; the latter are revealing their higher powers. How it came about that Australia remained for ages relatively an unpeopled territory, is a question not easy to answer. It is quite certain however that the geognostic and climatological conditions were such as to call for initiative, courage, and persistence in the face of various difficulties and dangers, on the part of the pioneer settlers. The early settlement in America made similar demands. And thus one may observe that the moral and physical characters of a race are qualifications for themn to become settlers, and the possibilities of populating territory are contingent upon the physical and moral characters of the population being developed.

VI. POSSIBLE POPULATION OF THE EARTH.

For some years attention has been focussed upon the question of the possibility of the greatest increase of the earth's population. There are at least two practicable methods of obtaining some idea of this possibility; one is to examine what is possible in a suitable and fairly large territory, and regard it as more or less representative of the whole earth: the other is to consider the consequence of a full use of all arable lands, treating the proportions in territories already surveyed, as applicable to the entire land-surface of the globe.
Mr. 0. E. Baker, agricultural economist of the United States of America' s Bureau of Agriculture, made an analysis of the possibilities for the United States, based upon the census of 1920, and he concluded that the following changes were possible, viz.

Highly improved lands, as existing, 503; mnay become

800

Forest cut-over and burnt lands, now 465; may be reduced to 855

Unimproved pasture lands, now

863; may be reduced to 658

Non-agricultural lands, now

72; may become

90

The figures denote millions of acres, the total being 1903 million acres. Thus the highly improved lands can be increased slightly over 59 per cent. If this proportion of change could properly be regarded as applicable to the entire earth, and it be also assured that the population-ratio will be the same, we have the possible total for the earth's
population, only 1950x800+.508, say 8101 millions; no doubt howw. ever too small a figure.

1182 EUGENICS REVIEW.
To obtain a concrete idea of the areas necessary for agriculture for forests, etc., one has to depend upon partial statistics, largely upon those of the International Institute of Agriculture at Rome. The earth's entire surface is only 197 05 million square miles; and, neglecting some portion of its polar areas, its land-surface is only about 5205 million square miles. Out of a recorded statisticaltotal of 24 18 million square miles, only about 7'53 is classed as productive; 6-25 as unproductive; the balance of 10 35 is unspecified. The 753 millions square miles may be divided into arable lands 2 53; natural meadows and pasturages, 129; trees and shrubs, 0*11; woods and forests, 3*35; and marsh lands, 0*43. The 2*3.5 million square miles of arable lands may be subdivided as follows:-Devoted to growing cereals, 1-63; to grasses and fodder-crops, 0.37; to other food-crops, 0d18; to industrial crops, 0 16; and to seed-crops, 0 01.
In considering how far these results can be used as the basis of an estimate, we note that the agricultural data exist for 46 per cent. of the entire land-surface, the corresponding population being about 41 per cent. of the world's total. In view of this and having regard to general considerations in respect to the countries not included, we may treat the data as affording a very sample of the earth's entire landsurface.
In attempting, however, to deduce the earth's population-possibilities from the standpoint of necessary food-supplies, one is in a difficulty, because of the very wide range of the percentages available for the cultivation of cereals and food-crops, and the wide range of results, expressed say in bushels per acre. The formner ranges from about 43 per cent. for Czecho-Slovakia, to about 0 4 for Australia, and 0 * 1 for Tunis, and averages 7 * 66 for the whole world. The latter varies from about 51 bushels of wheat per acre for Denmark, to about 7 bushels for Russia in Asia, with a world average of about 14 bushels per acre. Spain, Jugo-Slavia, Austria, Canada and the United States have about the average yield.
The extent of the possible use of various fertilisers is of great moment. In 1920, the total weight produced of natural phosphates, super-phosphate of lime, basic slag, natural guano, salts of potash, Chilean nitrate of soda, Norwegian nitrate of lime, calcium cyanamide, ammonia, sulphur, and sulphate of copper, was no less than about 38 million ordinary tons. The elements most needed are nitrogen, potassium, and phosphorus. Calcium is abundant. The atmposhere contains, I estimate, about 3920 million tons of nitrogen; and since through the agency of anaerobic bacteria, some return thereto is made from the earth, there can never be a shortage. About 80 million tons of ammonia, nitric nitrogen, and organic nitrogen annually reach the earth's land-surface with the rainfall; and no doubt this amount can soon be easily exceeded by artificial supplies. There will,however,be greater difficulty in securing necessary supplies of phosphorus and potassium .
Time will not permit of the working out in detail of a deduction of the earth's possible population on this basis: it may however be pointed out that it deals only with the food-supply of the question. A study of the acceleration of the rates of using timber, coal, mineral

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS.

288

oils, metals, etc., will disclose the fact that there are other limitations to human increase, if there is to be also an attempt to maintain the present standard of living. We cannot long continue our inroads upon world-supplies if they go on as in the recent past.
To return to the question of the quantity of arable land. For the whole world's land-surface, this is 9*98 per cent; for Japan it is 18- 39 per cent.; for the United States of America about 15*17, which perhaps might be increased to say 24 per cent. The 9 *98 per cent. is say 5 24 million square miles, hence if this could be people as densely as England and Wales at the present time, it would indicate a limit of only 8511 millions, as the ultimate population; which though somewhat larger than 3101 millions, on the United States basis, is a figure of the same order. It is worth noting that if the Japanese proportion of 18 * 39 per cent. of arable land were a possibility for the entire earth's land surface, it means only 9-655 million square miles, and with the population-density of England and Wales, only 6469 million persons as the ultimate population. This is a density of 12382 per square mile, say about 3*3 to 3-5 times what it is now. Such an increase is of course not at present possible, because man has not co-ordinated his entire effort, and is compelled to spend so much on preparations in case of armed conflict, expenditure which is intrinsically valueless.
In "Mankind at the Cross-Roads," Prof . E. M. East has indicated 5200 millions as the limit: see also Prof. Carr-Saunders, "Population." From a study of the question, and taking account of probable advances in the chemistry and technique of agriculture, it might, I think, reach 7020 millions. With the lowering of the standard of living, and the removable of hindrances to desirable migration, and the improvement of industrial technique generally, it might reach even 9000 millions. With also the complete elimination of the jeopardy of war, and the appropriate co-ordination of all human effort, even this number might, I believe, be slightly exceeded. At the rate of increase which doubles the population in 100 years, viz., 0 69555 per cent. per annum and with 2000 millions for the year 1931, these populations would be reached at the following dates:-
Populations in millions 3101 3511 5200 7020 9000 Dates at present rate 1994 2012 2069 2112 2148
Densitypersq.mile 59 1 66-9 99.0 13387 171-4
The countries of corresponding densities are Azerbaijan, 62*3; Estonia, 65 5; Philippine Islands, 97 7; Bulgaria, 126 4; and Portugal, 170 0. Although these dates would be correct if the recent rate of increase could possibly continue, it is certain that the three last densities could not be reached at the dates in question, because the necessary world-adjustments cannot be made in so short a period. This will be abundantly evident to any student of the history, of say the last five hundred years, of the most advanced peoples. Nevertheless the results shew how urgent the population question is; and the histories of the last two centuries of Great Britain, France, Germany. Italy, Spain and America, reveal the immense difficulties which have' to be overcome in all countries to secure good internal organisation, and appropriate adjustments with the balance of the world.

284 EUGENICS REVIEW.
In considering the possibilities of population, it is also not unimportant to remember that man needs animals. The total number of horses, cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, asses, buffaloes, cariboux, deer, elks, elephants, llamas, and reindeer, is just about the same as the number of human beings. Apart from the question of mere human customs, it is to be noted that there is a certain scheme of exchange in Nature, in respect of vitamines in vegetables and animals: this cannot be ignored. One may also note that although sea-mammals, fish and sea-products generally, will doubtless be much more largely utilised in the world's future than at present, life in the sea-world is already held in check by factors operating in that domain. The greater use of sea-products will not materially alter the possibilities of population, and may for our present question be left out of account.
VII. THE QUESTION OF MIGRATION.
Were the populations of different territories substantially identical in respect of language, and of physical, intellectual, moral, and political characteristics, differences of relative density, could be much more readily adjusted by migrations than is at present possible. By 'relative density' (8) is meant the ratio of the actual number (p) in occupation, to the possible number which the territory can carry (P-); i.e. 8=p/P. In any consideration of the question therefore, both the absolute numbers and the relative densities must be taken into account; both are essential in an endeavour to express quantitatively the absorbing power of any territory, for immigrants. At the present itme population density merely denotes the number in occupation (p) of any territory, divided by its area (A); i.e. a=p/A . Thus a/8= P/A; that is the ratio of the 'density' as at present expressed, to the 'relative density,' is the same as the greatest number the territory can carry divided by its area; that it is to say, it is the limiting number per unit of area. The relative absorbingpower is of course (1-8), and the actual
number which could ultimately be absorbed is P(1-8)=P---P. This
assumes that the question is merely a numerical one, which of course is not the whole question.
While it may be very important to learn, as soon as possible, what greater number each country can ultimately carry, in order to influence migration with this in view; actual settlement is governed greatly by various conditions, and by the element of time. Hence any practical consideration of migration, involves not merely an examination of the amount of the numerical overplus of population in given territories, and the ultimate numerical absorbing power of other territories, but also the factors governing the possibilities of desirable absorption. For example, no country is willingly prepared to absorb the derelict population of another country, to the detriment of itself,, or to the prejudice of its future development. We are thus reminded that every territory may properly be said to be subject to absorption conditions and these are factors of the greatest practical importance.'
Clearly the time has arrived when we must take account of the quality
as well as of the quantity of the occupation that we promote. The conditions referredto may-perhaps somewhat arbitrarily-

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMEN-TS.

1285

be divided into racial, linguistic, sociologic, political, and economic factors, and to these we shall now refer. The racial condition is a far-
reaching one. There is generally a very evident sense of differentiation between different races, and this is often so accentuated as to make satisfactory occupation of the same territory difficult, or even impracticable. The question arises, "Is the repugnance felt, some-
times a mutual one, an instinctive recognition of some incompatibility,
or is it merely a baseless prejudice ?" If the former, probably con-
siderable weight should be allowed to it: if the latter, it would seem desirable that it should be corrected by education. Doubtless this question ought to be reviewed from a world-wide standpoint, and should have regard to the qualitative elements of the solution, in respect to its moral, intellectual, and aesthetic aspects. For this reason all data affording evidence of the results of miscegenation, is
of very great importance. At present popular opinion is probably
overmuch affected by strong prejudices, and must be discounted accordingly; though perhaps it cannot be wholly set aside. One's personal observations leads one-it may be said-to regard much popular opinion on the subject, as quite ill-founded. Researches in heredity shew that we do well to weigh the evidence with great care,
and that we should avoid all attempts to promote any but desirable migration.
The linguistic differentiation is, in itself, not far-reaching. It may however be used to support political differences, and become the basis of hostilities, incompatible with the satisfactory occupation of a territory. Bilingual countries carry also an unnecessary economic load. It often leads, too, with persons speaking a particular language, to segregations of such a nature that the development of complete homogeneity in the population is seriously hindered. A community constituted thus is developmentally defective, as world-history shews. Where,however,there is no ulterior object in maintaining a difference, and where the children learn the official language of the territory, the heterogeneity tends quickly to disappear.
The sociologic differentiation has many aspects. From the history of the evolution of communities, we learn that satisfactory developments have been attained but slowly, and ordinarily after much
economic loss and considerable suffering. A community therefore which has attained to-what it believes to be-a good sociologic standard, cannot view with unconcern the influx of elements that promise to degrade its status. Thus the defining of what it believes to be desirable or undesirable, from the immigration point of view, is to be strongly approved. If nations could be permitted to rid themselves of their very poor or derelict members, by simply sending them to other lands, such nations would escape the discipline to which they ought undoubtedly to be subject, from the presence of such persons in their midst; and they would impose troubles elsewhere. The result from the world point of view, would on the whole be unquestionably disadvantageous. Communities which have built up commendable standards of living, and desirable social developments generally, will necessarily be hostile to all proposals that they should receive the moral, intellectual, economic and social defectives of other-peoples.

286 EUGENICS REVIEW.
It would obviously therefore be very unwise to consider the population and migration questions, without taking this hostile attitude -seriously into account. No community, in any way interested in building up its social life, in organising its educational system, and in moulding the ideals of its growing generations, can for a moment admit the claims of other peoples to send their surplus of population, merely on the ground of its numerical capacity to absorb them. The determination of the suitability of the immigration is an important question for the absorbing community, not for the communities that desire to get rid of their surplus of population. It would be of ill-effect for the human race, if peoples could rid themselves of their derelict productions, by placing them as burdens upon others.
Undoubtedly also the community asked to receive, may very properly decline to accept immigrants who are in any way disloyal to the constitution and social ideals they have developed, or who are not prepared to enter cordially and whole-heartedly into the community's life, and to accept their share of its public duties and activities. Experience has shewn that where immigrants merge themselves in the community, all is likely to go well: where they segregate, and maintain a sort of independent life, inconsistent with the social and general ideals of the community into which they have entered, they are a menace to its well-being, and tend to create a heterogeneity that is very undesirable.
It is important to observe also, that immigrants whose social and political aspirations conflict with those of the people by whom they wish to be accepted, are quite out of place. And groups entering territories, intending to subvert the social and political traditions of the inhabitants, should not be tolerated. They abuse the privileges conferred upon them. It may be noted on the other hand that immigrants who possess the virtues of residents in a somewhat larger measure, may be met occasionally with some degree of hostility, especially when they are more hard-working and more thrifty. Those capable of taking a long view will not, however, attach undue weight to antagonisms of this kind, and the immigrants will probably soon learn to avoid occasions of needless collision.
The conditions classed as political, are of course of very high importance. The entrance of foreigners whose open or secret activities are intended to subvert the political constitution and ultimate ideals of the community that receives them, is a menace not imaginary, but actual; and one which must be regarded as intolerable. Certain people at certain times, have promoted the emigration of numbers of their citizens, with a view to establishing centres of subversive influence, and foci for subversive action in the event of war. Their secret treachery has been maintained by the visits of influential agents of their original home-lands, by the activities of the consuls of such lands, and by special meetings of their fellow countrymen. The fact that this has been observed so frequently, has tended to reinforce the difficulties of migration, and has intensified the feeling that foreign immigrants are rarely absolutely loyal, and therefore that they cannot at once be whole-heartedly accepted as good citizens of the territory that

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS.

28q

absorbs them. It is of course not outside human experience, that disloyal immigrants co-operate with the traitors of ones' own country.
For these reasons the selection of immigrants demands much more care than perhaps has ordinarily been taken.
We now turn to some of the economic aspects of the question of immigration. Although the absorption-capacity of a territory may be verv great, for example the area drained bv the Amazon in South America, it does not follow that immigration is a simple matter, for not only is it dependent upon the characters of the immigrants them-
selves, it is also dependent upon the capital they possess, upon the capacity of the territorv and its inhabitants to aid their activities,
so that they will attain to economic success. A country promoting emigration, because it finds itself with a population in excess of that for which it can properly provide by its own primary production and the secondary production of which it can dispose, is not axnious for
its citizens with capital and high abilities to leave its shores, unless
it has an ulterior object. Such object is of course not necessarily consistent with the well -being of the recipient country; which of course is not considered, unless it be one of its colonies. And even when it is a colony, the country despatching emigrants is acting primarily in its own economic and national interests. A country receiving immigrants, therefore, must in all cases consider whether the personal qualifications of these, including their equipment as citizens, and the capital at their disposal, is such that they will fall into their place normally, and not cause a lowering of economic status, or status in
citizenship. The economic conditions of developing countries are often such
that, ordinarily, they cannot absorb relatively large numbers, without economic disturbance, more or less inimical to residents, unless the immigrants are provided with appropriate amounts of capital, and are prepared for activities which are not already in excess of requirements. Thus for satisfactory immigration it is essential that there should be an appropriate co-ordination of the civic and economic qualifications of those who desire to become immigrants. This a matter oJ great moment to those who receive, but of little moment to those who dispatch migrants: thus there is some measure of collision of interest as between the two. For this reason the advocacy of the policy of migration by different peoples must be weighed with due care, so that the question may be examined on its real merits. And it has to be borne in mind that one nation is not properly qualified to advance a policy, which tends to relieve itself, and to throw the burden-it may be-of receiving migrants upon another nation. The individualism of national views, usually tends to distort the perspective, so that the just balance, as between the different aspects of the question, is not maintained. For this reason also, the migration question needs to be very broadly and fairly considered, if any new light is to be thrown upon it. And however earnestly and sincerely this is attempted, one can rest assured, initially, that success in this direction can only be partial, and that the best solution will be the result of the analytic examination of a many-sided presentation of the subject. It is never to be forgotten that when pioneers of courage and resourcefulness have opened up a

I`288 EUGENICS REVIEW.
territory, there will always be only too many of the merely mensal, -or even the parasitic class, who will try to live-as it were-on the bountiful provision that others have made. Something analogous occurs when the people of nations who have not themselves made openings for their people, endeavour to flock to territories when the going is easy.
VIII. INHERENT DIFFICULTIES OF SOLUTIONS.
The great difficulty in finding a good solution of the population and migration questions, arises from the fact that the peoples of the world are so diverse in the stages of their development; in the nature and character of their measures of civilisation; in their interest in the higher evolution of humanity; in their physical, intellectual and ethical charactersistics; and in the intensity of their devotion to purely economic ends. There is, at the present time, no consensus of belief as to the fundamental purpose of communal and national organisation, or as to the desirability of modifying these in the interest of the whole human race. Thus the various peoples of the earth, with their intense individualisms, constitute a very heterogeneous whole, and one in regard to which a merely quantitative theory of migration would be purely academic and quite unpractical.
There are many other aspects of the population and migration questions to which reference could be made. It will suffice to mention one or two. What may be called "temperamental" differences of races may be serious. Peoples who have in the main reached that stage of civilisation, which has eliminated recourse to private revenge, cannot cordially receive immigrants from peoples who, subject to sudden impulses, resort to the use of lethal weapons. Similarly, people who organise secret conspiracies, are in many quarters most unwelcome, and would be properly classed as "undesirable immigrants." In general, the ordinary characters, and the ideals of immigrants, and their temperamental peculiarities, should not differ largely from those of the people with whom they desire to be received; in which case- other things being equal-they will probably find themselves welcome.
Anyone who has any knowledge of the nature of life in China, in India, in Tibet, in Russia in Asia, etc., will realise something of the heterogeneous character of the different races of mankind, and something of the difficulty of the fusion of peoples by migration. Moreover so long as national affairs are largely subordinated to purely economic interests, the individualism of peoples creates a world of almost overwhelming difficulty, for the solution of the question of providing for the earth's rapidly growing population, and the stimulation of migration in such a way as to be productive ofthe maximum benefit, and of the least possible friction.
One observation in conclusion in regard to those who imagine that solutions may be had by threats of armed conflict, or by actual conflict. Man's destructive powers are now so great, and his power of ameliorating conditions-relatively thereto-are so slight, that war must be regarded as non-economic, and its aftermath as creating new hindrances to the best solution of the questions under consideration.

FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS.

289

There is also another danger, viz. that the "Clausius-TreitschkeBernhardi" doctrine of frightfulness will be pushed to its logical end. That would be indescribable horror. It is submitted that we are not
prepared for this, and probably would be unprepared to countenance it. That being so, it is eminently necessary that the statistical efforts of the great nations, of the International Institute of Agriculture at Rome, and of the great international Institute of Statistics at the Hague, should be so developed as to meet the World's needs, in view of its ominous future. How to increase man's food-supplies; how best to distribute him over the earth's surface, having regard to all aspects of the question, including his future well-being; and how best to control the rate at which he multiplies, keeping in mind also his quality; these are the great questions which command the attention of all thinkers, who have any interest in a vision of the World's Future
Developmnent.

