THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Eugenic Bearing of Measurements of Intelligence in the United States Army.
By ROBERT M. YERKES. (National Research Council, Washington, D.C.)
Eugenics, the art of breeding better men, imperatively demands reliable measurement of human traits of body and mind, of their inter-relations, and of their modification by environmental factors. Scientific method has been commanded effectivelyto make available facts concerning bodilv form and physiological processes. Anthropometry, anthropology, morphology, physiology, pathology, have made their notable contributions and continue to supplement and to render more precise our knowledge of man as organism. But in the case of those hu an traits or functions which we traditionally call mental, both methodological and observational progress has been more slowly achieved and less satisfactory. At last, however, the method of science is being applied in thorough-going fashion to the investigation ,of human experience and behaviour.
An historical survey of the developmnent of man's knowledge of man is encouraging, for in the last half century psychology and psychotechnology have progressed steadily, and in some quarters and respects, marvellously. Psychology is now numbered among the natural sciences, and man, as conscious and self-conscious being, is studied intensively. It is assumed that like other natural objects he is understandable, modifiable, controllable. The method of speculative reflection has been replaced largely by systemnatized, controlled introspection, and that in turn has been supplemented by varied objective rnethods akin to those of the physical and biological sciences.
Following the determined effort of the psychologists of the last century to measure mental processes, there has developed a technique of research and a body of knowledge which command the respectful attention and hopeful interest of laymen as well as scientists. For this notable change in the status of psychology we are largely indebted to -the faith, initiative, energy, and ingenuity of such men as Francis
Galton, Alfred Binet, Hugo Muensterberg-to mention only those
whose great work is finished-and their successors. Methods of mental measurement are continually being devised
and perfected for the conduct of research, and simultaneously many of them are being adapted and standardized for practical (technological) use. As "mental tests" they do not necessarily lose their scientific
character, though often they are used and abused by persons who are
incapable of safe observation or interpretation of results. Like other natural sciences, psychology has an exacting technique, a considerable

226 EUG;ENtICS REVIEW.
body of facts and laws, and like every branch of engineering, psychotechnology has its basic information and its scientifically determined and evaluated practices. These essential facts about the science and its technology tend to be overlooked. Anyone, it would appear, may parade as psychologist or psycho-technologist; but only the adequately trained and competent may be relied upon for valuable service. The public has increasing reason to beware of those impostors and charlatans who are psychologists only in name.
Those among us who think of applied psychology or of "mnentat testing" as the application of the methods of Binet are sadly out of date. Binet's crude but ingenious procedure for the mental classification of children at the beginning of the present century gave an im petus to the educational and medical application of results of mental measurement which is largely responsible for the rapid development of psycho-technology. But more important by far than the Binet tests is the influence of their results on the lay mind and on the interest of professional psychologists. New and better scientific methods of mental measurernent, and, indeed, of classifying children are now available, and the time approaches when "Binet testing" will have no other than historical significance.
To-day many of the forms of behaviour which are primarily intellectual can be measured with reasonable facility and accuracy, but by contrast, behaviour of the affective sort,-traits of temperament and emotional expressions,-are imperfectly and incompletelv measureable. Doubtless what has been achieved in the measurement of intelligence presently will be achieved also in the measurement of the affective aspects of life. Already indeed, progress in this direction is substantial. Yet, whereas quickness of reaction, sensory acuity, memory span, and scores of other forms or aspects of behaviour may be measured readily and serviceably, interest, timidity, fear, honesty, cannot be so measured. The best we can do at present is to labor over these charac-
teristics with methods of research which are difficult of manipulation,
unstandardized, and wholly impracticable for psycho-technological use.
Eugenics needs accurate and reasonably complete description of human behaviour as partial basis for methods of control. It may look to psychology hopefully for accurate descriptions of traits of mind and their expressions in action, for measurements of the manifold features of intellect, feeling, will, temperament, character-in fine for the scientific description of the human personality. When this is possible, and the start already made justifies the prophecy that the coming gen-eration will achieve it, eugenics inay fruitfully compare individuals,. families, tribes, races, nations, occupational or other social groups, may observe and experiment and above all may intelligently strive for scientifically defined and evaluated ideals of human form and conduct.
The most impressive demonstration of the practical availability and serviceability of methods of mental measuremnent occurred in the Army of the United States of America during the Great War. I have been asked to tell the readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW something about the methods and results of this vast experiment in psycho-technology, and I gladly do so. But in undertaking the task I beg to remind my-

MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY.

227

readers that it is impossible to do justice to it in a few pages. Even the voluminous official reports are disappointing because of their
incompleteness .*
The methods used to measure intelligence in the United States
Arny are of two sorts: group examinations and individual examinations. The group examination was developed and perfected in response
to the compelling demand for speed, and the individual examination
to assure a greater measure of accuracy and fairness in doubtful cases. Although in general army psychological methods were adaptations of those previously used for research or technological purposes, several
new tests were devised, and certain of the assemblages of tests for use as group examinations were essentially new. Of peculiar importance are the performance tests, devised by army psychologists for the examination of foreigners and illiterates.
Psychological examining was originally undertaken with a group examination which required ability to read and write English, but the unexpectedly high frequency of men illiterate in English necessitated
the development of a non-linguistic type of examination. The group
examination for literates finally adopted is known as examination
Alpha, that for illiterates as examination Beta. Whereas Alpha consists chiefly of linguistic tests, Beta is made up wholly of non-linguistic or performance tests. By means of Alpha and Beta, men can be examined in as large groups as available space and the vocal power of the examiner make possible. In the Army the numbers usually varied from one to three hundred. As many as five hundred men have
been examined simultaneously. Three principal varieties of individual examination were devel-
oped, for different types of subject. They are the Performance Scale Examination, the Yerkes-Bridges Point Scale Examination, the Stanford-Binet Examination. The first was developed primarily for the examination of illiterates and the last two were used mostly for men
of low-grade intelligence and limited education in English. Each examination was made up of tests carefully selected to mea-
sure important intellectual processes. It is impracticable to describe

*(I) Psychological Examining in the United States Army (official report). Memoirs of theNationalAcademy ofSciences, Vol. 15. Washington, D. C., 1920. Pp. VI+890. (Available through the Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D. C.)
(2) Psychology in Relation to the War. By Robert M. Yerkes. Psychological Review, Vol. 25, 1918. Pp. 85-115.
(8) Report of the Psychology Committee of the National Research Council. By Robert M. Yerkes. Psychological Review, Vol. 26, 1919, Pp. 83-149.
(4) Army Mental Tests. Edited by C. S. Yoakum and R. M. Yerkes. Pp. xiii+ 803. Holt & Co., New York,. 1920.
(5) Intellectual and Educational Status of the Medical Profession as Represented in the United States Army. By Margaret V. Cobb and Robert M. Yerkes. Bulletin National Research Council, Vol. 1, No. 8, 1921. Pp. 76.
(6) The Personnel System of the United States Army. Vol. 1. History of the Personnel System; Vol. 2. The Personnel Manual. Published by the War Department, Washington, D. C., 1919. (Available through the Superintendent of Documents, Washington, D. C.)
(7) A Study of American Intelligence. By Carl C. Brigham. Princeton University Press (In press.)

228 ERUCENICS REVIEW.
all of the tests in detail since there were some two hundred included in the several types of examination. A few of the simplest must serve to indicate general characteristics.
Group examination Alpha consisted of eight tests, the descrip-

FORNM 6

GROUP EXAMINATION ALPHA

GROUP NO.. ........

Name .

Ran.k-

Age.

Company R.egi-ment........... Ar.m.Division .........

In what country or state born?

..

Years in U. S.?.. Race ............

Occupation Weekly Wages......................................................................................................

............W

Schooling: Grades, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8: High or Prep. School, Year 1. 2. 3. 4: College, Year 1. 2. 3. 4.

1~~~~~~~~~~Q~TE~STQ~I ~Q~~~Q~~J.

2. 6®®®®

3JZL
4 i t)

5 0 00 Yes No
6. 00000
7. ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOP
8. 0 0 0 MILITARY GUN CAPP
9. 34-79-56-87-68-25-8247-27-31-64-93-7141.52-99
I 10.

1 12.

1234 56789
Division of Psychology. Medical Department U. S. A.
Authorized by the Surceoo General, Feb. 8. 1918. Edition, Aug. 16. 1916, WN000.

FIG. 1.

MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY.

229

tive titles of which are: (1) oral directions or commands test; (2) arithmetical problems; (3) practical judgment; (4) svnonvym-antonym; (5) disarranged sentences; (6) number series completion; (7) analogies; (8) general information.
To facilitate description of the oral directions or commands test, the page of the Alpha record-blank which includes this test is reproduced-three-fifths original size, as figure 1. In giving this test the
military examiner, after general instructions to his group of subjects, proceeds as follows:

"Attention! 'Attention' always means 'Pencils up.' Look at the circles at 1. When I say 'go' but not before, make a cross in the first circle and also a figure 1 in the third circle-Go!"

After waiting for five seconds to allow the subjects to execute the command the examiner continues:

"Attention! Look at 2, where the circles have numbers in them. When I say 'go' draw a line from Circle 1 to Circle 4 that will pass above circle 2 and below circle 3 .-Go!"

So, in accordance with definitely prescribed rules, the examiner continues through the twelve items of the test. The items are arranged in order of increasing difficulty,the initial ones being very easy so that all subjects can respond correctly at the start.
Like the commands test, the remaining tests of examination Alpha consist of numerous items arranged from easv to difficult. Response
requires little or no writing, for in alinost every test the subject records his response by making some such simple mark as a cross, a check mark or an underscore. This at once facilitates reaction, eliminates difference in ease and speed of writing as a source of error, and makes it
possible to score examination records by the use of transparent stencils on which correct responses are indicated by position.
The maximum number of points allowed for examination Alpha
was 212. For convenience of report and use of intelligence grades by
armry officers, the scores for all types of examination were converted
into letter grades in accordance with the data of table 1, from which it
will be noted that a score of 135 points or more in examnination Alpha,
or of 100 or more in examination Beta classed a man as of A grade intelligence; and that a score of 14 or less in Alpha or of 19 or less in Beta classed him as D. It is important to note that the letter-grade classification is somewhat arbitrary. For practical reasons the range of scores included in A, for example, was so chosen that not more than five per cent. of recruits should receive that grade.

TABLE I.

DEFINITIONS OF INTELLTGENCE GRADES.

Intelligence
A B C+ C
CD D-

Definition. Very superior Superior High average
Average Low average Inferior Very inferior

Score (Alpha) Score (Beta)

135-212 100-118

105-134 90-99

75-104 80-89

45-74

65-79

25-54

45-64

15-24 20-44

0-14

0-19

230 ~~23O ~~EUGENICS REVIEW.

Examination Beta consisted of seven tests known as (1) the maze test; (2) cube analysis; (3) X-O series; (4) digit-symnbol; (5) number checking; (6) pictorial completion; (7) geometric construction. This

Test 7 II

I

I
n
4

77W

I7* a~~~~8 i7LKI1J~EZ~ ~ ~ ~ ~DDLKiL_ _ _ _ _ _ z7 J~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
FIG. 2.

AIEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE I- THE U. S. ARMY.

2,31

examination could be given, if necessary, without the use of language by the employment of pantomime, charts, or blackboard, and demons-
tration. Whereas in examination Alpha all directions are given orally and the subject must be able to understand English readily, read it and
write words and figures, examination Beta can be given satisfactorily
to men who are entirely unfamiliar with English, for the examiner in
ca§e of each test begins by showing the group what is to be done.
Test 7 of Beta is reproduced, one half original size, as figure 2.
In each item or part of the test the geometrical forms at the left can be
arranged to make a square. The subject is expected to indicate the
proper placement of the forms by drawing with his pencil proper line
Or lines in the blank square at the right. As a preliminary to the test the examiner demonstrated with blackboard and pieces of cardboard how a certain assemblage of forms can be fitted together to make a
square. This pantomime explanation was conducted slowly and
repeated with four different sets of forms. Then the subject was
required to go ahead with the ten parts of the test and to supply in each
the necessary lines.
In the Army non-linguistic or performance tests were devised and used extensively and to excellent purpose. Had the exigencies of the situation permitted, or had the war continued another year, doubtless a single non-linguistic group examination would have been developed as a substitute for Alpha and Beta. The practical importance of performance tests as contrasted with linguistic tests for the comparative
measurement of native intelligence is very great. For they escape individual differences in language, dialect, schooling, facility and speed in reading and writing, and native linguistic gift. If available, satisfactory nion-linguistic or performance tests and examinations might be given to primitive as well as civilised races, to immature as well as mature individuals, to uneducated as well as educated persons. There is urgent need for a practical system of examination with this degree of flexibility, applicability and comparability of results. The psychologists of the United States Army took a long step toward the development of non-linguistic methods of measuring intelligence, and although examination Beta is not entirely satisfactory for general use, it clearly points the way to further methodological developments which are sure to be of the greatest significance to eugenics.
The several types of individual examination used in the Army are too well known to justify description of the constituent tests. All were adapted to military needs. In some of them new types of tests appear. Those who desire detailed descriptions of methods, with measures of their value should consult the official report.
Probably the miost irmportant aspects or characteristics of Army psychological examining are (1) the utilization of mass mneasurement instead of individual examining. Previously the achievement of an examiner had been limited to ten or at most fifteen examinations per day. In the United States Army a psychologist examined as many as 1000 men in a day. (2) Objectivity of measurement. For all examinations were made in accordance with definite rules, and scored by rule, with the use of stencils so that the scoring clerk performed merelv the mechanical fuinction of indicating right or wrong responses. (4)

232 EU;ENICS REVIEW.

The use of examinations in series to increase accuracy ofmeasurement and to assure justice to the individual. If a subject failed in examina-
tion Alpha it was assumed that inadequate education or famniliarity with Englishrnight be partially responsible, and he was examined also
by means of Beta. Failing in the latter he was given an individual examination, if time permitted. (5) Unprecedented utilization of non-
linguistic tests as contrasted with those which demand facility in the
use of spoken or written language. The following "explanation " of intelligence examining and grades
was supplied by army psychologists for the enlightenment of officers in
command of troops. It will serve at once to indicate briefly the principal purpose or uses of intelligence grades, the meaning of the
different letter-grades employed, and important limitations of value.

EXPLANATION OF THE INTELLIGENCE GRADES.

The purpose of the psychological tests.-In no previous war has military efficiency
depended so mucbh upon the prompt and complete utilization of the intelligence of
the individual soldier. The purpose of the psychological tests is to give a quick and
fairly accurate classification of the men accordingto general intelligence. They
aid: (a) In the discovery of men whose superior ability recommends their advancement.
(b) In the prompt segregation in the Development Battalions of intellectually inferior men whose inaptitude would retard the training of the unit.
(c) In building organizations of equal or appropriate strength. (d) In selecting suitable men for various army occupations or for special
training in the technical schools. (e) In eliminating the feeble-minded.

What the tests measure.-The tests give reliable index of a man's ability to
learn, to think quickly and accurately, to analyse situations, to maintain a state of mental alertness, and to comprehend instructions. They do not measure loyalty,
bravery, dependability, or the emotional traits that make a man "carry on." A
man's valuie to the service is measured by his intelligence, plus other necessary quali-
fications.
What the grades mean.-All men are classified by the tests as A, B., C+, C,
C-, D, D - , or E, as follows:
A Very superior intelligence.-High officer type, when backed by, other
necessary qualities.
B Superior intelligence.-Commissioned officer type and splendid sergeant

material.

C+ High average intelligence.-Good non-commissioned officer material with

occasionally a man worthy of higher rank.

C Average intelligence.-Good Private type, with some fair to, good non-

commissioned officer material.

C - Low average intelligence.-Ordinary private.

D Inferior intelligence.-Largely illiterates or foreign born.. Usually fair

soldiers, but often slow D-Very inferior intelligence,

in learning. but considered

fit

for

regular

servioe^.

E Mental inferiority, justifying recommendation for Developnent Battalion,

special service organizations, rejection or discharge.

The grades should be consulted.-(a) in the selection of candidates fbr officers'

training schools; (b) in the selection of all non-commissioned officers; (c), in, balanc-

ing organizations; (d) in picking men for special detail; (e) in the classification and

training of men in Development -Battalions; (f) in court cases; (g) in the better

understanding of men who are in anyway peculiar or exceptional; (h) the tests have

also been used effectively in the selection of nurses, Y.M.C.A. personnel, etc.

IMPORTANT POINTS.
1. Commissioned officer material is found chiefly in the A and B groups.. Men grading C should be accepted for Officer's Training Camp only after carefuL scrutiny.

MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY.

233

2. The majority of non-commissioned officers rate A, B or C+. Men below C+ should not be entrusted with complicated paper work.
3. D men are rarely suited for tasks requiring special skill, forethought, resourcefulness or sustained alertness.
4. It is unsafe to expect D - or E men to read and understand written directions.
5. Only high score men should be selected for tasks that require quick learn-
ing and rapid adjustments. 6. A man's value to the service should not be judged by his intelligence rating
alone.
Every effort was made to emphasize the incompleteness of psychological examination of the soldier. It was recognized that the methods employed tested or measured only certain important intellectual processes and that grades were assigned merely for what is popularly known as "brightness," "mental alertness" or "general intelligence. " In emphasizing this limitation of psychological report it was pointed out that certain other psychological traits, as for example leadership, courage, reliability, may be equally important with
intelligence for success in military dutv. These affective or tempera-
mental traits also would have been measured by army psychologists had suitable methods been available or readily developed. It is regrettably true that only half the mind, or reactive capacity, of the soldier was measured. Had it been possible similarly to measure
traits of temnperament and character, the practical value of psychologi-
cal examining would have been increased tremendously. But here the army psychologists faced a condition which still persists, namely, the lack of simple, effective, standardized methods of measuring the affec
tive traits or aspects of behaviour. Description of methods of mental measurement, even of the psycho-
technological sort, for the enlightenment of laymen becomes increasingly difficult as the technique of the science grows varied and complex. It is hopeless to give adequate knowledge of even the general characteristics and values of the methods used in the United States Army. Those who desire accurate detailed descriptions are referred to the official report or to manuals of mental tests. Those who are sceptical of the reliability of even the well-established and highly standardized mental tests, and doubtful of the utility of their results, are urged to investigate them directly and especially to have the methods tried on themselves. For there is nothing more illuminating and safely convincing than the self-revelation which comes from a thorough-going psychological examination, conducted by a competent examiner.
A disproportionate amount of space has been given to method or technique. We may now turn to results of psychological examining in the United States Army which have significance for the eugenist.
Almnost the first achievement in army intelligence examining was
the differentiation of important military groups and the revelation that men of inferior intelligence are burdensome in the military machine, as elsewhere. Figure 3, one of the charts early used4 by army psychologists in describing results and mnilitary values, indicates at once the prevalence of superior intellectual ability anmong officers and among privates rated as "best" by their officers, and the amazing prevalence of inferior intelligence arnong d'isciplinary cases and men rated by their officers as of "low military value" or "unteachable."

234 EIJGENICS REVIEW.
D.Di-,E C+4,C,C- AandB
Commissioned Officers 6819
O.T. S.Students
9240
Sergeants
3393
Corporals
4093
"Ten Best Privates 905
White Recruits
- ~72W 1
CDisciplinary Cases
~~~~491 Camp Dix
- E 0I
"Ten Poorest"Privates $83
- r~ IfE
"Men of Low Military Value"
1a Camp ouster
I -- 0
"Unteachable Mer," 2m6 Camp Hawock
FIG. 3.
It was difficult for the military man to believe that the psychologist in a few minutes, by what appeared to be absurdly simple tests, could obtain an intelligence grade which generally agreed very closely with his own judgment of the man's ability based upon weeks or months of observation in connection with military training and duty.
The most reliable general statements of results of intelligence measurements in the Army of the United States are those based upon the so-called "combined scale," which was fashioned so that the results of all types of examination could be converted into it. The range of scores on the "combined scale" is 0 to 26 points. The percentage distribution of scores for such important army groups as officers, white draft, negro draft, and men individually examined, are presented in the accompanying table 2. Attention is particularly invited to the median scores of these groups and to the fact that' almost all of the officers are above the median for the white draft, and all but about 11 per cent. of the white draft, above the median for the negro.
The graphical representation of these facts (figure 4) is particularly impressive because it so strikingly indicates the wide range of intelligence and the surprising differences between groups as well as within them. Assuming that the curve for the white draft in this figure applies

MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY.

235

I I II I I c?co. o;c o
ohO000kc. C= l)- 10 co _I N G0o111) r1 ;

I I I 1i t?111

O NC 9mC

P- 0N

Co
0..
III I.o b :c> ooo U3C~
0 0'u~t~.~-~cqoo oP-

0 C.,t

In ER D]

II ookeNo?oooe0R0Xeo ct >0 u00X0F O

z

'.4

0

j3^
zQ

te

I Zt I

0 rik

fl S

jI

Coon o.
00 -Ct-o0co--00O 0-0000C0e.-
bo>XocXb>

Co
r2 .l i~§t.|Es~O~ C~~~b~~~~N~ m5N8 0Qfin =)00~

0 gO= §i *t | | 0 | t

04t0 00 C aq

00 Nec X00> 04 11 Go 'o

00qO O 0 0coCO

tO

0

0 .Eng,_Q| o~0O O^oO0IXIOtO_OOoIXOb4ksIU)nC:O0CO4 00O0O 0

Ij0=00O000 to 0Co

zo t. |o

|inO c-o O>4c 0 'o 0 0 co *I

^^

. II

C 0 > > V b O U U*C

tI

0

10-

*0X

00

0a0 I0COCOk XX'OP4

I?~~~~~ C?Il O

; t.E I [ 1 ~~~~~°°H°t °t-xo r°^°4 k

9z
jn
04

Nk 000

C .0

Or 0--00 CO? O0 '-It 0. .. to0 q0 C>0
cn 0 0 to 00 0 N C~l II 00 01-
co.4 =0=ow q I
6666 C60kl)C 01 000

. . . ** . . .

. . . ..** *

...... .

**.

.....

. ...

I

*0 co*q. -* * . 0 -. co. o

..

..........

=0M O =
11) C0

0 ;N

XlAH3Xil

1

236 EUGENICS REVIEW.
to the total adult population of the United States, it appears that a person who scores 15 points on the "combined scale" falls in the

OFFiCER5. GROUP ML

WHtrTE DRAFT. GROUPS5 I., m

WHITE DRAFT. GROUP x
NEGRO DRAFT. GROUP I

__
_ _ _ -.

WHIlT DRAFT, INDIV. EXAM5. (S6EPDAN)

NEGRO DRAFT, INDIV EXAMS (SHERlDA)
WHITE DRAFT, D%ZCHA.GE R.COM. (GRANT).

NEGRO DRAFT, DI3CHARGE RECOM. (GRANT) -

- _ _ .._._

0 10 20 .30 40 .50 60 .70 00 90 100 PERCENTILES
FIG. 4.

MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY.

237

seventieth percentile, while he who scores 21 points or over falls in the ninety-ninth or one hundredth percentile. This method of representing the intellectual status of a population, of a racial, institutional, or
other group of individuals, is likely to come into general use because of its definiteness of meaning and convenience. It is of considerable interest to the individual, as well as of practical importance to the examiner, to be able to compare a subject's score with the racial distribution of scores, and to read directly the percentile location of the
individual.

D- I D l C-l C l C+ B I A l

rLaborer . .
Gen. miner . . .
Teamster ... .

.
Larber

Horseshoer

. -I

Bricklayer .-

Cook

Baker.

Painter
Gen. blacksmith Gen. carpenter . Butcher . . . . .

..

Gen. machinist .
Hand riveter .
qC Tel. & tel. lineman . Gen.pipefitter . . . .
Plumber . . a . . . . Tool and gauge maker .
Gunsmi th . . .. Gen. mechanio ..

Gen. auto repairman . . Auto engine mechanic . .

Auto assembler

Ship carpenter

Telephone operator

Concrete const. foreman

Stock-keeper ... ..I. . Photographer

|

Telegrapher
4C R.R. clerk.
Filing clerk . . . . . . . . . .
Gen. clerk ... . . . . . . . .
Army nurse . ..............-

Bookkeeper .

FDental officer
Mechanical draftsman
B Accountant . . . . . . . . . . . . . Civil engineer.
Uedical officer.

A .SQHngineer officer ..

..

J D- I D I C-| C I

FIG. 5.

B IAI

238 EUGENICS REVIWIW.
Novel and suggestive of varied practical applications in industry
as well as in eugenics are the relations of intelligence measurement to civilian occupations, indicated by army statistics. The accompany-
ing figure 5 will serve to show some of the principal points. For the several occupations listed, the median intelligence is indicated by vertical cross lines. The horizontal line represents the middle 50 per cent. of cases under each occupation. It therefore fails to show the
complete range of intelligence engaged in an occupation.
The median intelligence for the white draft is practically identical
with the median for such occupations as blacksmith, carpenter, butcher, plumber, gunsmith, general mechanic. By contrast, the median intelligence of laborers, miners, teamsters, barbers, is distinctly below
the general median, whereas the medians for clerks, book-keepers, draftsmen, accountants, engineers, physicians, are very much higher.
These results clearly enough indicate the possibility of securing for practical vocational use reliable intelligence specifications for all important occupations. Both the range of intelligence actually engaged in a given occupation and the median should be known and proficiency or degree of success should be correlated with intelligence score so that limits may safely be fixed on the one hand for the minimum of intelligence necessary for success, and on the other hand for the maximum of intelligence usable without waste. For it is clear that the individual mnay have either too little or too much intelligence for a given task or occupation. Of course in addition he may be temperamentally qualified or unsuited to the occupation. There unquestionably is quite as serious human wastage on account of needlessly high grade intelligencein a given task as because of inadequate abilitv.
It would be inexcusable to overlook results which analyse the scores instead of presenting the single intelligence grade. Examination Alpha consists of eight tests which make radically different demands on the intellect of the subject. When the scores on these several tests. are computed for individuals or for such groups as medical officers, engineer officers, chaplains, it is manifest that there are significant differences from test to test. Graphic representation of these differ-ences yields what may be called an intelligence profile or psychograph for the individual or the group.
In figure 6, examination Alpha psychographs for nine army groups are presented. All are plotted about the fiftieth percentile and for each test the departure of a given group from that percentile is indicated. In test 1, oral directions, medical corps officers fall below the thirtieth percentile; chaplains at the forty-eighth; engineers at the seventy-second. On test 4, opposite or synonym -antonym, the medi -cal group is relatively much higher, forty-eighth percentile; engineers relatively much lower, sixty-second percentile, and the chaplains unprecedentedly high, eighthieth percentile. On test 6, number series completion, which demands detection of certain types of logical relationship, both medical officers and chaplains are low, whereas engineers are high.
By comparison with the dissimilarity of the psychographs for the several army groups of figure 6 the family resemblance of those of

MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY. 239
~ ~ ~ ~ ~/.1..

0 __ _ _

___
__00_A___0_

Co~~~~/~~0~~~0~~~A~~~0 ~~C

0 __4__1__$_~~3~~,~~-~~d~~~-~o~c~ Q t~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~o4 P

~ 0 ~ ~~~ ~~~

~ ~ *~ 4~X ~

0r
o C)

00-D49
00+ I)
.r4 HO~~~~~~~~~- edco 0+i ~
O 0 4.)~~~~~~~~) 40 9-40

~4O2

4-D ~ ~ ~ ~ 4.)ao,O2-0

0

E-4 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ C

~~~~~X~~~~~~~~
(

*0r-t 4.
a,
11
Cr

FIG. 6.

240 20 30

EUGENICS REVIEW. 40 50

figure 7 is significant. In the latter figure the group of medical officers has been resolved into its principal army specialities. It is noteworthy that the several psychographs are closely similar and that except for the somewhat higher scores of "internal medicine" and "mental and nervous all would fall within a narrow percentile range.
Whether or not the psychograph or some similar method of representing the status of important intellectual functions in the individual will come into general use is difficult to predict. The writer is inclined to think it will, because it gives infinitely more valuable information about the individual than does the intelligence score or grade. Indeed what we most need and desire to know about individual or group is the status of essential traits in relation to the norms for sex, age, race, occupational or other groups.

MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY.

241

The psychographic differences appearing in figure 6 may or may
not have occupational significance. Perhaps they are due to fundanmental differences in the intellectual make-up of men who choose engineering, medicine, or the mninistry, or perhaps they are due to pro-
fessional training and experience. The same possibilities obtain in
the case of differences in the psvchographs of individuals. For although psvchologists are striving to devise methods which shall yield clean-cut measurements of native capacity versus acquired ability, it is clear that they have not ideally succeeded, and that in most
instances they measure primarily the one or the other, but something
of both. So long as this is true, it will be impossible to say certainly whether and to what extent psychographs are descriptive of mental
constitution and possess educational or vocational significance.
I wish to avail myself of this opportunity to enmphasize the in-
excusable waste of scientific effort in the presentation of mental age,
letter grade, or numerical score as the sole descriptive result of "intel-
ligence examnination. " If and when an individual has been subjected to an examination consisting of a dozen or a score of different types of
test, each of which contains from ten to fifty different items, it is only a mnatter of common sense to present a statement of results which shall indicate achievement in the different tvpes of test. Thus it is possible to exhibit the status of different funetions instead of summing up the whole, and, thus hiding perhaps, the most significant features of the results, in such a simple statement as mental age or score. In this
respect the so-called "Binet testers" have been, and continue to be,
the worst offenders. Little indeed for the advance of scientific know-
ledge of mnental development has resulted from the i mense number of
Binet examinations made all over the world. If we could to-day replace the Binet tests by a miethod of measuring specific intellectual and affective functions which would permit of psychographic or other suitable mneans of indicating the relative status of each function, we should take a tremendously important step forward in the interest alike of eugenics, of education, and of other types of human endeavour.
Far more interesting doubtless to the practical eugenist than occupational differences in intelligence or specifications are the racial differences which appear when the foreign-born ALnerican draft is analysed into its principal constitutent groups. The difference even of median score or letter grade distribution are so great as to be significant alike to the American people and to the euigenists of the world.
The contrasting intellectual status of the white versus the negro constituents of the draft appear from table 8. Few residents of the United States probably would have anticipated so great a difference. That the American negro is 90 per cent. illiterate only in part accounts for his inferior intellectual status.

TABLE 3.

Race.
Whites .. Negroes ..

INTELLIGENCE OF AMERICAN NEGRO VERSUS WHITE.

Number of

Percentage making grade

Cases A B c + c C- D D-

.. .. 93,973 4*1 8D0 15-0 25*0 23*8 17*1 7*0
.. .. 18,891 0*1 06 2-0 5*7 12*9 29*7 49.0

Northernnegroes .. 4,705 0*7 2*7 7 2 18*0 25*8 31*2 14*4 Southernnegroes .. 6,846 0.1 0 2 0*7 3*4 9*¢ 29'2 570.

242 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Scarcely less rnarked than the contrast between white and negro, are the differences among the white racial groups. Again, the best basis for comparison available in the report of armny examining is the "cornbined scale. " By the kindness of Professor Carl C. Brigham of Princeton University, who recently has carefully re-examined the army data relative to nativity and length of residence in the United States, I am able to present in table 4 the median scores on the "conlbined scale" for those racial groups which were most largely represented in
the United States Army. The table presents also the rank-order of
the groups with respect to increasing percentage of intellectual.
inferiors, as dpsignated by letter grades, and similarly the rank-order
for diminishing percentages of intellectual superiors.

TABLE IV.

INTELLIGENCE RANK-ORDER OF NATIVITY GROUPS UNITED STATES ARMY.

Rank
order England Scotland Holland Germany Denmark..
Canada Sweden
Norway Belgium

Average score on Rank

Average score on.

"combined acale ." order.

"combined scale."

14-87 Ireland

.. .. .. 12-32

14-34 Austria .... .

. . 12 *27s

14*32 Turkev

.. .. .. 12'O*.

13*88 Greece,.. .. .. .. 11 9,

13-69 Russia .. .. .. .. 11.84

13.66 Italy ... . . . 11 01

13*30 Poland ... .. . .

10 74.

.1298 Native born white draft . 3.1377

.1279

Rank
order England Holland Denmark.. Scotland
Germany Sweden Canada Belgium White draft

Percentage D, D-, E.
8-7
9-2
13-4 13*6
.150
19'4
19-5
24*0
24.1

Rank

order

Norway

.. ..

Austria.. .. ..

Ireland

.. ..

Turkey

.. ..

Greece .. .. ..

All foreign countries ..

Russia ... .. . .

Italy .. .. ..

Poland.. .. ..

Percentage D, D-, E.
.. 25D6. .. 37-5 .. 39.4 .. 42 *0; .. 43*6. .. 45-6
60 -4 .. 63*4' .. 69*9

Rank
order
England Scotland White draft
Holland Canada Germany Denmark
Sweden Norway

Percentage of Rank

Percentage of-

A and B. order

A and B.

.197 Ireland ...... .

4 1,

13*0 All foreign countries

.. 3Q0.

12*1 Turkey.. .. .. .. 3.4

10O7 Austria.. .. .. .. 3.4;

105 Russia .. .. .. .. 2*7

8-3 Greece .. .. .. .. 2-

5.4 Italy .. .. .. .. 0*8.

4-3 Belgium .. .. .. 0*8.

4-1 Poland

.....0. 5

It is not suggested, much less mnaintained, that these general

ethnic results indicate the relative intellectual status of the several

nationalities concerned, or of the total racial groups, the world over.

Selective factors doubtless have markedly affected the intelligence of

immigrants. Possibly Poland, Russia, Ireland, have not sent as

nearly representative samples of their populations to this country as.

have England, Scotland, and Germany. In any event, the results.

offered are terribly significant for the United States of America.

MEASUREMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY.

248

Professor Brigham in a forthcoming book on intelligence and race,* which is highly commended to the reader in supplementation of this
article, uses the effective device of figure 8 to present graphically the
conspicuously important results of army psycholgical examining with
respect to racial differences in intelligence. Too much space has already been given to the sampling of general
results. Readers who desire all the facts must be referred once more to the official report. To sum up the story of psychological examining
in the United States Army:-One and three-quarter millions of men were examined. In all, more than two and one-half millions of examinations were made. About 42,000 of the number examined were
commissioned officers. More than 83,000 enlisted men- were given
individual examinations in addition to Alpha, Beta, or both. Just
about two men in every hundred were found to be so inferior mentally that thev could not safely be recommended for regular military train-
ing and duty. Some of these were discharged, others were assigned to development battalions or to labour organizations. Had the United States Army rejected or discharged immediately on the basis of psychological examination the lowest one hundred thousand of its recruits, it would have lessened by at least one half military crime, difficulty and
delay in training due to stupidity, and inequalities in strength of
organization. As in the light of war-tirne experience and its conspicuously impor-
tant psychological results, we consider the relation of psycho-technology to education, industry, and eugenics, we are impressed prir arily
by the necessity for the wise and skilful development of methods of observation and likewise of safe statistical methods of treating and
stating scientific results. No less important is the indicated need of standards of judgment or norms in connection with psychological measurement. In the main, mnental testing, so called, has been carried on with no other standard of reference than that of chronological age. Now age undeniablv is important, but least important of all ages perhaps is the chronological. Most important of all "ages" is the physiological, and equally important with this, or in certain cases even more important, are norrns and standards for sex, race, social or educational status, occupation, etc. Not until we have safe and ser-
vriceable standards of judgment can we use to advantage even accurate
results of mental measurement. Many, it is true, doubt the importance of special norms for sex, or for race, but whatever may be our
belief or conviction regarding sex or ethnic differences in mental constitution, we are compelled to admit that safe comparision mnust rest on statistically established facts and not upon accidental preconcep-
tions.
All civilized nations periodically take stock of material resourees and population, that they may have at hand reliable information for the guidance of their governments. But never yet has census been taken of the mental, or even of the intellectual, resources of a country, nation, or race. The United States of America demonstrated in its army the practicability of a wholesale mental inventory and discovered

*A Study of American intelligence. Princeton University Press (In press).

244 EUGENICS REVIEW.

I US (Ofker/18.84

-19
17-18

16
17

-1616
16-

Eglonurd 14 d?
Scor/and /4 34c
io/hw2d 14.32
US thrc"1377 Denrrr1#/3669 < Conoda /366
Sweden /330
Norway /2.98
8eOurn /?. 79
Irel/and /2.3 Autrria /Z.Z 7 /
TurKey IliCE Greece //90

-16 14
14 _ 13
-13
-121212-

Rus,ua //134 Ita~y /1.01
(A( and 1A.O74 V-S-CAvad JO.41

-11 ct
- ) 11-
'X

'-o10 FIG. 8.

MEASURETMENTS OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE U. S. ARMY.

245

certain uniquely valuable results. Is it rash to predict that in the near future, census or inventor7y of mental resources will become established as a means of securing information invaluable for the guidance of national, and ultimately of world, affairs? The group method of examining, given suitable tests for the most important intellectual and affective aspects of behaviour, would enable a country to sample the mentality of its population periodically at reasonable cost.
Not content with prophecy in this inatter, I definitely suggest both the extremne desirability and the practicability of mental census, and urge upon all nations the importance of thus providing information essential to the wise direction of educational, industrial, and governmental affairs.
EXPLANATIONS OF FIGURES.
FIG. 1.-Test 1, of Examination Alpha. FIG. 2 .-Test 7 of Examination Beta. FIG. 3.-Frequency of low, medium, and high grade intelligence in military groups. FIG. 4.-Percentile curves for intelligence scores (on "combined scale") for
various military groups. Reproduced from Memoirs Nat. Acad. Scs., vol. 15, p. 786. FIG. 5.-Intellig,ence by occupations. Vertical bar marks median; horizontal bar represents middle 50% of ratings (distance between first and third quartiles). Reproduced from Memoirs Nat. Acad. Scs., vol. 15, p. 829. FIG. 6.-Scores on Alpha tests (profiles or psychographs) for officer groups in the Army of the United States. Reproduced from Bull. Nat. Res. Council, No.8, p.477. FIG. 7.-Scores on Alpha tests of groups of medical specialists, United States Army. Reproduced from Bull. Nat. Res. Council, No. 8, p. 479. FIG. 8.-Relative intelligence of nativity groups, United States Army. Average scores on "combined scale" in left margin; estimated mental age in right margin. Reproduced by the courtesy of Professor Carl C. Brigham.

