REPORT OF MEETING OF INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE ON PLANNED PARENTHOOD

By VERA HOUGHTON
(Secretary, International Committee on Planned Parenthood)

THE International Committee on plan of the National Planning Commission of

Planned Parenthood met in London specific recommendations for the control of

on August 29th and 30th. Present were Mrs. Margaret Sanger, representing the
planned parenthood movement of America; Mrs. Elise Ottesen-Jensen, President of the

population, are being vigorously supported by the All India Women's Conference.
New organizations for family planning are springing up all over India, and every State

Swedish National League of Sex Education, and the British members, Mrs. Pyke and Dr. Helena Wright, representing the Family Planning Association. Unfortunately, neither

and Union is asked to consider how it can popularize birth control. Contraceptive advice is now to be given as part of the health services of the Corporation of Madras,

of the representatives of the Dutch Society for Sexual Reform were able to attend this

and of the Municipality of Berhampur, Orissa. Free municipal clinics have been

year. Dr. Abraham Stone, Director of the Margaret Sanger Research Bureau of New

operating for some time in Bombay, Poona, Bangalore, and in Hyderabad State, all of

York, was also absent, having had to return to the United States before the committee

which now have active family planning associations.* A special clinic is being

met. Professor Frank Lorimer, who repre- opened for patients attending the Tuber-

sented the Planned Parenthood Federation culosis Institute in Madras, where a Family

of America at the I949 and I950 meetings, has now resigned from the committee so as to devote more time to his work with the

Planning Association has been set up under the presidency of Mrs. Raksha Saran. A similar association has been started in Delhi.

International Union for the Scientific Study of Population, and the P.P.F.A. has been asked to appoint a successor.

All these various groups are affiliated to the Bombay Family Planning Association, which has reconstituted itself as the Family

Two representatives from Germany, Dr. Planning Association of India. This national

Anne-Marie Durand-Wever, of Berlin, and Frau Ilse Lederer, of the Kassel Marriage

organization is sponsoring an All India Family Planning Conference in Bombay

Guidance Clinic, were invited to London to report on the present position in Germany,

from November 30th to December 2nd, at which Dr. S. Chandrasekhar, founder of the

where the legal restrictions regarding con- Indian Institute of Population Studies, is to

traception are still very complicated. It is preside.

hoped to reproduce these reports in a later issue of the REVIEW.

Also of significance to India is the International Conference on Social Work, which

One of the main purposes of this meeting will take place in Madras from December

was to begin definite preparations for a per- i6th to 22nd, I952. Several requests have

manent world organization and to consider been made to the organizing committee for a

proposals for the holding of international session on population, which led to the

congresses. Particular thought was given to proposal that an International Congress on

the organization of an International Congress Population and Family Planning should be

on Population and Family Planning in India, where the recent pronouncements of Prime

held either immediately before or following the International Conference on Social Work.

Minister Pandit Nehru in favour of family
limitation, and the inclusion in the five-year

*Planned Parenthood in India, Eugenics Review,
Vol. XLIII, No. i.

'4'

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The International Committee on Planned South Pacific Islands, educational and

Parenthood feels that the growth of the organizational work is just beginning.

planned parenthood movement in India is The decision taken at last year's meeting of

now sufficiently advanced for encouragement the International Committee on Planned

to be given to the Family Planning Associa- Parenthood to proceed towards the setting

tion of India to follow its national conference up of a world information bureau in New

with the organization of the proposed Inter- York was reconsidered, and a preference

national Congress on Population and Family expressed to have only one international

Planning in I952. The International Com- information centre, as at present in London.

mittee on Planned Parenthood will gladly It was agreed, however, to ask the Margaret

co-operate in sending such delegations from Sanger Research Bureau of NeW York, in

Western countries as may be needed and consultation with the Planned Parenthood

requested by the Indian central committee. Federation of America, to appoint a com-

The invitation of the Swedish National mittee to consider the possibility of pub-

League of Sex Education to hold an inter- lishing an international news bulletin which

national congress in Sweden in I953, when would disseminate information collected by

the Swedish League will celebrate its twen- the International Committee on Planned

tieth anniversary, was gratefully accepted. Parenthood and by its liaison committee.

With a view to securing broad regional The International Committee on Planned

representation the International Committee Parenthood, distLessed to learn of the

on Planned Parenthood decided to set up a prevalence of abortion in Germany and

liaison committee of representatives from the Japan, and in other countries, passed a

many other countries which now have socie- resolution urging the Occupation Forces,

ties and groups for population problems and in particular, to stress the importance of

control. This liaison committee will, it is education in contraceptive technique so as

hoped, assist in the formation of a strong to ensure that recourse to abortion as a

world organization.

measure of spacing births would no longer

In addition to the present member-coun- be necessary, thereby improving standards

tries (America, Britain, Holland and of health. Such a programme is recognized

Sweden) the following countries have active to be of primary social and economic

organizations: Australia, Canada, Finland, Hong Kong, India, Jamaica, Japan, New Zealand, Singapore and South Africa. State or municipal birth-control services exist in Bermuda, Kuala Lumpur (Malaya) and Puerto Rico, and the countries of Austria, Ceylon, Denmark, Germany and

importance throughout the world to-day.
The Committee resolved to continue its efforts to interest medical research and other bodies in the universal need for a simple,
effective and cheap contraceptive. In conclusion, a unanimous vote of thanks
was moved to the Eugenics Society, which has continued during the past year to make

Norway are trying to rebuild their pre-war available, rent free, accommodation to the

organizations. Elsewhere, in Barbados, International Committee on Planned Parent-

Egypt, Israel, Italy, Pakistan, and in the hood.

genic lReiew, VoL XIMJI No. 8

