BYROM STANLEY BRAMWELL
M.A. (Cantab), LL.B. (Edin.), F.R.S.E., T.D. 1877-1948.

T HE Eugenics Society has suffered a In I907, after a brief period of practice at

grievous loss by the death, on October the Bar, he accepted an invitation from two

24th, i948, of its chairman of Council, Byrom Stanley Bramwell. In all the years
since I921, when he first joined the Society, Bramwell's knowledge, experience and energies have been freely at our disposal. He
was elected a member of Council in I922, and
in that capacity continued to serve until 1929; in that year, when the Society found itself for the first time with considerable

of his Cambridge contemporaries to join them in an old family firm of printers,
Messrs. Barclay and Fry, of Southwark. For one of Bramwell's scholarly habit of mind the decision to follow a business career cannot have been made without much heartsearching, but it is one that he never regretted. To the business he brought his scientific bent, his trained intellect and warm

funds to administer, he took over the onerous concern for his fellow man; and, starting as duties of honorary treasurer; and in I933 secretary to the company, within a very he relinquished this office for that of chair- short time he became its managing director, man of Council, a position he occupied with helping to bring about the amalgamation,

outstanding success to the end of his life. referred to in one of the tributes published Byrom Stanley Bramwell was born on below, which resulted in the formation of the

November i6th, I877, in Newcastle-on- Metal Box Co.

Tyne, the second son of the eminent physi- So modest was Stanley Bramwell in dis-

cian, the late Sir Byrom Bramwell, and position that it was possible to know him

Martha Crighton. For generations the Bram- for many years without learning anything

well family had been physicians in this area about some aspects of his varied life interests.

and in North Shields, and it is understand- Thus, many who counted themselves among

able that with a father, grandfather and his friends had no idea that he had been a

great-grandfather all in the medical profes- Volunteer and Territorial since I9OI, and

sion, Stanley Bramwell decided (or possibly had served with distinction in the first world

was persuaded by his father) that it was time war as staff captain, R.A., in Gallipoli and

a member of the family elected upon some Mesopotamia. Even after he had been

other career. That he would have made a invalided with paratyphoid fever he con-

fine physician is unquestionable. He had the tinued quietly to play his part in the war,

calm balanced judgment, the warm human entering first the Directorate of Recruiting

sympathies, the natural dignity and the and later the Ministry of Munitions.

requisite scientific attainments. But after a Meanwhile, in I9I4, he had married Evelyn

distinguished scholastic career at Chelten- Margaret, daughter of the late Archdeacon

ham College, which remained an abiding J. R. Hodgson of Lichfield; and of this

influence in his life, and at Trinity College, marriage there were two sons, John Byrom,

Cambridge, where in I899 he took a first in who has followed the family, tradition by

the Natural Science Tripos, he proceeded to becoming a physician, and Robert Stanley,

Edinburgh, where he graduated LL.B. and who followed his father in the firm Barclay

was called to the Scottish Bar in 1903. With and Fry. The one breach in the armour of

his lifelong genealogical interests it must Bramwell's modesty was the pride he took in

have been a source of deep satisfaction to his family and in the success of his sons in

him that at Edinburgh University he gained their chosen careers.

the medal in medical jurisprudence, just as It was shortly after the first world war that

his father had done before him.

Bramwell entered upon his long and fruitful

i84

BYROM STANLEY BRAMWELL

I85

association with the Eugenics Society. He the basis of a remarkable study which brings

was always fascinated by genealogical up to date the family histories recorded in

studies, and in pursuing them came to a clear Galton's classic. During Bramwell's lifetime

vision of their eugenic implications. Although arrangements were already in hand for the

it was not until I932 that he joined the publication of a new edition of Hereditary

Society of Genealogists, a study of his Genius which would include this important

writings long before that date reveals his new material as a long appendix. These

preoccupation with such questions as the arrangements are now complete, and it is

reappearance-whether through heredity or sad to reflect that a publication from which

the force of example-of special interests and Bramwell would have derived so much

traits through many generations of the same pleasure will now have to be issued post-

family. Thus, as far back as I922, he pub- humously in his honour.

lished in THE EUGENICS REVIEW a paper On his retirement from business in I936

under the title " Army Examinations and there began for Stanley Bramwell a period of

Heredity," in which he examined the intel- intense intellectual and administrative

lectual and family histories of boys who had activity in the organizations through which

entered the Army from Cheltenham College. he had canalized his many interests. He

It may be surmised that the collection of the became more assiduous than ever in his

considerable data which formed the subject attendance at committees of the Eugenics

of this paper proved a most congenial occupa- Society, accepted high office in the Society of

tion, for it served to link up two of his closest Genealogists and became absorbed in the

interests, the careers of Old Cheltonians and affairs of the Old Cheltonian Society and the

the influence of family tradition on the Masonic Lodge connected with it.

individual's choice of occupation and his Thus it was that the outbreak of war found

subsequent development. It was a happy him at his prime, ready for any duties and

fulfilment of these interests when, in I939, responsibilities that might come his way.

he became president of the Old Cheltonian He immediately became the A.R.P. post-

Society and, between I936 and I939, both warden for his district, and one can readily

chairman of the executive committee of the imagine how perfectly his tact and imperturb-

Society of Genealogists and joint honorary ability qualified him for this position. Those

editor of its magazine.

who knew him at the post say that he was

In THE EUGENICS REVIEW Byrom Stanley indefatigable; yet somehow he was success-

Bramwell continued over the years to con- ful in combining the long nights on duty with

tribute a series of attractively written papers, days spent in the service of the Eugenics

all marked by painstaking research, scholar- Society. It was a remarkable achievement for

ship and clear thinking. Some of his papers which we must for ever be in his debt.

called for the application of difficult statisti- The tributes published below give some

cal techniques, and here his mathematical idea of the man as he appeared to his col-

abilities served him well. His methods were leagues and friends. Inevitably they leave

not always orthodox, but experts agreed that much unsaid, for they concern a man who

they were sound. The papers covered an combined most diverse interests with an

extraordinary diversity of subjects: " Wealth exceptional reserve. Thus, they say nothing

and Ability" (I933); " Falling Population of the quiet pleasure he took in his election

and Positive Eugenics " (1937); " The to the Fellowship of the Royal Society of

Andersons of Peterhead " (1938); " A Note Edinburgh; or of his happy family life; or

oJ1 the Intellectual Differences Between the of the wonderful family holidays spent

Sexes " (94I) ; " The Span of Life " (I943); fishing in Scotland; or of his remarkable

" The Order of Merit: the Holders and their gift, as an omnivorous reader, for remem-

Kindred " (I944) ; and " Galton's Hereditary bering in detail what he had read. The

Genius and the Three Following Generations characteristics of Stanley Bramwell that

Since I869" (1948). This last paper forms made the deepest impression on the writer

i86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

were his gentleness and courtesy. To discuss Mr. Twitchin's bequest suddenly made us

a problem with him at the United University rich. Shortly after Sir Bernard's death in

Club was always an agreeable experience; I932, Bramwell became the Council's chair-

his unhurried, deliberate manner was itself man, and this important position he con-

the best assurance that he was completely at tinuously held for the sixteen years which

one's disposal, that nothing mattered except ended in his death on October 24th, I948.

the unravelment of the tangle one had come My first impressions were of his, caution,

to discuss. One invariably went away both his massive good sense, and his reluctance to

warmed and illuminated. Here, one felt, was express an opinion unless he were sure of his

a man dedicated to the service of impersonal ground. He was obviously interested in

ideals. He gave much to eugenics, but one eugenics; yet he then seemed somewhat

always had the impression that to eugenics aloof. It was when he became chairman that

he owed much of the inspiration of his own began the close personal relationship which I

life. He believed intensely that man's inborn came increasingly to value as I discerned his

endowment could be improved and that its fine though unobtrusive qualities. It was

improvement lay within our own power. It surprising to discover-though the fact may

is fair to say that much of his life was well be characteristic-how little his close

devoted to the pursuit of studies that might friends knew of the diversity of his interests.

help to bring this end about.

It was only two years ago that I learned how

To Mrs. Bramwell and to his sons we offer close and continuous was his interest in his

our deepest sympathy. In our own way we old school, Cheltenham; and it was at the

have a share in their very great loss.

same moment that an almost life-long friend

and fellow Cheltonian, Major-General F. S. G.

Lord Horder, president of the Eugenics Piggott, through whom I came to know of

Society, writes:

Bramwell's activities on behalf of his old

It would be much too trite a thing to say school, also learned for the first time of his

that the eugenics movement has lost a interest in eugenics. And it was only this

staunch supporter by the death of Stanley year that Sir Francis Fraser, a keen fellow-

Bramwell. When we recall that he was fisherman who had known Stanley Bramwell

chairman of Council for twelve years, guiding and his two distinguished brothers for years,

our Society through troublous times; that he first became aware of his connections with

was himself an authority on more than one our Society. It was, I believe, because of his

important aspect of heredity; and that his characteristic diffidence that his numerous

interest in the work of his colleagues, and his friends failed to recognize how many-sided

willingness to help them, never seemed to he was: and it may have been this diffidence

flag; remembering all this it is not an over- which at first made him seem difficult to

statement to say that he is irreplaceable. As approach.

president of the Society I owe Stanley Bram- But the better one knew him the more one

well a debt that I shall never forget.

came to appreciate his remarkable selfless-

ness, his indifference to recognition, credit,

Dr. C. P. Blacker writes:

prestige, honours, influence and power. He

With the possible exception of Clinton rarely talked of himself or of his experiences.

Chance, no one connected with the Society At a time when most people were boring

has, in the last twenty years, been in closer their friends with accounts of air-raid experi-

touch with Stanley Bramwell than I. He ences, he scarcely mentioned the fact that he

was not a man one came to know quickly. was an air-raid warden. And it was only

During the first three years that I was accidentally and by roundabout means that

secretary of the Society he was its treasurer; I learned what a splendid example he was

and our then president, Sir Bernard Mallet, setting to those who worked under him. He

used to turn much to him for guidance in the had remarkable though unobtrusive abilities

difficult decisions which confronted us when and an authentic scientific bent which, but

BYROM STANLEY BRAMWELL

I87

for his diffidence and the fact that he followed advancing, by reasonable measures, its

a business career, would doubtless have made objectives.

him well known.

By his death we have lost an elder states-

Bramwell's solid judgment and good sense man of high quality and a friend whom it is

were equallv apparent if one discussed busi- pleasant and edifying to remember.

ness matters, the personal issues which arise in every society, or problems of policy. To

Major-General F. S. G. Piggott writes:

those who had the privilege of knowing him In every school there are always a certain

well, other qualities became apparent-his number of names that occur with recurring

generosity, his kind-heartedness, his fairness, frequency down the years; their appearance

his integrity, his gentleness. For at least again and again in succeeding generations

twenty years he was the central pillar of our makes them almost synonymous with the

Society and no one in it has ever turned to school. Bramwell was such a name at

him in vain. Our debt to him must not be Cheltenham. The first of the family to enter

forgotten in future years.

the oldest of the great Victorian public

schools was the late Sir Byrom Bramwell

Mr. Geoffrey Eley writes:

(father of the subject of this memoir) in I858;

Of how many people with whom one works could one say, as I think we could all say of Bramwell, that the first and strongest impression that a mention of his name arouses in our thoughts is one of affection and respect ?
He was unfailingly available, wise and painstaking whenever a call came from the Eugenics Society, or from any of us who were
associated with it, and his advice was always on the side of reason and equity, with a strong underlying measure of charity.
It is true that in recent years, as his age began to tell, his speech and thought moved rather ponderously, and occasionally, it seemed, tangentially to the issues under discussion, yet it was never wise to imagine that one could neglect what he was going to say; and those with experience of him could feel no boredom or exasperation while he was
developing his thoughts, for the process was so essentially a part of the evident integrity of his nature. One was aware that the overall value of his contributions to our problems was real and that it could be
distilled in no other way.

he was followed by his six brothers, the youngest leaving in I882. Thus was the Bramwell tradition started.
There was a gap of only four years before
the second generation began to arrive; and in I89I Stanley himself-like his father, his uncles and his elder brother-entered Boyne House. In much more recent times the third
generation has made its mark and continued
the long family loyalty to house and college. One of Stanley Bramwell's characteristics
was modesty; proud though he was of his family's achievements in medicine, science, law and business, he seldom referred to his
own career; indeed the fact that he served in the Royal Artillery in the first world war, in Gallipoli and Mesopotamia, was unknown
to many of his friends. A good example of this modesty occurred on July Ist, I939, at Cheltenham, when he was unanimously elected president of the Cheltonian Society, perhaps the honour he prized most in his
varied and active life. In accepting office he
said he meant to Work hard to compensate for the feeling of unworthiness he had of the honour. When, two months later, the second world war began, he had already written

The Eugenics Society has indeed been ex- several hundred letters to Old Cheltonians all

ceptionally fortunate that its work should over the world to draw the attention of non-

have attracted the interest, ability and subscribers to the Centenary Fund; and he

devotion of such a man. He lent to its inner did all that was humanly possible during the

councils, over a long period of time, a con- following months to maintain the activities

stant and unruffled balance and a steady of the Society, no easy matter under war

determination to take every opportunity of conditions, with the College itself absent for

i88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

two terms at Shrewsbury, and with the departure overseas of large numbers of Old Cheltonians in the Forces.
The termination of a president's year of office always occurs at the annual dinner with time-honoured ceremony; it is his own special day, when he presides for the last time over a gathering of Old Boys, and reviews his stewardship. There was no such occasion in I940, for obvious reasons, and Stanley Bramwell passed from his distinguished position without any outward sign of recognition or gratitude. It was not until six years later, in I946, that the annual dinner was held again; and the president that year insisted that Bramwell's name should appear on the toast list. So it was arranged that he should respond for the Society, a task he carried out in a sincere and moving manner, enlivened by flashes of humour. One of the passages in his speech is worth recording:
Old boys' associations, and parents, are the major evils of a headmaster's life, major but necessary evils. The headmaster and council have a right to look to the Society for support for endowment and embellishments unlikely to come from any other source. The Society, on its part, regards itself to some extent as the guardian of tradition. Some traditions may have outlived their usefulness, but on the other hand not all innovations have a survival value.
Tradition was almost sacred to Bramwell, and his rare displays of impatience were caused by the overt and covert endeavours of younger and less wise men to decry, and even to destroy it. His faith may be summed up in the text of a sermon preached by the Dean of Hereford, Canon Waterfield (a former headmaster of Cheltenham), in the college chapel the morning after Bramwell's election as president: Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy elders and they will tell thee (Deut. xxxii, 7). As a pastpresident his advice was always constitutionally at the disposal of the Society; it was utilized to the very end of his life.
Mr. Cecil Binney writes:
Stanley Bramwell, till recently chairman of the Eugenics Society, was a model of what a chairman should be. He was punctilious in

attendance, brief and apposite in his re-
marks, urbane, self-possessed and goodtempered in the midst of controversy, com-
petent in transacting financial business, intelligent and well-informed on questions of policy, never anxious to express his own
views, nor too keen on getting them accepted.
To those who served with him on the
Society's Council or committees these facts
will be already known; to a casual reader of these notes they may not seem very interesting. And yet Bramwell was far from being a colourless personality. He was a most interesting companion, since he never talked for effect; the facts he stated were
always accurate and his language moderate and lucid. This was seen also on the rare occasions when he put pen to paper. Not long before the war he read at a members' meeting of the Society a paper on " Wealth and Ability: Eugenics in the Professions and Crafts," which was published in this
REVIEW.* It contained no complicated
tables or formula; still less was it a mere restatement of current thought. He set out in clear language intelligible to all many facts not generally known which he had been at
pains to ascertain; he weighed them judicially and drew his conclusions from them. At
least one reader found himself wishing that Bramwell had had the leisure to devote to a careful investigation-he would not have been content with less-from which he could have compiled a volume on social conditions in modern England.
He was an inheritor and a follower of a great tradition. England has been famous for its learned and progressive societies and committees, and their importance has been due to their consisting not of cranks or selfappointed experts wishing to advertise their views, but of men genuinely desirous of increasing learning and advancing progress and willing to devote their leisure hours to doing so. Many of them, like Bramwell, have been Scotsmen, with the industry and accuracy which are national characteristics ; many of them, like him, have been business men who have seen no inconsistency between engaging in commerce and taking an in-
* I933-4. 25, p. 23.

BYROM STANLEY BRAMWELL

189

telligent interest in the world in which they Mr. Bramwell devoted much time to Ithe

were doing practical work. Few of them, genealogical studies that fascinated him.

however, can have had such lovable per- And to him belongs the credit for attempts to

sonalities as Stanley Bramwell. He was one introduce quantitative methods into these

of the kindest of men, so kind that one researches. He was the first person to call

had to know him for some time before one attention to the merits of Guppy's remark-

could believe that he was in fact as kind as able book The Homes of Family Names, in

he appeared to be. His interest in the which the subject was treated, area by area,

Eugenics Society was part of a general desire in terms of actual frequencies. His own

to do everything he could for the improve- notable contribution on the association in

ment of the world and, enthusiastic as he the London area between occupation and

was, his moderation and consideration for racial origin as indicated by family name

others prevented him ever being led into (" Observations on Racial Characteristics in

unfairness to opponents or impatience with England "*) pointed the way to fruitful lines

over-zealous supporters.

of work whose promise is even yet not fully

appreciated. It is probable that future

The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff writes:
All who knew Mr. Bramwell felt a real affection for his kindly personality and a deep

research workers in this hitherto neglected field will increasingly pay to Mr. Bramwell
the tribute due to a pioneer.

respect for his unobtrusive ability and the outstanding integrity of his character. He

Mrs. Guendolyne Collyer writes:

gave himself unstintingly to the work in I learned of Mr. Bramwell's death with the

hand, and while listening patiently to every deepest regret, but feel that I can add little

suggestion, carried on unswervingly in the to the tributes which have already been paid

way he felt to be right. His interest in all to his memory by those who were associated

eugenic problems, especially from the genea- with him in the work of the Society. I came

logical point of view, was keen and pene- to know him as far back as I928, when I

trating. Even the routine of every-day joined the staff as business secretary, but it

business appeared to interest him. But it is was during his term of office as honorary

for his unfailing gentleness and sympathy treasurer that I was more closely in contact

that he will best be remembered by a large with him, and could more fully appreciate

circle of friends and admirers-and most his kindly nature and his ready sympathy in

keenly missed by those who had the privilege any difficulty. During the war, in spite of

of working with him.

heavy duties as a post warden in his own

district, I knew that I could rely on him for

Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts writes:
The first impression formed by everyone who met Mr. Bramwell must surely have been that of courtesy, and this impression was always confirmed and deepened by time. As chairman of Council and at members' meetings, as on all other occasions, his kindliness and urbanity were evident to all; without doubt they were firmly based on a sure sense of values, breadth of outlook and respect for the feelings and opinions of others. His services to the Society were immense, but the dominant feeling as long

the support and help which he was always willing to give. In any emergency, such as the unavoidable failure of a chairman to preside at a lecture, he would step into the breach at short notice and fill the vacancy with success, his wide and varied knowledge enabling him to do so whatever the subject under discussion. Personally, I have reason to be grateful for his kindness and consideration on more than one occasion.
By his death the Society has lost one of its most valued Fellows, and one who will be greatly missed.

as the present generation of Fellows and Members lasts will be one of personal loss.

* EUGENICS RzVIEW 1923-4. 15. Pp. 480 ff. and 556 ff.

I90 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Lt.-Colonel W. Stewart Roddie, C.V.O., management and direction of the business

writes:

until he retired in I935.

If, after half a century of friendship with In the period before the first world war he

Byrom Stanley Bramwell, I was asked to was mainly concerned in the work of re-

name the quality with which, in my mind, he organization, which was necessary to bring

is most clearly identified, I should unhesitat- an old family business up to the standards

ingly say the majesty of calmness. That, I of efficiency required by more modern condi-

think, more than any other of his admirable tions. O'n returning from war service in i9i8

qualities always impressed me strongly. I, he took a prominent part in the negotiations

and so many others, in times of distress, with certain other tin box manufacturers,

sorrow and uncertainty, sought that calmness which resulted in their amalgamation to

as storm-tossed mariners sought a haven. form the Metal Box Company Ltd., an

His natural honesty, his integrity, his legal organization which now enjoys a world-wide

training, his business training, combined to reputation. He was one of the first directors

produce in him a sense of unflinching of the Metal Box Company Ltd., which office

righteousness and a soundness of judgment he held until he retired.

which were unmixed blessings to those who He was always keenly interested in the

sought-and never sought in vain-his welfare of the staff and workpeople. In I929

invaluable advice. There are many who will he introduced a pension scheme for all male

miss " B. S. B.," but none more than myself, employees of the company, and also a

who, since boyhood, have stretched out my benevolent fund to relieve cases of hardship.

hand and taken a hold of his. And never He was the first chairman of the trustees of

without sensing the peace, comfort and both these funds, and continued in that

encouragement that came so generously office after his retirement up to the time of

from that majesty of calmness.

his death, never missing a meeting. The

letters which have been received since his

Mr. Aird Whyte writes:
Slow moving and unruffled, "B. S. B." could ever be trusted to give practical help and a useful direction to affairs. In all business matters in which he interested himself, his genial advice and smooth handling of the problem under consideration, made it the easier to resolve such difficulties as
arose.
My experience of him was chiefly concerned with family investment trusts. Without a very wide earlier range of experience in such matters, at the outset he rapidly grasped what was needful. His firm grip of the long-term essentials resulted in no mean measure of success, soundly based and continuously achieved.

death from the pensioners of the company bear high testimony to the comfort which he brought to many in their declining
years.
I first met B. S. Bramwell ini 1926, when
he engaged me as a management trainee for his firm on the introduction of the Cambridge University Appointments Board. It was certainly a fortunate day for me, for it would have been difficult to find a better man to
serve under. He took infinite pains to see that the training I was given was the fullest in every sense of the word. To-day there is perhaps a much wider recognition of the importance of training for management than there was twenty years ago, but Bramwell in this was in advance of his time, and his kindly advice and wisdom gave me a start in busi-

ness for which I shall always be grateful.

Mr. David Ducat writes:

In whatever he did he brought dignity to

B. S. Bramwell joined the firm of Barclay his work. He was respected alike by his

and Fry Limited, printers and tin box makers, customers, his competitors and his staff,

in I907. Apart from his war service in because with them all he was scrupulously

I9I4-I8 he was responsible, with his friends fair and honest. Equally he was also their

and colleagues, John and Rex Fry, for the good friend, giving advice and help to many

THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS
and never taking advantage of a fault to lawyer or a good teacher is without question; appear clever at the other man's expense. but we who worked with Bramwell will Some may have thought it strange that always be thankful that he chose business Bramwell should have chosen a business and that we had the great privilege of being career. That he would have made a good associated with him.

THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS:
The Utopia of the Eugenists* By PAUL BLOOMFIELD

MIEL wrote in his wonderful diary:
" Improve man, make him more just,
more moral, more humble, more pure -this is the only reform which has no correlative drawback. Institutions are worth no more than the value of the man who uses them." (" Les institutions ne valent que ce que vaut l'homme qui les applique.")
Governments on the whole behave as if people owed-and, still more, will in future owe-their character and " worth " to institutions, but without going as far as Amiel most of the Utopian writers from Plato to Bernard Shaw have believed that reform, or what we call progress, requires us to pay some attention to breeding. Since piety for the past is a virtue somewhat wanting just now, it may be fair as well as useful to recall the suggestions, made by some of those remarkable prophets, for supplying society with improved men instead of only supplying men with an improved society. It is true that eugenic principles occasionally sound out of tune with the precepts of the great moralists. The discord is usually only apparent, the impression we get being due to the fact that moralists emphasize more the individual's relations to God, eugenists more his ties to past and his responsibilities to future generations of men. At any rate the Utopian writers were moralists themselves,
* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on Septem-
ber 28th, 1948.

some of them in the small flight of the world's greatest.
Ancient Wisdom
The mysteries of kingship early in history bore upon mankind the significance of " blood." Folklore and fairy tales attest to it, and the Bible abounds with genealogies. Plato must not be expected to have fallen into traps which still catch prominent men with less intelligence. He neither regarded the human stock as stabilized, with the good, the beautiful, the capable and the strong reproducing themselves in an invariable ratio to the others, nor did he feel that any blind process of selection could be depended on to populate his ideal republic with an ideal race. So he had recourse to eugenic measures. The brave and the fair were to be encouraged to mate-but not to bring children into the world after the brave were fifty-five or the fair forty. Plato's persistent speculations as to the right age for getting married showed a scientific habit of mind which was soon to be abandoned for hundreds of years; not, indeed that other paragons of ancient wisdom or of mediaeval common sense failed to notice for themselves, as Ecclesiastes had put it, that " to every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven." Though the Jewish sage specified " a time to embrace and a time to refrain from embracing," his exact meaning is obscure.

