NEUROTICISM IN TWINS *
By H. J. EYSENCK, D.Sc., Ph.D.
Psychology Department, Institute of Psychiatry, Maudsley Hospital, London

IR FRANCIS GALTON, in his descrip
tion of the eugenic Utopia, which he
called Kantsaywhere, pictured a country in which " a system of competitive examination for girls, as well as for youths,
had been so developed- as to embrace every
important quality of mind and body." The
status of the individual as well as the number
of children which he would be permitted to raise depended on the results of this examination. It will be noticed that Galton did not confine himself to the measurement of
intellectual qualities but also stressed traits
of character and temperament. In a short
paper published in this Journal a few years ago' I tried to show to what extent psych-
ology had succeeded in furnishing the type of test which Galton would have required for such a searching examination. It was concluded that while we had succeeded in isolating and measuring some of the main
dimensions of personality, we knew little about their genesis, their distribution in the population and their connection with age, sex, social status and birth order.
Of all these unknown variables the one which is of most interest to eugenics is, of
course, the genetic one. It would not be true to say that no research had been done into the inheritance of personal qualities other
than cognitive ones; elsewhere2 I have given
a review of about a hundred studies dealing with precisely this problem. The results, however, are unsatisfactory for a variety of reasons. In the first place the investigations using objective tests are mostly very limited in scope, dealing with traits of a very low order of complexity, such as scribbling, angle of handwriting, eidetic imagery, reaction times, spatial orientation. The interest in the particular tests used is usually dependent on the acceptance of a particular system of typology; thus eidetic imagery would be of interest to the fdllowers of Jaensch, conditioned reflexes to the Pavlovians and details

of handwriting to the graphologists. In the absence of any convincing proof that these systems and typologies are of any great value, the interest in the specific tests used diminishes accordingly.
In the second place, it must be noted that when an attempt is made to study higher order concepts, such as criminal predisposition or mental abnormality, the concepts chosen are of an ethical, sociological or psychiatric, rather than of a psychological nature, and the investigations usually proceed along lines far removed from the objectivity of psychometric testing procedures.
In the third place, the results of previous studies are frequently difficult to interpret for a variety of reasons. We often do not know just what it is that a given test is measuring. Many tests have very low reliabilities, so that clear-cut results cannot be expected. There are many experimental errors (lack of proper statistical treatment; faulty sampling practices; faulty diagnosis of mono-zygoticity or di-zygoticity) which may account for the frequent inexplicable differences in the contributions of different students, using what are apparently identical tests and procedures.
More important than these faults, which could be obviated by suitable statistical, diagnostic and sampling techniques, is a fundamental methodological error which pervades nearly all the studies reported in the literature. All these studies make use of the so-called " twin method " developed in Germany, which consists in comparing the average resemblance of identical twins with
* The study discussed in this paper was carried out jointly by Mr. D. B. Prell and the author; it was made possible through a financial grant from the Eugenics Society. A full account of the details of the experiment and the numerical results is being published under the title " Inheritance of Neuroticism: an experimental study" in the June issue of the Journal of Mental Science.

79

8o

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that of fraternal twins. The differences psychological field. In these circumstances

between identical twins due to environment we may be somewhat doubtful of the general

alone are compared with the differences conclusions drawn by Newman, Freeman and

between fraternal twins due to both heredity Holzinger3 from their own investigations,

and environment; if differences between who maintained that* " the only group of

fraternal twins are much greater than dif- traits in which identical twins are not much

ferences between identical twins, heredity more alike (than fraternal twins) consists of

appears to be a powerful causal influence, those commonly classed under the heading of

while, if differences are small or non-existent, personality.... The difference in resem-

the influence of heredity as a causal factor in blance of the two classes of twins is not the

individual differences is discounted. The same in the different groups of traits. In

assumption is made, of course, that the general the contrast is greatest in physical

influence is as similar for a pair of fraternal traits, next in tests of general ability

as for a pair of identical twins; this assump- (intelligence), less in achievement tests and

tion, while it would be difficult to prove, is least in tests of personality or temperament.

not contradicted by such studies as have been In certain instances, viz.... tapping, will-

done in order to investigate it more closely. temperament and neurotic disposition, the

This method of twin study has many correlations of identical twins are but little

advantages, but it has led, in the past, to higher than those of fraternal twins." The

certain unjustified conclusions because those conclusion is appropriate not to traits of

who have used it have tended to make a personality but to the results of certain very

quite unjustified intellectual jump which poorly chosen tests which may or may not

may best be illustrated by reference to measure those traits to a degree which is

studies in intelligence.

almost certainly very limited.

In a typical investigation, an experimenter These doubts and criticisms have deter-

might give a certain test of intelligence, such mined the set-up of an experiment radically

as the Binet, to groups of identical and different from those mentioned above. We

fraternal twins, show that the intra-class have tried to investigate the inheritance not

correlation between identical twins was far of a given test score but of certain important

larger than that between fraternal twins, and underlying general traits. Again we can

conclude that intelligence was inherited to clarify this idea by reference to intelligence.

the extent of, say, 8o per cent. Even if we Instead of giving one test of intelligence the

assume that the assumptions underlying the proper procedure would be to give a large

mathematical calculations are unexception- number of tests, intercorrelate these and

able, it will be seen that somewherein the argu- demonstrate by means of factor analysis the

ment there is a jump from a given test (the existence of the different abilities which are

Binet) to the conclusion on the inheritance of measured by them (general intelligence,

intelligence. Now it is well known that a test numerical ability, verbal ability, memory,

like the Binet measures in addition to etc.). We could then derive, through suitable

intelligence a number of other factors, such mathematical procedures, an expression of

as memory, visuo-spatial ability, verbal the ability of our twins, not for each test, but

ability, numerical ability, and so forth, as for each of thesefactors, and study the degree

well as certain specific factors which it does of inheritance of general intelligence,

not share with any other test. What is numerical ability, verbal ability, memory,

inherited to the extent of 8o per cent is the etc.

ability to do well on the Binet ; this ability is This is what has been done in the present

only in part identical with intelligence and investigation. The trait investigated was

there is no direct way of equating the two. chosen because of its social importance, its

This mistake of drawing general conclu- interest to eugenics and the availability of a

sions from specific tests is so widespread as to

vitiate most twin investigations in the

* Italics not in original.

NEUROTICISM IN TWINS

battery of tests known to measure it with a
fair degree of accuracy. Some of these tests have been described in my previous paper in
this Journal,1 and it would therefore not be
worth while to describe them again. Suffice
it to say that seventeen tests in all were
given to twenty-five pairs of mono-zygotic
twins and twenty-five pairs of di-zygotic twins born during the period I935 to I937 and discovered after searching through the
birth records for five boroughs in South
London for all twins of the same sex born during that period. The diagnosis of zygosity was established by means of fourteen criteria including: close resemblance of
ears, teeth and facial features ; iris pigmentation; standing height; the presence or
absence of mid-digital hair; ability to taste
phenyl-thio-carbamide; scapular shape; and
blood groups AjA2BO, Rh, MNS, P, Lewis,
Kell and Lutheran. All these children were normal in the sense that they had never been
to a child-guidance clinic and had never had any kind of psychiatric treatment.
In addition to these twins, twenty-one children of a similar age were selected from out-patients at the Maudsley Child Guidance Clinic to constitute a neurotic control group. Great care was taken to exclude children with organic complications or with possible psychiatric traits, or who were not considered " unstable " by the examining psychiatrist. The resulting sample approaches as closely as is possible, at the present stage of psychiatric knowledge, to a " pure " neurotic group with relatively little mixture of mental and physical disorders.
The tests used were intercorrelated for the total sample of twins, a factor analysis was carried out, and a factor of " neuroticism " or emotional instability found. The interpretation of this factor was validated by showing that those tests which had a high saturation on the factor were also those tests which gave the best discrimination between our experimental group of normal twins and our control group of neurotic children. Next intra-class correlations were calculated for the identical and fraternal twins separately on each of the seventeen tests used; we also calculated the neuroticism score for all the

twins by suitably weighting all the test
scores by their factor saturations. Lastly the
percentage of heredity determination for each test and for the neuroticism score was
calculated using Holzinger's h2 statistic. This purports to give the degree to which a
given score is determined by inherited factors
as opposed to environmental factors and ip
spite of certain dubious assumptions made in its derivation, this statistic does give a
quick and probably fairly accurate measure of the degree of hereditary determination.
Using this statistic, it was found that for the neuroticism score the correlation between
identical twins was *85I, whereas that for the
fraternal twins was only *2I7; h2-*8io, and if we accept Holzinger's derivation we would
conclude that neuroticism or emotional instability is inherited to the extent of 8i per cent for the particular cultural conditions in
which this sample of children was brought up. It is particularly interesting to note that
none of the individual tests have as high an h2 value as does the factor score of neurotic-
ism; this is important because it demonstrates conclusively a point which has often been disputed, namely the fact that a factor derived through statistical analysis need not be a " statistical artefact ", but may have
biological reality. We may summarize our results. Our first
step was to show that a battery of suitably chosen tests defined a general factor of neuroticism or emotional instability; this interpretation was validated by comparing the scores on our tests of normal and
neurotic children. Our second step consisted in calculating scores on this factor of neuroticism for identical and fraternal twins. Our third step consisted in correlating these scores for the two groups of twins separately and to show that thezorrelation for identical twins (.85I) was considerably higher than
that for fraternal twins (M217), thus arguing
strongly in favour of the inheritance of this particular trait. Our last step consisted in the calculation of a statistic purporting to show the percentage of hereditary determination of this trait, which worked out at 8i per
cent.
In view of the smallness of the sample

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

used and the doubtfulness of some of the assumptions underlying the derivation of the h2 statistic, it would not be correct to attri-
bute too much importance to the exact value obtained for the degree of hereditary determination of neuroticism. There can, however, be little doubt that our study demonstrates the fact that individual differences in
emotional stability in our type of cultural pattern are determined very strongly by
inherited genetic factors and to a very much smaller extent by environmental influences of one kind or another. It is hoped that this experiment may be repeated soon with a

better selection of tests than we were able to make at the time this work was begun, and using larger numbers of children than we were able to use, so that we might be able to verify our conclusions and to give a more correct estimate of the exact degree to which neuroticism is inherited in our society.
REFERENCES
1 Eysenck, H. J. " The Measurement of Socially
Valuable Qualities." EUGENICS REVIEW, I947. 2 Eysenck, H. J. " The Inheritance of Neuroticism:
An Experimental Study." J. Ment. Science, 1951. 3 Newman, H. H., et al. "Twins: A Study of Heredity
and Environment." Chicago, I1937: Chicago University Press.

POPULATION STUDIES

Vol. IV. No. 4

Edited by D. V. GLASS

March 1951

H. V. MUHSAM. Fertility and Reproduction of the Beduin J. W. COMBS, JR., and KINGSLEY DAVIS. The Pattern of Puerto Rican Fertility S. P. BROWN. Analysis of a Hypothetical Stationary Population by Family Units-A Note
on some Experimental Calculations
RUTH GLASS and F. G. DAVIDSON. Household Structure and Housing Needs HANNms HIEmus. Reproduction and Replacement J. R. H. SHAUL and C. A. L. MYBURGH. Vital Statistics of the African Population of
Southern Rhodesia in I948 N. K. SARKAR. A Note on Abridged Life Tables for Ceylon, 1900-I947
Subscription: 3os. net per volume.
Published for the POPULATION INVSTiGATION CoMMITrEE by the CAMRMDGE UNIVESrrY PRSS, 200 EUSTON ROAD, LONDON, N.W.i.

Euges Rview, Vol. lUlL No. 2

