VETERINARY EUGENICS*
By PROFESSOR 'W. G. MILLER, M.R.C.V.S., F.R.S.E.

T HERE may be some who require a breed which now can be readily divided into

enlightenment upon what exactly are at least three distinct categories: the beef

the conceptions embodied in these two type; the dairy type; and the so-called

words, veterinary eugenics. To explain all commercial type which can be utilized for

that could be included within such a title dual-purposes, i.e. for either beef or milk

would be far beyond the scope of this paper. production. Before about I790 the Short-

I may be permitted to point out that if we horn did not exist as a pure breed. A few

define eugenics in the widest sense, namely as men of great individualism, courage and

" a study of the influences which improve the foresight, whose names to-day are historic

inborn qualities of a race, and especially the in agricultural circles-Bates, the Collings

development of those qualities to the highest brothers, Booth, Amos Cruikshanks-at dif-

degree "-which is the Encyclopcadia Britan- ferent times during the later eighteenth and

nica definition, and if we restrict the word the nineteenth centuries began selective con-

" veterinary " to its modern meaningt trolled breeding. Some followed the prin-

-namely, " pertaining to animal health and ciples laid down by Bakewell-the doyen of

disease," we are faced with a structure all livestock breeders; others followed their

possessing such a multitude of differing own ideas and ideals. The hitherto very

facets, comprising the whole of livestock heterogeneous, even mongrel breed, was in

improvement, that we must choose only their hands moulded and shaped until slowly

some one or two to examine in detail.

a certain degree of uniformity of type began

The Historical Background

to emerge. What had hitherto been a collection of animals liable at any moment to pro-

The control by man of animal breeding, duce creatures possessing no characteristics

which has without doubt achieved its or perhaps possessing almost every bovine

maximum results in Great Britain, has not characteristic, by dint of inbreeding, constant

been effected by conscious scientific progress. selection and elimination of undesirables

For some I50 years or more, breeders of from further breeding, began to take shape as

livestock in this country have had no definite a breed possessing some uniformity. The

settled policy, no clearly envisaged goal at mob plasticity of the original stock slowly

which they could aim, apart, of course, from became less, and a more concrete fixed type

the production of the animal which would sell grew in its place.

for most money. If I may expand this idea The pioneers were followed nearer to our

in some detail for one specific breed it will own times by men no less able or successful

serve to illustrate the circumstances which -especially and most pre-eminently William

have, more or less, applied to various other Duthie of Collynie who died only a few years

breeds and to a very large extent to the ago, to whom has been given the ungrudging

British livestock industry as a whole.

title of the " Shorthorn King," the man who

Perhaps the most famous breed of cattle practically founded the modern Scottish beef

produced in these islands is the Shorthorn- Shorthorn, the supreme individuals of which

still command prices running up to thousands

* A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on June I5th, I937.
t The old meaning of " veterinarii " is those who

of pounds per head. The work of these men and numerous others is being pursued and

looked after the beasts of burden. This might restrict continued to-day by modern breeders, and

the of

word milk,

to horses; although a cow giving i.e. 13t tons, is also possibly

a3,0"0b0egaasltlonosf

burden " I

short of calamity will continue in future indefinitely and incessantly.

389

Igo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It becomes pertinent to ask: What was founded the Shorthorns, and this applies

the guiding star which led these men? also to horses, sheep and pigs.

What was it that enabled them to foresee So much then for one aspect of livestock

what would be the proper type to breed? eugenics-perhaps hardly " veterinary

How could one analyze their policies, and eugenics "-except in so far as it may indi-

use them ourselves? I think to these cate that in Great Britain the stocks of

questions there is no answer. Each of the animals which the veterinarian must now

great animal breeders was a man who was use have already, in a very large measure,

born-an individual who sometimes owed been improved. But breeding alone has not

little or nothing to his environment (Duthie been responsible for the high general level of

was originally a branch bank manager)-a excellence possessed by British livestock.

man who had in his mind a clear-cut con- There has been, almost pari passu, tremen-

ception of what to him was the perfect dous improvement in the animal's environ-

animal, and who, aided by a mastery of the ment and management. Problems of nutri-

art and the craft of animal breeding (two tion, physiology, disease control, and all that

complementary necessities), sought to con- is included in the comprehensive term

jure from among his material this perfect "animal management," have engaged at-

type. Different men used differing methods: tention and a complete or partial solution

some practised the closest inbreeding; others has been found for at least most of them.

tried to correct deficiencies in one sex by

mating them with animals in which the re- Economic Factors

quired characters were markedly developed. To some extent the direct application of

Perhaps you wonder where this historical results obtained has lagged behind the

survey is leading. I wish to give you some knowledge of the facts. In every branch of

idea of the stocks upon which present work knowledge there is always a time lag between

is carried out, and to enable you to contrast discoveries and their application; but this

the patient, sure, steady progress of the lag is now of far shorter duration than

older breeds with what happens to-day. In formerly. It may be stated without hesita-

these days we are rich in everything except tion that many of the most serious scourges

time. In the days when the foundations of of the animal population could readily be

British livestock pre-eminence were laid, eradicated from Britain were there no

time was a far more plentiful commodity economic factors involved. Bovine tuber-

than it is to-day. The older breeders could culosis, for example, could be eradicated in

afford the time to make their matings in the Britain, if the farmer and the country could

unhurried, dignified and natural manner. face the cost. Similarly, we possess the know-

The bull was not just a supply factory; he ledge and the ability to effect complete con-

was the chief actor in the drama. His likes trol and ultimate elimination of many other

and dislikes were considered; he was animal diseases, such as sheep scab, dis-

nurtured and studied and observed and temper of dogs, rickets, contagious abortion,

managed, with a view to keeping him up to swine fever, Johne's disease of cattle, bovine

concert pitch, in a way which would prob- mastitis, pullorum disease in fowls, and

ably amaze many of you if you heard the probably many others, just as some even

details.

more serious diseases, e.g. rabies, glanders,

I chose the early history of the Shorthorn pleuro-pneumonia and sheep-pox have been

not because efforts with this breed were more eradicated.

intense or successful, but simply because it Perhaps I have said enough to show that,

serves admirably as an index to what hap- in contrast to the position to-day in connec-

pened and is happening with every other tion with human affairs, a great deal has

British breed. There are names connected already been done to effect such improve-

with the foundation of other cattle breeds ment among the domesticated animals as

quite as famous as those of the men who will enable them to achieve a reasonably

VETERINARY EUGENICS

i9i

satisfactory equilibrium in relation to their local cattle possess a resistance against

environment. Man's animals are in fact trypanosomiasis (a disease due to blood

better bred than is man himself. In other parasites transmitted by an insect vector),

words, keeping in mind that we demand whereas British or European cattle possessing

meat, milk, eggs, work, and offspring from superior conformation or performance carry

our farm livestock, the types which have been no such immunity.

evolved are those which under normal farm For these and many other reasons, there-

conditions, in the shortest time and with fore, it has become necessary to evolve tech-

least labour, will give the best economic niques which will enable man to effect a

returns.

greater degree of control of livestock im-

provement, and to speed up the processes of

Some Problems of Livestock Improvement reproduction to a faster rate than was

I must not, here, give an impression that possible in former times.

all British stock is perfect. This is by no One of the chief factors which has made

means the case. There is still much room this possible has been the application of

for improvement, and far too many animals artificial insemination to horse, cattle and

with inferior qualities and potentialities are sheep breeding in particular; another has

retained for breeding instead of being been the development of early methods of

castrated or otherwise eliminated. The pregnancy diagnosis-especially in the mare;

general level of efficiency is, however, high, and intensive studies of the physiology of

and all British breeds are without exception reproduction including lactation, and of the

immeasurably superior to the stocks from pathology of sterility, have each contributed

which they originated.

much valuable information, which will with-

But few other countries, if any, are in this out doubt contribute even more help in

fortunate position. In some, such as the future.

Argentine, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, it is still necessary for one or another

Indications for Artificial Insemination

reason to maintain a constant stream of new To those who have an incomplete anato-

blood from Britain, so that such improve- mical knowledge it is somewhat difficult to

ment in the local cattle stocks as has already explain in detail the methods of producing

been brought about will be maintained and artificial insemination in animals, and I

increased. In others, such as Russia in par- propose to deal with them in the simplest

ticular, a previously fairly satisfactory popu- manner. The following are among the

lation of domesticated animals was allowed, reasons for employing artificial insemination:

owing to political upheavals, to degenerate (i) To make reproduction possible in cases

into a mixed heterogeneous mongrel stock, of infertility due to discrepancies in size

very much like the London pigeon, or like between male and female, abnormal physio-

the animal population of Britain prior to logical function, lack of- uterine tone, etc.,

improvement. An average or good-grade when there is no other pathological or

stock deteriorated into " scrub stock." In physiological bar.

yet other countries, especially in some of our (ii) To conserve the energies of males of

African colonies, in some countries in South proved superior quality, or alternatively to

America and other areas, improvement of enable a single superior male to become the

local stocks is hindered or made difficult by sire in a single breeding season of a far greater

the incidence of diseases transmitted by number of offspring than would be possible

coitus, or by diseases to which local races from normal matings. This accelerates the

have in the course of time acquired a toler- rate of improvement of a species of livestock

ance or even immunity, but which make the in which there is a comparative dearth of

importation of improved stock not possessing superior males but a superabundance of

this tolerance, an impossibility. In many breedable females often of inferior quality

areas of Kenya, Tanganyika and Uganda, (e.g. in Russia and the Argentine).

192 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(iii) To avoid (a) infection of males with the quality of the offspring, if one can judge

diseases contracted during, and transmis- by the prices obtained for many of them and

sible by, coitus; or (b) spread of coitally by the number of prizes they obtained in the

transmitted disease among female breeding show and sale rings later. One breeder, for

stock by the agency of the male.

example, sent forty-five mares to this stal-

(iv) To breed from animals which, being lion, and forty-one of them proved to be in

in captivity or under domestication, might foal after one service only.

otherwise be " shy breeders" or refuse to The adult bull may serve on an average

mate (e.g. silver foxes and martens).

between fifty and seventy cows in a year, the

(v) To overcome sex antagonisms, either ram fifty to sixty (up to eighty or ninety in

between animals of differing breeds or species particular instances), and the boar some

(hybrids), or in those peculiar cases of repul- twenty-five to thirty-five sows.

sion which apparently have a psychological It should be clearly realized that these are

basis. all figures for adult animals, and that most

(vi) To explore the scientific possibilities young or adolescent animals are only allowed

of interspecific hybrids which might have to serve half or two-thirds of these numbers.

important economic uses-e.g. argali x It should also be realized that the average

domesticated sheep in Pamirs, and zebra x level of fertility of some of our farm live-

domesticated horse. There are other theo- stock is rather low. In the horse, for example,

retical possibilities, such as the eland x apart from ponies living a free life, the

cattle cross, the buffalo x cattle (the " cat- average fertility is only between 56 per cent.

tallo "), and so on, in which hybrids have and 68 per cent. of the mares served. It is

already been produced by natural mating. certainly higher in cattle, sheep and pigs,

though few sires leave IOO per cent. of the
Normal Reproduction in Domesticated Animals females they serve pregnant. Without doubt

Before dealing with the technique of arti- much of this low fertility is directly due to

ficial insemination, it is desirable to say the trammelling effects of domestication

something more about normal reproduction systems on the free play of reproductive

in the larger domesticated animals. As is impulses. Females are not always served at

well known, all farm livestock sires are poly- such a time that the recently erupted ovum

gamous, but this polygamy is not a constant has a chance of being fertilized by a living

feature. The normal average number of active spermatozoon. Frequently service is

mares served by an adult thoroughbred too early; sometimes it may be too late.

stallion in a season (say February to June) It is very difficult to obtain adequate and

is about forty; in the heavy draught breeds reliable figures about differential fertility, as

(Shire, Clydesdale, etc.) with a breeding between the beginning, the middle, and the

season from March to July, it may be almost end of the serving period, for there is a great

any number between 8o and I20. Most of deal of individual variation. I think, how-

these mares are given at least two separate ever, it is safe to say that where the breeding

services; many need three, four or five, or season is restricted to certain months of the

even more. There are, however, some really year only, as in the horse and sheep, there is

amazing records for individual heavy draught a certain proportion of unsuccessful matings

horses. The famous Clydesdale stallion, at the very beginning of the season; then

" Dunure Footprint," for instance, in one fertility rises and remains at its maximum

particular season served 480 mares. A for the greater part of the period, but tends

groom slept in his loose-box, and day and to fall off again with the later services at the

night an alarm clock, set for every two hours, end of the season, especially in a sire which

fixed the time for a fresh mare to be brought is expected to fertilize more females than

in for service. The record of fertility for this whatever the number may be of which he

particular year's services is normal, about is physiologically capable. This latter drop

64 per cent., and there was no diminution in in fertility may, however, not always be

VETERINARY EUGENICS
attributable to the sire, since if there should which would be impregnated by a normal be any females among those he serves which, service. The accelerating effect of this techfor one reason or another, are sterile, a big nique in mass improvement schemes can be proportion of these will almost certainly fall readily realized. From a single bull during among those served latest in the season, and one season over I,000 calves are stated to may contribute towards an apparent termi- have been produced by the Russian innal infertility. Physiologically, however, it is vestigators. Instead of perhaps fifty to to be expected that during a period of ex- ninety lambs from a ram, in a single season ceedingly active spermatogenesis, there will over I,200 have been produced, and it is come a time when a greater or lesser degree of claimed to be possible to inseminate 4,000 exhaustion of spermatogenic tissue occurs. ewes during a forty to fifty-day season by This brings up the important question of the latest methods in which as many as the great desirability of adequately spaced fifty ewes may be impregnated from a single matings. Unfortunately, the periodicity in ejaculation. As already mentioned, however, horses and sheep is always-or nearly always the British stockowner is not so much in-determined by the frequency, duration and terested in mass improvement, as in securing sequence of cestral manifestations in the the maximum numbers of offspring from a mares and ewes. On one day, no females may particularly prepotent or pre-eminent sire. be at the right stage of cestrus for mating;
on another, there may be four, six, eight or Obstacles to Extended Use of Artificial
even more, and few owners and no rams are Insemination content to postpone service until a later date At this stage it may be well to mention (matings in horses being usually controlled, three other facts which serve to illustrate but in sheep the animals are at liberty). why very large numbers of females are not
being inseminated in Britain as they are in Problems in Britain and Abroad Compared Russia. Livestock-breeding is a competitive
From this brief outline, it may perhaps business, and he who breeds a particularly be appreciated that successful artificial in- superlative bull or stallion naturally wishes semination can bring to the aid of the stock- to reap some financial rewards for himself. owner a very powerful expedient for correct- These rewards are represented partly by ing some abnormalities of reproduction. In prize money, but much more so by the value Britain, however, the need for the develop- of the offspring. For example, the owner of ment and extension of the use of artificial a " triple crown winner," or the owner of a insemination amongst the various species of supreme Royal and Highland Champion domesticated animals is not by any means so Bull, will most naturally wish to reserve as acute as it is in many countries abroad. many as possible of his own brood mares or Britain is essentially a " sire-producing " breeding cows for service. To maintain country; many overseas states are " sire- something in the nature of a partial monoimporting" countries-for example, Argen- poly of offspring from such a sire is financially tine, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa profitable. To multiply the numbers of such and Russia. Wherever there is an absolute offspring tenfold is to do far more than to or comparative dearth of pre-eminent sires, decimate the price per head obtained. there artificial insemination can be of the Secondly, when natural mating occurs there greatest aid to rapid livestock improvement. is a considerable degree of security of pediAs will be mentioned later, it is possible, by gree for the offspring. Were artificial inusing a technique in which each ejaculation semination to become a common technique is diluted with a suitable fluid (now called a in this country, a certain proportion of the " dilutor "), and then divided into a series more unscrupulous breeders might succumb of fractions, to effect successful insemination to the temptation of substituting sperm from of eight, ten or twelve or even up to fifteen an inferior sire for one of superior meritsor sixteen females in place of the one only with the risk of disastrous results to pure
c

I94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

breeding. Of course, it would be relatively (b) Collection by means of the artificial

easy to devise a mechanism whereby this vagina. There are two main types of these:

latter disadvantage might be overcome, but the Russian type which is virtually a pure

the former would still operate. There is also latex rubber lining for the vagina of the

a third reason. The use of a large number of female; and the Cambridge pattern, which

sires in any given breed keeps that breed, consists of a felt-covered metal or bakelite

when viewed as a whole, in a satisfactory rigid tube, into which fits a latex rubber

state of genetic fluidity. When the genetic liner. The cavity between tube and liner

characters of any one animal, superlative is filled with warm soapy water and air,

though it may be, become unduly concen- and at one end is a glass collecting-chamber.

trated within a breed through excessive use, Lubrication is effected by means of pure

much of this malleable breed fluidity is lost, white vaseline or liquid paraffin. The

and more fixity of characters results. If there penis of the male is diverted just before

should be a sudden change in breed fashions penetration into the artificial vagina held

or in the nature of the public taste, or if some alongside the female, and the semen is col-

adverse character begins to assume undue lected in the glass container. In the Russian

general prominence, there is a more restricted type, the sire serves into the rubber vaginal

choice of out-crossing available to the lining fitted to the female; this receives the

breeders, and valuable time may be lost in ejaculation and is subsequently removed.

achieving once more that desirable lack of From either type the subsequent procedure

undue rigidity which permits rapid breed- is similar. The semen is obtained pure and

modifications to be made to meet sudden uncontaminated by vaginal secretions or

demands.

saprophytic or pathogenic vaginal organisms,

Methods of Sperm Collection

and it can be diluted suitably and used for the insemination of such other females as

There is a choice of several methods of are in cestrus, or it may be used undiluted

collecting sperm for animal insemination. after division into appropriate fractions.

These methods, some of which have distinct The disadvantages are that a female in

advantages, will be briefly outlined here. cestrus is necessary, or alternately a specially

(a) Collection from a normal service. This trained female which will allow the male to

method has been in common use for some mount even though she is not in season. The

considerable time. The female in cestrus is technique is not so simple, and for the larger

served in the normal way, and immediately animals two operators are usually required,

afterwards semen is collected from the while the apparatus must be maintained

anterior vaginal floor, by a long syringe-like scrupulously clean and bacteriologically

instrument (the inseminator), which is then inserted through the cervix into the uterine cavity where its contents are expelled. This method has certain disadvantages: there is the possibility of infection being transferred from male to female or vice versa; it is essential that the female shall exhibit cestrus; and it is generally possible to inseminate only one or perhaps two females from one service, so that male energies are not greatly conserved. Alternately, there is greater guarantee of pedigree,
less chance of unscrupulous malpractice,

sterile. Advantages are that coital infections are avoided and that the complete uncontaminated emission is available and under complete control.
(c) Collection by service-crate. The purpose of this is to secure the female in such a way that irrespective of whether she is in cestrus
or not she cannot escape from the attentions of the male, which will mount and serve either into a Russian or Cambridge-pattern vagina as above. Up to the present, the method has been chiefly employed for sheep

simplicity of technique, and less risk with a and cattle, since the females of these species

valuable highly strung sire or dam of any are more tolerant and placid. Mares will

untowards psychological sequelae.

probably never lend their co-operation to

VETERINARY EUGENICS

I95

man for purposes of collection by service- though apparently eminently practical, and

crate; thoroughbreds certainly will not. of use to prevent injuries to valuable

(d) Collection by Phantom female. Certain breeding animals through fighting or even

sires, especially rabbits, bulls and rams, if a playfulness, is a somewhat rough and ready

stuffed imitation of a female is presented to one and does not commend itself to modem

them, in which the skin is used and the ideas.

general outline is preserved, will mount it It will be seen that the steps in the

and serve into an artificial vagina held in development have been (i) a normal female

suitable position. Such phantom females are in full cestrus which is given a normal service;

useful in that no female in season is required (ii) a normal female in cestrus given an ab-

and no actual contact between the two normal service; (iii) a normal female not in

parents takes place. Subsequent procedures cestrus given an abnormal service; (iv)

are the same as those already mentioned an abnormal female (phantom) with an

above.

abnormal service; and (v) no female at all-

(e) Collection by electrical stimulus. A electrical and manual stimulus to the male.

technique has been elaborated within the Do not think we can dispense with the male

last few years whereby, by passing an elec- just yet!

trical stimulus through the lumbar region of the spinal cord, a normal emission of semen Technique of Insemination

can be obtained in rams. This itself is re- The actual technique of insemination of

markable, but when it is mentioned that the collected sperm does not present any

previous administration of certain drugs to undue difficulty. The appropriate amount is

the ram will increase the survivability of the introduced into or through the cervix by

sperms from about two to four days up to means of an all glass or other non-metallic

as much as sixty-four days in one instance, syringe, using a suitable means of illumina-

and from twenty-four to forty-eight days in tion and a vaginal speculum. No evidence is

numerous instances, it may be realized what available to show that any active co-opera-

tremendous possibilities there are in the tion on the part of the female is required,

further development of this technique in apart from the obvious one of exhibiting

future years. So far as I am aware, this normal signs of full oestrus. No orgasm or

method of collection has not yet been other psychological or physiological dis-

attempted successfully in the larger domesti- turbance occurs during insemination, yet

cated animals, but there seems no reason fertility in carefully inseminated groups of

why it should not be applied to bulls at least. females is recorded as being frequently much

It has great possibilities in connection with higher than when normal service occurs.

the examination and investigation of breeding sires which are not functionally up to Possible Lines of Development

normal breeding standards as regards such It may be mentioned that with further

matters as sperm count, density, total development of methods of employing the

volume, and reaction, or are possibly in- various gonadotropic hormones now being

fected by such organisms as Brucella abortus, actively investigated in many centres, it may

or by tuberculosis of the genital organs. probably be possible to induce artificial

(f) Collection by frictional methods. This oestrus in groups of females at any given

hardly merits more than mere mention, but prearranged date; but to be effective such

since it is sometimes practised by certain cestrus will have to be accompanied by the

dog-breeders and owners of silver fox farms, development of mature and ripe follicles and

especially abroad, perhaps it should be in- by their ovulation. As a corresponding

cluded. Manual or other friction is carried development, the preservation of sperma-

out until an emission is obtained; this is tozoa in an active state for considerable

collected in a test-tube and used to inseminate periods will be required. When this is

such females as are in cestrus. The method, possible, Man will have achieved almost

196 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

complete control of the mechanical features remains to be seen. Doubtless there are

of reproduction, and it will then be possible households where the disappointment occa-

to superimpose any desirable modifications sioned by a lack of offspring might have been

upon the sexual rhythms which at present avoided by judicious employment of these

are to a large extent dependent upon or at modem reproductive techniques; equally

least associated with seasonal and climatic certainly similar opportunities for their

conditions. If, for instance, it became application will arise in future. It would

economically desirable for a portion of lamb- seem that careful consideration might be

crop to be produced in autumn or mid- given to the pros and cons of the problem as

summer instead of early spring, this could it applies to man. There may be difficulties

readily be arranged. Appropriate use of to be faced: staunch supporters of the

hormone preparations is readily capable of established social structure of the modem

overriding many or most of those sub- world might look askance at such sugges-

normal or abnormal physiological or psycho- tions; the law of entail and inheritance

logical functionings (such as unduly long or might have to be modified; and without

short oestral periods, irregularities in rhythm, doubt there would be bitter antagonism from

lack of adequate desire, or undue desire) those whose knowledge of anatomy and

which at present appear to be concomitant physiology is limited to what they have

with the intensification of modem methods of learnt by the exercise of their own limited

livestock production no less than they are of powers of observation.

the progress of human civilization.

On the other side of the picture, however,

Before these days arrive, however, there is there are very definite advantages to be

much to be done. As yet, although much obtained. In addition to contributing to the

more is known about reproductive physi- sum of human happiness by making progeny

ology than formerly, there still remains a possible where otherwise there could be

great deal to be investigated. Especially none, artificial insemination might open up

is this the case regarding hormone therapy, wider and truly eugenic vistas; some con-

the exact vitamin requirements needed trol over the temperament, mental or

during reproduction, the details regarding physical abilities of future races might be

anti-hormone production, the control of exercised and our sons and our sons' sons be

infections of both male and female generative consequently better fitted to cope with the

tracts, and the exact influences of feeding, exigencies of a civilization that becomes more

exercise, and general methods of manage- complex and a society that becomes more

ment upon breeding, both in man and exacting as the years pass.

animals.

In conclusion, I claim no originality for

Conclusion

what I have put before you. Most of the work to which references have been made

Breeding is an exact science which, like is contained in the post-war literature of this

any other science, possesses its own rigid and other countries, particularly Russia;

laws. Just how far knowledge obtained from and so far as Man is concerned others before

a study of reproduction in animals can be me have envisaged the Brave New World of

used to solve the problems of mankind to-morrow.

Eugenics Review, Vol. X31X, No. 8.

