THE EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY
AND VENEREAL DISEASE.
Now that the campaign against venereal disease is entering on a new and most hopeful stage, it may interest the readers of this REVIEW to be reminded of the part which the Eugenics Education Society has played in this movement. Social reforms are, as a rule, only accomplished when the subject has been in the air for some time, that is to say when -some underlying cause has simultaneously attracted the attention of many individuals to the possibility of further advances being made in the direc. tion desired. In this case the discovery in Germany of the drug salvarsan was, at all events, one of the most important of the factors tending to promote progress. Now when many are working in the same field each individual or group knows full well what are the steps which he or they have taken, whilst being only partially acquainted with the efforts made by others; and consequently when a Society is presenting a record avowedly only of its own proceedings, it is nevertheless apt to give the impression that undue claims are being made in regard to the effects of its own endeavours. Let it, therefore, be clearly understood that the Eugenics Education Society fully realises that it has merely been pulling one of the many strings, the combined effect of which has been to set the whole machine in motion.
At the Eugenics Education Society's Council Meetings in October and November, I91 I, the question of combating venereal diseases was discussed, and certain definite steps were then taken. And in regard not only to what was then done, but also as to all the steps subsequently taken by us, it must here be placed on record, once for all, that the hon. secretary of the Society, Mrs. Gotto, was the main underlying moving force, and that to her the chief credit is due for what the Society may have accomplished. A medical committee was then appointed with Dr. Douglas White as its secretary; and, armed with a letter drawn up by this committee, I, as

214 EUGENICS REVIEW.
President of the Society, called on the President of the College of Physicians, Sir Thomas Barlow; the President of the College of Surgeons, Sir Rickman Godlee; and the President of the Royal Society of Medicine, Sir Henry Morris; and was
sympathetically received by them all. Sir Henry Morris at once determined to push the matter forward with great energy, and in January, I912, the Eugenics Education Society received an invitation from the President of the Royal Society of Medicine to send delegates to confer with a Committee which that Society had then appointed to consider, amongst other
things, the suggestions put forward by the Eugenics Education Society in the letter above mentioned. In consequence of this invitation, the matter was again considered by our Medical Committee, and according to their report, which was adopted by our Council, the following were to be the main points brought to the notice of the Royal Society of Medicine at the forthcoming conference:-
(I) To express great satisfaction that the Royal Society of Medicine has appointed a committee to deal with this
question. (2) To state that the representatives of the Eugenics
Education Society would like to have attended the meeting armed with statistical information. Little or no reliable numerical information, however, is known to them concerning the prevalence of these diseases, and it i9' partly because of this ignorance that they are approaching the Royal
Society of Medicine. (3) To suggest to the Royal Society of Medicine the
desirability of their urging on all large hospitals the advantages which would result from a record being kept in future of the number of cases of venereal diseases treated, in such a form as to be readily available at the end of each year for statistical purposes.
(4) To urge the Royal Society of Medicine to consider
the question of hospital facilities for the early treatment of venereal diseases, and to outline methods of reform.
(5) To suggest that the question, whether the present method of instruction of medical students with regard to

THE EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY AND VENEREAL DISEASE. 215
these diseases is adequate, is one which is worthy of the attention of the Royal Society of Medicine.
(6) To consider whether it would be wise to approach the Government, either now or when further statistical information is available, with regard to the reforms above
suggested, and, perhaps others.
It is interesting to note that though this was written some four years before the Report of the Royal Commission on Venereal Diseases was issued, yet there is nothing in that Report to make us wish that these instructions had been in any way different from what they in fact were.
The delegates of our Society met the Committee of the Royal Society of Medicine at their house on February 27th, 1912, and a long and interesting discussion took place. Shortly afterwards the Royal Society of Medicine appointed a very strong Committee, the " Conjoint Committee," to inquire into the whole problem of venereal disease, and it is gratifying to record that the members of the Eugenics Education Society's Medical Committee were, as a body, invited to serve thereon. The Royal Society's Committee, which appointed Dr. Douglas White as its secretary, worked hard at its task, and issued a valuable report in December, 1913.
Simultaneously with some of the proceedings above recorded other steps were being taken. The Local Government Board instituted an inquiry as to the existing control of venereal diseases, and in 1913, a report by Dr. R. W. Johnstone was published as to the adequacy and character of the institutional treatment in England and Wales. In the year I9II it had already been decided that venereal disease was to be one of the chief subjects for discussion at the International Medical Congress of 1913, and, as a result of that discussion, strong recommendations to the Government were framed. An agitation then sprang up in favour of the appointment of a Royal Commission, an agitation in which Sir Malcolm Morris played a prominent part, and to which the Morning Post gave invaluable help by publishing, in July, 1913, a weighty appeal for such an inquiry signed by 38 leaders of the medical pro-

2I6 EUGENICS REVIEW.
fession. The Government responded promptly, and on November Ist, 1913, a Royal Commission was appointed, with Loird Sydenham as its chairman. The severity of its labours is clearly indicated by its report, which appeared early in I9I6, and which will for long constitute the document on which all reforms concerning venereal diseases will be based.'
It was, however, felt by those interested in the subject that there was a serious danger of the Report of the Royal Commission falling flat, if, when it was issued, there were not already in existence a body especially organised with the object of promoting the reforms likely to be therein advocated. The desirability of forming a National Committee for such purposes was discussed at the Council Meeting of this Society in January, 1914, and it was decided that the Society's premises in Kingsway might be utilised for all the preliminary steps in the formation of such an organisation should the promoters so desire; and in our offices the National Council for Combating Venereal Diseases has been located ever since its formation. Obviously, none of the members of the Royal Commission could take any overt action in connection with the public reception of their forthcoming report; but it was privately ascertained that Lord Sydenham viewed with favour the action proposed to be taken. Sir Thomas Barlow, and other prominent medical men not on the Commission, then took the matter in hand; the Bishop of Southwark gave the movement his valued support; and, after a large number of private conferences and discussions, the National Council was actually inaugurated, with Sir Thomas Barlow as its chairman, at a meeting held in November, 1914, at the rooms of the Royal Society of Medicine. The fact that Mrs. Gotto and Dr. Douglas White were first
appointed the hon. secretaries,2 whilst I was subsequently nominated as hon. treasurer of the National Council, may, perhaps, serve as a reminder of the historical connection between that Council and the Eugenics Education Society.
" A synopsis of the Report of the Royal Commission and other documents can be obtained from the Secretary of the National Council for Combating Venereal Diseases, Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C.
2 Dr. Otto May was subsequently appointed an Hon. Sec., and has done adnlirable work, especially in connection with the military lectures.

THE EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY AND VENEREAL DISEASE. 217
This is not the place to discuss the work of the National Council; but to bring the story to a conclusion it may be mentioned that after the issue of the Report of the Royal Commission most of its members joined the National Council, of which Lord Sydenham was then appointed president. A powerful deputation from the National Council waited on Mr. Long at the Local Government Board to urge the adoption of the Royal Commission's recommendations, with the gratifying result that they were informed that the Government intended to do more than even the Council had then dared to request. In July of this year the Local Government Board issued a most important circular to all local government authorities, together with a memorandum by Dr. Newsholme. This great social movement has, therefore, now been started under the most promising auspices, and the Eugenics Education Society may well feel proud that they pulled with all their might at one of the many strings which set this great reform in motion.
LEONARD DARWIN.

