FAMILY ENVIRONMENT AND - INTELLIGENCE*

By JOHN NISBET, M.A., B.Ed., Ph.D.
Lecturer in Education, University of Aberdeen

A BERDEEN, as research workers in not unaware of the fact that environmental

other fields have discovered, is a good influences enter into intelligence test scores

district for population studies, for its and affect the size of the negative correlation

position as the centre of a comparatively between intelligence test score and family

isolated region and its mixture of farming, size. T-hey have attempted to allow for the

fishing, industry, commerce and administra- influence of environment in two ways, both

tion make it in many respects a representa- of which seem to have serious weaknesses.

tive urban population. Almost all the Some have tried to measure relevant environ--

children under twelve in the city, in the mental factors, such as parental occupation

Scottish tradition, attend local schools, and or overcrowding in the home, and then have

the Education Authority is progressive in observed the effect on the negative correla-

authorizing and assisting research projects. tion when these environmental factors are

The investigations described in this paper held constant. Such a method, however,

could not have been carried out without the does not give accurate results if (as is sug-

generous facilities afforded by the Education gested in this paper) one of the environ-

Authority,t for it was possible in the mental factors is the size of family itself, the

administration of tests to achieve an almost amount of contact between adult and child'

complete coverage of age-groups of children, and the consequent stimulation of the child's

only two small primary departments of verbal development. Again, other investiga-

private schools being omitted.

tors have made allowance for environment by

In this paper a hypothesis is advanced first estimating the future trend of intelli-

which to some extent reconciles certain of gence as if intelligence test score were deter-

the contradictory results which have emerged mined wholly by heredity, and then halving

from recent studies of intelligence and family that estimate, since at least half the variance

size. Investigations over the last thirty of intelligence is attributable to heredity.

years-there have been at least thirty-three This, however, is not altogether a valid pro-

on this problem, among them particularly cedure: for it does not follow that if half the

the Scottish Mental Survey with its 70,000 scatter of intelligence is due to heredity, then

cases-have established that in any repre- the negative correlation of family size and

sentative sample of the population there intelligence is half attributable to hereditary

exists a negative correlation between the factors. If a variable X (e.g. intelligence test

intelligence test scores of children and the score) is determined by two factors A and B

size of the family to which they belong. In so (e.g. hereditary and environmental factors),

far as intelligence is inherited this seems to then the correlation of X with any other

imply a decline in the level of national variable Y (e.g. family size) may be due to an

intelligence; yet two recent studies+ have association of Y with A or with B or with

not found any such decline. Those who have both A and B together.

attempted to predict the amount of the

possible decline in national intelligence are The Hypothesis

The hypothesis which is advanced in this

*A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on January 2ISt, I953.
t The Education Authority is not in any way responsible for this investigation or its conclusions.
+ Scottish Mental Survey, 1949; Cattell, I950.

paper is that family size has a direct effect on the environmental aspect of mental development. This hypothesis derives from the view that language and words afford a

3'

32TH---; THE EUGENICS REVIEW

syste-m of symbols which greatly increase the guage development is affected by age of

efficiency of abstract thought. Limitation of associates, children -who associate most with

opportunities for verbal development is- adults being' superior. to others: thus only

therefore likely to exercise a depressive children show- a striking superiority in

influence on ability to score in a test even of language development, and children from

general mental ability. It has been estab- institutions a marked retardation. This

lished that the only child enjoys a much finding was based on her own work (1930) on

greater verbal development than the child the subject, and was supported by a number

from an orphanage, because of greater oppor- of studies reported from Iowa University. A

tunities of contact with adults and of conclusion in accordance with these was that

acquiring adult vocabulary. The large family of Smith (I933), that pre-school children use

is considered here as an environment midway longer sentences and ask more questions

between that of the only child and the when alone with an adult than when in a

orphanage. The mere fact of belonging to a group of children. Day (4932) and Davis

large family implies restricted contact with (i937) found a retardation in verbal develop-

adults and fewer opportunities of acquiring ment among twins; since this retardation

adult habits of speech and thought, a dis- was less marked after school attendance

advantage which enters into the intelligence began it was suggested that the inferiority of

test performance -,of children from large twins to non-twins was due not to any pre-

families. If this hypothesis is correct, if this natal handicap but to their family environ-

is a factor in the negative correlation of test ment, in which twins are at first inclined to

score and family size-and it is not suggested communicate non-verbally with each other

that it is the only factor-then a reduction in and to have less verbal association with

the average size of families will mask any adults. In the Scottish Mental Survey

decline in national intelligence which may be (Mehrotra and Maxwell, I949), the average

occurring. From the point of view of future test score of twins was slightly below that of

research one important conclusion would non-twins, a phenomenon which may have

result if the present hypothesis were con- been associated with a verbal handicap. /In

firmed: in any comparison of the mean view of all these findings, it seemed probable

intelligence scores of two generations, such that children from small families would have

as is strongly urged in the Report of the Royal better opportunities for language develop-

Commission on Population (1949), the advan- ment than children from large families, who

tage would tend to be with the generation have relatively less contact with adults and

with the smaller family units, and some would thus suffer a slight environmental

allowance for this would have to be made. handicap. /

"This is the sense in which the phrase Such an influence of family environment on

" family environment " is used in the title verbal development could reasonably be

of this paper; it is not concerned with expected to affect scores in a verbal test of

income or nutrition or the number of rooms intelligence, merely through the words used

in the house-though of course these may be in the test.. However, the effect may be more

important factors-but only with the con- direct than this: ability to manipulate

tact between child and adult, which is on verbal symbols seems to play an important

average proportionate to the size of the part in the process of thinking, and particu-

family, except that in a large family the first larly in problem-solving. This is the point

and the last perhaps have some advantage of view of Terman (1937), who wrote:

over the others. (And, in fact, a tendency

Language, essentially, is the shorthand of the

towards slightly higher test scores among higher thought processes, and the level at which

first- and last-born has been observed.)

this shorthand functions is one of the most

A summary of investigations of the language development of children is given by

important determinants of the level of the processes themselves. (p. 5.)

McCarthy (I946), who concluded that lan- This is not by any means a new idea. It

FAMILY-ENVIRONMENT

1-

33

appears in the writings of Dewey (I909), the Gaelic-speaking population of Lewis.,

Thomson (I924), Ballard (I934), Watts found the average performance of the bilin-

('944) and others, even of widely different guals to be below normal. Christophersen

background: for example, Head (I926), -writing on aphasia, noted that speech disturbances sometimes impaired ability to perform mental operations which requifed the use of symbols. The problem of the rela-
tion of language and intelligence is not an
easy one to put to the test of experiment,

(I949) suggested that in the case of monoglots, " after early youth ... a linguistic 'crystallization' sets in: their speech organs become, fixed in certain grooves, and their thoughts become inseparably linked with the words of their mother tongue";

since in most cases verbal ability and but in the case of a bilingual person his

general mental ability develop normally side " mental processes are not immediately-

by side. However, in two situations, those linked with either of his languages," a theory'

of deaf children and bilinguals, an experi- which " will account for that hesitancy of

mental design has been set up by nature and speech that one sometimes notices in bilin-

throws light on the problem.

guals." A bilingual person, he suggested,

Children who have been deaf from an early may become as competent as a monoglot if

age afford one situation in which mental he is prepared to concentrate on one of his

development must occur without the usual languages, as for. example Conrad did, until

accompaniment of language growth. These that language becomes the natural medium

deaf children who have not learned to use of his thought.

words show retardation in mental develop- I On the basis of these findings it is suggested

ment and even in their performance in non- that restriction of the normal language

verbal tests of intelligence. This is the growth of children may depress the standard

general finding: of twelve studies from I9I5 of their performance in an intelligence test.f

onwards, summarized by Pintner, Eisenson The hypothesis to be tested then is that a

and Stanton (94I), all except one found that portion of the observed negative correlation

deaf children were on average mentally between family size and intelligence test

retarded. A recent investigation by Blair score is due to the limiting influence on

Hood (1949), using Alexander's Performance general mental development exerted by an

Test as a measure of intelligence, did not sup- environmentally restricted development of

port this view; but Watts and Slater (I950) verbal ability. If this hypothesis were justi-

have shown that the standardisation of this fied it might afford a clue to a partial resolu-

test is misleading. In Aberdeen, on a small tion of the paradoxical results of the Scottish

sample, Smith (I952) reported that the Mental Survey, in which a negative correla-

mental retardation of deaf children appeared tion was established but no decline in intelli-

to become progressively more serious as age gence observed. If part of the negative

increased. Pintner and his colleagues also correlation were due to the effect of family

summarized five studies of the language environment, then a general reduction" in the

development of the deaf, all of which con- size of families would result in an artificial-

firmed the very severe retardation suffered rise in mean score which might be sufficient

by these children.

to mask a real decline : a genetical loss would

Other children whose language develop- nevertheless be occurring in proportion to

ment is unusual are the bilinguals, whose the extent to which intelligence is inherited

average performance in verbal intelligence 'and the extent to which the negative correla-

tests is inferior to that of monoglots. Smith tion is due to the limiting of families' by

(I923), Saer (I923) and others have found intelligent parents. Other explanations of

this result in Wales, though Barke and the situation have, of course, been made-

Williams (I933, I938) found no inferiority of for example, the explaining of the observed

bilinguals on a non-verbal test of intelligence. rise in score in terms of the test-sophistica-

Smith (1948), using a non-verbal test among tion of the I947 children-and such influ-

34 THE'EUGENICSREVIEW

ences as this may well be operating to total. Their ages ranged from io2 to IT5,

9omplicate the situation still further.

but again more than 90 per cent of them lay

Evidence for or against the hypothesis was between iii and I2-3, and the mean age

soiught in three ways: firstly; by finding if was II7. The mean family size was 3-38.

the method of partial correlation showed a The tests used were Moray House Tests 4I-

negative correlation between verbal ability and 42, and Moray House English Test I9.

and family size independent of any associa- The possibility of excluding all those whose

tion with general intelligence; secondly, by ages lay outside a twelve-month range (to

finding if the correlation between test score make the groups more strictly comparable

and family size differed from test to test with the eleven-year-old group of the

when several tests affected in varying degrees Scottish Mental Survey) was considered;

by verbal ability were applied to a single but it was thought inadvisable because of the

group of children; and thirdly, by checking fact that test scores were expressed as

the prediction *from the hypothesis that, if quotients to eliminate the effect of age, and

verbal intelligence tests were applied to because such a course would have excluded

children at different ages, the negative cor- the brightest and the dullest sections of the

relation betwee' family size and intelligence group instead of making it more representa-

test score would be more marked at later tive.

ages when the cumulative effect of environ- The tests in this part of the investigation

ment began to show itself.

were those used by the Education Authority

for its transfer procedure, and so were not.

Partial Correlation

altogether suitable for the present purpose.

The first test of the hypothesis, then, in- The tests of intelligence were verbal tests,

volved determining whether a negative corre- so that to use these for the holding constant

lation between verbal ability and family size of intelligence made likely an under-estimate

existed independently of any association of the relation between verbal ability and

with intelligence. The method of partial family size. Tests of English attainment

correlation was applied to the test scores of were used for the measure of verbal ability;

two large groups each of about 2,500 chil- though scores in such tests are corrupted by a

dren. These were children at the stage of schooling factor, they do have a considerable

transfer from primary to secondary educa- verbal loading. It was clear that a certain

tion in Aberdeen. Such transfer groups are negative correlation between the English

approximately equivalent to a cross-section score and family size would be attributable

of the child population of the city.

merely to the dependence of English attain-

The first of thesew transfer groups, the I949 ment on intelligence. But if the hypothesis

group, numbered 2,709 in all, and for 2,56I were correct, if the largeness of certain

of these it was possible to obtain data on size families operated to limit the verbal develop-

of family, position in the family, and scores ment of their members, the holding constant

in two intelligence tests (Moray House Tests of intelligence test score would still leave a

39 and 40) and a test of English attainment negative partial correlation between family

(Moray House English Test i8). This was a size and English score. If, on the other hand,

94 per cent coverage of the group. Their the environmental influence of the size of

ages ranged from IO*5 to I2-Io, but more family were negligible, and if the negative

than 90 per cent of them lay between the association of intelligence and family size

ages of ii-i and 12-3, the mean age being were due only to the limiting of families by

II*7. The mean family size was 3.4I.

intelligent parents, then one would expect

The I950 transfer group numbered 2,638 no association between family size and Eng-

in all, and by giving a second opportunity of lish score except such as was due to the

testing to those who were absent on the correlation of English score and intelligence.

appointed date it was possible to obtain full In that case the partial correlation would be

,information on 2,607, or 99 per cent of the zero. It is maintained in this study that both

-FAMILY ENVIRONMENT

I35

*causes are at work. If this were so, the result which might be predicted would be that the partial correlation of family size and English score, with intelligence test score held con-
stant, would be substantially smaller than the zero-order coefficient (due to the second of the causes mentioned above), but would

still be negative and significantly different from zero (due to the first of the causes). This prediction was confirmed by the analysis of results.
The means and standard deviations given in Table I show that the groups are representative samples.

TABLE I. MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF QUOTIENTS

I949 Transfer Group

2,56i cases

Test Mean

M.H.T.39 ...

IOIP37

M.H.T.40 ...

io6*30

M.H.E.I8

...

I05'33

S.D. I3.8 14.8
I5.3

Test M.H.T.4I M.H.T.42 M.H.E.I9

1950 Transfer Group
2,607 cases
Mean ... I02-59
... io6.3I
... I03-35

S.D. I3.8
15.2
I5.6

The mean scores in each test for each size correlation a check on linearity of regression

of family were calculated, grouping together was made. The partial correlation coeffi-

all sizes of eight and above because of the cients are given in Table III. All these

smallness of their numbers. The tendency partial correlations are hegative and sig-

for mean score to drop with increasing size of nificantly different from zero. They are,

family can be seen in the results of all the however, substantially smaller than the

tests, as is shown in fig. i.

zero-order coefficients.

FIG. I. MEAN TEST SCORES AT DIFFERENT SIZES OF FAMILY
Quotient Family Size -23 4 5 6 78+ 1 2 3 4 6 73+ 2 34 5 79+

Though this first prediction was confirmed there are too many sources of ambiguity in the method of partial correlation for it to be altogether satisfactory; and it was clearly desirable that alternative methods of

10ItIo33 ~ -

*.M.'H.'T
39 0

IM.SHE.

approach to the problem should be tried to see if further support could be obtained for

104 2 3 5 6

the hypothesis.

102-

409 96

Different Verbal Loadings In the second part of this investigation a

9 32.90

233
-

-

i 10-

number of tests, depending in varying degrees on verbal ability but otherwise as far as possible comparable with each other,

2 34 5 6 7s*+ 2 3 4 56C 78+ 2 3 4 SG 78* were applied to a single group of children.

if 2 -
190

M.-IT.

305-7919

106

M..TMHE

The argument at this stage was that if the
negative correlation of intelligence test score
and family size was seriously affected by the family environment operating on verbal

102
100
99~ ~
2392

IN9

4

development in the manner suggested, the negative correlation would probably be

greater with tests much dependent on verbal

ability, and would tend to be less with tests

more nearly independent of verbal ability,

LI ILI jIThe figures givegtrhoeupnuomfbteerstosf cases for each
The same results are expressed as correlation coefficients in Table II.
Before applying the method of partial

provided that the tests were comparable in other respects. Thus a test of vocabulary should show a relatively large negative correlation with family size; a verbal test of intelligence should show a certain negative correlation with family size; and a non-

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE II. CORRE3LATION OF FAMILY SIZE AND TEST SCORES

Correlation of family size and:

Verbal intelligence test M.H.T.39 ... ... ... ... ...

,, ,,

,, M.H.T.40 ...

... ... ... ...

M.H.T.39 and M.H.T.40 combined ... ... ... ... ...

English attainment test M.H.E.i8 ... ... ... ... ...

- -320 -335
-.333
-.3I8

Verbal intelligence test M.H.T.4I ... ... ... ... ...

,, ,, ,, M.H.T.42 ...... ... ... ... ...

M.H.T.4i and M.H.T.42 combined ... ... ... ... ...

English

attainment

test M.H.E.ig

*..
.

.. ... ... ...

- 323 - .334
-.334
-*342

I949
Transfer Group N=2,56I
I950
Transfer Group N=2,607

TABLE III. PARTIAL CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS

Partial correlation between family size and: Holding constant:

M.H.E.i8 (English) ... ... ... M.H.T.3g (Intelligence) ...

,, ,,

... ... ... M.H.T.40

...

,, ,, ... ... ... M.H.T.39 and M.H.T.40 ...

Number of cases 2,56I

M.H.E.I9 (English) ... ... ... M.H.T.4I (Intelligence) ...

,,..i,., ... ... M.H.T.42 ,,

...

.... M.H.T.4i and M.H.T.42 ...

Number of cases 2,607

... -*o8I -046
... -044
... -*13I ... -*o9I ... -*Io9

verbal test of intelligence, being only slightly ligence quotients were below 50 (Stanford-

influenced by family environment, may be Binet), were included in the lowest class

expected to show a small negative correlation interval of the distributions of scores, in

with family size. If, on the other hand, the accordance with the practice of the Scottish

negative correlation is relatively independent Mental Survey. This made the number for

of this verbal environmental influence the whom results were available exactly 2oo.

variations in the verbal loadings of the dif- The missing six were: three children from

ferent tests will not be accompanied by private schools, one deaf child, one invalid,

parallel variations in the size of the correla- and one with an irregular school history.

tion. Among the twelve measures which were

With the limited facilities available, how- obtained for this sample of loo, there were

ever, increasing the number of tests neces- four tests of intelligence, two non-verbal-

sarily involved reducing the number of Progressive Matrices (I938), untimed, and

subjects tested. Consequently it was decided Jenkins' Scale of Non-Verbal Intelligence I

to apply as wide a variety of tests as possible -and two verbal-Moray House Tests 4I

to a small group which would be a random and 42. The vocabulary items of Moray

sample of the population, making sure that House English Test I9 were scored separately

the sample was genuinely representative of to give an estimate of range of vocabulary;

the population and was fully located and and the remaining measures were of various

covered by the testing.

aspects of scholastic attainment.

The sample selected consisted of all the The scores in the standardized tests were

children in Aberdeen who were born in the at first expressed as quotients in accordance

month of April I939-a total of 2o6. The with the published norms; but considerable

choice of a single month avoided the necessity of age allowances and made possible the use of raw scores in calculation. The locating of the sample was done through the co-opera-
tion of the headmasters, and was checked during personal visits to the schools, against Education Authority records and by personal letters.

differences emerged between the mean quotients in the four intelligence tests, in spite of the fact that the group was a random sample of the population and all the tests were applied in the same order at the same time, or at nearly the same time. Since correlational analysis of these results was

Test results were obtained for I98 of these proposed it seemed desirable to impose new

children; and two others, in a special school normal distributions on the raw scores in all

for the mentally handicapped, whose intel- the tests, giving each a mean of IOO and a

FAMILY ENVIRONMENT

37

standard deviation of 15. Means and stan- tions in the Jenkins Test are printed in small
dard deviations are shown in Table IV: type and difficult to interpret. This explanagrouping of scores has introduced small tion is supported by the comparatively high

TABLE IV. MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF QUOTIENTS

Test

Progressive Matrices (1938) ...

Jenkins' Non-Verbal Scale I

Moray House Test 4I

...

Moray House Test 42

...

Moray House English Test I9

Vocabulary ... ... ...

... ... ... ...
... ...
... ... ... ...

...

...

Old Quotients

Mean S.D.

I02*50 IO7'95 103*55 io8.30 104-28

13.0 14.3
I3.5 I5'4
I5.5

-

New Quotients

Mean S.D.

99-98 I4.6

100-05 I4.6

99.72 I4.8

99 90 I4.9

99.80 1-4.6

99.72

14.6

deviations from the imposed statistics. The correlation between the Jenkins Test and the

mean family size was 3-I8 and the standard Vocabulary Test of .73, compared with a

deviation of family size was Igo.

correlation of *56 between Matrices and

Using the new quotients, correlations were Vocabulary.

calculated between family size and scores in However, there are at least two alternative

these measures, and are given in Table V. explanations of why the correlation involving

TABLE V CORRELATIONS OF FAMILY SIZE AND TEST SCORES

the Matrices Test should be smaller than the-others:

Correlation of family size and:
Progressive Matrices (I938)
Jenkins' Non-Verbal Scale I Moray House Test 4I ...

...-I97
... -*249 ... -*298

(i) It might be due to differences in reliability between the tests : unreliability of any of the tests would depress the

Moray House Test 42 ... Moray House English Test i9
Vocabulary ... ... ...

... -303 ... -*289 ... -286

correlation of that test with any other
measure; (ii) It might be due to differences in

The main interest in these results lies in

validity between the tests : it might be

the difference in the correlation between

argued that the " intelligence " mea-

family size and intelligence test score with a

sured by the Matrices Test is a different

non-verbal test (Matrices -*I97; Jenkins

type of ability from that involved in

-249) and that with a verbal test (M.H.T.4I

the Moray House Tests,.and that the

-298; M.H.T.42 -303). The significance

reason for the differences in the cor-

of these differences cannot be calculated

relations is that the tests are measuring

exactly, for the family size measure is dis-

different abilities.

crete; but it was tested by Cochran's The first of these possibilities can be tested

formula* for a difference between two cor- quite simply by means of correction for relation coefficients based on the same ran- attenuation: such correction had virtually

dom sample. The difference between the no effect on the difference between the corcorrelation involving the Matrices Test is relations. The second is rather difficult to significantly different at the -o5 level from test, but a factor analysis of eight of the

the correlations involving Moray House measures made possible a comparison of Tests 4I and 42. None of the other differ- the " g " loadings of the various tests. From

ences reaches the -o5 significance level. For the most part the results are in accord-
ance with the prediction that the non-verbal tests would show a smaller negative correlation with family size than the verbal tests. The Jenkins Test is intermediate between the non-verbal Matrices and the verbal Moray

the results there seemed to be no basis for the suggestion that the differences between the correlations could be attributed to differences in the " g " loadings of the
tests. There remains the second part of the pre-
diction, that the vocabulary test would show

House Tests, perhaps because the instruc- the highest negative correlation with family

* Lindquist, 1940, P. 2I8.

size. This was not supported by the results:

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

all the correlations involving verbal tests, both verbal intelligence and English attaininent, are of approximately the same magnitude. The vocabulary test, however, was shorter than any of the other tests. In case it might be thought that the test form of all these measures was introducing spurious results the correlation was calculated between
family size and marks in a composition
written by these children, and was -253.
Different Ages
A third method of testing the hypothesis is to find if the age at which the intelligence test is administered affects the size of the correlation. A preliminary prediction may be made that the negative correlation, if it is subject to marked environmental influence, will tend to be greater at later ages when the cumulative effect of environment begins to show itself.
Ideally to test this prediction one should apply the same test to the same children at different ages. However, at different ages the children would score on different parts of a test and therefore would in effect be taking different tests, although these might be printed all in a single booklet. Consequently the need to use different tests at different ages is a weakness in the design of this part of the investigation. The performance of a small number of children was studied over a period of years; and the results from this small group were checked against the testing of large numbers at different ages.
Scores in verbal intelligence tests at ages

seven, nine and eleven were"'obtained for
I78 of the 200 children in the random sample
described above. The test at age seven was Moray House Picture Test; at age nine,
Schonell's Essential Intelligence Test. These were compared with the results of Moray House Test 4I at age eleven. The means and standard deviations given in Table VI show that the group is representative of the
population. The intercorrelations of the tests were
between Moray House Picture Test and Schonell's Test, -738; between Schonell's Test and Moray House Test 4I, .856; and between Moray House Picture. Test and Moray House Test 4I, -748.
The correlations of family size and intelligence test score at the different ages were
at age seven, -*2099; at age nine, -*226;
at age eleven, -289. The correlation is smallest at age seven and increases as the children grow older. Because of the small number of cases the differences are not
significant. Significant differences emerged from the
testing of large groups at different ages. In Aberdeen a representative group of about I,200 children enter the primary schools
every six months. Moray House Picture Test was applied to one such group of I,236 children at age seven; and Schonell's Essential Intelligence Test to one group of I,270 children at age nine. These two groups were compared with four groups tested at age eleven plus and described previously as the I949 and I950 Transfer Groups. This

TABLE VI. MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS

Small group:

N Age Mean

Moray House Picture Test ... ... ... ... 178 7 99-22

Schonell's Essential Test ... ... ... ...

9 IOI*I9

Moray House Test 4I

... ... ... ...

II I02'79

Family size

... ... ... ... ...

7 300

,, ,, ............ ... ... ...

9 3.15

,, ,, . . . . . ... ... ... ... II

3.28

Large age-groups:

Moray House Picture Test ... ... ... ... I,236 7 I04.50

Schonell's Essential Test ... ... ... ... 1,270 9 104-63

Moray House Test 39 Moray House Test 40

... ... ...

2,56I II IOI37

... ... ... ...

io6:30

Moray House Test 4I Moray House Test 42

... ... ... ... 2360
... ... ...2, 07

1802 59 IO63I

Family size

... ... ... ... ... I,236

7

2.77

,, ,, ..... ... ... ... ... 1,270

9

3°00

,, ,, ....... ... ... ... ... 2,56I I I

3.41

,, ,,

2,607... ... ... ... ...

II

3.38

S.D. 14.5 i6-8 I3.8
1.93
1.94 1.94
15.5 I7.I I3.8 14.9 I3.8
15.2 IP54
I.70 I.87 I.87

FAMILY ENVIRONMENT

eleven-year-old group numbered 5,I68 in all, 2,56i tested on Moray House Tests 39 and 40, and 2,607 on Moray House Tests 41 and 42. The means and standard deviations
given in Table VI show that all the groups are comparable and representative samples.
In the large age-groups the correlation of intelligence test score and family size was at age seven, - 256; at age nine, -*287;
and at age eleven, - 333. These coefficients
are all larger than the corresponding coefficients in the small group, but they repeat the same pattern. The negative correlation is greater when the test is applied at a later age. The difference between the correlation at age seven and at age eleven is significant at the *oI level.
It is difficult to see why the coefficients from these large groups should be greater than the corresponding results from the small group. Vernon (I95I) reported a correlation of -34 between intelligence and family size in a group of io,ooo recruits aged i8: however, the tests in that investigation were both verbal and non-verbal tests, so that his results are not directly comparable with these.
The differences between the correlations at age seven and at age eleven may be due to any of three causes. They may be due to:
(i) Differences on the size side of the correlation, because the families are most nearly complete at age. eleven;
(ii) Differences on the test side of the correlation, either (a) differences in test reliability, or (b) differences in validity;
(iii) Genuine differences in the degree of relationship, through the increasing effect of environmental influence.
It is only in the small group of I78 cases that the nature of the data allows a precise testing of these alternative explanations. The first alternative, attributing the result to differences in the completeness of families, may be tested easily. The family size at age eleven is the nearest available estimate of the completed size, and if the test scores at age seven and nine are measured against family size at age eleven, this will eliminate dif-

ferences on the family-size side of the correlation.
The result of such a process was to raise the correlation at age seven from -*209 to -*225; to raise the correlation at age nine from -226 to -232; while the correlation at age eleven remained - *289. This brings the coefficients slightly closer, but the differences remain.
The second alternative explanation, attri-
buting the results to differences in test reliability, may also be tested simply. Correction for attenuation, using the reliability
coefficients given in the test manuals, was applied to the revised coefficients which have just been obtained. The result was to raise the coefficient at age seven to -230, at age nine to - *242, and at age eleven to -293. This has very little effect on the differences between the correlations.
The question of differences in validity is not so easy to handle. Moray House Test 4I
was selected for this comparison because it
appears to resemble the other tests more closely. It is certainly similar to Schonell's Essential Test; and it differs from Moray House Picture Test principally in that the latter does not require reading ability, although the oral instructions of the Picture Test are just as verbal as those of the other tests. It is clear from results mentioned earlier in this paper that if a non-verbal test
had been chosen at age eleven for this com-
parison the correlation between test score and family size would have been much smaller. However, it is the verbal element that is of chief interest in this investigation.
It remains to be said that since all these calculations were based on the I78 cases of the small group the numbers are too small to
yield significant differences at any point. Significant differences might be expected to emerge from numbers as large as those in the age-groups; but since these are separate samples of the population it is not possible to make an accurate calculation of the effect
of incomplete families. A new but rather complicated method of estimating the degree of incompleteness of family among an agegroup of children (which will be described elsewhere) suggests that the effect of incom-

40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

plete families in the large age-groups is approximately the same as that found in the small group. If this assumption is valid, and corrections for incomplete families and unreliability of tests are applied to the correlation coefficients obtained from the large age-groups, the resulting corrected coefficients at age seven and at age eleven show a difference which is still significant at the *o5 level.
The disposal of two of the alternative explanations suggests that the third explanation is the correct one, that the differences between the negative correlations of intelligence test score and family size at different ages are due to the cumulative effect of
environmental influences.
Summary and Conclusions
A hypothesis has been advanced that the
environment of the large family-the limited
amount of contact between parent and child, and the consequent retardation of the child's verbal development-tended to depress the
environmental component of a child's test score. This was based on previous work on the comparison of orphanage children and only children, on studies of bilinguals, deaf children and twins. It was not suggested that this cause alone operated to produce the negative correlation of family size and intelligence test score, but only that it contributes to the correlation to an extent sufficient with other influences to mask any possible downward trend in national intelligence and to prevent the use of test scores of age-groups of children for predicting future intelligence levels in the nation.
Predictions from this hypothesis were tested by three methods: by partial correlation of family size and verbal ability with intelligence held constant; by correlation of family size and several tests with different verbal loadings ; and by correlation of family size and intelligence at different ages. The fact that the hypothesis has survived these three tests does not, of course, mean that it is correct : there are still other possible explanations of the results. But it seems that part of (though not all) the negative correlation of family size and intelligence test score may be attributed to an environmental

influence of the size of family on verbal development and through it on general mental development. At the same time, at each stage of the investigation it seemed clear that the whole of the negative correlation could not be explained in terms of this environmental influence. Others who have worked on this problem on a nation-wide scale do not deny a certain amount of environmental influence, and would probably wish attention to be drawn to the substantial negative correlation which remains when the environmental influence is allowed for. Such remaining negative correlation, it would seem, must have the effect of depressing the trend of national intelligence, a tendency which may easily be masked by environmental influences.
REFERENCES
Ballard (I934), Thought and Language. University of London Press.
Barke (I933), Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 3, 237-50. Barke and Williams (I938), Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 8,
63-77.
Cattell (1950), Eug. Rev., 42, I36-48. Christophersen (I949), Bilingualism. Methuen. Davis (I937), Inst. Child Welfare Monog. Series, 14.
University of Minnesota Press. Day (I932), Child Development, 3, I79-99. Dewey (I909), How We Think. Heath. Head (I926), Collected Papers on Aphasia and Kindred
Affections. Cambridge University Press. Hood (I949), Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 19, 210-I9. Lindquist (1940), Statistical Analysis in Educational
Research. Houghton Mifflin. McCarthy (I930), Inst. Child Welfare Monog. Series, 4.
University of Minnesota Press. McCarthy (1946), Chapter X, Manual of Child
Psychology (editor, Carmichael). Wiley. Mehrotra and Maxwell (I949), Population Studies, 3,
295-302.
Pintner, Eisenson and Stanton (I94I), The Psychology
of the Handicapped Child. Crofts. Royal Commission on Population (1949), Report.
Cmd. 7695. H.M.S.O. Saer (I923), Brit. J. Psychol., 14, 25-38. Scottish Mental Survey (I949), The Trend of Scottish
Intelligence. University of London Press. Smith, C. (I948), Mental Testing of Hebridean Children
in Gaelic and English. University of London Press. Smith, D. (I952), Brit. J. Educ. Psychol., 22, 71-2.
Smith, F. (I923), Brit. J. Psychol., 13, 27I-82.
Terman and Merrill (I937), Measuring Intelligence. Harrap.
Thomson (1924), Instinct, Intelligence and Character. Allen & Unwin.
Vernon (I95i), Eug. Rev., 43, 125-37. Watts (I944), The Language and Mental Development
of Children. Harrap. Watts and Slater (I950), The Allocation of Primary
School Leavers to Courses of Secondary Education.
Newnes.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 1

