THE GERMAN STERILIZATION ACT OF 1933: " Gesetz zur Verhutung erbkranken Nachwuchses"
By HANS HARMSEN
Director of the School of Public Health at Hamburg.

AS a result of the war, most of the enforce sterilizations for eugenic reasons was

documents dealing with the carrying submitted to the German Reichstag in

out of eugenic legislation in Germany I925. In the discussion in I927 of the

are lost. The total number of eugenic sterili- amendment to the German Criminal Code

zations between I934 and I945 can therefore it was agreed that sterilization on medical

only be estimated. Giirtner, the Attorney- grounds should no longer be considered as a

General at that time, has stated that 62,463 personal injury. A eugenically or socially

persons were sterilized in I934 and that the indicated sterilization, performed with the

number was as high as 7I,760 in I935. Since consent of the injured person, should be

I936, however, there has been a considerable liable to prosecution only if violating " good

decrease in the number of proceedings manners and customs." Before I933, sterili-

brought before the Erbgesundheitsgerichte. zations of minors and adults were performed

A " Central Association of Sterilized in Germany with the explicit consent of

Persons," constituted after I945 with a view the Court of Chancery and if the costs were

to financial indemnification, maintained paid by public authorities. The total

that in twelve years the total number of number, however, has been very small.

sterilizations amounted to two million. An inquiry in ninety-five cities of more than

Lenz, however, maintains that not more 50,000 inhabitants, carried out in I930 by

than 350,000 sterilization operations were Fetscher of Dresden, showed that there

performed. From I934 to I945, in the were only II2 sterilized persons: eighty-

Hamburg-Altona district, I8,987 sterilization three women had been sterilized on medical

proceedings were held and I5,8i6 decrees for grounds ! Only eighteen women and eleven

sterilization were made. In Hamburg the men were sterilized for eugenic reasons.

most rigorous standard was applied; based Up to I932 Fetscher himself operated on

on the Hamburg rate, the number of steriliza- sixty-five persons in Dresden for eugenic

tions would amount to nearly 300,000, but reasons; Klose, between I929 and I932,

the real number may be about 200,000 to on twenty-one persons in Kiel, nineteen

250,000. But even this exceeds by far the of these on account of congenital imbecility.

total number of sterilizations in all other On July I4th, I933, the " Gesetz zur

countries of the world since the enactment Verhiitung erbkranken Nachwuchses" (Act

in I907 of the first sterilization law in the for Averting Descendants afflicted with

American state of Indiana. What is the Hereditary Disease) permitted the steriliza-

moral of the praxis and the handling of tion of those persons who could be confidently

sterilizations in Germany ?

expected to transmit serious physical or

mental defects to their descendants. Among

The History of Eugenic Sterilization

the conditions mentioned were: congenital

The first sterilization against the passing imbecility, schizophrenia, manic-depressive

on of a hereditary taint was carried out as insanity, hereditary falling sickness

early as I897, when the gynaecologist (epilepsy), hereditary St. Vitus's dance

Kehrer of Heidelberg operated on a married (Huntington's chorea), hereditary deafness

woman who had borne several idiotic and or blindness, serious physical deformities

feeble-minded children. A draft law to and chronic alcoholism.

227

228 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The application for sterilization could be The order of July 28th, I947, enacted

made by the patient himself, or, with the by the British Zone's Central Board of

approval of the Court of Chancery, by his Justice, dealing with the reopening of

legal representative, or by the local public health officer. If the person was a patient in a hospital, sanatorium or asylum, the director of the institution was authorized to apply for sterilization. Erbgesund-
heitsgerichte, which were annexed to a District Court, made the preliminary decisions, against which a protest could be lodged within two weeks. The final decision was made by Erbgesundheitsgericht annexed to the Provincial Court of Appeal. Decrees
could then be carried out without the consent of the person to be sterilized. After the war, records of some cases gave the

proceedings in Erbgesundheitssachen, was followed by a report of those proceedings up to I945. The claims for financial compensation for the enacted sterilizations were decided upon under another bodythe compensation legislation for victims of the Nazi Government-but the reopened cases were very informative in many other respects. In addition, I asked my students of the Akademie fur Staatsmedezin in Hamburg to examine the documents on the carrying out of the Erbgesundheitsgesetz in representative urban and rural zones. The results obtained by these public health officers have been collected: in a

impression that the law had been misused series of papers. In all these investigations

against political enemies.

there was no evidence that any reasons other

After the war, unlike other Nazi laws, than eugenic ones influenced the handling

the Act "zur Verhiitung erbkranken Nach- of the proceedings. The improper political

wuchses" was not rescinded by the Control misuse mentioned above seems to have

Commission of Germany (C.C.G.). New occurred only to a very insignificant extent,

boards of the Erbgesundheitsgerichte, how- but that it should have occurred at all is a

ever, have not been constituted and therefore most regrettable fact.

no use is made of the Act.

Some of the Lander rescinded the whole Grounds for Sterilization

Act or parts of it; in some instances only , Our investigations give a reliable frequency

the rules concerning the interruption of ' distribution of conditions leading to steriliza-

pregnancy are still in force. The legal tion. Congenital imbecility, schizophrenia

uncertainty in the field of eugenics, which and hereditary epilepsy added up to 85 per

was created after the war, calls very urgently \cent and constituted the chief reasons for

for a change.

the operations.

TABLE I

FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION OF HEREDITARY CONDITIONS LEADING TO STERILIZATION REPRESENTATIVE URBAN AND RURAL AREAS OF WVESTERN GERMANY

Area:

Hamburg Braun-

schweig

Totalnumbersofproceedings ... I5,8I6 2,756

Period ... ... ... ... 1934-45 I934-44

Bochum
I,172
1934-44

Flensburg Stadt/Land 305 237
1934-45

Kiel Freiburg/Br.

2II Y 896
1934-37

214c
1934-35

Conditions:

PER CENT OF TOTAL STERILIZATIONS

Imbecility

62-3... ... ...

598

52.8

64-4 70-8 78-2 64-2

56o

Schizophrenia ... ... ... I43 I3.9 I4.2 20.5 15*2 8-o I2-3 12-0

Manic-depressive Insanity ... i-6

o*8

3'5

o-6 o*8

0-5 I"

2-0

Hereditary Epilepsy ... ... IO*2 I9-7 22 -4 I0-2 II*2 9-8 I5*7 II*0

Hereditary St. Vitus's dance ... 0-2

0-2

0-9 -

-

Hereditary Blindness ... ... 0-5

0-5

2-5

- 0-4

--

4-0

Hereditary Deafness ... ... Ix*0

26

1.5

0-4 o-8

0-4 -

4.0

Deformities ... ... ... 07

I5

0°5

I 5 o*8

09 --

Alcoholism ... ... ... 9-2

I*0

2-6

I-5 -

2 -2 6.7

II O

Total

IOO-O

100I0

10I-O

ioo-1o00I IO0100-0

100IO

THE GERMAN STERILIZATION ACT OF I933

229

In general, sterilizations were performed in equal numbers on both sexes. In Hamburg, 8,559 out of I5,8I6 sterilizations were
carried out on men, 7,257 on women. Sterilizations for congenital imbecility were performed more frequently on females,
those for chronic alcoholism more frequently on males. The distribution of hereditary conditions leading to sterilization in several large psychiatric hospitals is also rather
informative:

rejecting a sterilization on account of
"social proof " likewise shows precision in handling the law. By bringing a case to the Erbgesundheitsobergerichte as the higher court, which was done fairly frequently, local influence could be avoided and new scientific knowledge could be taken into account.
An edict of the Department of the Interior, dated September I3th, I939, ordered that medical health officers should not apply
for sterilization if pregnancy'was improbable

TABLE 2 FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION OF INDICATION FOR STERILIZATION IN REPFRESENTATIVE PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS.

Institution:

K6nigslutter

(Landesheilanstalt)

Diagnosis:

Congenital Imbecility

...

13.3

Schizophrenia ... ... ...

79 5

Epilepsy ... ... ...

4-0

Other Hereditary Conditions .

3-2

Aplerbeck

Ilten

(Prov. Anst.)

(Prov. Anst.)

Per cent of Total Sterilizations

25*2 36.8

60o7 52.3

9.7 4.6

4-4 6-3

Bethel (Inn. Mission)
I9-0 i8-o 6o-o 3-0

Total ... ... ...

I1000

100*0

100*0

The institutions named in Table 2 show

typical differences. The Landes- und Pro-

vinzial-Heil- und Pflegeanstalten (State and

county hospitals) deal mostly with schizo-

phrenia, while epileptic cases predominate in

Bethel, a typical charity hospital. Two-thirds

of all sterilizations were carried out between

I934 and 1936.

TABLE 3

REJECTION OF STERILIZATION APPLICATIONS

Number of Percentage of

Area

Rejections

Proceedings

Hamburg ... 2,425

12,2

Braunschweig ...

431

17.0

Bochum

...

III

107

Flensburg/Town

79

25-9

Flensburg/County

43

i8- I

With regard to so-called serious physical deformities, Harmsen showed in I935 that sufferers from congenital dislocation of the hip were on the whole quite talented and socially valuable people. In this group,
therefore, as Smidt showed in I953, numerous applications were rejected, if they were put at all. In I936 Harmsen pointed out that the question of the seriousness of imbecility in relation to social aptitude resulted in frequent demands for revision at Erbgesundheitsobergerichte. The rather high proportion of decisions of the superior court

(e.g. with women in the climacteric, or women who had for several years lived in childless matrimony), if the diagnosis was not clear or in borderline cases. The circular of April 8th, I943, brought a further restriction, instructing the medical officers to put ih applications only in cases where the diagnosis was absolutely -clear and a classic form of development could be expected, or if the case could be indisputably diagnosed as a hereditary affliction. More than ever, judgment should be based on practical genetics and on social adjustment.
Analysis of Reopened Cases While I5,8I6 sterilization decisions had
been closed from I934 to I945 in Hamburg, the reopening edict of I947 was followed by 458 demands for revision leading to new proceedings between I947 and I952. Traenkner and Bonhoff carefully analysed the investigations of these reopened cases. For the evaluation of their findings it is important to note that these reopened cases, representing about one in thirty-five of the original material, coincide with the " old proceedings " as to sex-and age distribution as well as in their diagnostic sub-groups.

230 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Nevertheless, the 664 applicants (4 2 per into account social adjustment, which may

cent of sterilized persons) may very well be relatively good.

represent a certain amount of self-selection.

The re-trials in Erbgesundheitsangelegen- Large Asocial Families

heiten confirmed the demand for the special The total significance of large asocial

consideration of social aptitude and social families with slight imbecility, although

adjustment in a very instructive manner. they are often the cause of concern to social

In the re-trial proceedings, two-thirds of welfare workers, is usually overestimated.

the former sterilization decisions were Among thirty-seven unmarried mothers

quashed-preponderantly those on women. sterilized at Kiel there was one with nine

In the imbecility group, representing 74 per children, but these thirty-seven unmarried

cent of all the re-trial cases, the revised mothers had only fifty-nine children between

judgments were preponderantly on persons them, i.e. an average of roughly i 6. The

sterilized before their twenty-fifth year, fringe of this group of imbecile persons,

whose prognoses had obviously been put
too unfavourably. Above all, the importance
of poor environmental influences in adoles-
cence and infancy (dipsomania or alcoholism
of one or both parents, illegitimate birth,
early divorce of the parents, early loss of parents, etc.) had certainly been underestimated.
A survey of women sterilized in Kiel, published by Felicitas Klose in I938, showed that 82 per cent of the sterilized women led normally moral lives; 4 8 per cent continued their imrmoral lives; 2 -8 per cent were sexually promiscuous before the operation; 7 6 per cent seemed to be endangered by extraordinary sensual desires; 19 per cent, however, did become more stable and homeloving; o 9 per cent had no sexual inclinations. A summary states that sterilization

especially the prostitutes, rarely had a higher number of children. The revision of the Hamburg Erbgesundheitsverfahren (I952) showed that of all those who were
sterilized for imbecility at an age of over twenty years, less than one-third had had even one child. The average number of children of those sterilized between their twentieth and thirtieth years was o '36. Cases sterilized on account of severe alcoholism had an average of I.4 children; most of these people were over thirty, 50 per cent were over forty. There is a similar low reproduction rate in other groups of people with hereditary afflictions. Schizophrenics, for instance, whose mortality rate is three times higher than the average, have a fecundity of one-quarter to two-thirds of the rest of the population.

did not further a sliding off into prostitution.

Beukert, too, conducting his investigations Schizophrenia and Epilepsy

at Bochum, stated that he found no cases of In the schizophrenic group, 50 per cent

sterilized women (including imbeciles) turn- of the former decisions were quashed. This

ing to prostitution and promiscuity.

may be because of recent research in schizo-

Regarding social adjustment, only one- phrenia, according to which a certain

quarter of all cases of imbecility proved to be diagnosis is possible only if there is also

a burden on society, and very few cases mental defect.

could be considered a severe burden. People Re-investigation of the epilepsy group

with a slight or medium degree of imbecility very often resulted in quashing former

were often made to feel relatively secure in decisions, depending more upon the degree

times of economic crisis by frequently chang- of the socio-psychic effect of the disease ing their place of work! Thus, the value of than upon the diagnosis. In this connection

sterilization in such cases of imbecility it may be noted that Sioli, according to

appears to be very doubtful. This seems to Schroder, could verify only fifty-four out

be particularly true in cases of early steriliza- of 200 cases of alleged epilepsy as being

tion (before the age of twenty), and taking hereditary.

THE GERMAN STERILIZATION ACT OF I933

231

'aPhanokopien" In I933 Richard Goldschmidt observed for the first time the existence of nonhereditary conditions which he called "Phanokopien." Such " Phinokopien" occur not only in animals but also in humans-as, for instance, serious bodily deformities of new-born babies after the infection of the mother with German measles in the first four months of pregnancy. As Nachtsheim points out, the possibility of these " Phanokopien " calls for a detailed and exact differential-diagnosis and examination of family histories on the question as to whether a hereditary disease really exists.
Genetics and Sterilization Experience of the German law of I933
for preventing the transmission of hereditary disease, and progress in human genetics, has proved that the danger of passing on hereditary taints has often been overestimated. While it is true that research in twins confirms the importance of hereditary factors, the varying ways in which a disease may develop encourages therapeutic measures. Only a few genetic traits have such a strong (dominant) genetic force as to demand a renunciation of children. Moreover it must be remembered that many hereditary diseases eliminate themselves by non-marriage or by a very small number of children.
Sterilization seems in the main to be indicated for individuals who suffer from a hereditary disease who want the operation for personal reasons or out of consideration for their partner in matrimony or their possible descendants. Sterilization may also be wanted within the family after serious hereditary infirmities in children have occurred. Although a helpless member of a family may be regarded as a challenge, and as the permanent object of loving care, there are limits to spiritual strength which seems to justify a sterilizing operation.At the present time, lack of uniformity in the sterilization laws, coupled with the non-existence of a superior court to which decisions could be referred, has resulted in no operations being performed, not even in cases where sterilization is eugenically

desirable. On the other hand, it is my opinion that many healthy women are sterilized as a birth-control measure.
Generally, the consequences of negative eugenic measures by the State on a people's entire genetic substance cannot be overlooked. Experience up to I945 proves that disregard of life, of human individuality and personality must result in the destruction of people and community.
The encouragement of the healthy and efficient family is still the best way for a qualitative policy of population.
REFERENCES
(The titles of papers have been translated into English.)
Bonhoff, G. (I953), Psychiatric Experiences with the
Re-examination of Sterilized Persons. Fortschr. Neurol., 21, 251-284.
von Brandis, H. J. (I935), The Sterilization of Males
with Hereditary Diseases. Munch. Med. Wschr., 82, I528-1530. Bremer Inaugural Dissertation 1953. Greggersen, H. (I938), Results of a Study of the Fate of a Number of Sterilized Men. Ver6ffentl. a. d. Geb. d. Volksges. Dienstes, 51, 363-397. Harmsen, H. (Ir93I), Praktische Bev6lkerungspolitik. Junker u. Dunnhaupt Verlag, Berlin.
(I935), The Significance of Hereditary Crippling in the Health of the People. Gesundheitsfiir-
sorge, 9, 203-208. -(1936), The " Gesetz zur Verhiutung erbkran-
ken Nachwuchses" and its Challenge to the Clergyman. Schriftenreihe des Evang. Gesundheitsdienstes, 6. Klose, F. (1940/4I), Investigation on the Fate of Women, who were Sterilized between 1934 and
1937 in the City of Kiel. Der 5ffentl. Ges. dienst, 6,
294-305, 325-333.
Nachtsheim, H., Lenz, F. and Fetscher, R. (1952), Fiir und wider die Sterilisierung aus eugenischer Indikation. Thieme Verlag, Stuttgart.
Schr6der, H. W. (I947), Is Sterilization a Crime? Das
Dtsch. Gesd. wes., 2, 113-II5. Traenckner, K. (I953), Legal Aspects of Sterilization
and Refertilization. Fortschr. Neurol., 21, 239-250.
-_(I953), Results of Operations for Refertiliza-
tion in Hamburg. A rch. Gynak., 182, 387-403.
Written Examination Papers at the School of Public Health in Hamburg. Leader: Prof. Dr. Harmsen: Beukert, H. (1948), The " Gesetz zur Verhutung
erbkranken Nachwuchses vom I4.7.1933 and its Results in the Area of the Public Health Department of Bochum. Buchholtz, U. (1952), The Performance of the Act " zur Verhiutung erbkranken Nachwuchses " in Flensburg (Town and County) up. to 1945 and the Value of the File on Psychiatric Diseases.
Boning, E. (I953), The performance of Sterilizations
in the Bethel Hospital. Bonk, F. (1952), Expert Opinions of Public Health
Officers on Injuries, caused by Nazi Legislation (District of Hanover).

232 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Evers, P. (I949), Extent and Development of Eugenics
during and after the War.
Klein, S. (1948), The Reasons for the Reopening of Cases in " Erbgesundheitssachen " in 1947 and its Results.
Milhe, G. (1948), The Performaince of the Gesetz zur Verhiltung erbkranken N\achwuchses" and its
Results in the Psychiatric Hospital Wahrendorff. Noeres, A. (1952), MIedical Problems of Expert Opinions
in " Sonderhilfe" Claims in the Counties Osna-
brilck and A\Ielle.

Smidt, F. (1953), The T-roblems of Dislocation of the Hip Joint in Ostfriesland and the " Gesetz zur Verhutung erbkranken Nachwuchses."
Straube, A. (1948), The Performance of the Gesetz zur Verhutung erbkranken Nachwuchses " and its Results in Braunschweig-County and in the Area of the Landesheil-u. -pflegeanstalt Konigslutter (['sychiatric Hospital).
Traenlcknier, K. (195I), Experiences with the Reopening of Cases in Erbgesunidheitssachen.

THE WORLD'S GREATEST' BOOKSHOP
F FOR BOOK S
FAMED CENTRE FOR MEDICAL BOOKS
Bookbuyers throughout the world turn to this bookshop as a
knowledgeable source of information on all their book
requirements. And from generation to generation they praise and recommend Foyles-and
buy their books here.
119-125 CHARING CROSS ROAD LONDON, W.C.2
GERrard 566o (i6 lines) Open 9 to 6 (Thurs. 9 to 7) Two minutes from Tottenham Court Road Station
Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 4

