THE COMPLEX DETERMINANTS OF AMENTIA*

By L. S. PENROSE, M.A., M.D., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.

W HEN people began to take an interest in the problems of mental deficiency, in the middle of last
century, the causes of the condition were entirely unknown. Early investigators, such as Ireland and Shuttleworth, accepted the ordinary medical standards of aetiological classification and divided their cases into congenital and acquired types. Since then the attitude of specialists has undergone many changes. Some have laid stress on the existence of definite clinical types, while others have taken the view that mental defect is a disease entity with a specific aetiology and pathology. The main cause is asserted, by some authorities, to be a single recessive Mendelian character: others have identified the cause with defective developmental potentiality of the germ cells or with neuronic insufficiency. The investigators who proposed these solutions are people of the highest knowledge and experience, and their respective outlooks must receive the greatest attention from those who hope to elucidate the problems in this field of work. From my own experience of the subject, which, admittedly, is of short duration, I do not find it possible to accept any simple view of causation, and, if I use the term " amentia " as an alternative to "mental defect," for verbal convenience, I do not wish to suggest thereby that the subjectmatter is simplified. It may be that, after further research, I shall think differently, but I should like to try and explain the problem as I see it now. I shall have to compress my description within a short compass in which only the main lines of argument can be discussed. I hope to show how great a variety of factors contribute to the end result of mental
* An Address to the Society at the Annual General Meeting.

deficiency as it is known in this country at the present time.
The determinants of amentia-it is misleading to call them all causes-can roughly be divided into two classes: there are what may be called arbitrary determining factors, and there are true biological causes. The arbitrary determinants depend upon legal and social definitions. These definitions reflect our social habits and are of scientific
interest to the social psychologist. The biological determinants, on the other hand, are physical phenomena, such as the processes of heredity, neuro-pathology and individual mental development.
MENTAL DEFECT-A LEGAL ENTITY
Turning first to the arbitrary determinants, we have to consider the consequences of the fact that mental deficiency is a legal entity. The Mental Deficiency Acts contai special provisions for dealing with persons of inferior social ability, partly for these people's own benefit and partly for the benefit of the rest of society. There is, naturally, a fairly large positive correlation between the class of individuals defined by the Acts and the class of individuals with inferior ability at mental or scholastic tests. There is also an association between those persons who are defective within the meaning of the Acts, and those who have weak moral characters. For example, over one-tenth of the patients in the Eastern Counties' Institution are legally criminals and are cared for there instead of being sent to industrial schools or prisons. Adolescents are sometimes certified because they are considered to be in danger of becoming immoral. Patients often have brothers and sisters whose intellects are no brighter than their own, but who are well behaved, and are, therefore, not certifiable. There is, again, an important

121

I22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

relationship between the number of persons community. Other investigators (Dawson,

certified mentally defective in a given district Richardson, Terman) have obtained results

and the outlook of the local magistrates and intermediate between ii per cent. and I9

medical officials; and the administration of per cent., and it is fairly safe to assume that

the laws depends partly upon the accom- the value lies between I0 per cent. and 20

modation available in local institutions. per cent. This shows that, if we subtract

Another arbitrary complication arises be- twice the standard deviation from ioo per

cause a great many institutional beds are cent. intelligence, we must draw the border-

supported by charity, as in general hospitals. line of normality between mental ratios of

Consequently, while some parents may find 6o and 8o. On the other hand, we may pre-

it more convenient to educate a defective fer to define as defective the lowest scoring

child at home, others, on account of humble hundredth part of the population: if so, we

circumstances, find application for institu- should have to draw the line somewhere

tional training absolutely essential.

between the mental ratios of 55 and 75. If

a child's intelligence falls within the marginal

QUANTITATIVE MEASURES OF

range, about 20 points wide, it will be diffi-

DEFICIENCY

cult to say whether or not he is defective

It may be suggested that one can short- -according to the existing methods of

circuit all these difficulties and measure diagnosis: we shall be guided in our decision

mental deficiency quantitatively by intelli- in any particular case by such things as the

gence tests. At the present time, none of the child's social behaviour, his educability and,

tests in regular use are perfectly efficient, and what is even more important, we shall be

the results depend a good deal upon the guided by the available accommodation in

subject's previous experiences; but even if special schools or training centres. It was

precise tests for general intelligence were estimated in the Wood Report that about

available, we should still be faced with the three-quarters of certifiable defectives have

problem that the line between a normal score intelligence above 50 per cent. A slight

and an abnormal score must be drawn alteration, therefore, in the position of the

arbitrarily, because the frequency distribu- borderline makes a big difference in the num-

tion of intelligence test scores, ascertained ber of aments.

in various ways for school age populations, An inevitable consequence of the am-

forms a continuous curve.

biguity of definition is that the normal

It is a statistical convention to regard as and abnormal groups overlap one another.

abnormal those observational values which Even if we confine our attention to the chil-

fall outside twice the standard deviation of dren judged to be defective according to

the distribution. The standard deviation the criteria of the Education Act, we find

(a convenient measure of the spread) of that about a quarter of the children sent to

intelligence in the general community varies special schools are better at mental tests

according to the type of community studied than the lowest scoring normal children, The

and the type of test used. If only the children overlapping is partly due to the imperfec-

in the ordinary schools are tested, the spread tions of mental tests, but it is greatly

is less than if the sample includes the best accentuated because social behaviour is a

educated as well as the feeblest intellects criterion of defect.

outside the schools. The estimate of the standard deviation, obtained by Burt, was OVERLAPPING OF NORMALITY AND ii per cent. for London elementary school MENTAL DEFICIENCY

children with the Binet scale. In the Dr. E. 0. Lewis has courageously stated the

Swedish data, analyzed by Pearson, the view that it is a mistake to regard mental

corresponding value was about I9 per cent.: defect as a pathological state, because a con-

here also the Binet test was used in a com- siderable proportion of aments actually be-

prehensive survey of all the children in the long to the normal population. He has

THE COMPLEX DETERMINANTS OF AMENTIA

I23

proposed the term " subcultural " to apply to the frequency distribution curve of intellimembers of the group which is formed, one gence conforms to the normal law of error: might say, by the overlapping of the defini- it may even be wrong to suppose that the tions of normality and mental deficiency. To distribution of normal intelligence is sym-
some people this notion seems altogether metrical or normal in the statistical sense.
absurd, but there is nothing very unusual In most investigations there is found to be a
about it. Lewis pointed out the analogy slight skew; that is to say, deviations from
between mental grade and physical stature. the mean in the direction of poor intelligence
We could divide men into two classes: those are more frequent than deviations in the
who, on account of their physique, were direction of superior ability. The people at
suitable for the police force, and those who the lower end of the scale more than balance
were not. Among those rejected we should those at the upper end. This finding is to be
find a certain number of dwarfs and poor expected, because accidental disturbancesphysical specimens, but we should also find according to their magnitude-are more
many men who were quite normal, though likely to reduce intelligence than to increase
too small to pass the required tests. Similar it. The preponderance of low intelligence circumstances are constantly arising in can be attributed to pathological accidents.
medicine. We are accustomed to speak of Whatever may be the exact form of the curve,
some deviations from the average condition if the basis of Lewis's view is sound, the preof the body as physiological changes: other vailing definitions of mental deficiency must variations are called pathological. This is a be discarded in the scientific investigation of distinction partly of degree and partly of causes. Let us forget about legal and ad-
kind. Usually, a variation is physiological ministrative necessities in the discussion of the
unless it is a symptom of a previously recog- causation, and speak of inferior mental ability. nized disease. Thus, the pulse rate and the temperature vary from day to day in the THE BIOLOGY OF INFERIOR MENTALITY
same individual and they vary also in differ- What, then, are the real biological causes ent individuals according to constitution, of inferior mental ability ? In the first place but we do not regard pulse or temperature there are the causes which are similar to changes as abnormal unless they overstep those producing superior mental ability. some assigned limit or unless they are associ- The minor differences which produce (among ated with signs of disease. Again, one may normal people) the variation above or below consider the distribution, in the general the average mental powers have been studied population, of refractive errors in the eye. by all sorts of different methods. Practically Few people have perfect sight, and there all observers agree that hereditary factors exists a normal or physiological variation play an important part and that environwhich may amount even to a degree requiring mental circumstances also contribute, though optical correction. There are also cases of we have little precise knowledge of how these high errors of refraction which cannot be factors work in combination with one anregarded as normal. It is an interesting fact other. The relative proportion of these that high refractive errors are usually associ- factors in determining the individual's inated with pathological changes in the retina telligence varies from case to case and from or in other structures. Transferring the same family to family. I am personally inclined ideas to the distribution of intelligence, it to accept the estimates of Hogben, Holzinger seems reasonable to refer to feeble-minded and Newman, based on studies of boardedpersons who show no associated physical or out children or twins, that, in determining mental abnormality as normal variants. deviations above and below the mean
There is difficulty in deciding exactly what intelligence level, heredity and environment proportion of the individuals at any given are approximately of equal importance. mental level will be expected, theoretically, This estimate applies to individuals who to be normal variants. It is doubtful whether are part of the normal population, and it

I24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

therefore applies equally to that group of inherited diathesis is of importance. Possibly

defectives which can be regarded as belong- this is so in syphilitic amentia: some other

ing to the nornal distribution.

types of encephalitis also seem to run in

I have previously pointed out that the families.

major accidental occurrences which alter intelligence are more likely to reduce it than EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC INSTANCES

to raise it. Accidents may be either environ- By examining exceptional types, we are

mental or genetic and they may be in the able to identify most effectively the indi-

nature of infectious diseases or injuries to vidual factors which can combine together

the nervous system, or they may be the in these complex ways to produce inferior

effects of uncommon gene mutations. Now mental ability.

these factors do not all produce their effects Mongolism is a type of mental defect which

in the same way. There are two main ways occurs in all classes of society: it may be due

in which they behave, and these two ways are to the product of genetic factors and specific

logically distinct.

prenatal environment. There is very little

In the first place, the effects may be doubt that the maternal age at a child's

cumulative. Thus, to take a simple example, a birth is a potent cause. The father's age

child who contracts encephalitis lethargica and the birth order seem to be of no signifi-

loses, on the average, about six points in its cance. On the other hand, maternal age does

mental ratio (or intelligence quotient) in two not seem to be the only causal factor: the

years, and the deterioration is progressive. incidence is higher among some races than

A child with an initial ratio of IIo is in little among others and some families appear to be

danger of becoming mentally defective under particularly prone to produce mongol chil-

such circumstances. On the other hand, a dren. Like twins have always been observed

child with an initial ratio of 8o may be ex- to be equally affected and mongolism is often

pected, about three years after the onset of found in one of a pair of unlike twins. These

the disease, to reach a level of intelligence facts support the view that, while one child

within the range of mental deficiency. Here can have a predisposition to become a mon-

the initial dullness, with the superadded gol if the mother is elderly, other children-

disorganization of the brain, causes the in the same sibship can be immune. But

borderline to be overstepped. Subcultural maternal age at the birth of a child is not

mentality plus organic disease is a potent itself a pathological circumstance. Nor are

cause of mental deficiency.

English people to be regarded as specially

In the second place, accidental factors may pathological on account of the relatively high

combine to produce inferior intelligence, incidence of mongolism in this country as

though they have little or no effect on men- compared with some others.

tality when they act separately. The here- The question of predisposition is also

ditary predisposition to a certain type of important when we notice how frequently

disease may be of no consequence if precipita- the mentally defective suffer from some form

ting factors are absent from the environment. or other of mental derangement. Experience

If susceptibility to tuberculosis were entirely in the field of mental diseases leads us to

hereditary, this would be of little conse- expect that some psychoses are the combined

quence to susceptible individuals unless product of inherited predisposition and men-

tubercle bacilli existed in the environment. tal strain. The mentally disordered patient

Conversely, the presence of pathogenic usually has an intelligence which is lower

organisms would be of no significance to an than would be expected if his faculties were

immune race. The coexistence of suscepti- well co-ordinated. There is a great deal of

bility and a precipitating factor, however, difference between the initial capacity of a

produces a disease. Not improbably, in patient who is a reliable, steady worker, and

some of the infectious diseases which appear that of a patient of similar mental age who

to cause mental deficiency, the question of suffers from severe psychosis or epilepsy.

THE COMPLEX DETERMINANTS OF AMENTIA

I25

There are numerous other special condi- different types and grades of mental defect

tions. Some of these are due to genetic gives valuable clues to modes of action of

accidents. The cause of amaurotic idiocy is multiple genetic and environmental factors

well established, but there are probably other in the causation of normal deviations from

types of amentia in which a rare recessive the mean intelligence. I therefore do not

gene is the chief determinant. One such consider the time is wasted when we sort

condition seems to have been identified by out the different peculiarities associated with

Sj6gren in Sweden. His method was to amentia instead of regarding the whole group

examine exhaustively an inbred, isolated of certified defectives as a single entity.

community. This type of investigation is not It is often stated that the influence of

always practicable. The alternative method environment is most marked in the causa-

of comparing the children of consanguineous tion of idiots and low-grade aments and that

parents with those whose parents are un- heredity plays more part in the causation of

related, however, gives some useful hints. the milder degrees of mental impairment. I

I have found that institutional defectives hope I have made it clear that the causes of

whose parents are consanguineous usually amentia are too complex to admit the satis-

suffer from diseases which are distinct from factory division of cases into hereditary and

the rest. In the consanguineous group one non-hereditary groups. The incidence of

occasionally finds cases of defect associated neuropathy, however, is asserted-I believe

with well-known neurological conditions correctly-by Wildenskov and others, to be

like retinitis pigmentosa or amaurotic much higher in the families of the feeble-

idiocy. Far more often these cases do not minded than in the families of idiots. To

exhibit the picture of any known disease. my mind this fact only permits the con-

Their grade, however, tends to be low, and clusion to be drawn that heredity enters into

they are sharply differentiated from their the causation of the high and low grades in a

brothers and sisters as regards mentality. different manner. The occurrence of defect

Another type of rare genetic accident is a in the families of defectives (i.e. a positive

dominant sublethal mutation. If this should family history) is far from being unequivocal

happen, usually only one child in the family evidence of hereditary influence. I know, for

is affected when the parents are both normal. example, a partially blind and deaf patient

An affected parent, however, transmits the who has six normal sibs and there was no

disease to half the offspring. Two examples neuropathy discoverable in any relative: all

of dominant sublethal characters, met with the same I feel certain that this case is

in mental deficiency, are epiloia (sebaceous mainly of hereditary origin with a super-

adenoma with epilepsy) and neurofibroma- added element of deprivation. This convic-

tosis. Even when dealing with the apparently tion arises from the clinical diagnosis coupled

simple genetic problems presented by such with the knowledge that the parents are first

diseases, complications are liable to arise. cousins. Conversely, I am inclined to attri-

Abortive forms of the disease make their bute to environment the amentia in a

appearance in the families of affected indi- paralytic child with a history of very difficult

viduals. Neurofibromatosis, for example, is breech labour in spite of the occurrence of

not always associated with mental deficiency. insanity and mental deficiency in a branch of

Much analysis is required to determine the family.

whether the inconstancy in the pathological

effects is due to environmental causes or whether the extraneous genetic constitution

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

is to be held responsible.

To sum up, I have, for convenience,

Multiple genetic constituents of mental divided the determinants of amentia into two

capacity may be mutually additive in main groups. One set of determinants de-

their effects or may only produce a change pends upon our way of looking at the proW

when they collaborate. The analysis of lem, and is not inherent in the biological

i26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nature of the problem itself. The other determinants are the true biological causes of inferior mental ability, and they act in a variety of ways: there can either be cumulative effects or else causes which, innocuous in
themselves, may combine disastrously. If
I am correct in thinking that the causes are

so complex, it is obvious that no very simple
solution to the problem of prevention or cure is possible. As in the campaign against cancer, the attack must be made along the whole front. We shall have to fight each
individual cause by the method which is most suitable.

JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION AND INTERNATIONAL LAW

THIRD SERIES.

VOL. XVI. PART I.

FEBRUARY 1934

1. ARTICLES-

CONTENTS:

Case Law in France. Contributed by Dr. Marc Ancel. Perpetuities in French Law. Contributed by Sir Maurice Sheldon Amos, K.C. The Report of the Newfoundland Royal Commission.
Contributed by Professor Berriedale Keith, D.C.L. Moslem Law in the Egyptian Mixed Courts-Wakf. Contributed by F. M. Goadby, Esq., D.C.L. The Unification of the Rules of Conflict relating to Negotiable Instruments.
Contributed by H. C. Gutteridge, Esq., K.C., LL.D. The Position of the American Indian in the Law of the United States.
Contributed by W. G. Rice, Esq., Jr. Delegated Legislation in England as seen from Abroad. Contributed by Cecil T. Carr, Esq., D.C.L. Dominion and Colonial Cases on the Conflict of Laws for the Quinquennium, 1928-1932.
Contributed by Professor R. W. Lee. Indian and Far Eastern Cases on the Conflict of Laws, 1928-1933.
Contributed by S. Vesey-Fitzgerald, Esq. Notes on Imperial Constitutional Law. Contributed by Professor Berriedale Keith, D.C.L.

2. NOTES.

3. NOTICES OF BOOKS.

Annual Subscription, One Guinea.
SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISIATION, 1 Elm Court Temple, E.C.4.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 2.

