'REJUVENATION'
The Work of Steinach and Voronoff

By ARTHUR WALTON, Ph.D.
Dr. Walton was one of the Commission sent to Algeria by the Ministry of
Agriculture to investigate Dr. Serge Voronoiff's experiments on the improvement
of livestock.-Ed.

To the Living and Posterity

Death and senescence must be clearly distinguished. Death may result from accident,

The History ofLife and Death, being the last
of sixe monethly designations, seemed worthy
to bee preferred to bee the second in Publication, because the least losse of time, in a matter of so Areat utility should bee pretious, for wee hope and desire that it may redound to the Food of many; and that noble Physitians raisinA their minds, may not be wholZy im-

disease, or deliberate interference with the essential functions of the body, and may
occur at any time from conception onwards.
Senescence implies a series of irreversible changes in the organism, coincident with growth and age, which lead to a diminution in vital activity and to deficiencies in the

ployed in uncleane cures, nor honoured only various functions of the body. The

for necessity, but become also the Stewards of organism becomes less active, decrepit, and

Divine Omnipotency and Clemency, in pro- more susceptible to injury and disease.

lonAinA and renewinA the life of Man, especially since it may be done by safe, convenient, civill, but untryed new waies and meanes: For while wee Christians aspire and labour to come to the Land of Promise, it will be a siAne of Divine favour, ifour shoos and the Aarments ofour frail bodies, be here little worne in our journey in the world's wildernesse.

Sooner or later death supervenes. It is difficult to distinguish between the
effects of inherent senescence of the organism on the one hand and the accumulative ravages
of the external environment on the other. An organism may be progressively and irreversibly altered by disadvantageous circum-

Francis Bacon (Trans. 1638)

stances, injuries, or diseases, and these alone might conceivably be responsible for the

decrepitude of old age. Nevertheless there

FROM the earliest times the idea of per- are certain processes in the growth and

petual youth or the restoration of the differentiation of the various structures of

old and decrepit has intrigued man's the higher organisms which appear to be

imagination, leading him to the creation of irreversible and to lead to inevitable change.

many myths and superstitions and urging If these changes are truly irreversible even

him to search for the key to the mysteries under the most favourable conditions, 'reju-

of senescence or for remedies by which it venation,' in the sense of a return to a con-

might be avoided.

dition identical with that of former years

Experimental science has demonstrated is consequently impossible and the claim to

that with certain lowly organisms and cer- effect ' rejuvenation ' must be rejected.

tain isolated tissues life may be prolonged Granted, however, that there are irreversible

indefinitely, provided the experimental con- changes in the organism, it may still be

ditions are maintained. But these condi- profitable to inquire into the methods by

tions are remote from those which pertain which they can be reduced to a minimum,

to the normal environment of highly evolved and the ravages of the external, environ-

forms; and while the experiments un- ment avoided or repaired. It is in this

doubtedly help to elucidate the mechanisms latter sense that ' rejuvenation ' is now em-

of life and death, they offer but a vague ployed by the more responsible clinicians,

ultimate prospect of practical application. and in Germany " A Itersbekdmpfung " has

253

254

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

replaced " Veryiingung " in order to ex- breast, and pubic region, which is charac-

press the same intention.

teristic of the adult normal male, is held in

This change in attitude has undoubtedly abeyance. The voice does not ' break.'

widened the field of inquiry, since it is The mentality is also said to be profoundly

obvious that many factors may contribute different. Replacement of the testis by

to the preservation of youthfulness and the grafting, as has been frequently accom-

postponement of senescence. Eugenics, plished on animals, will mitigate or prevent

Hygiene, Therapeutics, and Sociology are the appearance of these symptoms.

all sciences which bear directly or indirectly Now, many of the symptoms of senescence

on the problem, but in this article we are are not unlike those of castration. There

concerned only with the physiological as- is absence of sexual desire, loss of or dimi-

pects of ' rejuvenation ' and particularly nished growth of hair; the voice may lose

with the methods of glandular therapy asso- its deep intonation, and there is a general

ciated with the names of Steinach and lowering of vitality. Based upon this

Voronoff. These methods have come pro- similarity of symptoms, the claim has been

minently before the public, first because of advanced that testicular deficiency contri-

the sensational claims that have been made, butes largely to senescence, and that conse-

and secondly because of their association quently ' rejuvenation ' can be obtained by

with sex, a subject which never fails in its stimulating to renewed activity the ageing

appeal to the general public.

testis, or by reinforcing it by grafting

CASTRATION AND SENESCENCE The rationale which underlies ' rejuvena-
tion ' is based upon the physiological properties of the sex organs. For simplicity our discussion is confined to the male, but,

tissue from young and vigorous animals. Before discussing these claims it is necessary to examine the problem a little more closely. As we have shown above, by comparing castrate and normal animal, there can be no doubt that the testis plays an impor-

mutatis mutandis, the argument is also applicable to the female. The testis of the adult male is a relatively large organ of highly specialized function, and as such will
require adequate and specialized nutrition from the blood stream. Its activity will involve by-products of metabolism, as well

tant role in the internal economy, and that its presence is necessary for the full development of the male characteristics. On the other hand its presence is by no means essential, and without it the castrate attains a considerable degree of muscular development and vitality.

as the primary products which are the sex The gelding, for example, is strong,

cells or spermatozoa. As one might expect, therefore, removal of the testis involves a considerable change in the internal economy of the organism. The animal castrated early in life fails to develop many of the characteristics of the intact male. The gelding, in comparison with the stallion, is less well developed with regard to the muscles, especially of the neck; it has little or no sexual desire, and is more amenable to control. The castrated lamb also does not attain the skeletal and muscular proportions of the ram; its fleece is said to be finer, but not so luxuriant, and it has a tendency to fatten more readily. The eunuch, or human
castrate, shows skeletal and muscular differences. The growth of hair on the face,

vigorous, and capable of hard work and rough usage. Although, no doubt, not so strong and muscular as the stallion, it is by no means decrepit or senescent. It is impossible to obtain critical data on the relative duration of life of the gelding and stallion, since their conditions of life are so different. In the first place the stallion is generally chosen from superior hereditary stock and from only the best individuals within that stock. Its superior economic value ensures the best care and nutrition, and the stallion is not subjected to the arduous toil which is the characteristic portion of the gelding. In the absence of exact data to the contrary, I believe that the duration of life of the gelding is not inferior to that of the stallion.

' REJUVENATION'

255

The same relationships probably hold good parations from the testis; but no conclusive

for the other domesticated animals, but since evidence has been brought forward that such

the butcher intervenes it is impossible to extracts are physiologically active in remov-

get the requisite information on the duration ing the effects of castration or are in any

of life.

way advantageous to the senile. The first

important contribution was made by

IN THE HUMAN

Steinach, who showed that by simply tying the spermatic ducts leading from the testis,

With man the problem is similar. Castra- rats which were decrepit and sexually impo-

tion in early life involves the loss of the tent became endowed with greatly increased

male sexual characters, but it is doubtful vigour and sexual activity. In explanation

whether it has any direct effect on the inci- he claimed that, although the primary

dence of senescence. Voronoff bases much function of the testis, the production

of his argument on the premature senility of spermatozoa, was destroyed by this

which he observed in the eunuchs of Egypt, operation, the physiological activity of the

but it would be necessary to inquire care- testis was increased. Since success attended

fully into questions of social status, employ- the ligature of one testis only, leaving the

ment, and the psychological effect of en- other intact, it was possible not only to

forced isolation from the normal life of the restore bodily vigour and sexual desire, but

community, before passing a critical also fertility. The animals so ' rejuve-

opinion. It is also important to note that nated ' lived beyond the normal span of life.

the similarity between the symptoms of These experiments are, as they stand, of

senescence and castration is not absolute. considerable importance. But it is legiti-

For example, arterio-sclerosis, or hardening mate to offer certain criticisms as to their

of the walls of the arteries, is an almost general applicability to other animals, in-

universal symptom of senescence, but does cluding man. In the first place, there is

not appear amongst the symptoms of castra- the obvious criticism that the rat differs

tion. The direct dependence of senility specifically from other animals, secondly

upon the failure of the testis is therefore not that the animals were kept in confinement

supported by an appeal to the effects of and under laboratory conditions, and thirdly

castration; and in any case the hypothesis that the experiments were not sufficiently

provides no explanation of the failure in quantitative or extensive to allow statistical

the first instance of the testis itself. It is analysis and the elimination of all variables.

perhaps more reasonable to assume that Steinach's experiments have been repeated

physiological deficiency of the testis and by many workers and on different species

the appearance of castration symptoms are of animals, sometimes with success, some-

consequences of senescence, rather than times with failure (failures are attributed to

primary causes. On this hypothesis faulty technique or unsuitable material). In

' rejuvenation ' by removing aggravating general, however, the same criticism applies,

symptoms might conceivably have consider- namely, that the experiments have not been

able effect upon the general health and well- sufficiently extensive or quantitative, and

being of the organism, and prolong life be- that there always remains an element of

yond the allotted span. There is certainly doubt, rather than convincing proof.

much that is problematical in this hypo- Further critical research is undoubtedly

thesis and it remains to discuss how far it is desirable.

supported by the experimental evidence.

UNCERTAINTY OF THE EVIDENCE

THE STEINACH METHOD

In the meantime the operation has been

Early attempts at ' rejuvenation ' were applied to man, and it is claimed that

made by administering extracts and pre- remarkable results have been obtained.

256 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The results however cannot be regarded practitioner and patient are satisfied with

with the same degree of certainty as a care- the results, presumably the operation justi-

fully controlled experiment. In the first fies its existence, but this post hoc propter

place, it should be noted that the operation hoc argument can scarcely satisfy the

of ligature of the spermatic duct was in use scientist.

previous to Steinach's research, in an We have discussed only the Steinach

attempt to relieve hypertrophy of the pros- operation, but there are several methods

tate. Its rejuvenating effect was not then from which equally advantageous results are

remarked, although it is now claimed that claimed. X-ray treatment, diathermy, and

many of the cases showed otherwise in- the simple application of phenol to the

explicable recoveries. As an alternative, testicular nerve-supply belong to that cate-

it has also been suggested that the modern gory which aims at stimulating the deficient

technique differs in important respects from testis to renewed activity. In a second cate-

that used when hypertrophy of the pro- gory belongs the application of testis grafts

state was the aim; but this objection, as far to replace or reinforce the testis. Grafting

as I am aware, has not been supported by testicular tissue finds an obvious application

experiment. The operation has also been where either by accident or by disease the

in force as a measure of sterilizing delin- patient has undergone virtual castration,

quents, and it is claimed that improvement but these cases must be carefully distin-

in general health follows the operation. It guished from the same treatment applied

should be kept in mind, however, that advo- for the purpose of ' rejuvenation.' Although

cates of sterilization would tend to lay stress not the originator of this method of

on the beneficial effect of the operation, and ' rejuvenation,' Voronoff has become the

that the results were not sufficiently striking principal exponent, and he and his associates

to demonstrate of themselves the alleged have been mainly instrumental in bringing

value of the treatment.

the subject so prominently before the

Many case records of 'rejuvenation' general public.

patients have been published, and the

number which show definite improvement THE VORONOFF METHOD

is remarkable. In most of the cases, how- Briefly, the method consists in making a

ever, the patients were suffering from, or small pocket between the layers of skin

even undergoing treatment for, various sub- of the scrotum on each side of the testis.

sidiary complaints; and it is impossible to The internal surfaces of the pocket are

eliminate the influence of this treatment on slightly scarified in order to induce a mild

the subsequent recovery of health and inflammation and to promote the formation

vigour. There is considerable disagreement of new blood connections between the tissues

as to the effect of the operation on the patient. and the graft. A piece of testis is then sown

Some clinicians have stressed the recrudes- into the pocket and the wound stitched to-

cence of sexual activities; others the im- gether. It should be noted that the graft

provement in mental efficiency. In the does not actually come in contact with the

human subject it is impossible to elimi- testis of the animal grafted, being separated

nate the psychological effect. ' Rejuvena- from it by the internal layers of skin of the

tion ' has received such publicity that few scrotum, so that there is no possibility of

patients would undergo the operation with- the sperms from the graft finding their

out some previous conviction of its value. way into the reproductive tract of the

In spite of this criticism, which, of course, animal.

in no way disproves the hypothesis, it is Voronoff's work is based upon less critical

the firm conviction of many practitioners experimentation than that of Steinach. He

that improvement does follow and cannot be has described many instances of the opera-

attributed to the subsidiary treatment or tion performed on domesticated animals, but

psychological influence. Provided that both little is known of their pedigrees, exact ages,

'REJUVENATION'

257

or previous nurture. Many of his cases Samples of the various flocks were shown

show remarkable vigour subsequent to the to the Commission, and undoubtedly sup-

operation, and the duration of life is appa- ported the claims made. The Commission

rently prolonged beyond the normal. But were, however, not satisfied that rigid pre-

statistical analyses have not been published, cautions had been taken to avoid chance

and, as explained above, it is exceedingly selection of superior hereditary types. All

difficult to obtain critical data on the long- the flocks were extremely variable, and

evity of domesticated livestock. Voronoff statistical safeguards and adequate control

has applied testis grafting to the human, of nutrition had not been taken. Also it

using the glands of various species of mon- was noticed that the changes in the sheep

keys, and he claims remarkable success. were not those which one would normally

But, again, the problem is complicated by associate with increased masculinity as a

subsidiary treatment and possible psycho- result of the testis grafts, but were exactly

logical influence. Nevertheless, from the those improvements which are obtained by

case records which have been published, the genetic selection and improved nutrition. In

number of successful operations is remark- Voronoff's latest book, The Conquest of

able and the patients appear satisfied with Life, the author claims much kudos from the

the results.

reports of the various Commissions, but does

RACIAL RESULTS CLAIMED

not mention or even attempt to reply to the criticism offered.

Although not bearing directly on the problem of ' rejuvenation,' Voronoff's experi-

The experiments are now being repeated in this country and abroad, and reports will

ments on the grafting of young rams, with no doubt be published shortly; until then

a view to increasing the yield of meat and
wool, may be mentioned. It is claimed that

it is perhaps better to treat the subject as sub judice, and suspend comment.

young rams which are grafted with addi- The exponents of ' rejuvenation ' have

tional testicular tissue grow to increased made out a strong case to which an answer

weight and produce a more abundant crop of is undoubtedly required. If the facts are

wool. Furthermore, Voronoff claims that in accordance with the claims made, eugenic

this acquired character is transmitted to the and social problems of importance are raised.

offspring of both sexes. Thus Voronoff claims what is virtually

The chief difficulty which arises in assessing these claims is the absence of critical experi-

"the creation of a new race," and raises a mentation; and it is to the latter, and not

question of the utmost importance to geneticist, eugenist, and agriculturalist alike.

to hypothetical discussion that we must look for an answer.

A detailed criticism of this work has been

published by the Commission of investiga-

BIBLIOGRAPHY (Selected)tion appointed by the Ministry of Agricul-
ture, to which report readers who desire

Steinach. " Verjiingung." Roux' Archiv fur Entwicklungsmechanik. Bd. 46. 1920.

more detail are referred. Here it may be briefly said that the " racial improvement " claims rest upon experiments in Algeria.

Sand. " Die Keimdriisen und das experimentelle Restitutions-problem bei Wirbeltieren," Handbuch der Normalen und Pathologischen Physiologie. Berlin, 1926.

Certain young rams were chosen from Commercial flocks belonging to the French

Voronoff. " The Study of Old Age and My Method of Rejuvenation." London, 1926.
" The Conquest of Life." London, X928.

Colonial Government, and were engrafted Haire. " Rejuvenation." London, 1925.

with testicular tissue. The grafted rams attained a greater weight and fleece than

Benjamin, Marinesco, Schmidt, et alii. " Verhandlungen des I Internationalen Kongresses fur Sexualforchung." Berlin, I928.

their ungrafted fellows and, when mated with ewes, the offspring of both sexes were heavier and woollier than offspring of

Marshall, Crew, Walton, and Miller. "Report on Dr. Serge Voronoff's Experiments on the Improvement of Livestock." Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. London, 1928.

ungrafted rams.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 4.

