EUGENICS ABROAD

VII.-IN HOLLAND, by DR. M. A. VAN HERWERDEN

T HE event of greatest interest to Psychiatry, at Rotterdam, where Dr. G. P.

eugenists and students of human Frets gave an introductory lecture, followed

heredity in Holland has been the foun- by a paper by Professor J. N. van Bemmelen,*

dation, in June I933, of a Netherlands Insti- professor of criminology at Leiden Univer-

tute of Human Heredity and Race-biology. sity. From the Roman Catholic side, a

The first plans for this Institution were drawn professor of the Roman Catholic University

up by the Netherlands Eugenic Federation of Nymvegen and a Roman Catholic physi-

in 1930, but the actual foundation cannot cian gave their opinions.

be compared with the projects that were A month previously (February 26th) a

cherished in the days before the financial meeting had been held in Amsterdam by the

crisis. Yet the conviction that a centraliza- Mental Hygiene Society, which, in contrast

tion in this field of scientific work was to the one mentioned above, proved to be

urgent, and the opportunity of establishing more a protest against than a propaganda for

three immediately useful departments (two eugenics. The subject for discussion, to which

of them with small endowments of their a whole day was devoted, was the " problem

own), decided us to found the Institution. child," his background (genetical, social,

Professor J. F. van Bemmelen will direct and psychological) and treatment: and

the bio-genealogical section, Dr. J. Sanders the opening papers by five of the foremost

the medico-statistical section, and Dr. leaders in this field were printed beforehand

H. J. T. Bylmer the section for race and circulated in advance. At this meeting

biology. The director4te has amongst its of several hundred social workers, amongst

members representatives of the Royal Acad- whom were representatives of the legal pro-

emy of Sciences, the National Bureau of fession and psychiatrists, there was a certain

Anthropology, the Netherlands Genetics amount of opposition to the eugenic stand-

Society, and the Eugenic Federation. The point, which was expounded by Drs. J.

lack of means to construct a central building Sanders and G. P. Frets. The latter dealt

for the Institution has to be compensated for mainly with his own experience during a

by a constant personal co-operation between visit to hospitals in California last summer.

the directorate and the heads of the three Dr. Sanders tried to prove the uselessness of

departments. Dr. M. J. Sirks, the geneticist, spending money on the delinquent child as

is the chairman, and Dr. M. A. van Her- long as eugenics was neglected. The oppo-

werden is the secretary of the directorate. It sition was specially directed against this

is expected that the Institution will stimulate latter statement-which is perhaps'under-

among physicians all over the country standable from an audience which consisted

interest in the problems connected with the for the greater part of persons who had

distribution of hereditary characters in devoted themselves to bettering the indi-

different groups of the population. We have vidual lot of the unsocial, feeble-minded, or

started work in an unfavourable time, but delinquent child. This meeting was useful,

with sufficient enthusiasm and steadiness to however, in showing how important it is in

be hopeful for the future.

eugenic propaganda to find exactly the right

A remarkable development during the past approach to the audience to which it is

year has been the growing interest among directed; indeed, how urgently necessary

lawyers in the sterilization problem. This

culminated in a discussion held in March, under the auspices of the Society of Forensic

* Son of the above-named Professor J. F. van Bemmelen.

'75

i76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

such an approach is to secure a proper under- The Netherlands Eugenic Federation took

standing of the subject.

an active part in these events. Dr. Bylmer,

Too much weight need not be given to this who is an anthropologist, represents the

experience of the failure of an intelligent East-Indian Eugenic Society in our Federa-

civilized public to understand our principles. tion. He has been invited to give lectures on

In private conversation with the younger anthropology and human heredity at the

generation of psychiatrists-in so far as they University of Amsterdam, so it may be

have not been captured by Adler's principles expected that before long physicians leaving

ne discovers in Holland a growing interest the different Dutch universities will be better

in human heredity, the natural consequence equipped than formerly for understanding

of personal experience in the mental hos- the value of eugenics. Though human here-

pitals. And there really is some hope that dity is not an obligatory branch of study in

in the future one will not witness the event- any of our universities, there is a growing

as one may now-of the management of a interest among students in following lectures

mental hospital occasionally allowing its on the subject. At Utrecht University a

feeble-minded male patients to visit their practical course on general genetics is given

feeble-minded wives in Amsterdam, with the to medical students at the end of the annual

consequence, to be expected from long ex- lectures.

perience, that new mentally deficient children The Genetics Society, which counts

are added to the already large defective amongst its members a number of practical

families.

breeders, arranged in its human heredity

The economic crisis is not favourable for section three meetings specially designed to

the furthering of practical eugenics in Hol- arouse the interest of physicians. One of

land. This winter a new law was proposed, them, held at Utrecht in February, included

urging the courts of justice to restrict the an interesting programme on genetical

number of psychopathic persons that might research in cancer. Dr. W. F. Wassink, one

be placed under institutional control. This of the first investigators in this field (I923),

means that the opportunity of segregating has continued these investigations during

delinquent psychopathic persons for periods the last few years, making use of the valuable

of some years (psychopathic laws I929) Will material of the Cancer Institute at Amster-

be very much reduced. Last year a large dam, and comparing his results with those of

asylum was built in the north of the country Waaler in Norway. In an excellent paper,

where such persons could be treated under Wassink concluded that there is evidence of

excellent psychiatric care-a step of possible the incidence of cancer of the same organic

eugenic value if the above-mentioned restric- system in families. Dr. J. Versluys, who is

tion does not prevent the new Institution the author of a monograph on heredity of

from fulfilling its function.

twins, has started an inquiry into the

Lectures on heredity and eugenics have occurrence of cancer in twins. Dr. J. Sanders

been given this year in different parts of the gave a review on cancer research. The same

country at the special invitation of (among evening a lantern slide was shown of a pro-

other organizations) the Netherlands Society visional new pedigree chart for use in investi-

for Preventive Medicine and the Society for gating heredity in Man, this being the result

Child Study. The Batavian Scientific Society of a questionnary that had been sent to

at Rotterdam organized an extensive course European geneticists after the meeting of

of lectures on heredity and eugenics, starting the International Federation of Eugenic

with general genetics, and invited several Organizations which was held in Dorset in

Dutch geneticists and physicians to partici- I930. The Human Heredity Commission

pate. The annual course on heredity and of the Federation will consider this scheme

eugenics for instructors in the schools for fully before we recommend it for general

feeble-minded children has been continued use.

as in former years.

At the annual meeting of the National

EUGENICS IN HOLLAND

I77

Committee for the Scientific Study of Popu- marriages during the years I877-8I (for a lation Problems a discussion was held on the period ending in I897). The report of the eugenic side of this problem, the economic preliminary work was published in the side having been treated the previous year. Proceedings of the International Population
The Committee (chairman, Dr. Methorst) is Union, I931. continuing its investigation of I35 Nether- Amongst the Netherlands literature on lands communities with regard to the relation human heredity and eugenics of last year I between the annual income and the number have to mention the very valuable book by of children in the family, taking the marriages Dr. P. J. Waardenburg on the heredity of during the years I907-II (for a period the eye. This work (which is in the German ending in 1927). The results will be com- language) appeared just after my survey on pared with those of an identical investiga- eugenics in Holland in this REVIEW a year tion that had been made previously upon the ago.

CHANGE OF ADDRESS
Will readers kindly note the new address of the EUGENICS SOCIETY, to which all communications should be sent.
69 ECCLESTON SQUARE, LONDON, S.W.1
Telephone Number: Victoria 7302
Eugenics Review,-Vol. XXV, No. 8

