THE EUGENICS REVIEW
The theoretical basis of the techniques used to determine the role of heredity in the control of growth and other quantifiable phenomena in mice and men is discussed in the third part of the symposium. The author of the paper on mice makes the common mistake of regarding body weight as a measure of growth when it may, in fact, indicate change in body composition either with or without true growth. This however does not detract from the value of his paper as a study in genetics. The genetic basis of variations in the neuroendocrine response to stress, in humans, is discussed in relation to the information which can be obtained from the study of "inborn errors" of metabolism. The value of studying inbred strains and poly-genetically determined characters in animals in relation to the inheritance of stress responses and behavioural characteristics is also considered. Interesting questions are raised in relation to gene-hormone interaction in the development of the neuro-endocrine system.
The book's main value does not lie in the factual information it provides about either the genetic basis of endocrine phenomena or the endocrine basis of heredity because, as is usual with symposia of this kind, no final answer is obtained to the basic questions which are asked. The reader is however stimulated to ask new questions and he gains information which will help him to frame them in a useful way. The non-geneticist will learn about genetic techniques which can be applied to the study of endocrine physiology and growth while the geneticist may be encouraged to use his techniques in this way. Certainly they will both find parts of the book well worth reading.
W. A. MARSHALL
Green. E. L. (Editor). Biology of the Laboratory Mouse. Second Edition. New York and London, 1966. McGraw-Hill. Pp. xii+706. Price 132s.
THIS IS THE second edition of a book first published in 1941 which has been widely read especially by anybody interested in the house mouse as a laboratory animal. After being reprinted in 1956 it has now been extensively revised and rewritten and twenty new chapters added to the original thirteen. It follows the same general arrangement as the first edition with a comprehensive bibliography at the end of each chapter. This leads inevitably to some repetition, but it probably does not add appreciably to the overall bulk of the book. An author index separate from the subject index would have been an advantage and also some means of identifying those items which refer solely to topics mentioned in papers, but not dealt with in the general text. Techniques connected with mouse husbandry and genetics, including a catalogue of mutants with a brief description of each; anatomy, development, physiology and biochemistry; responses to radiation, drugs and foreign tissues; pathological conditions and immune reactions as well as behavioural traits are all dealt with in detail. The editor states clearly in his introduction that there are still certain aspects of the mouse which have been omitted (e.g. experimental embryology, organogenesis, late responses to radiation, responses to stresses other than radiation and drugs, and induced tumours). The printing and layout of the book are of a high standard and it will undoubtedly have a long and valued existence wherever there is somebody interested in the mouse both in sickness and in health. GILLIAN M. TRUSLOVE
SOCIOLOGY
Maccoby. Eleanor E. (Editor). The Development of Sex Differences. Stanford Studies in
Psychology. London, 1967. Tavistock. Pp. 351. Price 60s.
THIS BOOK CONSISTS of six contributions to a series of discussions held at Stanford
University, USA. The contributions are, broadly, from the point of view of pediatrics,
198

