GENETIC PROBLEMS IN PSYCHIATRY

And their Solution by the Study of Twins

By AUBREY J. LEWIS, M.R.C.P.

G ENETICS and psychiatry have this nant causal agents, or definite quantitative

in common, that they are old in so or qualitative variation of function; normal

far as speculations and empirical function, which is usually average range of

practice go, but very young as sciences, and function, and normal structure are known,

still under suspicion by their elders of being and deviations can be recognized for the

apt to romp and run wild on occasion. These most part beyond dispute; causal agents

are clearly grounds for friendship between likewise are known and detectable. But in

them. But the respects in which they differ psvchiatry the range of the so-called normal

are significant: genetics would be precise, is uncertain; and sharp differences in kind

standing by " actual measurement and the between the actual morbid phenomena are

Rule of Three "; in psychiatry, on the other often hard to establish; whether a given fea-

hand, the material of observation is fluid, ture is to be called a delusion, a hallucina-

not clear cut, and measurement is seldom tion or an obsession, may at times be a

attainable.

matter of terminology, to be settled only by

I propose to consider briefly the peculiar some arbitrary standard or definition of

difficulties which arise when these two are very limited validity. To the much greater

mated, or perhaps, in franker expression of difficulties in the matter of actual disease-

my own attitude, I should say when genetics groupings, syndromes, and symptom-com-

becomes the handmaid of psychiatry. For it plexes, I shall come in a moment.

is the problems of psychiatry with which I Before starting any genetic studies, one

am concerned, and they are for present pur- assumes that the general principles obtained

poses twofold-to determine what are the through the work of Mendel and later in-

individual mental disorders, and how these vestigators dealing with physical structures

are transmitted. For the latter end, genetic and functions, will be valid in the particular

study is indispensable; for the former it is field one is concerned with, that is, of men-

of almost unexpected value.

tal " structures," or " concepts," and func-

It might be said that the psychiatrist tions. One would need then first of all to

ought to know his own business well enough consider how far the inheritance of mental

by now to have found out what the mental characters has a somatic basis, such as may

disorders are. This is a matter presently be found or assumed in other subjects of

to be discussed, but I would say here that genetic study. But this is a problem which

geneticists and others often assume that the in a sense may be said not to exist, for the

diagnosis ' manic-depressive insanity,' or separation of ' mental ' from ' physical ' is

'dementia praecox,' or ' hysteria,' or generally repudiated in psychiatric episte-

'melancholia ' is as definite and trustworthy mology, as is, for example, the false con-

as one of ' diabetes mellitus ' or ' typhoid trast between ' organic ' and ' functional '

fever.' It is not so. These psychiatric disorders. For the psychiatrist-or as he

terms represent different sorts of diagnosis may properly be called, the psychobiologist

and a considerable diversity of opinion as to -it is the whole man, the organism, integ-

names and categories. In general medicine rated at a conscious level, that is the living

diagnosis and the delimitation of diseases unit, reacting to situations, if you like, by

depend on the recognition of more or less means of ' physical ' and ' mental ' func-

characteristic structural changes, predomi- tions which are ' abstractions in themselves

II9

I20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and in their components ' or morphological define, measure, or describe: slippery cus-

representations; the heart and lungs being tomers, in short. Gall's Phrenology was

no more actual entities permitting of inde- an essay in this direction; the work of Lava-

pendent consideration than the affects or the ter and Carus likewise; Mott concluded that

memory.

a general abiotrophy, manifest in the

In psychiatry, therefore, one is consider- gonads and the brain, was the central fea-

ing functions of the total person, which is ture in dementia praecox; and in our own

more than the sum of the functions of indi- times Kretschmer has given a fillip to all

vidual parts, detached or isolated for pur- such studies, through his well-known

poses of study. So when the inheritance of attempts to find mathematical correlations

mental disorder is spoken of, one is con- between psychic and somatic structure.

cerned primarily with the type or mode of Against his conclusions and his methods

reaction of the whole organism, not with the very weighty objections have been urged,

abstracted ' physical ' or ' mental ' changes. but even though his findings were just and

As a matter of convenience and to establish sound, they would tell us only in what

constant relationships, rather than by way bodily types mental disorder of a given kind

of looking into a crux, one makes the artifi- may be expected, should mental disorder

cial distinction between physical and mental occur in them at all: these bodily types are

and considers systems and functions found also widely spread in the average

separately.

population. It is fairly widely held that

temperament is dependent on the humours,

RELATION OF BRAIN AND MIND

as Hippocrates supposed, and that the endo-

What then are the physical correlates of crine secretions, and even more the mid-

mental activity ?

brain and the brain-stem, are the chief

The relation of the brain to mental dis- material substrate for affective and conative

orders was recognized by Galen; it was changes. But any close correlation has so

made into a famous sentence by Griesinger: far proved impossible of demonstration, and

" Geisteskrankheiten sind Gehirnkrank- although the totality of the psycho-physical

heiten "; and it has been greatly furthered constitution, integrated, with consciousness,

by recent researches, as those of the Vogts, may be taken for granted, we do not know

von Economo, Elliot Smith, Monakow, and enough of its working to use its exclusively

many more. Less clear relations exist somatic manifestations as material for gene-

between the working of the great systems, tic studies.

the metabolism, the vegetative-endocrine So it becomes a question of examining the

apparatus, and the mental state-the rela- 'psychic ' phenomena of ' mental ' dis-

tions are much less precise and certain than orders. But the difficulties here, as we

some loud talkers assert. But there is, it is have already partly seen, are of a kind

clear, a co-ordination of psychic part-func- seldom met in somatic disorders.

tions with definite somatic-i.e. physical-

changes, although one can by no means TYPES OF MENTAL DISORDER

explain the former by the latter. The co- In the early years of this century the

ordination speaks for the applicability to great, one might say paramount, influence

psychic characters of genetic principles of Kraepelin had resulted in a systema-

ascertained by the investigation of physical tized descriptive psychiatry, in which

characters.

diseases - i.e. nosological entities - were

It might be supposed, then, that the best separated off on grounds of etiology, course,

plan would be to establish the regular rela- outcome, and occasionally also of structural

tionships between somatic and psychic, and pathology. Nowadays it is very different.

thereafter to use the somatic features as the Not only have the great groups, such as

more suitable material for genetic study, Dementia Praecox and Manic-depressive

since psychic characters are so difficult to Insanity, altered their boundaries and inci-

GENETIC PROBLEMS IN PSYCHIATRY

I2I

dentally their names, but their real exist- visional ' symptom-complexes ' or ' types of

ence as clinical entities is disputed. The reaction.' Of what, then, is one to deter-

prevailing point of view has become bio- mine the inheritance? Some answer to this

logical, with a strong teleological bias. problem is to be found in that method of

Mental disorders are considered as types of analyzing a mental disorder which seeks to

reaction, complexes of attempts at adapta- distinguish ' pathogenic ' from ' pathoplas-

tion along special lines. Certain commonly tic ' influences. The latter-i.e. patho-

occurring types are grouped together in such plastic-may be held accountable for all

broad categories as ' schizophrenia,' ' affec- sorts of individual variations from the

tive psychosis,' and the like; but fluid fundamental picture, variations which are

transitions to the normal and intermixtures the product of special conditions of person-

between the types comprehended in these ality and environment. It is not to be sup-

categories are the rule.

posed that a sharp distinction in this sense

This conception of mental disorder has is always possible, but the more thorough

pragmatic value, since it permits of more one's inquiry, the better does one succeed

adequate study of the individual illness, and in separating the superstructure from the

conclusions as to its outcome, than did the fundamental disorder, or, to vary the meta-

earlier rigid system. But for genetic pur- phor for the better, in stripping the skin

poses it presents singular problems. There and other tissues from the skeleton. Very

is no common morphological basis or con- often it is a matter of distinguishing

comitant for these reaction-types; the chief between the content of the psychosis and its

effective causes of them are in doubt: it is form. By this means a better conception has

indeed a commonplace of psychopathology been reached of what constitute the great

that for almost any group of clinical fea- endogenous types of reaction, which chiefly

tures, a number of indispensable preceding occupy the attention of the psychiatrist: the

happenings or ' causes ' may be assumed. problems of the exogenous types are of a

No doubt this is true of general medicine somewhat different order.

also: not all those exposed to tubercle One will therefore first seek to determine

bacilli respond with tubercle formation in the inheritance of the fundamental disorder,

their tissues, nor if it occurs do the forma- stripped of pathoplastic features; later one

tion and development of the tubercles go on will consider the personality, or, more

in the same way in different people. But in broadly, the inheritance of the ' normal '

most ' mental ' disorders one has nothing psychic characters-a very difficult task in

t so constant as the tubercle bacillus to deter- which studies have not so far been particu-

} mine the essence, and incidentally the larly happy.

limits, of the particular reaction: there is

:-no indispensable morbific agent, no main factor. Into the very pertinent disputes

THE STUDY OF TWINS

about the disease-concept in general, and These are by no means all the problems,

especially in psychiatry, this is not the place nor is it my intention here to describe the

*to enter. Briefly we may say that the re- extraordinary successes that have been

action types are by no means unitary obtained, in spite of the difficulties. I pro-

'diseases but are very useful provisional fic- pose to go on to consider one limited branch

tions, ' as if ' constructions, with which of genetic study in which I am particularly

ne must work.

interested. I mean the study of twins.

So far three difficulties have become appa- Twins who are the outcome of two ferti-

,ent: (i) there is no constant recognizable lized ova are in their predispositions and

lation between mental change and bodily similarity to one another like ordinary

structure; (2) there are no unitary diseases; brothers and sisters, but when questions of

and (3) there is not yet unanimity as to the development of some illness arise, they

twhat shall be comprehended within the pro- are of value since they usually grow up in

I22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

much the same external conditions. Differ- ability whether a particular pair are, or aret

ences between them may therefore be not, uni-ovular twins.

ascribed in the main to different inherited So one can say that twins are uni-ovular,

tendencies. If uni-ovular twins, on the and if so, that they are alike in inherited

other hand, are different, one accounts for it tendencies, though not necessarily in the

by dissimilar environmental influences-that manifestations of these tendencies; in other

is, if uni-ovular twins are really identical words, the genotype is not by any means

in their inherited tendencies. As to this the phenotype, and there may be consider-

there is dispute, but I think that one may able variation in the latter. Just as uni-

say that most of the evidence is in favour of ovular twins have been known in whom one

it. It is not to be supposed, of course, that showed the inherited anomaly, hexadacty-

even if this be accepted, uni-ovular twins lism, and the other did not, so in the case

will be the same at birth: intra-uterine in- of mental anomalies, even though predomi-

fluences have been operative, there is often nantly inherited, differences may occur.

a sort of life and death struggle between Indeed, it is one of the objects of twin

them, and at birth it is quite common for investigations to discover what is the range

the difference in weight and length between of possible manifestations of an essentially

uni-ovular twins to be greater than between unitary disorder, though, of course, it is

binovular ones. Such differences usually hardly likely that the inherited influences

disappear as the children grow, and in many will be as predominant in determining the

cases the twins become almost indistinguish- form of these as in certain anomalies of the

able. But illnesses that affect one may not nervous system, like the muscular dystro-

affect the other; the colour of the hair may phies.

change, according to exposure, etc.; the It is not to be supposed that the method

shape of the skull may be altered in child- is new. I need hardly remind this audience

hood by the adoption of a particular lie of Galton's advocacy and use of it; but most

when sleeping; and altogether the question of the literature until fairly recently was

of whether a particular pair of twins is uni- anecdotal and misleading. A doctor saw

ovular may be very difficult.

twins whose mental illnesses were very

One must therefore consider what are the alike, and he wrote to the medical journal

criteria of uni-ovularity. For obstetricians about it, but as often as not he gave no

it is a simple matter: they usually say that evidence as to whether they were uni-ovular

a single chorion means a single ovum. But or binovular: he said little or nothing about

this is perhaps not universally true. And the respects in which the illnesses differed,

even if it were, it could only rarely be applied and he never wrote to the medical journal

to the solution of the particular difficulty: to report cases where twins did not behave

information about the chorion is not to be alike in the matter of mental disorder. So

got for the asking. And so the determina- one-sided a selection of material is obviously

tion of the uni-ovularity must rest on not adequate.

physical likeness. Mere similarity of In order to obtain unselected material,

appearance is deceptive; no single observa- there are two paths open-to go through a

tion is decisive, and one has to take particu- given area, i.e. a given sample of population,

lar account of findings which have been ascertaining all the psychopathic twins, as

shown by statistical analysis to be trust- well as all the healthy ones; or to go

worthy. Such a finding is likeness of finger through all the psychopathic people in cer-

patterns; but, as Dr. Stocks has pointed out tain mental hospitals or attending psychia-

in his very valuable study of the problem, tric out-patient departments, and to deter-

" in no branch of scientific investigation is mine who among them are twins.

the circular method of reasoning so com- The former method is clearly impractic-

mon." However, for tho most part one can able when one considers that twins are fairly

determine with a very high degree of prob- rare, and that mental disorder is no com-

GENETIC PROBLEMS IN PSYCHIATRY

I23

moner among them than in the general There are other difficulties in the way

@opulation. One would have to search of twin research. The most important

Fhrough a very large area to get a sufficient psychoses have a prolonged and often

Fpumber of affected twins, and resources for rather late danger period, so that by the

h a survey are not available.

time one twin comes under notice, the

But the second method does not offer such other may be dead; or alternatively, when

t difficulties, although unfortunately the one twin is affected, the investigator

hod of recording twin births in England must wait years, sometimes, before the

not such as to make reference to the birth illness of the other comes on. If one of the

*sters a simple and rapid method of deter- twins is dead, one cannot be sure of the

ning, for a large group of people whose uni-ovularity; binovularity can be estab-

and place of birth are known, which of lished with comparative ease. Further, the

are twins.

later the incidence of the psychosis, the

And then, having discovered the twins, greater the influence of the environment,

must use the whole armament of different elements in which may produce

chiatric investigation, a lengthy and different effects; one twin may have had a

staking business.

blow on the head and may have borne seve-

series collected in the latter of the ral children, while the other is celibate and

ways just mentioned is, it has been has been exposed to lead poisoning at work.

ted out, of representative value (i) in Furthermore, in all one's inquiries directed

t of the frequency of twins among to the members of the family who are not ill,

e who manifest a particular character, and especially the healthy twin, one must

in respect of the relative frequency of count on even less trustworthy and more

vular and uni-ovular twins among those partial replies than in the case of ordinary

ng the character, and (3) finally, in somatic or psychic characters.

ct of the concordance or discordance of

with regard to the character in ques- INVESTIGATION OF PERSONALITY

Of course, one has selected a group When one seeks to investigate person-

people for initial sample, in whom ality, which must always be a very difficult

e of the possibilities of manifesta- thing, the distortion of the data becomes

of the particular inherited tendency a serious obstacle. If both twins are ill,

not be realized. If, for example, a the examination of the present state offers

otype may appear either as epileptic fewer difficulties, but information as to the

ks or attacks of migraine, the genotype twins' earlier lives cannot easily be obtained

g the same, then those who show only from their relatives in separate and unbiased

aine will possibly be excluded. But reports. Then twins, especially uni-ovular

one partner at least will show the in- twins, are often almost inseparable; they

ted disorder in the usual clinical way, grow up together, they literally share each

has no cases in which the twins are alike others' joys and sorrows; they live as

their genotypical constitution, to use " We " and not as two " I's "; and when

's term, though in neither of them has they fall ill, they are apt to play a part in

character attained manifestation; nor the delusions and hallucinations of each

one cases in which the manifestation is other. Finally, uni-ovular twins, who are

uppressed, but has taken a form other the most valuable material for research, are

_psychopathy calling for treatfent. on the whole few and far between: uni-

is a limitation one has always to bear ovular twins who have been reared apart

iind in such series; a further dis- are extremely rare. Their value needs no

tage is the small number of con- emphasizing; the more different the en-

t twins one obtains in this way-I vironmental conditions from infancy up-

concordant as to the particular wards, the more satisfactorily will essential

er concerned.

similarity of any disease picture demon-

I24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

strate that it is an inherited, fated illness-
anankastic.
THE ' FATED' ILLNESS
I have used the word " fated." That mental illness is " fated " or predestined is a hard saying. But there seems to be a good deal of loose thought about these matters and perhaps a certain confusion between what people would like to be the case, and what is. Psycho-analysts, whose influence on general psychopathology should not be underestimated, assign much greater importance to environmental influences, from birth until about the fifth year of life, than to inherited tendencies: and although this attitude of theirs has been modified, their scheme of therapy assumes that the repairing of post-natal detriment will be effective in improving or curing mental disorder.
Likewise, much prophylaxis against the incidence of mental disorder in the individual assumes that alteration of the conditions of living will be efficacious in checking or reducing the liability to such illness. In so far as this is a hopeful attitude towards a widespread blight, and has been fruitful of much good, it has, of course, tremendous advantages; but there is not yet incontestable evidence that the environmental factors in mental illness are more potent than the inherited factors; it may be on the contrary, as Lange and other psychiatrists maintain, that the part played by ' mental ' experiences is of less significance than that of experiences affecting the ' bodily ' structure, and that these latter, too, fall far short of the great influence of inherited tendencies. On the possibilities of realization permitted by environmental factors to the inherited tendencies towards mental disorder, twin studies should throw much light. It remains to be seen whether, as Lange declares, Galton's views are corroborated:
" The steady and pitiless march of the hidden weaknesses in our constitutions, through illness to death, is painfully revealed by these histories of twins. We are too apt to look upon illness and death as capricious events-whereas the fact of

the maladies tinually alike

of two twins being shows that illness and

I
conq
death-

are necessary incidents in a regularQ

sequence of constitutional changes begin-

ning at birth, and upon which external

circumstances have, on the whole, very

small effect."

It is superfluous to say that this is a fiel in which the psychiatrist with a knowled of genetics is incomparably more fitted work than the geneticist who has acquir a partial familiarity with psychiatric terms Not that their collaboration is anything bu desirable. But it is by no means to belittle the geneticist to say that the problems are such as he could not cope with, unless hen had also a thorough training in psychiatry. Of course, so far as the inheritance of " intelligence" is concerned, one has measure-! ments, however partial, permitting of fairlyl impersonal determination, but in the rest ofI psychiatry pitfalls are everywhere. Into the analysis of the material obtained I shall not now enter. I would mention, however, two other aspects of twin-study.
The prophylaxis of mental disorder is energetically urged, but our knowledge does not yet permit us to recognize with cer tainty those who, now apparently well, ar in danger of falling ill or already in the pr dromal stage. This is as much as to sa that we have no sure way of recognizin the pre-psychotic signs or the latent morbi disposition. Since, however, in uni-ovula twins, with great similarity of psychosis, the respective times of onset of the illness may be fairly wide apart, especially i schizophrenia, one has particularly favour able opportunities for observing the firs signs and the development of the psychosi or 'neurosis ' (to use a not uncommon, if undesirable, distinction).
And then there is the study of personality, as it is found in healthy people and it those with minor deviations. How is per sonality built up? What part do traininl and the experiences of ordinary life play i
its development? It is almost essential tj determine these points by a study of twins especially in regard to their daily activitie

GENETIC PROBLEMS IN PSYCHIATRY

I25

at work and their sexual relations, if one is these are problems not necessarily calling

to investigate similarly the so-called reactive for an answer in the individual case:

psychoses, as well as hysteria, obsessional psychiatry in practice has here and there

states, anxiety neurosis, and such wide- outstripped its theory, as it were; and our

spread social misfortunes as compensation- answers to the particular questions:

neurosis and pension-neurosis, and other " What is the matter with this patient?

forms leading to chronic invalidism. Of Will he get bettef? How long will he be

criminal twins and the inferences to be ill? How should he be treated ?" are much

drawn as to the influence of inherited char- more likely to be sound and justified by the

acters, it is unnecessary to speak: most event than our replies if we were asked,

readers will have seen Mrs. Haldane's " What is the -name of this man's illness?

translation of Professor Lange's little book Is it a disease? How far is it the product of

Crime as Destiny.

inheritance? Will his children have similar

illnesses ?"

A CURRENT INVESTIGATION

Though much has been learnt, it is still

My own investigations are still in the true to say that one can give more help to

initial stage, and I do not mean to give any the anxious relative than to the anxious

account of what has been or may be con- eugenist. Preconceptions and impressions

cluded from these twin-studies. I have have proved most fallacious: the simple vice

spoken of the necessity for complete series of crediting mass-statistics, with false belief

of cases, but I would not be understood to in the unitary psychosis; the folly of rash

minimize the value for some purposes of and wholesale judgments about ' tainted

carefully-studied single pairs of twins. I heredity,' ' bad family history,' ' degene-

shall be on the contrary very grateful for ration,' and the like; the deceptive mixture

any information about twins who show any of entertainment with instruction in the

kind of mental abnormality, or about like ' interesting case,' the ' remarkable in-

twins who have been separated from infancy. stance '-all these have been responsible for

The collecting of the material is one of the undue pessimism in one direction, as well

main problems in this research, and I shall as cloudy enthusiasm in another-both pur-

be very glad of suggestions as to how I may blind. Painstaking and informed workers,

get in touch with suitable cases.

especially those in Germany (to whom I am

I have intended only to outline, in the indebted), have done much of late years to

most general way, how the study of twins redeem psychiatry from this Egypt, but the

can help to clear up the genetic problems of way is hard and the Promised Land is not

psychiatry, and not only the genetic prob- yet: I think, however, that the work I have

lems but others of definition, diagnosis, and been discussing is peculiarly fitted to clear

grouping. I would like to make it clear that away some of the hindrances.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 2.

