22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for the I93I data. The results are not produced a superb analysis of differential fer-

entirely comparable with those of the earlier tility, but it is, by the nature of the material,

study, for a somewhat different class group- related to only one point of time, and it gives

ing has now been adopted, derived from no grounds for deciding whether or not the

Alba M. Edwards's study for the United differential has been narrowing in the past

States. But a general comparison is per- twenty years. The study will need to be

missible, and Dr. Tietze concludes that the repeated at fairly frequent intervals in the

total paternity rates show " a rapid future if it is to throw light on the process of

decline of the birth rate in all social-economic historical change. For the moment, if the

groups from I9II to I93I," and that this present writer is permitted to refer once

" has resulted in a narrowing down of the more to his own very brief study, it seems as

difference between the least and the most if the differentials in the urban white

fertile section of the population."

population of the United States have about

The third study, relating to the United reached the position found in London in

States, is the most interesting both in the I93I, when the borough with the highest

nature of the basic material and in the way index of economic status-Hampstead-had

this material has been handled. It is based an estimated gross reproduction rate of

upon the National Health Survey under- o043 (Westminster, second on the scale, had

taken in I935-6, and relates to a sample a rate of 0 * 42), and the borough lowest

of 596,474 women aged I5 to 44 years in on the scale-Poplar-had a rate of I *O7.

some 632,000 families, geographically repres- Yet the evidence plausibly suggested a

entative of the urban white population of significant decline in the differential in

Eastern, Southern, Central and Western London in I93i as compared with I9II. It

United States. From the statistics collected, is not at all unlikely that a similar process

Dr. Karpinos and Dr. Kiser have been able has been at work in urban United States.

to compare the fertility of the population in

D. V. GLASS.

various income and educational groups,

using not only crude birth rates and legitimate fertility rates, but also gross and

SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY

estimated net reproduction rates (the mortal- Bartlett, F. C.; Ginsberg, M.; Lindgren,

ity data for estimating the net reproduction
rates was derived from a Chicago study by Dr. P. M. Hauser). For the first time, therefore, we have an accurate analysis of reproduction by income classes. The authors

E. J., and Thouless, R. H. (Editors). The Study of Society: Methods and Problems. London, I939. Kegan
Paul. Pp. xii+498. Price I2S. 6d.

conclude that when reproduction rates are The Study of Society is a symposium on the

used, " the traditional inverse relation methodology of the different branches of

between fertility and socio-economic status social psychology, written by a number of

is found still to be consistently and sharply experts who formed themselves into a

manifested." In fact, the gross reproduction group for the purpose of the discussion of

rates range from 0*46 for the classes with their problems and the integration of their

an annual family income of 3,ooo dollars points of view. The volume that emerged

and over, to o-86 for the income group of is of interest to the intelligent general reader,

I,000 to I,499 dollars, and to I * I7 for whole but is more especially intended for research

group with incomes below i,ooo dollars workers. It should help them to overcome

(including a higher gross reproduction rate the difficulty encountered to some extent by

for the population on relief). The present all specialists when they follow the ramifica-

writer does not, however, find that these tions of their subjects over the border into

numerical results conflict with the data other territory, to find that they are not

given in other studies mentioned in this really competent to judge what they dis-

review. Dr. Karpinos and Dr. Kiser have cover there. Often the efficiency of one's

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

23

thinking in one's own scientific sphere is Dr. S. F. Nadel's discussion of the applica-

partly dependent on a just appreciation of tion of intelligence tests in the anthro-

the value of discoveries in other spheres; pological field. He warns us against too

and that evaluation can usually only be naive an assumption that intellectual

done if the methodological snags are already organization is sufficiently similar in totally

clear in the reader's mind.

different cultures, for intelligence tests de-

The introductory papers by Professor signed for one to be valid in the other. In

Pear and Professor Bartlett outline the most our present state of knowledge it is not

important and interesting problems currently possible to say whether the white races

under discussion among social psychologists, are intellectually superior to the more

and suggest problems for further research. primitive or not.

Dr. Thouless considers problems of termin- In so far as some of the data used by

ology and of statistical method, Dr. P. E. eugenists are derived from family records

Vernon the use of questionnaires and rating collected by social workers, Miss Clement

scales. The bulk of the book consists of Brown's chapter on social case work will

papers on intelligence testing and ways of be found of value. Her attention is directed

assessing other psychological factors, on mainly towards case work with problem

child psychology, methods of social anthro- families or individuals, but some of the

pology, and on the making of social surveys. methodological points she raises are relevant

The final chapter is a very valuable com- to the collection of data of other kinds.

parative survey by Professor Morris Ginsberg Several of the writers discuss the need for

of the sociological field as a whole, describ- awareness on the part of the scientific

ing the methods and main conclusions of the worker of his own personal bias; facts are

foremost masters of the science, and thus looked at through the screen of the re-

forming a necessary framework or back- searcher's own view of life. In any socio-

ground into which the specialized discus- logical study this has particular dangers,

sions of the other essays can be fitted. He because facts are fluctuating, tremendously

brings out the importance of the comparative complex, and often form unique concatena-

method, whose primary object is " to pro- tions of circumstances which can be recorded

vide a social morphology, or a classification once and never again. Personal bias may

of the forms of social relationships, with a determine, in this complex, which part is

view to facilitating causal analysis." The noticed, which remembered, and which

earlier papers provide some of this causal considered important. It is possible, how-

analysis.

ever, to study one's own weaknesses in this

Some of the essays are of special interest matter, and to some extent guard against

to the eugenist. Dr. Thouless points out the them. This warning is of special importance

confusion of terminology pervading social, to eugenists, whose subject presents these

as well as general psychology. His longer difficulties in a marked degree.

paper explains clearly the statistical methods This book has been given a unity by care-

in general use among psychologists and ful editing and the fact that the writers have

sociologists; it is simply written and can obviously fully assimilated each other's con-

be read by the non-mathematical reader. tributions. Study of their references back

Attention is drawn to the pitfalls which less and forth would be greatly helped, however,

careful workers so often fail to avoid, and the if in future editions the chapter and para-

writer remarks that statistical methods do graph number could be given at the head

not provide a technique for drawing trust- of each page.

worthy conclusions from untrustworthy Readers who wish to bring their reading

data. up to date on any of the topics dealt with

Another section of special interest is Dr. will find a useful and not unwieldy biblio-

Audrey Richards's learned resum6 of field- graphy at the end of each section.

work methods in social anthropology, and

EVELYN LAWRENCE.

