L. F. GREGORY

Parson Maithus's Great-Grandfather
DANIEL MALTHUS, ROYAL APOTHECARY

W HAT DOES A man owe to his great- apothecary as "A man whose employment is to

grandfather ? It is not easy to say keep medicines for sale." In this instance, how-

precisely, but perhaps traces of face or ever, Johnson unaccountably wrote with less

fortune; possibly of talent or temperament; or than his usual knowledge of the world around

conceivably elements of each, with more besides. him. For a century, broadly speaking, before he

Parson Malthus-as Cobbett called him, with compiled his dictionary many apothecaries had

every mark of calculated disrespect-certainly exceeded the limit set by his definition; they acted,

owed something to his paternal great-grand- in effect, as general medical practitioners, pres-

father, Daniel Malthus, who himself had a cribing as well as selling and dispensing drugs.

notable career. He was probably the chief archi- At the time of the Great Plague, when Malthus

tect of the family fortunes, which enabled Parson was a boy of fourteen, the apothecaries provided

Malthus to enjoy all the advantages ofbeing a son almost the only attention available to the poor,

ofan independent country gentleman, with ample since the qualified physicians had either fallen

leisure to pursue his studies; perhaps, too, victims to the plague or had sought refuge with

Parson Malthus inherited from his great-grand- their wealthier patients outside the danger zone.

father the mental aptitudes which helped him Moreover, the system was tacitly accepted by

to become our first systematic and widely some of the foremost medical men of the time.

acknowledged (if also much disputed) writer on Such dominant figures as the irascible Dr.

population, expounding doctrines which, Cobbett Radcliffe and the courtly Dr. Mead regularly

thought, outraged the humane principles that attended at their favourite coffee-house, where

should guide a clergyman.

the apothecaries waited upon them and dis-

For Daniel Malthus was an apothecary, a man cussed their more difficult cases. The physicians

eminent in his calling. As a result, he gained the gave their opinions without seeing the patients,

friendship of some of the most distinguished charging half a guinea for doing so. The

medical men of his day and the coveted appoint- apothecaries' freedom to treat their patients was

ment as apothecary to two sovereigns. Daniel in fact upheld by the courts at the beginning of

Malthus was born in 1651, a son of the Reverend the eighteenth century. All this was symptomatic

Robert Malthus who was educated at Oxford and of the medical world of those days: at the lower

was for some years vicar of Northolt in Middle- levels quackery was rampant; at the higher there

sex-a nonconforming clergyman who in the was a groping towards a scientific approach.

troubles of the times was involved in conflicts Where did Daniel Malthus stand in this con-

with his parishioners. His wife was the daughter fused scene? We know nothing of his early life

of a medical practitioner at Kingston-on-Thames as an apothecary, but as a comparatively young

which may have influenced Daniel in his choice man his status was evident and the main lines of

of career as an apothecary.

his activities were clear. By this time he was con-

Daniel was made free of the Society of ducting himself within the bounds of Dr.

Apothecaries of London in 1678, when he was Johnson's definition. He was concerned essen-

twenty-seven years old. The term apothecary at tially with dispensing and selling medicines.

this period was capable of more than one mean- He had established a close connection, which

ing. Dr. Johnson, in his Dictionary, defines an was later to ripen into warm friendship, with the

9' THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1961, 53,2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

renowned Thomas Sydenham, then in the first Malthus was with Queen Anne in her last hours.

rank of practising physicians and now famous in He writes that on July 30th, 1714 (as Sir Winston

the annals of medicine; he was, too, a man of quotes him) "Her Majesty ... had two very

great force of character. Dr. Sydenham stood no violent convulsions," lasting till 11 o'clock.

nonsense from anybody and he was not likely to From near noon, he goes on, "Her Majesty had

be tolerant towards an apothecary who tres- her understanding perfect, but from time to time

passed upon his preserves. Apart from this, answered nothing but aye or no." Then "At the

Daniel Malthus described himself in formal coming out of the fit the Duchess of Somerset

documents in terms which left little room for desired from the Lords of the Council that they

doubt as to his specialized sphere of activity. might propose something to her of great mo-

Dr. Sydenham, at the height of his career, ment" and for a minute she transacted official

lived in Pall Mall and Malthus lived next door, business, afterwards sinking into a coma. She

his sign being the traditional Pestle and Mortar. breathed her last on August 1st, 1714. If, from

Sydenham, however, died in 1689, his last years all this, Daniel Malthus seems to have been, for

tormented by gout, and Daniel Malthus, then an apothecary, very close to the centre of affairs,

thirty-eight, faced a turning point in his career. the explanation may be largely sought in excep-

Henceforward he stood alone, with his own way tional personal qualities that merited such trust.

to make. That he did so to good purpose is When the Queen died she owed her apothecary

manifest. By the beginning of the new century over £300 for fees, medicines, etc. (including

life was opening out to him in very attractive "Spaw Water bought by her Majesty's particular

directions; he was moving in the broad sunshine order"). It appears that his annual fee was

of a career that was rewarding in money and £320 5s. He was, however, a very patient

prestige alike.

creditor, for though he himself lived three years

He had apparently been appointed apothecary longer, it fell to his executors to collect the

to King William III. In 1702 he bought the debt.

Manor of Hadstock in Essex from the Earl of We have no means of knowing the extent of

Suffolk for £5,500-a substantial investment in Malthus's estate, but it can scarcely be doubted

the money values of those days. A year or two that it was very considerable. Dr. Radcliffe's

later he was elected Master of the Society of principal apothecary is said to have accumu-

Apothecaries, but was compelled to decline the lated £50,000-an enormous sum in the money

honour because ofthe pressure ofbusiness. Then, values of the time; and other fortunes of like

having become apothecary to Queen Anne, he magnitude were known. Daniel Malthus was

entered upon a period of constant service to the well placed to match them. His will is one of the

Queen, which lasted till her death.

simplest documents imaginable. Describing him-

His surviving letters indicate that he was often self as "apothecary", he indicates that he had

in attendance on the Queen at Windsor, keeping already made provision for his son and daughter,

the Royal physicians informed about her health. so all is left to his wife. He died in 1717 at the age

Thus in 1708 he reports to Sir Hans Sloane that of sixty-six, and was buried in Hammersmith

"Her Hs. took the purge to-day, but I have not churchyard, but there is now no sign of his tomb.

yet directions to pursue the rest of the course." His son Sydenham, engaged in law and finance,

In 1713 hewritesagainto saythat "Dr. Arbuthnott achieved no public distinction, though he is said

desired me to acquaint the phisicians that Her to have further improved the family fortunes.

Majesty is very well," though there was to be a Sydenham's second son Daniel is best remem-

meeting of the "phisicians" the next day. Daniel bered as a landscape gardening enthusiast, as a

Malthus has the distinction of being quoted by friend of Rousseau and as the father of the great

Sir Winston Churchill in his life of Marlborough. economist, Thomas Robert Malthus.

92

