PROFESSOR SIR CYRIL BURT
D.Sc., D.Litt., LL.D
Gifted Children

THE LATEST REPORT OF THE TERMAN STUDIES *j

T HE LATEST INFORMATION about the smaller urban communities. In all, the final progress of the gifted children selected by number of subjects amounted to 1,528.
Professor Terman for a follow-up study Six years later (1927-8), when the group had
forty years ago is contained in this highly inter- reached an average age of about seventeen, the esting report, planned and partly written by first follow-up survey was carried out and pub-
Professor Terman himself just before his death. lished under the title The Promise of Youth.t A
Mrs. Oden, who has been responsible for com- second survey was undertaken in 1939-40, when pleting the unfinished chapters, was one of his the subjects had attained an average age of about
former students, and worked with him on the thirty and had presumably settled down into
project from 1927 onwards. The book is the adult life: these further results were summarized
fourth in the series dealing with the group. It in the volumeentitledTheGiftedChild Grows Up, t
makes a somewhat slimmer volume than its perhaps the best known of the whole series. The predecessors, and for a complete appreciation of present survey is based mainly on data collected the results that it records, it must be read in the by means of tests, questionnaires, and interviews light of the details given in the earlier accounts. by field workers, and general correspondence be-
In the first volume of the series, Mental and tween the years 1950 and 1955. Ninety-three per
Physical Traits of 1,000 Gifted Children (1925), a cent of those who survived out of the initial
gifted child was defined as one who is "well survey are still co-operating. As a longitudinal within the brightest 1 per cent of the school study the whole series of researches is unique. It
population," or in more precise terms "a child not only extends over a far longer period than with an I.Q. of 140 or above." In the hope of any other similar inquiry, but covers a far wider getting something like a thousand cases the range of problems: and indeed has already schools ofthe five largest cities in California were largely revolutionized the general view about the systematically screened with the aid of the nature and subsequent history of the gifted teachers. The pupils which they put forward were individual.
progressively examined first with a group test, It has long been the popular belief that, as the then with an abridgement of the Stanford-Binet youthful prodigy grows older, he will as a rule scale, and finally with the full Stanford-Binet. either revert to the general average, or, particuThe result was 661 gifted boys and girls between larly if pressed during early years, decline the ages of seven and seventeen. These formed and sicken and end with a premature
the "mnain experimental batch." In addition a decease. "Early ripe, early rot" is the proverb
number of supplementary groups were subse- commonly quoted. The outcome of Professor quently included, "located by less systematic Terman's surveys is to demonstrate that the
procedures" (Binet or group tests); many were exact opposite is true. "With few exceptions the discovered by volunteer testers working in the superior child becomes the superior adult,

* Terman, L. M. and Oden, M. H. The Gifted Group at
Mid-Life: Thirty-five years follow-up of the superior child.

t 1930. Stanford University Press. Volume m.

Stanford, Cal., 1959. Stanford University Press. (London, t 1947. Volume IV. (Volume IH of the series, The Early

Oxford University Press.) Pp. xvi + 187. Price 36s. Genetic Mentcil Traits of Three Hundred Geniuses, was not con-

Studies of Genius, Volume V.

cemed with this survey.)

'7 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1961, 53, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

superior in nearly every respect to the generality, This proportion is ten times as high as that which

though, as in childhood, the degree of the would hold for a random group of the same age.

superiority differs in different areas."

14 per cent of the men, 4 per cent of the women

Throughout the thirty-five years covered by obtained a doctorate, whereas the figure for

the case-records the general health of the gifted college graduates generally is only 3 per cent.

group remained superior to that of the average And academic honours were three times as

population; and their liability to specific defects numerous as among an ordinary batch of ex-

or ailments proves to be far slighter. When fully college students.

grown the males were three inches taller than the The vocational record is similar. In most of the

general average, and two inches taller than follow-up surveys the occupational classification

the average college student. With the females the adopted was the so-called Minnesota scale. Of

differences were similar but smaller. The overall the gifted men 86 per cent now have posts in one

mortality was only 84 per cent of that reported or other of the two highest categories, viz.

for the general population of California. The "professional" (chiefly lawyers or judges, mem-

relative degree of nervous and emotional bers of college faculties, scientists or engineers,

stability and of general social adjustment proved physicians, school administrators or teachers-

harder to evaluate, partly owing to the lack of in that order) or "semi-professional" (chiefly

comparable data for the normal population. executives or managers in business, industry or

Judged by the incidence of delinquency, alco- banking, accountants, sales managers, and the

holism, suicide, homosexuality, neurotic and like). From the earlier volumes we learn that

psychotic breakdown, together with reports only 62 per cent of their parents were in this

from the subjects themselves and their acquain- category, and that the proportion for all males in

tances, the frequency of nervous or mental dis- California would be just under 14 per cent. None

abilities was certainly no greater than the of the gifted individuals are in the lowest occupa-

average, and probably, when due allowance is tional categories, though these categories account

made for the greater thoroughness with which for about 13 per cent of the general urban popu-

the information was collected, decidedly less. lation. The income ranged from $4,000 to

The question which naturally interests us most, $400,000 a year, with a median of just under

however, is to what extent is the promise ofchild- $10,000. 10 per cent are earning $25,000; and in

hood fulfilled by the achievements of later life? every occupational category the earnings of the

As a general rule, it would seem, the intelligent gifted men were well above the median for that

child develops into the intelligent adult. As we category as given in the Statistical Abstract ofthe

might expect from the mode of selection, "the United States. The lowest salaries were earned by

superiority of the gifted group is greatest in those who had taken holy orders. Although most

intellectual ability, scholastic accomplishment, of the men are still in their forties, they include a

and vocational success." Tests applied in 1927, number who "have won national prominence,"

1939, and 1950-52 show that at every stage their and nearly a dozen who have achieved an inter-

mental superiority is astonishingly well sustained. national reputation. Seventy (of whom thirty-

"The majority of the subjects remained close to nine are physicists and twenty-two biologists) are

the 99th percentile of the generality; and this was included in American Men of Science; ten in the

true even of those whose careers were not Directory of American Scholars (biographies of

particularly notable." Indeed, judged by the test notable persons in the world of scholarship and

mainly employed in the follow-up surveys (a test the humanities); and thirty-one in Who's Who in

of "concept mastery") "not only do the mentally America. Three have been elected to the National

superior hold their own, they actually increase in Academy of Science-one of the highest honours

intellectual stature."

accorded to scientists in America, comparable to

The educational record of the group is excep- a Fellowship ofthe Royal Society in this country.

tionally good. Over 85 per cent entered college, None of the eminent personages are named; but

and nearly 70 per cent graduated, usually a year they include the vice-chancellor of one of the

or two earlier than the average college student. largest universities in the U.S.A., a physicist who

18

GIFTED CHILDREN

is head of one of the most important laboratories showing "the same high order of creativity" as in

for research in nuclear energy, a physiologist who the sphere of science and technology. These con-

is director of a world-famous laboratory and clusions, I fancy, tend to confirm what I have

himself an intemational celebrity, one of the ventured to suggest elsewhere on somewhat

world's foremost oceanographers, the controller different grounds, namely, that the individuals

of one of the largest steel companies, and the picked out by the best known scales of intelli-

vice-president of one of the largest American oil gence test tend to belong to the analytical and

companies.

logical type rather than to the synthetic, intuitive,

Additional evidence of the surprisingly high or creative.

achievement attained is furnished by their publi- A good deal of the foregoing information was

cations and patents. These include nearly 2,000 recorded in Terman's previous volume. What we

scientific and technical articles, some sixty books now discover is that even during the last ten

or monographs on science, art, literature, or the years the group has still been advancing; and, as

humanities (including textbooks translated into it turns out, the predictions which Terman tenta-

several languages), thirty-three novels, and 700 tively then put forward were far too modest.

plays, short stories, essays, and miscellaneous Where he expected the entries in the books of

articles, not to mention thousands ofjournalistic fame to be doubled they have been quadrupled;

contributions and scripts for film, radio, or tele- where he thought they might be trebled, they

vision. The number of technical patents runs to have increased sixfold. "There is," we are told,

at least 230.

"almost no one who has not improved his status,

With women occupation or occupational even though he may be well below the average

status depends less on talent or training and of the group in terms of realizing his intellectual

more on extraneous circumstances. Of those in potential in his vocational accomplishments";

the gifted group the majority became and re- and plainly the peak of achievement is not yet

mained housewives, though frequently working reached.

at the same time outside the home. Two, how- Out of the 1,500 cases, however, there were

ever, have already found a place of their own in eighty or ninety whose apparent progress fell

Who's Who in America, and seven in American short of expectation. Since their intelligence, as

Men of Science. The publications of the gifted assessed by tests, differs little from that of the

women include five novels, five volumes of rest of the group, it is evident that outstanding

poetry, four plays, over thirty professional books, accomplishments call for something else besides

200 essays, critiques, and short stories, and more sheer innate ability. A comparison between the

than 700 scientific papers.

most successful and the least successful suggests

It may be noted, however, that the men and that health, emotional stability, ambition, and

women of the highest achievement, and in parti- will to work are equally indispensable. This does

cular those who have won international fame, not affect the main inference to be drawn from

are nearly all of them scientists. There are a few all these investigations-namely, the value of

who are heads of university departments in intelligence testing, even in its present imperfect

music or art, and several who have produced form, for the purpose ofpredicting future accom-

excellent original work in one or other of these plishment. Indeed, the accuracy of the methods

fields; but there is not a single painter, sculptor, used in 1921, when mental tests were still a

or musical composer with a reputation that could novelty, is quite amazing.

be compared with that of the most eminent Terman himself was always a firm believer in

scientists. This appears to be in keeping with what Galton's view that high achievement in almost

factorial studies have shown, namely, that music every sphere of adult life is dependent largely on

and art depend more on specialized abilities for the degree of general ability with which the

each subject and less on "general intelligence." individual is genetically endowed. During the

To some extent the discrepancy also seems to period between the two world wars, while be-

hold good of literature: in poetry and belles haviouristic doctrines still predominated,

lettres, we are told, there were fewer persons Galton's views were rejected or brushed aside.

I9
ER-D

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

But during the last two or three years opinion quence of their superior financial position. The

has been rapidly changing. And, as one American proportion, of course, is under that required to

reviewer has observed in summing up the present maintain the stock; but it will obviously increase

volume, "with to-day's emphasis on the identi- as the years go by. The average I.Q. of the

fication of the gifted, one must indeed be grateful children is 133-just a little higher than the

for the vision which has thus provided us with ordinary figure for regression would lead us to

detailed information on the factors influencing expect.

the subsequent achievements of a group typifying How far the conclusions that can be drawn

the highest 1 per cent of the school population." from these surveys are limited by the circum-

To the student of eugenics there is one further stances to which they relate, and how far they

point of special interest, namely, what the gene- would hold good of other countries where the

ticist would call the "breeding system" of the population, the type ofculture, and the economic

highly gifted. On this a good deal of data is now and social conditions may be widely different,

available from this latest survey. It appears that are questions that cannot be answered without

the incidence ofmarriage and the age ofmarriage further research. That some ofthe results can be

do not vary greatly from those of ordinary men safely generalized is strongly suggested by

and women. Here they differ from other college psychological studies of men of genius in the past

graduates among whom marriage is somewhat and by investigations of gifted children carried

less frequent, and is contracted later in life: the out elsewhere, e.g., the follow-up inquiries

discrepancy, it is added, "was particularly strik- relating to London pupils who have gained

ing in the case of the gifted women." "Assorta- junior county scholarships. But is is urgently

tive mating," however, is well marked. There is desirable that a comprehensive longitudinal

a strong tendency for gifted men and women to investigation should be undertaken on similar

marry persons who, like themselves, are above lines in this country. The probable cost is indi-

average in general intelligence. The divorce rate cated by figures given in the preface to the

is lower than in the general population, amount- present report. The cost of the initial Califor-

ing to little over 20 per cent of those who have nian survey (defrayed partly by grants from the

married.

Commonwealth Fund of New York City and

It is too early to estimate the ultimate fertility partly by contributions from Stanford University)

rate of the group as a whole. But by 1955 the amounted to $50,000. The further surveys have

entire group had produced approximately 2,452 been subsidized by additional grants and a

children and 115 grandchildren. Among those number of anonymous donations from various

who have married the average number of sources. "The total expended to date," we are

children so far is 19-rather more for the gifted told, "has been approximately a quarter of a

men and rather less for the gifted women. Those million dollars." Few researches can have so

who were college graduates have slightly larger magnificently justified the outlay which they

families than the rest; but this may be a conse- entailed.

20

