FAMILY PLANNING IN CHINA
By HAN SUYIN

I RETURNED to Peking in May I956 and To provide first the contraceptive materials,

spent three months in China. Much of secondly to train the nurses in contraceptive

this time was devoted to making myself techniques, and thirdly to send these nurses

acquainted with hospitals, public health to the villages all over China, is a Herculean

work in all its forms, and of course, the task. " We could never envisage confining

recent trend towards family planning. On ourselves to the towns and factories" said

family planning the policy formi4lated by Madam Li, very sensibly. " That would

the Chinese Government in Peking is very merely be side-stepping the problem."

clear: The Health Minister, who is a woman Without even mentioning the problem of

and a Christian, Madam Li Teh-chuan, made training enough nurses or workers and

it one of the topics of a long report which was educating them in contraceptive techniques

presented to the National Assembly in June so that they may, in turn, educate the public,

I956, and supported by several other the problem of a supply of adequate contra-

delegates. There has been a lot of derisive ceptives is staggering enough. What contra-

and ill-mannered comment in the Western ceptives should be used? There could not be

newspapers on some items culled out of too many failures; the population as a whole

these speeches. Perhaps this article will was fairly ignorant, and one failure in a

make the whole concept of family planning village would discredit the whole process.

in China clearer to readers.

There were no factories to make these

contraceptives, no raw materials, no source

A Demand for Family Planning
Madam Li said that after six years of Communist regime in China, there has come, through the many offices of the Women's Federation of China (which comprises many social welfare and health workers), a definite demand on the part of women, whether in villages or cities, for family planning. Family planning, she emphasized, was not

of supplies except purchase from the outside world. The public health resources were strained to the utmost with the magnificent campaigns against cholera, smallpox, tuberculosis, plague, leprosy, the building of hospitals and clinics, and it was not possible to spend a great deal of money on such a project without first making sure that the best means would be utilized.

being forced upon the people; it was a positive demand from the women themselves.

Research for an Oral Contraceptive

Therefore it had to be considered. To many That is where the suggestion was made by

in China it was a new concept; men, one delegate, Mr. Shao Li-tzu, of devoting

especially, were vaguely against it, even some money to research into an oral

though they could feel the pinch of increasing contraceptive. Mr. Shao reminded the

numbers of children on a limited salary and National Assembly that contraception was

within a limited space. This was felt not a new thing in the world. Time and

especially among the new industrial workers, again, people had tried various means of

in the new factories, where dormitory limiting births. Thus, in the old Chinese

accommodation was limited. There the pharmacopeia, he knew of a " recipe"' in

husbands were more willing to consider limit- which tadpoles taken by mouth were said to

ing their children. The problem, however, is of prevent conception.

nightmare dimensions. There are 6oo million This story of " tadpoles" was eagerly

people in China, of whom 50o million are seized upon by some western journalists and

peasants, living in small villages or farms.. a lot of sardonic laughter was heard.

8i THE EUGENICS REVIEW July, 1957. 49, 2.

82 > THE EUGENICS -REVIEW

Actually it is not more strange to mention tadpoles than to mention calves liver extract for pernicious anaemia.
What Mr. Shao meant to convey was that he felt the answer to the problem, at least in China, lay in an oral contraceptive. He is not alone in thinking -so; the subject is being given much thought both in the United States and in some laboratories in England.
At the moment contraceptives are freely sold in all the pharmacies in the cities of China. Contraceptive advice is freely available from doctors. It is, however, impossible as yet to look upon this as a definite " campaign " in favour of family planning; China is too vast a country for such a thing not to require careful planning over a good many years.
Abortion and Sterilization
Recently, due to the health campaigns, which have drastically reduced the death rate, the increase in population at the pace of a million a month has become very evident. Things move swiftly in China: from announcing a campaign for birth control and the search for an oral contraceptive, the pace for curbing population increase has led to the

legalization of abortion. Sterilization, especi-
ally voluntary sterilization in the male, because it is such as easy procedure, was advocated in June I956 by the same
representative who aroused so much controversy with his " tadpole " recipe, Mr. Shao Li-tze. Mr. Shao is an old man nearing seventy-five; in a country where the male is proud of his fertility, traditionally, it was a bolder and more controversial suggestion to advocate male sterilization than any other measure. Yet at the moment it is being advocated as superior to sterilization in the female, which is a more lengthy process, demanding a fairly high-grade operation and general anaesthesia.
Owing to the fact that the Government of China is able to use the press, films, radio, and all other means of propaganda to exhort the people to population control, there will probably be very little resistance to the idea of sterilization, even among men, as compared to the resistance it would arouse in less disciplined countries.
One thing is certain: Family Planning has come to China, and there have been no barriers of Government prejudice or organized religion against the idea; we shall have to watch further developments with interest.

