VERA HOUGHTON
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Bill

S HORTLY BEFORE TWO o'clock on Friday, As things stand at present there can be no

February 10th, Mr. Kenneth Robinson, uniformity of practice: women wishing to have

Labour member for St. Pancras North, their pregnancies terminated are treated quite

moved in the Commons the second reading of a differently according to who their general

Bill to amend a hundred-year-old Act of Parlia- practitioner is, in which town they live and to

ment, the Offences Against the Persons Act of which hospital they are sent. The result is that

1861, Section 58 of which makes it a felony to not only the unskilled, so-called backstreet,

administer drugs or use instruments to procure abortionist thrives but so does the skilled pro-

an abortion.

fessional, so-called Harley Street, abortionist: a

More fortunate than its predecessor of 1952 simple example, Mr. Robinson pointed out, of

which was talked out after a minute or two, the one law for the rich and one law for the poor.

debate on the present Bill continued for two Mr. Patrick Gordon Walker, the official

hours when "it being four o'clock", and Mr. spokesman for the Labour Party, and back-

Speaker having declined to put the Question, bencher Mr. R. J. Mellish (Bermondsey, L.)

"the debate stood adjourned". Early on an crossed swords on whether this Bill would in

opponent of the Bill, Wing-Commander Grant- fact help to get rid of backstreet abortionists.

Ferris (Nantwich, C.) tried to cut the debate Mr. Mellish argued that the Bill would not make

short and end the sitting by calling for a "count": the slightest difference to which Mr. Gordon

an unusual occurrence on a Friday in the House Walker retorted "we cannot stop manslaughter

and one about which Mr. Douglas Houghton by motor car on the road, but we try to pass laws

(Sowerby, L.) later said "we should express our which will reduce it".

disapproval". It happened at the conclusion of The fact that Section 58 of the 1861 Act refers

Mr. Robinson's speech and just after several to the "unlawful" administration of drugs and

members were seen to leave the House. However, the "unlawful" use of instruments implies that

forty members being counted present the debate there exists some "lawful" use and such has been

continued.

the interpretation ofjudges. So, maintained Mr.

The main purpose of Mr. Robinson's Bill is to Peter Rawlinson (Epsom, C.), no doubt should

bring statute law into line with what case law has exist in the mind of any doctor. This was too

been since the Rex v. Bourne judgement of 1939. much for Mr. Julian Snow (Lichfield and Tam-

It seeks also to extend the grounds for legal worth, L.). He for one could not believe that the

termination of pregnancy. Clause 1 of the Bill ordinary medical practitioner clearly understood

states:

his position: whether this was the fault of his

It shall be lawful for a registered medical practi- professional organization, or the fault of his

tioner to terminate pregnancy in good faith: training in medical school Mr. Snow could not

(a) for the purpose of preserving the life of the say but it seemed to him that "case law was not

patient, or (b) in the belief that there would be grave risk
of serious injury to the patient's physical or mental health if she were left to give birth

a very good method of so instructing the medical profession".
The medical members, Dr. Barnett Stross

to and care for the child.

(Stoke-on-Trent Central, L.) and Dr. Alan Glyn

93 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1961, 53,2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(Clapham, C.), who spoke in the debate were
both in favour ofletting the Bill go to Committee. Dr. Stross drawing on his own experience as a
medical practitioner in an industrial area over many years said that among those cases which had come to his notice there were women who had gone into the back streets to have their pregnancies terminated who, if this Bill had passed into law, would have been saved that terrible experience. Dr. Glyn agreed that every effort should be made to remove from the social system the ghastly tragedies of abortion. He thought it would be "extraordinarily difficult to adapt a Bill in Committee to cover the defects in the law and, at the same time, to give the doctor protection". None the less he was prepared to see it go forward.
The more controversial part of the Bill was as expected the additional grounds for lawful abortion:
(c) in the belief that there would be grave risk of the child being born grossly deformed or with a physical or mental abnormality which would be of a degree to require constant hospital treatment or special care throughout life, or
(d) in the beliefthat the patient becamepregnant as the result of intercourse which was an offence under Sections one to eleven inclusive of the Sexual Offences Act, 1956, or that the patient is a person of unsound mind.
It was here that the really serious legal problems might arise. For the Government, Mr. David Renton, Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department, said "we would have no objection in principle to the Bill's limited purpose of putting into statutory form the present case law and practice". He went on to explain that the Government would hope to see it amended in Committee "to eliminate or overcome some of the difficulties" and at that stage "would have a good deal of advice to give". As the Guardian commented next morning "to have learned what advice he had in mind would be not merely interesting but very helpful to any other member who might wish to introduce a Bill on similar lines at some other time.... Can the ingenuity of members find him [Mr. Renton] some opportunity of outlining it ?".

Of the types of cases which might come within the provisions of sub-clause (c) Mr. Robinson quoted virus infections of the mother during early pregnancy, the most common being German measles, and what he termed "genetical dangers" such as Huntington's chorea, retinoblastoma and phenylketonuria, all admittedly fairly rare. Not so German measles: fewmembers couldhave known that there exists a voluntary organization of parents of deaf-blind children whose terrible affliction stems from this cause. The risk to the child of serious abnormality if the mother is infected by German measles during the first three months of pregnancy is something like 25 per cent: the risk in the first month is 50 to 85 per cent.
Rape and incest (sub-clause (d)) it was frankly admitted would be difficult to prove though, as Mr. Renton pointed out, where a girl is under thirteen and is pregnant the position is somewhat less difficult because the mere fact that she is under thirteen and is pregnant is in itself evidence
that someone has committed a criminal offence. He hastened to add that the number of such cases is very small indeed. When it comes to the definition of "a person of unsound mind" there
are always legal difficulties.
The "killing of the unborn child", which in some sections of the opposition press had been exaggerated to the absurd point of trying to infer that the happy healthy baby in the picture was the victim instead of an unrecognizable foetus which most of us would not consider a human
being, had been carefully gone into by Mr. Robinson. "I have come to the conclusion", he said, "that the best case which can be made out
on logical grounds is that a human life begins at the point at which the foetus becomes viable ... when it becomes capable of an independent life apart from its mother ... normally in the 28th week of pregnancy."
Except for the saving of the life of the mother in an emergency, the Bill limits the lawful grounds for termination of pregnancy to the thirteenth week. To that extent it is restrictive because
present law makes no limitation but "if the best medical opinion says that this is a dangerous

94

MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY BILL

operation after thirteen weeks" it is, Mr. Robinson suggested, a desirable limitation.
It must be realized that the provisions of this Bill were deliberately moderate to try to make it as acceptable as possible to the House and as non-controversial as possible outside. The Press reaction was on the whole favourable: the Economist and the Spectator as well as the Guardian were in favour of the Bill. At a very late hour the Church of England Moral Welfare
Council (which does not speak for the Church of England as a whole) issued a statement opposing the Bill which a committee, headed by the Bishop of Exeter, reported must be judged on whether it would help or hinder the doctor in cases of conflict between the claim of the mother and the claim of the unborn child. To that extent the committee judged the Bill to be bad.
Mr. Douglas Houghton (Sowerby, L.) had this to say about the question of religious convictions or morals: "those of us who believe in the Bill, and who believe in going further than the Bill, do so because we believe in certain basic

human rights ... and that, from my point of
view, takes precedence over any other conviction in regard to this matter".
There was undoubtedly a good deal of support
for a change in the law both among those who spoke in the debate (twelve in all) and among other members who although not called upon to speak were ready to vote. Had it been the first instead of the second Bill to be taken that day its fate might well have been different. The Guardian pointed out "how ill-equipped Parliament is for dealing with a measure of this kind . . . the hazards of such a Bill are so great that, even if a member is found to embrace the principle, it is odds against its coming to a vote".
It is now twenty-two years since a Government inter-departmental committee on abortion, under the then Mr. Norman Birkett, reported in 1939 in favour of a change in the law. Not only the world but people's ideas have changed greatly in that time. It seems incredible that out-of-date Victorian ideas on sex should in this respect still govern our private lives causing endless distress, ill-health, death and professional ruin.

95

