REPORTS.

TRANSACTIONS OF THE. EIGHTH ANNUAL MEETING OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR STUDY AND PREVENTION OF INFANT MORTALITY. Richmond; 1917.

THE eugenic section of these Transactions contains the Report of the Conmittee on Venereal Diseases and Marriage, with recommendations that run, mutatis mutandis, on lines similar to those of the Royal Commission on Venereal Diseases. It is interesting to note 'that the Committee advoc.ates two measures of propaganda which are being carried out by our National Council for Combating Venereal Diseases-the insertion of advertisements in newspapers and the posting of placards in public lavatories. From the Report it appears that there is the same lack of venereal statistics in America as in this country. It quotes the estimate of the Health Department of New York City (March, I9I5) that one-tenth of -the adult population of that city is probably syphilitic, an.d that of Dr. Edward B. Vedder, Captain in the Medical Corps of the United States
Army (Social Hygiene, July, i9i6), that as much as 20 per cent. of the
adult maile population of the class from which the Army is r-ecruited in times of peace is infected with syphilis. The Committee expresses the
emph-atic op,inion that "reporting laws," as notification is called on " the
other side," would drive patients into the arms of quacks-a more numerous tTibe in America, I believe, than here.

The section contains a paper by Mr. Robert D. Dripps on the preven-

tion of venereal diseases as a war m-easure, and another o'n the effects of

these diseases on infant mortality by Dr. Frederick H. Bartlett, of New

York, who avails himself of statistics published in the Report of the

Royal Commission, and copies two of Dr. Mott's illuminating diagrams

from that document. But the most important of the papers from the

eugenic standpoint is that of Dr. Michael F. Guyer, of Madison, Wis-

consi.n, the Chairman of the Eugenics Committee, dealing wi,th the

WVisconsin eugenics legislation. He reviews the much discussed 'la.w of

1913, amended in 1917, which forbids marriage to all male persons who

have not submitted themselves to medical examination and obtained a

certificate declaring them venereally uninfective, the examination includ-

ing bot-h laboratory and clinical tests if, in the judgment of the physician,

these are necessary. Dr. Guyer asserts roundly that public opinion in

Wisconsin is strongly in favour of this measure, although opposition has

had to be encountered, and that while a small but very vocal number of

physicians still condemn it, the majority axe conscientiously endeavouring

to carry it out. With regard to the law of this pioneering State authoris-

ing the sterilisation of criminals and of the insane, feeble-minded and

epleptic, he records that up to date about Ioo feeble-minded persons had

been rendered sterile, some 6o females by salpingectomy and some 40

males by vasectomy, and that all of them' had made a speedy recovery.

He adds that no serious opposition to the operation had been encountered.

" On the contrary, some of t;he more intelligent parents of the parents

have favoured it."

M. M.

RECONSTRUCTION PROBLEMS. THE FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC FUTURE, by the Hon. R. H. Brand. National Economy Series, No. 2. His Majesty's Stationery Office; 1919; 2d.; pp. 23.
THE war ha's absoTbed over L2,000,000,000 of -the nation's capital, i.e.,
one-seventh of the pre-war savings of the people. One of the first steps which must be taken for making the loss good is that of .restoring the

84 EUGENICS REVIEW.
gold standard by contracting currency and credit, abandoning the policy of raising loans at home and abroad, .limiting im,ports and keeping taxation at a high .level. Further, out of their savings the public must pay off the money they have lent to the banks. The State-guaranteed credit which is advocated in many quarters is a dangerous panacea for u±nemploymnen.t. This expansionist policy was the one which Mirabeau adopted, and it was pursued until a pair of boots cost Xioo in the depreciated currency. Other prices were on the same level, and a financial crash was the consequence. By hard work and economy alone will the nation escape bankruptcy.
RECONSTRUCTION PROBLEMS. PUBLIC HEALTH; 2 vols. TOWN PLANNING,
DOMESTIC SERVICE. His Majesty's Statioinery Office; 1919; 2d.
each.
"THE whole field of health provision " used to be " staked out in the form of claims or vested interests on behalf of one or another of the numerous sets of competing local authorities." For instance, the centres for the treatment of venereal diseases which, in i9i6, the Local Govern-
ment Board empowered local authorities to establish, could be of no
service to large numbers of patients who required treatment there, because they were managed by a different authority from th,at under which th,e N.ational Insurance doctors did their work. The Ministry of National Service, by allocating,doctors to the various groups of people, both civil and mili.tary, -by whom they were most needed, at once brought into a strong light the disadvantages of the old " system," with its overlappings and lacunae, and prepared the way for the Ministry of Health. To this body the health work which has hitherto been done by the Insurance Commissioners and the Local Government Board has now been transferred'; and the Ministry of Health Act provides for the gradual transfer of all duties of a similar natuTe which are now performed by other branches of the public service, e.g., the Pensions Mfinistry and the Home Office.
` In Greek and Roman times the plans of towns were dictated largely by military necessity. After the Renaissance the governing factor was the desire of the ruling prince to beautify his own palace and, its surroundings. In later ti,mes it was the bourgeois love of embellishment and display. Now, for the first time in this country, is the opportunity given to plan the development of town and village in the interests of the community as a whole." The Town Planning Bill of igig proposes to shhorten .the procedure which was authorised by the Act of I909, and to compel every local authority to undertake a housing scheme. From the ratepayers' point of view these provisions ought to be very acceptable. Between 1904 and 1914 Birmingham spent ',8,ooo,ooo on street widening which would have been saved had the houses been built in view o,f the probable expansion of the city; and Liverpool reckons that by levying a rate of 2-d. in the pound for re-housing slum folk it has avoided a rate
of double th,at amount for the upkeep of dispensaries, prisons, infirmaries
and similar institution,s. The faithfulness of this estimate to fact is corroborated by a comparison of the children of Liverpool with those of Port Sunlight. In the former place the average weight and height of
boys of 14 are Io0 lbs. and 60.7 i.n. respectively, and in the latter 75.g lbs. and 56.2 in. But town planning will be of economic benefit not only to
the public, but also to the landowners. The present byelaws permit builders to erect 40 houses to the acre. If only 12 are allowed the landowner will sell more land and realise the returns from it more quickly.
" The professional man's wife with a small fixed incorme and thousands of others who have similar or sma.ller incomes make up the

REPORTS.

bulk of the British nation and rear the children who axe to man the

country. Their health and prosperity is of more vital importance to the

future of the r-ace than satisfying all the demands of a single body of

workers. before we

Their voice must finally make hard

be heard and and fast rules

listened to. sympathetically
for domestiac workers. For

the real problem before us, which so far remains entirely unsolved, is

how to create and keep up a sufficient supply of the kind of domestic

help required to make the bearing and rearing of healthy chil.dren pos-

sible to the bulk of middle and lower class women. Till that is accom-

plished we may have the most carefully drawn up rules, and the most

contented maids in a few rich families, but our reconstruction problem

has not even begun to be touched, and New Jerusalem is as far as ever

from -being built in our land." The relation of mistress to maid is a

personal one which cannot .be standardised like that of the factory hand

to the manager. Thexefore a trade union would not be of much use to

domestic workers. But certain other organisations, such as local clubs,

hostels and bodies like the Corps of Commissionaires, would put the

industry on a high social plane. The Women's Legion and the Women's

War Workers' Reserve are setting an example of corporate effort which might be fo;llowed by domestic servants; and'the Employment Exchanges

migh,t be 'use-d as a meeting-place for employer and employed in such a

way that the latter woul,d feel that they belonged to the g-reat national

army of working women, and were not isolated individuals engaged in an

unpopular occupation. The training in the domestic arts of both mistress

and maid would be essential for the success of any scheme of organi-sation.

MINUTES OF DISCUSSION AT AN INFORMAL CONFERENCE TO CONSIDER GENERALLY THE SUBJECT OF " PEDIATRICS," held at the Local Government Board March 6th, I9I9. His Majes;ty's Stationery
Office; 6d. AT this Conference Dr. W. R. Ramsey said that a Department of Pediatrics had been started in connection with the Medical School of the Universi.ty
of Minnesota. It was managed by a whole-time professor, an associate professor and a staff of clinical assistants; and there were 30 beds. The work was much needed, because the ordinary physician judged the normal by the diseased child, and looked on a baby as a small adult. The doctor
,ho had .learnt the importance of breast-feeding was much better pre-
pared for dealing with infants than he who knew how to discover diseases and abnormalities in them. The doctors of -to-day were quite uneducated in the care of young children. They were hardly on a hig.her level, in ithat respect, than the ordinary grandmother or midwife. Consequently
they perpetuated many supersitions, e.g., that a baby should be bathed
immediately afterbirth, that the mouth of a newly-born child ought to be washed -out every day, and that a dose of castor oil should be administered on the third day.
Lieut.-Colonel Strathy said that special classes in p-ediatrics were instituted in' Toronto ten years ago. To-day several pediatricians were
a;t work 'there who spent part of their time in training students and p.art
in giving information to the general public. All the students devoted six weeks of the fifth year of the.ir course to the subject, to which they gave intensive study in out-patien,t clinics and in th'e children's hospital, whe.re 5o 'beds were reserved for infan,ts of less than 12 months.
Dr. H. C. Cameron gave an account of the pediatric work which has been done at Guy's Hospital since the Children's Department was founded in I9I1. He pointed out that physicians had always paid more attention to 'decay than development, and that they could not set up the highest standards of health as long as they thought more about the former than

86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

the latter. Dr. Zealand; while

Truby King told the Captain Richard Bolt

story of
brought

fpeodriwaatrrrdicmupircohgriensfsoirnmaNtieown

with regard to -the effects of the war on the child population of Italy, and

to Pxofessor Tedeschi's plan " for the co-ordination of the study of

i,npediatrics wi,th the national child welfare work." The facts and schemes

of which Captain another appendix babies and th-eir

Bolt spoke are set forth all the existing facilities mothers in England and

fWoartlwpeorsoumsaeomftuilnmgeanptptheienodnwieexdlefsa.urnedeIornf

headings that make reference very easy.

tcwhuaarstrTiatchlhuelaltuicmnhofifoaeffnmtmsadeikdfsifihincocgauullltdsry,touowdimfheinpctfohossr;stipbhaleenedd,iCaottbrnheifecesbrprreeinianncsceti-tpfhabeelrd,oruaeglactrhoetimanmdtieyennrtvdooaalvt'pesirroobnumosfridneewfnneoecrudeer

hours, with a seven- or eight-hour rest at night; and that public

infan.tauthorities should standardise their teaching with regard to

care

and mateTnity. All the conclusions were unanimous.

REPORT

dOoFnT:HEHiWsAMRajeCsAitByI'NsETStCatOiMoMnIeTryTEOEffiOcNe;W19OIM9E;NprIiNceINisD.US6Td.R;Yp.p

Lon341.

tfgThaeHecnEteRowrEraaileglsaerysxieskantdnoweowoqtnu.anoretceOetshnasrneaedreiil-ostyuhetthhsasatartanmnifdttuihalenrgytecomfoapntcldthcoseiytmmiionen-nisftthtgihsooeofrde.hpporouerrIgtnsndaweanhertdie,cmhwotodhameerreewanetnlmeoli,t-

being of mother and chi-d alike is actually promoted by the employment of the fomer, not only because the woman who earns money obtains

better -and more abundant food than she who depends' upon the wages

of her husband, but the mind, and gives

also because the
the worker more

hwooprekfulisneosfsteann,dmocroenfisdteinmcuelatiinnghert-o

wlseehlgofislthahtaaivnoenthfneoortpewedropm'etethuantaltwoe,dl:blre-ufdegadebroylwiosomfheeldni?f"edoasitonmgheomqieuni.vteesthi"geOaautvgoyrhstwohrapvkreotieancstkitevhdee factories have proved themselves, during the war, to have greater

reserves of strength than they have usually been supposed, to possess.

Dr. Jane Campbell, who writes down this question, does not give an

wacfehfililfrdambraeetaircvioenngd,ainttisoownesdro;'hmbaovuertebsehaeerndsueuosgutgasebslwtiossrhektdhiawntotimhnee nwfoumrt.kuarsyehobtpehsaanbwlhtehe,erienma'stnphaeigtebeersostf

have expected them to. do in the past, and that 'the results will be bene-

ficial 'to both mothers and babies. One of the facts by which thi's con-

I9I6cwlhuesnionmoirsesuwpopmoertnedweirsetehemplloowyeidnfianntfacmtoorrtiaelsittyhanrataet

of any

and
previlous

1917, time,

and w-ag'es were good were, for the most part,

and the surroundings 'healthful. Another is

otfhetrhaepiodpefralaltiovfestheat

work death-

rate among infants wi-thin the last ten years, during which more and

more women have become industrial workers. Another is the very high

rate of infant mortality in the mining districts, where the women seldom

go out almost

to as

work, high

but the housing is in the textile and

poptotoere.ry

On the other hand, the rate is as in the mining regions. In

ttwohoerbkefotarhrmaeetrleolv.n-aegrngeasnendvuemrtebheeitrorsilhooifmn ewasowmaoerrenksnehoaotrpnwehhlailsghmaawl,aengsaesgsei,dn.jbuurTtiohtuehsei-rerfuflheeoctusreusepmoosnf

the her

-health, of lot if she

a is

mother and her children than the poverty which falls to
not a wage-earner. Another important piece of informa-

tion which -the report brings out relates to the minor ailments and

apparently insignificant fatigue from which industrial women suffer in

carrying out their daily tasks. are more dangerous and more

These undermine health. insidiously,
frequent than direct injuries, which

and are

comparatively uncommon, at any rate among unmarried women. Dr.

REPORTS.

87

Campbell intimates that the cumula-tive effect of the less noticeable weaknesses may be widespread degeneration.

AN INQUIRY INTO THE PREVALENCE AND AETIOLOGY OF TUBERCULOSIS AMONG INDUSTRIAL WORKERS, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO FEMALE MUNITION WORKERS. National Health Insurance: Medical Research Committee. Special Report Series, NO. 22. His Majesty's Sta-
tionery Office; 19I9; price is. 6d.; pp. 59.
IN the towns the death-rate from tuberculosis of men between. 25 and 65 is double that which prevails in the rest of the population. In ¢he country districts women suffer -and die from the disease in about the same numbers as the men, bu.t in thickly-populated places they are afflicted by it
in much fewer numbers. The virulence, if not the cause, of the maladymust therefore be largely occupational. The greatest number of victims belong to callings in which but little muscular exertion is required, and in which workers can remain, therefore, when the disease is far advanced and readily communicated.
In 1914 a cons.iderable increase took place in the deaths from tuberculosis among women. For many years there ha,d been a steady fall in the death-rate, which reached its lowest point in 1913, when it amounted' to 1,154 per million females living. From that level th-ere was a rise of 7 per cent., to I,23; in i9i5 and 1,254 in I9I6. Women over 45 years of age were not affected by this movement. Therefore health officers suspected that the cause lay in the employment of larger numbers of women in factories during the war. A detailed inquiry confirmed this conclusion. The investigators did not consider that the increase of the cases could be attributed to insanitary housing, trade habits, or poor physique and natural susceptibility to infection on the part of the sufferers. About heredity they were doubtful. Forty-three, or 26.54 per cent., of the victims belonged to families in which other cases had occurred, but the data were too scanty to afford a basis foT a decisive opinion. " Soil " is held to be an important factor in the causation of the disease, but no o.ne, perhaps, is entirely immune. The difficulties of arriving at the truth are great. " Since infection is possible at any age, and the possibility of l.atency being admitted, it is obvious that until all the offspring of any tubeTculosis-tainted union have completed their span of life our information as regards hered.ity (even for such single unit of a generation) cannot be complete."

