THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RECENT BIRTH-RATE FIGURES

By RICHARD M. TITMUSS

THIS article has a strictly limited
.1 purpose. It is to recall some simple,
though essential, features of the dyna-
rmics of population in their bearing on recent birth-rate figures in England. These figures have shown an upward trend which by many has been welcomed, and by a few Malthusian die-hards deplored, as evidence of a turn in our reproductive tide so definite and unmistakable as to falsify the predictions that had been made of a progressive diminution in the numbers of our population. It will be shown that the published figures, viewed in

rate touched bottom at I4 *2; it rose to I5 - 8 in I942, and still further to i6*8 in the first
quarter of I943. At mid-I939 the number of
women in the age groups I5 to 49 was II,464,000, and in the group 20 to 34 it was 5,032,000-i.e. distinctly greater than the corresponding figures for I9I8 and, it may be computed, not materially different from the figures of I942-3. Yet in I942, despite this advantage of nearly a million more potential mothers, there were fewer births-i.e. a total of 654,ooo-than in the worst year of the last war.

proper perspective (i.e. against a background of the demographic trend of the past thirty The illusion of short-term oscillations

years), offer no reason for assuming that our population problems are, in any fundamental sense, nearer solution than they were only a couple of years ago, when our birth rate touched the lowest figure ever recorded in the history of vital statistics.
Some basic data

After the last war the birth rate rose sharply from the hitherto record low level of
I7.7 in I9I8 to 25'5 in 1920. In that year) 958,ooo infants were born to approximately
the same number of women as in I9I8. From
this peak, however, the rate subsided rapidly, falling back to I7*8 by I926 and then declin-
ing less steeply to I4-4 (the lowest between-

During the year or two immediately preceding the war of I9I4-I8 the rate of live births per i,ooo population was in the order of 24.* By the end of the war it had fallen to
7.7, at that time the lowest annual figure
ever recorded-the year I9I8 having also
been distinguished by the all-time lowest rate for any first quarter, namely I7.5. In
I9I8 the total number of women in the reproductive age groups, I5 to 49 years,

wars figure) in I933. Nevertheless, there were many in I920 who believed that the rise to the highest birth-rate figure registered for
ten years heralded a permanent change in our reproductive trend. Similar conclusionsthough with far less excuse, since we now have past experience for a warning-have been, and are being, drawn from the I942 figures, which were again the highest for ten
years.

amounted approximately to I0,500,000, of whom some 4,800,000 belonged to the highly The influence of changing marriage rates

reproductive group of 20 to 34 years. It is
siguificant that these women, in the sternest
period of the war, produced between them
some 663,000 live births.
These figures should be contrasted with those prevailing to-day. In I94I the birth

In this war, as in the last, marriage rates
have fluctuated violently. When the numbers of new marriages contracted rise or fall we must expect parallel movements in the birth rate. These changes, up or down, in the
annual numbers of births may be brought

* A the statistics quoted in this article refer to England and Wales.

about mainly by an unusually high or low proportion of first births to young couples,

36

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RECENT BIRTH-RATE FIGURES

37

In I9I5 the rate of new marriages per I,000 total population, after fluctuating around 14-I7 during the preceding seventy-five years, suddenly rose to a record rate of I9.4; and then again in I920, after a slump to I3 8 in I9I7, a new record was established in the rate of 20* 2. From I922 to I932 the rate
varied between I4 3 and I5-8; but in I933 it began to rise, climbing slowly to I7' .6 in
I938, 2I12 in I939, and then in I940 to the highest point ever reached-namely 22. 7. The inevitable recession occurred in I94I,
when the rate fell to i8 7, and still further to I7 -8 in I942. This decline continues, andwith statistically unimportant fluctuations must continue, as our marriageable stocks dwindle.
Factors favouring reproduction
By I942 we had a situation in which many short-term factors were operating together in favour of a higher birth rate. In the first place the number of married women under 40 had risen by about 20 per cent since I93I, and in I939-42 there had been a record number of new marriages. Actually there were 225,000 more marriages during I939-42 than there would have been if the moderately high marriage rates of I936-8 (approximately I7-5) had persisted; and if only half these additional marriages had produced one child there would thus have been II2,500 additional births during the war years. Yet over the period I939-42 there were, in fact, only 19,000 more births than there would have been had the birth-rate average of I936-8 been operating.
To put the matter in another way. During the past ten years there have been approximately half a million additional early marriages, mostly between young people, the mean age of spinsters at marriage having decreased considerably during that decade. Yet this enormous additional number of years of married life within the fertile age groups, though it has depleted our marriageable stocks possibly to a record low level, has had but a trifling effect on the crude birth rate. This is all the more noteworthy when we recall how the smaller increment of new marriages after the last war produced such a far greater number of births.

Among other favourable factors now operating we must reckon full and regular employment, rising wage levels,* and the payment of allowances for several million children. The conscription of women for industry and the forces must also have led many women to decide, as one Member put it in the recent House of Commons debate, that they could best serve their country as mothers; and we must add as other factors the high concentration of the Armed Forces in this country as compared with I9I7-i8, the presence of very large numbers of young men from the Dominions and elsewhere, and the measures taken by the Government to safeguard the health of expectant and nursing mothers and of young children. Furthermore, the number of female births registered in I920-2I was 2Io,000 greater than in I9I8-I9, and the vast majority of these had reached marriageable age by the outbreak of the present war.
Some general conclusions Thus, an extraordinary series of favourable
elements, all operating within the last few years, have been brought to bear on our reproductive trend. Between them they might have been expected to lead to a marked rise in the number of births; but within our present population structure this rise does not necessarily denote one in the net reproduction rate. Indeed, on a critical examination of recent demographic history it becomes evident that we are still advancing on the last wave of a tide of high fertility. The consequences of the low reproduction rates
* In this connection we may quote a recent American investigation into the relation of business cycles, marriage rates and birth rates during 19I9-37 (Galbraith, V. L., and Thomas, D. S., Journal Amer. Stat. Ass., I941, 36). The authors' conclusion was: " This suggests that the direct restriction of first births during depressions is somewhat less than that of immediately higher orders, a finding that is compatible with the spread of the small family system. The conclusion seems inescapable that, during the past two decades, the preventive check has been extensively in operation. Marriages are ' controlled ' during depressions, and, within marriages, births of all orders are likewise controlled. Since birth rates of higher orders are overweighted with births to the lower income, occupational, and educational classes, it is clear that the birth control movement has penetrated deep into the social structure during the past two decades."

38 - ' THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from the mid-I92o's have yet to come. At and better world within realization, the riser

the moment economic conditions are favour- in the birth rate has not been higher than-

ing a high level of young marriages; delayed recorded to date. It is indeed more thahi

fnarriages and delayed births from the years probable that the rise will continue for some

of the great depression are also contributing time, perhaps reaching 20 per I,OOO. But let

their share; and we have been " borrowing " us remember the oscillations in the past and

marriages and probably births from the bear in mind that what is happening to-day

future. It is, as Kuczynski remarks, " absurd in Britain is also happening in other parts of

to assume that those who now marry at 24 the world. In the U.S.A., in most parts of

would adopt the views and habits of another the Dominions, and even in Denmark,

social group only as a consequence of marry- Holland, Sweden, Switzerland and Czecho-

ing earlier."* In other words, earlier marriage slovakia the crude birth rate rose in I94I

and the earlier birth of one child does not and again in I942. Whereas the rise in I942

mean that families will be larger.

for England and Wales (over the average

Perhaps, however, " borrowing " is not the for I936-8) was 6 per cent, the corresponding right word, for we may not intend to pay increases in Sweden, Switzerland and Denback. Thus, in a period of unprecedented mark amounted to 23 per cent, 2I per economic prosperity we have, while tem- cent and I4 per cent respectively.

porarily enjoying an abnormally large age This turn in the birth-rate trend has been

group 20-40, been recouping from the past unexpected because of the known effects of

and " stealing," shall we say, from the future. previous wars on fertility. In I939 it seemed

To this favourable situation we have added as though the war would cause the birth rate

an entirely novel incentive for women to have for England and Wales to decline to an

at least one pregnancy. Future students of abnormally low level. Up to the end of I94I

demographic history may well ask why, in these fears were at least partially justified.

this favourable situation, with the danger of Now the upswing has come. Does it herald a

national defeat removed, the cessation of permanent change ? Should we not rather

massed air attacks, and the promise of a new say, after taking account of the remarkable

* The New Population Statistics. Occasional Paper No. i, issued by the National Institute for Economic and Social Research. Cambridge University Press, I942.

combination of favourable influences, that the tide of reproduction, which has been receding for over sixty years, has not yet turned ?

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Artics appearing in fothig issus:

RACTIVITIES OF COLPODA DUODENARIA TO ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS. II. FACTORS INFLUENCING THE FORMATION OF RESTING CYSTS. By C. V. TAYLOR and A. G. R. STRICCAND, Stanford University.
RETARDATION OF EARLY CLEAVAGE OF URECHIS BY ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT. By A Rmns C. Gisa,, Stanford University.
ON THE KILLING ACTION OF OPTICALLY ISOMERIC NICOTINES IN RELATION TO PROBLEMS OF EVOLUTION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN ANIMALS. By G. F. GAUSE and N. P. SMARAGDOVA, Institute of Zo6logy, University of Moscow.
THE PRODUCTION OF DUPLICITAS CRUCIATA AND MULTIPLE HEADS BY REGENERATION IN EUPLANARIA TIGRINA. By ROBERT H. SILBER and VIKTOR HAMBuRGER, Washington University.

Edited by W. C. ALwF, Professor of Zoology, The University of Chicago. Published

Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press.

Subscription: 35s. 2d. per year.

,-Ex,gfisA-dgest: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX,No. 2

