EUGENICS AND PAUPERISM
BY SIR EDWARD BRABROOK
POLITICAL economy, or Economic Science generally, has been described as a dismal study, and has been discredited and spoken of as if it were an effete and exploded superstition. The facts, however, are all the other way. All the great events in history, half the observances of religion, all the events in social life which are supposed to be dependent on human will and on the exercise of sympathies, emotions, and sentiments not reducible to calculation, will be found upon analysis to be dependent upon economic considerations. Mr. Buckle, long ago, showed that when things that appear either to be casual, or to be dictated by the multifarious motives that affect the mind and will of man, are tested by statistics, they become subject to a doctrine of averages from which the element of uncertainty supposed to be imparted by the exercise of human will may be altogether eliminated. He showed also that the great revolutions of history, even when they appear most sudden and violent, are the results of a long chain of causes, extending over many centuries. We may carry the argument a step further. We may cite numberless instances to show that personages who in their sense of their own importance have supposed that they were affecting the course of history by their own imperious will have been merely agents in the hands of nature for working out its economic purposes by the means of laws which no human being or aggregation of human beings has the power to change. It is accordingly only fitting that when we are asking the public to consider old problems in a new light, when we are grouping together under a new title aspects of humanity that have always been present to the minds of the thoughtful, but have been too much neglected by the generality, we should show that we have an economic basis for our views. If our views be right ones the economic basis is there, whether

230 E. Brabrook:-
we observe it or not; and it is, therefore, well worth while for us to seek it and trace it out. We shall accordingly enquire what are the economic evils to which Eugenics is capable of applying a remedy; what are the economic laws upon which the science of eugenics rests; and what will be the economic consequences of its acceptance and application by mankind.
I propose to consider, as the first and principal of the economic evils which it is the object of the Eugenic philosopher to meet and to diminish as far as possible, the evil of pauperism. How great and how growing that evil is, there is abundant evidence to show. There is an interesting narrative of early days, which points several morals as to the origin and growth of pauperism. In a small community, one of the members, of an economic turn of mind, having been present at what he considered the wasteful consumption of a certain commodity, said, "that might have been sold for ten guineas, which we might have put in our money box to be given to the poor." One of his colleagues, recording the incident, some years after the lhero of it had committed suicide, was unkind enough to add that he said this, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and having the money bag or box, took away or at any rate carried what was put in it. The comment of their leader was also instructive: " You have the poor always with you, and whenever you will you can do them good."
We see in this story-in these days people have so much left off reading their Bibles that I suppose no one has the least suspicion whence it was derived-several morals. There is that of the danger of misapplication of charitable funds. The administrator finds no one more deserving than himself, no necessities more pressing than those he himself feels, and accordingly helps himself out of the money bag or box, and takes away what was put in it. There is that of the steady deterioration of the sympathy which is the foundation of charitable relief. The poor so soon cease to be interesting: it becomes so clear, as things are looked into, that their poverty is their own fault, and that the poor in a lump are bad: they are either so wickedly ungrateful or so contemptibly servile: your relief has done them so little good, they come asking for more:-that at last Bumble

EUGlNICS AND PAUPERISM

23r

arises in all his glory, and teaches us how paupers ought to be dealt with. Then there is the sad conclusion of the Chief-the poor you have always with you and whenever you will you can do them good. Can we ? are we not doing them harm ? ought they
to be always with us ? Lord George Hamilton, chairman of the late Poor Law
Commission, observed recently (May I3) that there are conditions existing in certain big towns which are producing a degenerate class in the community. No country could afford to
carry on its back this dead weight of pauperism. The Commissioners reported that, notwithstanding our assumed moral and material progress, and notwithstanding the enormous annual expenditure, amounting to nearly sixty million pounds a year,
upon poor relief, education, and public health, we still have a vast army of persons quartered upon us unable to support themselves, an army which in number has recently shown signs of increase rather than decrease. It is true that that increase is not greater than the increase in the population :-but that is
little comfort for us, for unless we can devise some measures that will diminish the aggregate of pauperism, although the population may increase, that very increase of population will itself bring an increase of pauperism that will tax our utmost resources
to meet it. Messrs. Chapman and Hallsworth, in a recent work on Unem-
ployment, say that in considering the case of the unemployment among trade unionists we feel the predominating presence of an industrial cause, but when we come to examine the facts revealed by distress committees, the personal causes of unemployment force themselves more to the front. The personal causes are physical, intellectual, or moral. Some persons, on account of physical defects, are unfit for continuous employment or unable to earn more than a pittance at any time. Others are periodically without work because they are unintelligent, whether by reason of neglected education and a mis-spent youth or of the taint of feeble-mindedness received at birth. The number of feebleminded persons at large in the world without the stability of will to guide their lives must be great: it would seem, from the evidence given to the Royal Commission on the Feeble-Minded, that

232 E. Brabrook :
they constitute 5 per cent. of the habitues of casual wards, cheap lodging houses and night shelters.
Messrs. Chapman and Hallsworth argue further that as regards the unintelligence which does not imply actual feeble-mindedness, economic progress means usually increasing demand for intelli-
gence, and may therefore render the employment of the less intel-
ligent increasingly precarious. The more precarious their work, the more rapidly is the army of unemployables recruited from them. As soon as they are out of work they are in distress: the longer their distress lasts, the more physically incapable they become. However charitable we may be disposed to be in our judgment of our fellows, it is impossible to be entirely blind to the fact that large numbers of the chronically unemployed have brought their troubles upon themselves. There are the criminal and semi-criminal classes whose records keep them out of work. There are the drunkards, gamblers, and incorrigible idlers. These are those not positively vicious, but who are incurable loafers. As our authors put it, they tramp the country, beg, do odd jobs very occasionally, pass through casual wards and cheap lodging houses and exist somehow.
These views are supported by the high authority of the Rt. Hon. Charles Booth, who says, " these men hang about for the odd hour or work one day in the seven. They live on stimulants and tobacco, varied with bread and tea and salt fish. Their passion is gambling. Sections of them are hereditary casuals; a larger proportion drift from other trades. They have a constitutional hatred to regularity and forethought, and a need for paltry excitement; they are late risers, sharp-witted talkers, and above all, they have that agreeable tolerance for their own and each other's vices which seems characteristic of a purely leisured class, whether it lies at the top or the bottom of society." It may be, as our authors suggest, that their lives are not in all cases unhappy: but certainly their existence does not conduce to the happiness of others. They are by instinct parasitic on the community. They usually live upon the meagre earnings of their wives and children, when they have any. To sum up,
there exists a large body of unemployable or semi-employable people.

EUGENICS AND PAUPERISM

233;

The circumstance that these people frequently have wives, and still more frequently have children, points to the possibility that an hereditary caste of morally and physically deteriorated persons-potentially a burden upon the community as paupers, but certainly valueless to the community as workers-is being created. I may quote from the Report of the Poor Law Commission, as abstracted by me for the first number of the EUGENICS. REVIEW, some instances which show how the granting of outdoor relief under the Poor Law has been so worked as to subsidise the birth and bringing up of children under conditions which are inconsistent with their becoming good citizens. An old woman living in a dirty insanitary room gets out-relief and ekes it out by taking in two mill girls, one having a child, as lodgers. A widow has iod. a week out-relief with which to maintain sevea children in a dirty, even filthy, home. A man suffering from phthisis, aged 56, is allowed out-relief: he has five children, of whom the youngest is only 8 months old, and another is expected. Another man, also suffering from phthisis, aged 40, lives with wife, son aged I9, and two children, in one filthy room. The boy is delicate already, and will without doubt follow his father. These cases are specimens of a great number which were brought before the Commission; and the Cornmissioners reported that children who are brought up in such conditions, surrounded by disease and immorality and drunkenness, are almost doomed to pauperism.
It seems obviously to follow that in some way the instinct of humanity which results in the introduction into the community of members who are burdens to others as well as to themselves, and are not qualified to make an adequate return to it for the care it expends upon them, should be placed under some effectual form of control, moral or physical. This is so clear that it is recognised by the Hindu races. According to an account contributed to the Journal of the Royal Anthropological Instituteby Mr. H. A. Rose, one of its local correspondents, an investigation into the physical characters of a boy and girl is necessary before their betrothal. As betrothal takes place in infancy, and marriage follows when the parties become physically capable of it, it is necessary according to orthodox Shastric ideas that the

-234 E. Brabrook:
relatives of each of the two children should be satisfied as to the ,other. Thus the guardian of the girl must see that the boy is sound in body and mind, and his family free from hereditary disease. " Broad or deep should be his chest, face and forehead, and voice; short his throat, back and legs; fine his hair, nails, teeth, flesh and the joints of his fingers; long the distances between his eyebrows, his arms, his nostrils and his chin; red his palate and tongue, the soles of his feet and the palms of his bands, and both the corners of each eye." Palmistry has to be taken into account, for a boy with no lines, or too many, in his hand will be poor and short-lived. The horoscope must be Teferred to, for a boy born in the house of Mars will doom his mate to early death. The guardian of the boy must see that the girl is beautiful, young, healthy, of good repute, having a swanlike gait, fine teeth and hair, delicate limbs and soft red-soled feet without prominent joints. Her fingers and toes should be separated, and the palm of her hand shaped like a lotus for luck. Her shape should be fish-like, and on the soles of her feet there should be the marks of a goad and barley corns. Her knees should be round, her legs free from hair, her forehead broad and prominent, her throat like a lion's, the lips red, the voice soft like a cuckoo's, the nostrils evenly matched, and the eye like a lotus. Her little toe should not touch the ground, lest she become a widow; the second toe should not project beyond the big toe, lest her character should be lost; and her legs should not be long and thin, for that, too, is an omen of widowhood; her eyes should not be reddish-brown nor like those of a cat. Dry hair and everted lips show a quarrelsome temper.
I refer to these requirements not as suggesting that they would form a suitable code of eugenic desiderata for this country, but as showing the importance which the religious ideas of the Hindus, derived from their sacred books, attach to the ascertaining, before a marriage is resolved upon, that the conditions which they think to be essential to the welfare of the offspring of it are fulfilled.
Eugenics is defined by our Society as the study of agencies under social control that may improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations, either physically or mentally;

EUGENICS AND PAUPERISM

235

and we are enjoined persistently to set forth the national importance of eugenics in order to modify public opinion, and create a sense of responsibility in the respect of bringing all matters pertaining to human parenthood under the domination of eugenic ideals, to spread a knowledge of the laws of heredity so far as they are surely known, and so far as that knowledge might affect the improvement of the race, and to further eugenic teaching at home, in the school6, and elsewhere. It is surely relevant to those objects to show that the old sages who, in the dim darkness of antiquity, framed the holy writings of the Hindu religion, had firm convictions on the importance of maintaining a high physical and moral standard in the persons of those who were to be united in marriage, though their methods of fixing the standard may not suit our modern ideas.
To ascertain what is the remedy for the great economic evil of pauperism we have to enquire what are the causes of that evil. A relieving officer from Leeds informed the Poor Law Commission
" That one of the most important causes is the early marriage of persons dependent upon casual labour. Large families are the rule. Owing to the low wages earned, no provision can be made to meet such contingencies as unemployment, sickness, or imprisonment for non-compliance with a county court judge's order for payment of a few shillings of debt. Cases are not wanting to show that pauperism is hereditary-third generations occasionally occur."
Mrs. Bosanquet says that it
" Cannot be doubted that under the present system many of the children are growing up aneemic, diseased, undisciplined, and unskilled, and likely, therefore, to add to the pauperism of the country in the future. Unless we can cut off some of the sources from which that stream is being fed, the attempt to do more constructive work, whether by public assistance or by voluntary charity, will continue to be swamped by hopeless cases-men and women ruined by bad habits, or diseased from infancy, who propagate their own misery and hand on another generation of helpless cases to the future. A great evil justifies strong measures to remedy it."
Those measures are undoubtedly the measures which the science of Eugenics points out as the only effectual ones.
No statement of this subject would be complete that did not contain some reference to the pioneer work of the Rev. T. R. Malthus, F.R.S., one of the " Associates " of the Royal

236 E. Brabrook:
Society of Literature and in that capacity its Professor of Political Economy and Statistics. The great influence on the public mind of his Essay on Population is exemplified by the fact that while in I752 a Bill for taking a census was ignominiously rejected by the House of Commons upon the strange ground that ancient Hebrew superstition forbade any numbering of the people, that David when he committed that supposed sin had brought upon his people the punishment of a pestilence, and that to number the people would be an impious proceeding that would bring upon the country the wrath of heaven-as i8oo approached a Bill for taking a Census in i8oi was passed without serious opposition: so great had been the impression caused by Malthus's close reasoning out of the problems of population.
I discussed this question in the year I89I in a contribution to a High Church magazine, now defunct, and said that if that pestilence was indeed an evidence of the Divine anger, it was because of the overcrowding and insanitary conditions that prevail in walled cities. This rationalist inference caused so much horror in country vicarages that the editor of the magazine next month apologised for allowing the passage to appear, not having fully realised its mischievous teaching till after publication. Mr. Frazer says that though we may not presume to fathom the grounds for this supposed divine dislike of a census, we can at least show that it has been shared by savages. The Gallas of East Africa think that to count cattle is an evil omen, and that it impedes the increase of the herd. The Lapps used to be, and perhaps still are, unwilling to count themselves and to declare the number, because they fear that such a reckoning would both forbode and entail a great mortality among their people. This is exactly similar to the belief held by the Hebrews
in the time of David, and by the Imperial Parliament of this
Kingdom in I752. If, notwithstanding the protests of these very silly legislators, the Bill had then been passed, and a pestilence had followed the census, it would no doubt have been regarded by them as a proof sufficient to confute the doubts of the blindest and most obstinate sceptic. It was not only, however, in the direction of putting to flight these foolish superstitions that the work of that great economist, Malthus, was effectual: it was

EUGENICS AND PAUPERISM

237-

equally effectual in convincing the thinkers of that day that the unrestricted addition to population, without the provision of extra means of subsistence, was a fatal error.
Darwin refers to this work as an ever memorable essay. He says that the primary or fundamental check to the continued increase of man is the difficulty of gaining subsistence and of living in comfort. With civilised nations the primary check acts chiefly by restraining marriages.
All the authors of ideal plans for the establishment ofrepublics have sought to deal with the question from the point of view of establishing some preliminary investigation before marriage into the fitness of the parties for entering upon that
state. That of Sir Thomas More, in his Utopia, is a familiar
instance. No statesman has yet, however, given practical shape to any such methods, and the difficult of doing so is that of determining what are the precise physical, mental or moral characters that are to be put to the test in each individual case. We are not so fortunate as the Hindus in being able to determine precisely what peculiarities are to be looked for in each individual submitted to examination.
The editors of the EUGENICS REVIEW, in their enumeration of the branches of learning with which that publication is concerned, specified Biology, Anthropology, Politics, Ethics and Religion. It may seem presumptuous in me to add another to that very wide and varied range of subjects, and to say that it must comprise economics as well. It lies at the foundation of all those branches of learning, and cannot be ignored by any. Prof. Ashley, in an interesting sketch of the history of economics, says that neither in I776, when Adam Smith wrote, nor in 1798, when Malthus's work was published, was the man or the time ready for a system. The creative period he places between i8io and I820, towards the end of which, in I817, Ricardo's book came out and completed the edifice. If the word religion has any meaning, he says political economy was one of the new religions of that era, and the Political Economy Club was the assembly of the elders of that new Church.
It will not do, however, to erect science of any kind into a religion. All science is progressive: and if that is true of every

2.38 E. Brabrook:
science, it is especially true of the sciences which deal with the
social organisation of the people. That social organisation is so complex: so many different elements go to make it up: we react so much upon one another as individuals and in the various classes of society, that we must beware of dogmatism. If this is true of sociology generally, it must be even more especially true of such a branch of sociology as eugenics. It claims to deal upon rational grounds with a matter in respect to which the ordinary attitude of the human mind is a disparagement and defiance of reason: in which the will of man claims the right to exercise itself at the dictates of animal instinct-a matter in which sentiment, and affection, and the desire of physical gratification, are held to be supreme. To talk to a young lover of either sex of the duty of considering the welfare of others is to preach to the winds.
The present condition of affairs is this. The thoughtful, the intelligent, the temperate among the population, are not in haste to marry. They are sensible that marriage entails obligations which a conscientious man cannot take upon himself unless he can assure himself that he will be able to fulfil them. Those obligations are towards the wife he selects-her suitable maintenance during the continuance of the marriage, and provision for her during widowhood; towards their children-for whom maintenance, education, and settlement in life he is bound to provide; towards the community, which has an interest in the physical and mental health of all its members. Such a man, capable of controlling his physical instincts by reason and by prudence, is the ideal father the State would desire to have for the next generation of its members, for (other things being equal) the children of the good have a better chance of being good themselves. Fortes creauturfortibus et bonis.
On the other hand, the ill-nourished, ill-trained, and illregulated population of the crowded and unwholesome portions of our large cities marry early. They leave homes in which little or no good influence has been exerted over them to establish themselves on their own account, and have no difficulty in inducing young women of their own class to share their lot, with or without the sanction of marriage. Whatever difference there may be in the moral bearing of these alternatives, there is little

EUGENICS AND PAUPERISM

239

or no difference in the economic result. Thought for the future, regard for the interest of others or of the community, does not enter into the mental attitude of either party. The results are graphically described in the novels of Mr. George Gissing and Mr. Richard Whiteing. They are what might be expected. A numerous and weakly progeny are brought into the world from deteriorated sources, only to carry that deterioration still further.
We have thus, therefore, two streams of tendency tending from opposite sides to obstruct the working of the natural law, which is essentially also an economic law, of the survival of the fittest. In primitive times, that law had its full operation:

"Turpe pecus, glandem atque cubilia propter, Unquibus et pugnis, dein fustibus . . Pugnabant."
"The human herd, unbroken and untaught, For acorns first, and grassy couches fought; With fists, and then with clubs, maintain'd the fray."
Not only, in the quest for food, but in the quest for wives.

"4. . . Ignotis perierunt mortibus omnes
Quos venerem incertam rapientes more ferarum, Viribus editior ccedebat, ut in grege taurus."
" Obscurely died the savage ravishers, Who like brute beasts the female bore away, Till some superior brute re-seized the prey."
Civilisation has bestowed many benefits upon us, and has among them imparted a new meaning to the idea of fitness to survive. It has repealed:
"The good old rule, the simple plan, That they should take who have the power,
And they should keep who can."
It no longer recognises that this is of God's appointment. Having realised the powerful influence of heredity combined with environment, and also the principle that physical excellence, combined with intellectual activity and moral backbone, are the elements of fitness that civilisation calls for, we find those who possess these qualities produce few children, while those who do not possess them produce many. Thus there is not merely the tendency to further degeneration in the offspring

240 E. Brabrookc:
caused by the marriage of those already degenerate, but the deterioration in the general average. Suppose the population to be equally divided among those well qualified to become parents and those not so qualified, if the first class produce two children each and the second class four, the next generation will have one-third only instead of one-half of the class of the fit and two-
thirds of the class of the unfit.
It is satisfactory to observe that the ordinary processes of education are being so worked as to become in effect an education in Eugenics. The children who used to infest the gutters of the more squalid portion of our large towns, themselves in an unhealthy condition and communicating disease to others, are now brought to school and submitted to careful examination to see that they do not bring into the school elements of contamina. tion. Cleanliness is enforced, medical aid is provided, special schools are established, and in many other ways it is brought home to the children and their parents that they have duties of citizenship which they must not be allowed to disregard. The report of Dr. Kerr, Medical Officer to the Education Department of the London County Council, contains much information, not only respecting the extent to which unwholesome conditions prevail, but also respecting the measures which are taken to remedy them.
Mr. Thompson Reid, of Montreal, in a letter to The Times, of June 5th, I909, has stated that a Canadian visiting our industrial centres sees evidence of physical decline in the majority of the men whom he meets in the streets: that he observed in June, I908, a Sunday School procession of children in Birmingham which satisfied him that they would not reach a high standard of physical development at maturity; and that the factory girls of our manufacturing centres give little promise of that physical vigour which is essential in motherhood to the well-being of future generations. He quotes forcible words from several authorities.
Gladstone defined as the noblest work of the statesman that which is done to raise the standard of public health. Ruskin
said that the veins of true wealth are purple not in rock but in human flesh: that the divine intent of all wealth is the produc tion of sturdy men. Carlyle defined the greatest state as that

EUGENICS AND PAUPERISM

241

which produces the brawniest breed of men. That definition, however, we can only accept as part of the truth, for brawn does not count for everything. Prof. Seeley tells us that Rome failed with the failure of her crops of men. Thus we again reach the conclusion that the breeding of human beings is a science; and that it is at least as important to know the conditions under which the best specimens of humanity can be produced as it is to know how to produce the best specimens of horseflesh or of cattle. Being a science, its practice has to be raised into an art. I do not ask that its promoters, students and professors should be elevated into a priesthood: for I have no great love for priesthoods either in pedagogy, or in medicine, or in religion-still less in any such practical, political and economic science as that of Eugenics. It is not for them to say " this is the way: walk ye in it." It is for them to accumulate facts until their science is established upon such a basis of induction that its teachings cannot be disregarded.
Are we not justified, therefore, in stating, as the conclusion of the whole matter, that the evil of pauperism has been greatly increased by the physical, moral and mental deterioration of large classes of the population; that the financial burdens of which this state of things is the cause are growing and are likely to grow unless the remedy offered by eugenic science is applied; and that education in Eugenics is a matter of the most pressing necessity ? The moral responsibility attaching to the relation of parentage requires to be taught as it has never been taught before, and brought home to individual consciences.

