THE EUGENICS REVIEW

enumerated; it seems likely that all, to some also the counselling, especially since such a con-

extent, will be found to be genetically determined. siderable part of the judgement must in "the

The environmental component may be con- foreseeable future" be formed on subjective

siderably larger than for intelligence, this will grounds and on grounds of over-all performance.

necessarily reduce the efficiency of attempts at Yet even personality is proving increasingly

genetic improvement and may well suggest that analysable. Moreover, the important share of

attention would better be concentrated on en- inheritance in it is becoming clearer (see for

vironmental bettering of phenotypes.

instance James Shields, Monozygotic Twins

(3) This is, I suspect, a somewhat easier ques- (London, 1962; Oxford University Press)). As

tion to answer than the first two; nevertheless for castes, the very personality traits here aimed

it is clear that an objective rating of a number at work against their existence, and a gradual

of the characteristics given in Muller's list would percolation of these traits, genetic and cultural,

be quite difficult.

both outward and "downward", would ipso

One final point I want to make is this. Who facto be encouraged by their intensification at

decides for whom? It is suggested that partici- the levels of the more fortunately endowed

pation both by donors and recipients be entirely individuals.

voluntary. There are, I suggest, two potential

dangers, the first is perhaps minor, but we should

ABORTION

be aware that such a system may well lead to selection for over-representation of qualities

To the Editor, Eugenics Review

such as egotism and conceit in the treasury. Sir,-Mr. Herbert Brewer's logic is hard to

Secondly and more importantly the chance of fathom. He argues that abortion ought not to

formation of castes which may be increasingly be permitted in cases of rape, for the singular

genetically differentiated from each other (be- reason that rape does not always result in

cause of so to speak "insemination of the con- pregnancy. Is it not sufficient to know that it

verted") seems to me not wildly improbable. sometimes does? (As it did in the case of Rex v.

For a democratic society this could pose a Bourne that altered English common law on

problem of principle of the first magnitude. abortion in 1938.)

J. A. BEARDMORE

Perhaps sensing his shaky ground, Mr.

Genetical Institute,

Brewer passes hastily to the supposed "formid-

Rijksstraatweg 76,

able judicial and administrative problems" that

Haren (Gr),

legislation on grounds of rape would involve.

The Netherlands.

I am happy to inform him that these have been

successfully overcome in such countries as

DR. H. J. MULLER writes: There is much
that I agree with in Dr. Beardmore's letter. If he will look up my article in The Control of Human Heredity and Evolution, referred to in my previous letter, or my chapter in The Population Crisis and the Use of World Resources (The Hague: W. Junk, 1964; Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1965) he will find that

Denmark, Norway and Sweden, and that nobody now seriously supposes they could not be overcome here, too.
Mr. Brewer seems anxious to maintain the Ultimate Deterrent of the Unwanted Baby for those "females", to quote his words, who acquiesce "in sexual liberties up to the point of no return". This attitude is not of course un-

I emphasized virtually the same aims as he did. The space limitations of a letter caused my list there to be shorter, but I believe the very general faculties there mentioned do, when taken in conjunction, encompass or result in the more specific ones detailed by him.
However, I do not agree that those more general characteristics often conflict. Rather, they tend to reinforce one another's action. They also help to guard against the selection of paranoid personalities, that I warned against in

familiar to many of us.

Much ill-health, as Mr. Brewer rightly suggests,

results from repeated and unnecessary abortion,

as it does of course also from excessive child-

bearing. The answer to this is inevitably to be

found in much improved contraceptive facilities

combined with a more realistic and humane

abortion law aimed at reducing unskilled

practice-a solution that the Abortion Law

Reform Association has been advocating these

many long years.

MADELEINE SIMMS

these articles. Likewise protective should be the Abortion Law Reform Association,

long period following the donor's death, and 68 Uphill Grove, London, NW7

55

