REPORTS.

MEDICAL RESEARCH COMMITTEE: SPECIAL REPORT SERIES, NO. 34. THE

INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL ON MANUAL WORK AND NEURO-MUSCULAR

CO-ORDINATION. THIS report records the result of an investigation carried out by Dr. H. M. Vernon at the instance of the Advisory Scientific Committee of the Central

Control Board (Liquor Traffic), with a view to obtaining precise evidence as to the degree to which the influence of alcohol on neuro-muscular activity is affected by varying the conditions under which the drug is administered.

The points specially considered were the effects of dilution and of the

absence or presence of food in the stomach. In most of the experiments the test employed was the repeated typing of a memorised passage, the influence of alcohol being measured by the effects on speed and on accuracy. In order to reduce these two variables to a single

expression, Dr. V7ernon adopted the device of typing at two selected

speeds, and estimating from the results the time equivalent of a typing

error. The method is ingenious, but obviously open to criticism, as

introducing psychological factors of uncertain effect. And it appears

to be hardly necessary, since all the experiments show that alcohol

influences speed and accuracy in the same direction. In addition to the typewriting tests, which were made with seven

subjects, experiments were carried out by three subjects in working an adding machine, and by six subjects in pricking a target at arm's length.

The most striking result brought out in all the experimental methods

is the effect of the presence or absence of food in the stomach. It was found that the effect of a given dose of alcohol in disturbing neuro-muscular

co-ordination was on an average twice as great when taken on an empty stomach as when taken with or after food. A similar but less considerable

exaltation of toxic effect was found when alcohol was given in strong as opposed to dilute solution. These results agree with those obtained by Dr. Mellanby (No. 31 of the Medical Research Committ-ee, Special Report Series), who made direct chemical estimation of the alcohol content of the blood after administering the drug under varied conditions, and who found that dilution, and still more the presence of food in the stomach, had a marked effect in delaying and decreasing the absorption of alcohol

into the circulation.

In promoting the scientific investigation of such points as are dealt

with in these experiments, Lord D'Abernon has given a new aspect to the

study of the liquor question, and it is to be hoped that further research

on similar importance

lines will be in connection

directed with that

to the many other
question, on which,

matters of practical as he himself rightly

insisted, our knowledge is still deplorably deficient.

WV. C. S.

PENAL REFORM LEAGUE RECORD. Vol. VIII., Nos. I and 2; July, I9I9.

London: 7, Dalmeny Avenue, N.7.

THE League, though undoubtedly its influence is now inconsiderable in

comparison with what work, as shown in a of various proceedings

it will be, is doing strenuous and excellent spadenumber of most interesting articles and abstracts of their society (p. I4.) The lines upon which the

work at the Women's Training Colony at Newbury is being carried out

certainly do not err on the side of Victorianism. They are, in fact, daring,

and The

perhaps League

crude, but they are decidedly is also taking advantage of

a step in the right direction. each new phase of social

evolution that may help them to get in the thin edge of their

234 EUGENICS REVIEW.

wedge in the right direction. Thus they state (p. 32), "smaller wars than this have been followed by great increase of crime and demoralisation. What is likely to follow this greatest of all wars ? We do not know. . . Large numbers of soldiers

will find their way into our prisons (p. 6). To condemn these men,

with their memories, to solitude and silence, seems . . . to be such

refinement of torture . . that the public would (not) acquiesoe

. . if only the fact of our penal system . . . could be

brought home. " Much attention is also being given to pro-

bation and remand work and the treatment of juvenile offendeirs

(p. 78). "We are not here arguing for or against any one kind of punish-

ment or another. One would rather a man whipped a boy and loved him

than that he should refrain from whipping him without feeling any affection

or respect for him. But what we plead for is a new attitude, a desire

to understand, a recognition of our abysmal ignorance in these things,

a reluctance to jump at hasty conclusions and quack remedies. For we

are all quacks in the Law Courts, and it will require years of patient and

loving investigation before we are much else."

L. K.

RESCUE WORK: AN ENQUIRY AND A CRITICISM. i9, Tothill Street, West-

minster, S.W.i; price is.

THIS is a carefully-compiled and thorough investigation of the subject

from all possible angles. Its study should prove useful to all, but more

especially to those engaged upon this form of social work, or about to

take it up. Without actually condemning any of the existing means of

dealing with the problems, it yet throws much light upon many of the

defects of the present-day system, and at the same time gives a number

of valuable suggestions of possible, nay, of imperative modifications, im-

provements, and extensions of the work as it stands now. Every chapter

of the inquiry, however, leads to the ultimate conclusion that want of

trained workers-trained mentally, morally, and physically-and want of

funds to carry on the much-need'ed work, are the chief obstacles. This,

of course, is a vicious circle, for training and a life's devotion to woTk of

this kind cannot be obtained or retained without adequate financial

Tesources; and these, again, are not likely to be forthcoming until the

nature of the work and its need become a matter of common knowledge.

The best of workers, if inadequately supported financially, or over-

worked owing to lack of helpers, must fail.

L. K.

THE

PLACE OF SEX EDUCATION
Van Buskirk, M.A.

IN BIOLOGY AND GENERAL SCIENCE, by E. F.
Washington Government Printing Office;

I9I9.

THE results of Mr. Van Buskirk's experiments in sex education by means

of classes in biology and general science as culum of schools for either sex, ought to desirability of this proceeding in all schools
Nature's phenomena, those founded on sex are

part of
go far all over

the ordinary curriin establishing the
the world. Of all

the most insistent, and the

most
life. to be

obvious to be brought home They are also, owing to our mis-interpreted and abused.

to a human being throughout his present-day education, those most
From earliest times it has been

whole
likely
found

necessary to enlighten young humanity upon the phenomena of astronomy,

astrology, geology, lated knowledge of

geography,
the ages.

botany,
But for

etc., with the aid of the accumu-
proper teaching, any child might

aomarsaatfanonnnitldudddltnnaeidwiabtrmnibuesptutraohsharloreeleeu,tmldtaaeamtanwanirtcniinotntiethgefh,trebothsefioelttssriaTutseetihhecvitexeeooie?,snnndsssu.febtwbToqrjohheuouycieemnttrnsd,estmyheteotadhraorueereeltsbdrfbeuidoaltmatlnhicehdelonmyntseyutaanioofandnbeunusetindaeyrnglrsgwavtagrnmataeeidninnscdoeidpkinnrrin,taorngetgegriratpaoehsornansofetsdntnaatiobttthntholieeeoknntbmn,heeosoessuwLstnnt.lbaeeeougKdavgfgli.guohetaetetcal,,ystll

