THE TREASURER'S PAGE, No. 4

H AVING shown in the three previous

issues of the REVIEW:

I. The growth in the Society's

income and expenditure from I924 to

I935 inclusive;

2. The financial position of the Society

and the financial reasons for the

urgency for more funds;

3. The eugenic objectives on which we are

spending money out of capital, and for

which more funds are needed;

I propose in this issue to discuss the support

given to the Society by its Fellows and Mem-

bers as shown by its subscription and

donation income, and to compare this with

the support, also in the form of donations

and subscriptions, given by their members

to other societies engaged in work of no

greater urgency and importance.

The facts in the case of our Society are these:

Year Number of Fellows Total Subscription and Members and Donation Income
Ended Dec. 3Ist, 659 [528 I2S. 3d.

I936

which equals a total annual contribution of

i6s. oid. per eugenics enthusiast! Compare

this with the following table:

FIGURES OF AVERAGE SUPPORT PER PERSON

IN THE CASE OF OTHER SOCIETIES WITH

GENERALLY COMPARABLE ORGANISATIONS

AND AIMS

A. Society
B. I.

Total Membership
(All Categories)
I3I
I85

Total of Subscriptions and
Donations per Annum £ s. d.
287 II II
407 4 4

Average Amount per
person £ s. d.
2 3 I01 2 4 Of

C. , D. ,,

26I 458 II 7 I I5 Ii
I67 795 0 0 4 I5 21

E. " F. ,,

372 579 8 6 Iii 4i 245 I,097 2 6 4 9 62

I think you will agree with me that the

comparison reveals a shocking state of affairs

and one of which we have reason to be

thoroughly ashamed. But there are mitigat-

ing circumstances which should in fairness

be set out:

I. I have no doubt that if the Society's capi-

tal reserves were less, the subscription

and donation income would be greater;

2. Support which in other circumstances would go direct to the Society now goes to some of its work and objectives through other channels;
3. The Society is continually undermining its own income support by its practice of creating co-operative bodies with other societies to develop or achieve special objectives;
4. This is a rather curious point. When the question was raised at a Council meeting some months ago, I found to my great astonishment that suggestions for increasing the subscription income and for giving publicity to appeals to this end were not entirely approved. The objection was based on the ground that, the Society being a scientific body, members liked to know exactly what their subscription was and also to know that all Fellows and all Members paid the same subscriptions respectively.
There is much to be said for this viewpoint so long as the progress of eugenics is not hindered. The difficulty is, however, that the Eugenics Society, though in fact a scientific body, is something more than that; it is also a society that can only develop towards its objectives by engaging in propaganda. It must educate and carry the people with it if it is to achieve its objectives.
There are, of course, ways of getting round the difficulty, such for example as leaving the subscriptions for Fellows and Members unaltered but, in addition, establishing special subscriptions to research and propaganda funds. Any other suggestions for dealing with the matter and increasing the subscription income of the Society would be most welcome, and I would invite any reader of this page who has helpful ideas to send them to the General Secretary or to me.
The whole problem will without doubt have to be tackled by the Council, unless the legacies left to the Society, or special donations made by Fellows and Members during their lifetime should prove to be dependable sources of supply.

201

