404 EUGENICS REVIEW

the preconceptions, and the prejudices of men. " The history of religion,"

says Frazer, " is a long attempt to reconcile old custom with new reason,

to find a sound theory for absurd practice." That is one point of view.

" The essence of religion," says Warde Fowler, " in all stages of civilisa-

tion lies in the feeling of the individual that his own life, his bodily and

mental welfare, is dependent upon the Divine, as he and his regard it."

That is another point of view. To discuss these conflicting views with

any attempt at thoroughness would divert us too far from the proper field

of eugenics.

The concluding essays in M. Rignano's work are devoted to a sum-

mary and criticism of collectivist and socialist theories and doctrines.

His remarks are temperate and lucid, but, as they do not present any

particular novelty, they need not detain us. He concludes this portion

of his subject with an amiable hope which we may be allowed to endorse:

" Quel que soit, du reste, cet avenir plus ou moins inconnu, nous pouvons

du moins-comme conclusion de tout ce qui vient d'etre dit-constater ce

fait qui est d'un bon augure. C'est que l'eveil d'une conscience collective

dans la classe la plus mis6rable, dans toute cette si grande fraction de

nos semblables jusqu'ici raval6e, constitute deji par lui-m6me un

6largissement et un perfectionnement pour l'ensemble de la conscience

sociale; tandis que la puissance accrue de cette classe a d6ji rendu moins

in6gales les diverses forces sociales en conflit. Il en est resulte un plus

grande sensibilite sociale a l'egard de toutes les peines et de toutes les

souffrances dont gemissent encore d'innombrables creatures humaines et

la formation d'un nouvel ideal supreme d'une 6quit6 plus grande. De

faqon qu'il est permis desormais d'esp6rer que dans le choc de tous les

lfu'thuurmsaniatn6tanuaounriasmpelsu,s

quelle qu'en i craindre de

puisse sombre

'etre dans

la solution definitive, de plus profonds abimes,

mais qu'en toute confiance ct securite elle pourra monter vers des cimes

plus hautes et de meilleures destin6es.J

J. A. LINDSAY.

Nieeforo, ALFREDO. Contributo alto studio della misura diffusione della Cultura in Italia: I nuovi 4rogetti

e della
per uina

Statistica della Vita Intellettuale Italiana. Perugio, Unione

Tipografica Co-operativa, 1912.

IN the year I9IO a law was passed in Italy, in connection with the quin-

quennial census, authorising the reorganisation of the Central Statistical Office. On the invitation of the ministers concerned, Professor Niceforo has taken part in the work of reorganisation, in particular by the framing of several schemes for the collection and storage of statistical

data. Of these one of the most interesting is his proposal for forming

a card catalogue of all students for higher education, in order

at to

the universities investigate the

and other diffusion of

institutions culture in

different parts of Italy and to obtain a statistical measure of the intel-

lectual life of the The secretary

country. of each university

would

be

required,

at

the

beginning

of the academic year, to enter particulars concerning each student on the
face of a separate card which is divided into suitable spaces for the

various items, such as name, date, and place of birth, nationality, name

and occupation of father, place of residence of family, nature of pro-

posed studies, and so on. To facilitate sorting, these cards have a

triangular space on the left hand upper corner tinted in different shades

to indicate the course of studies to be pursued. On the back of the card

is a list of the examinations involved in that particular course, with a

space after each in degree of success.

which At the

the secretary end of each

is required to academic year

enter the the cards,

student's filled in

up to date, have to be sent to the Central Statistical Office to be filed and

to serve as the basis for statistical returns.

