SOME PROBLEMS OF POPULATION*
By A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, M.A.

I PROPOSE to describe briefly the work to convince that reform was necessary. The

of the two committees which the Eugenics Population (Statistics) Act, which was passed

Society is assisting to finance, namely the into law a little more than a year ago, has

Population Investigation Committee and the made provisions under which certain infor-

Population Policies Committee. The first is mation is collected which was not assembled

purely scientific; it aims at ascertaining the before. That information will enable us,

facts and analyzing them. The second is when it has been published and analyzed, to

intended to review the facts, and where ascertain the extent of differential fertility.

problems are found to exist, to suggest We shall be able to say to what extent any

policies to deal with the problems disclosed. group or class or occupation in this country

These two committees are complementary to contributes to the future population. We

one another, the first being fact-finding and shall be able to tell as years go by how far

the other policy-making.

such differences as now exist between the

Population Investigation Committee

classes are increasing or diminishing. I do not think that there is any greater

The Population Investigation Committee service this Committee could have rendered

consists of twenty-two members of whom to this Society and eugenics in general than

half are on the committee by virtue of their to have been influential in obtaining this

special knowledge of population problems; reform. Ever since the days of Sir Francis

the remainder, all of whom also have special Galton we, as eugenists, have been interested

knowledge of this field, represent other in differential fertility, but we may fail to

organizations. The Eugenics Society has three realize how little we know about it; we are

representatives, Lord Horder, Mrs. Hubback apt to rely on birth-rate figures. Much more

and Mr. Julian Huxley. The remaining eight data is required in order to understand the

societies have one representative each, and position. Owing to the operation of this Act

Dr. Blacker is the honorary secretary. All we shall come year by year into possession of

the funds which have been contributed from the necessary data and we shall eventually

various sources to this committee, with the have really accurate information about this

exception of £2o a year which is devoted to matter.

salaries, go entirely to research. The Eugenics The Committee is also interested in making

Society provides the room for secretarial work the census more useful to people who have

free and the London School of Economics our particular problems in view. Once only

provides free accommodation for research in the history of the British census, in I9II,

workers.

particulars were taken which gave informa-

The Committee has done a great deal of tion about the size of families in different

work in obtaining improvement in the system classes and occupations. That proved to be

of registration of births, marriages and of the greatest possible interest to us, but

deaths. Other persons and other bodies have that information is quite out of date. Those

been influential, but I think this Committee questions were not asked in I92I or in I93I;

may claim to have put more energy than any we hope to ensure that they are asked once

other body into this particular objective. again in I94I, and if we are successful we

We met with most cordial co-operation from shall have accomplished something of great

the Registrar-General. It was Parliament importance to eugenics.

and the Government whom it was necessary The Committee has put in the forefront

* The substance of a paper read before the Eugenics Society on May i6th, 1939.

of its agenda investigations into the situation which governs child-bearing and child-rearing

IOI

102 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in this country to-day. Under that head ies, and that its prophecies have already been

come numerous projects of which I am only proved to be wrong. But the Committee has

going to mention two. First, the investiga- never prophesied at all and therefore it has

tion into the cost of education in relation to not prophesied wrongly. All the Committee

the size of family. The Committee entrusted has said is that, if the population continues

this task to Dr. Leybourne about eighteen to move at a certain pace, it will be of a

months ago. Dr. Leybourne is preparing a certain size in future years. There were two

book which we hope will be published in the estimates in which the Committee was

autumn. The second investigation, to which specially interested, both made by Dr. Enid

I have alluded, comes under the head of Charles. One estimate was made on the

child-bearing and child-rearing: the problem supposition that the pace on which the

of housing in relation to family needs and population was going in I933 would con-

family size. This is a problem which is tinue.

bound to be of importance because of the Another calculation was based on the

increasing Government activity in all fields assumption that the pace would continue to

of housing in relation to the type of house drop as it had been dropping for many years.

that is built, whether cottages or flats, in Certain critics point out that, if you take the

relation to the location of houses as governed first estimate, the population is now higher

by the Housing and Town Planning legisla- than her figure gives. This is true but Dr.

tion, and in relation to the number allowed Charles was most careful to say that any

in houses as controlled by the overcrowding effect of migration into or out of the country

legislation. All these Governmental activities had not been taken into consideration. If

in the field of housing have an obvious and you look at the figure given by Dr. Enid

direct bearing upon the whole problem of Charles in her first estimate, and the figure

families in this country. We are fortunate estimated by the Registrar-General for the

in obtaining the services of Dr. Elsas who has population to-day, you will find that the

begun the investigations which we anticipate estimated population to-day is higher than

will take about two years.

her figure by little more than the amount

The Population Investigation Committee that the population has gained by immigra-

also considers it of importance to observe tion. What has been happening since I933

and record what is happening in foreign is that the population has been going at about

countries. Mr. Glass, the Research Secretary the same pace so far as births and deaths

of the Committee, has published a book are concerned. That is a very important

called The Struggle for Population, in which fact. It is not impossible that this long

he describes the trend of population in continued drop in the size of the family has

several European countries, and the various very nearly reached its end, and that we may

efforts made to increase the birth-rate. He have neared the point where the size of the

is now engaged upon a complete revision of family is becoming stable. But we have not

that work, which is likely to appear in the got the data in our possession which would

autumn.

enable us to say whether this is so. If how-

I want to dispel what seems to be a ever the Population (Statistics) Act had been

common misapprehension. The Committee on the Statute Book years ago we should

concerns itself with the trend of population already have the information necessary to

and has in its publications used the calcula- decide this point.

tions of Dr. Enid Charles and others concerning the estimated future population of this Population Policies Committee

country. These publications have met with The Population Policies Committee is a

criticism which takes the form of saying that joint enterprise with the P.E.P., which is

the Committee has made prophecies about short for Political and Economic Planning.

the future population of this country, or has They have published many interesting

adopted or sponsored other people's prophec- reports on the Press, on the social services,

SOME PROBLEMS OF POPULATION

I03

on housing and so on, but this is the first had any suspicion that heredity might play

time they have co-operated with any other a part in producing the evils that had

body or society. This joint committee aims attracted their attention and which they

at producing a report on population policies. wished to abolish. They had not rejected the

It will take into account both the quality notion; it was that the idea had not reached

and quantity of the population; it is not them. To-day there are few people who have

interested merely in quantitariate considera- not heard of eugenics and the possible and

tions. It will consider the qualitative as well probable part played by heredity in most

as the quantitative aspects in order to arrive social evils. Nevertheless when the Eugenics

at a coherent social policy which aims at a Society has tried to put forward measures of

population adequate in quality and quantity. eugenic nature, it has found it very difficult

This Committee will have to turn its atten- to gain support for them, because only

tion to the practical policies which might be immediate practical problems engage the

put into operation to-day, and they cover the attention of political parties. But when the

whole field of social effort, the question of population of this country begins to decline,

Income Tax and its relation to family, as it undoubtedly will before long (the date

possible family allowances, housing, types of cannot be foretold, largely because we cannot

housing, whether in town, country and so even guess at the amount of immigration into

on; indeed the whole question of the social the country, or movement out of it), there

services comes under review by such a will be great public concern. Population will

Committee. It is to be hoped that it will then become an issue of the moment, and

have concrete proposals ready by the time measures will be demanded to deal with the

when the public will be interested in the situation. There will be a great opportunity

population problem.

for eugenics, an opportunity to insert

Consideration of the work of these two eugenic considerations into any measures

Committees leads me to a final reflection on that will be taken for dealing with the

the position of the eugenic movement, its quantity of population. The time has not

past history, present position and future quite come, but it is appropriate to begin

prospects. The eugenic movement began now considering the measures that could be

because Sir Francis Galton and others had taken when public interest is aroused. That

a profound belief in the importance of precisely is what the Population Policies

heredity, both for individuals and for Committee is attempting to do; before the

society. That belief has proved to be well public is ready it is attempting to get a

founded. Before the War very few persons programme together.

SCIENTIFIC BOOKS

Current and Standard ENGLISH, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE supplied from stock, or obtained promptZy to order.
A visit to this Department is respectfully su&,ested. Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioninA interests.

H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd., Phone: EUSton 4282 (5 Zines)

136 GOWER STREET
L

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.

