THE EUGENICS REVIEW
acceptance and sympathy which encourages frank discussion. Usually one interview was not enough. In a few cases there were four interviews, though mostly two were sufficient.
The histories were then assessed, and it was judged that of the fifty-two adopted adults, fifteen were well adjusted (Group A), ten (Group D) had poor adjustment, six (Group B) had fairly good adjustment, and twenty-one (Group C) were intermediate. The book contains several case histories which illustrate the characteristics of each group.
Although this is a pilot study, not sufficiently large to be used statistically, it nevertheless does seem to answer many of the vexed questions surrounding adoption.
The most striking finding was the positive correlation between good adjustment and an emotionally stable family background, where the adoptive parents were contented with each other and accepting of the child as an individual, needing encouragement but also the right to develop along lines best suited to it.
There was unanimous agreement amongst Dr. McWhinnie's interviewees that adopted children need to be told of their adoption by the adoptive parents and on the parents' initiative. The optimum age for this is five years or under, and the book gives plenty of evidence for this conclusion. Yet adoptive parents, for various reasons, often find it difficult to impart this knowledge. Their difficulties are sympathetically described and ways of meeting their problems are discussed.
The factors leading to maladjustment are approached in the same sympathetic way. Some of the criteria hitherto thought necessary by many adoption societies do not seem to be important factors. For instance, in all groups there were families who adhered to religious beliefs, so that this, in itself, was not a discriminating factor. The shape of the family-whether the child was an only child, one of other adopted children, or one among the biological children of adoptive parents-seemed to matter less than the emotional climate of the family. These are only two of many aspects that are considered.
The small group of foster children-six in all-were placed in a category of their own (Group E). Two were fairly well adjusted and four had poor adjustment. Here again, the fact that they had been accepted for monetary gain did not seem to be the deciding factor. Once more it was the attitudes that the family members took to each other and to the foster child-attitudes which were also found in the homes of the adopted children -that counted.
This book is a gallant attempt to assess in depth the effects of adoption from the point of view of those who have been adopted. Even in the well adjusted group, it is obvious that these children have had to face difficulties which do not occur when a child is brought up in its own family. The book should prove of valuable assistance to all who are concerned with adoption and should finally dispel any complacency we may have felt that to find a child a good home is something straightforward and simple.
MARGARET PLATT
McWhinnie. Alexina M. Adoption Assessments. Petersham, Surrey, 1966. Standing Conference of Societies Registered for Adoption. Pp. 30. Price 3s. Obtainable from Gort Lodge, Petersham.
THE TWO LECTURES published in this booklet describe the work done by the Guild of Service in Edinburgh, especially with regard to adoption. This was originally a moral welfare organization which, under the direction of Dr. McWhinnie, has developed its case-work service to unmarried parents alongside its work as a registered adoption society.
There has thus been an integration of the two services. One advantage, among many, has been that the unmarried mother has been known to the case-worker for some months 200

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

before her child is born. She is given sympathetic help to face the situation objectively

and to decide on the course of action most likely to be beneficial both to the coming baby

and to herself.

The need for teamwork, both in the assessment of the biological parents, the baby

and the adopting parents is stressed. Dr. McWhinnie has been fortunate in obtaining help

from paediatricians, psychiatrists and the Department of Genetics in the University of

Edinburgh, in cases where specialized help has been thought to be necessary. Controversial

cases are referred to a medical referee.

In this setting, Dr. McWhinnie has been able to apply the knowledge she gained

from her study in depth into the attitudes of adults who had been adopted as children.

(This study, Adopted Children-How They Grow Up, is reviewed above.) She feels that the

needs of the child are of primary importance, as the child's future adjustment to life is so

dependent upon the environment in which it is reared. Nevertheless she is well aware of

the problems of both the biological and adoptive parents, and her attitudes towards them

are sympathetic, accepting and constructive. Her work has brought new insight into the

problems of adoption and the booklet can be recommended to anyone who is interested

in the subject.

MARGARET PLATT

201

