ROSAMUND SHUTER
West Ham College of Technology
Hereditary and Environmental Factors in Musical Ability

THE AIM OF the investigation to be described was to study how far musical ability depends on heredity or environment by comparing parents with children, and monozygotic with fraternal twins.
In most earlier studies musical talent had been assessed on the basis of reputation or of questionnaire data on musical activities. Though satisfactory tests of musical ability had existed since the 1930s, little attempt had been made to apply them in genetic studies. A detailed account of the literature can be found in the writer's thesis (Shuter, 1964).
Pedigree and Questionnaire Studies
Galton (1869) studied the genealogy of 120 eminent and original musicians. But only twenty-six of these had had eminent kinsmen, not all of whom were musicians. He included nine members of the Bach family-surely the most remarkable of all the musical families in history. According to Shull (1948), of fifty-five male Bachs in six generations, forty-eight were musicians and only seven had no known musical gifts.
Biographical material tends to be incomplete, however, as Feis (1910) found. He attempted to study the ancestors and descendants of 285 famous musicians, but information on maternal lines was especially difficult to obtain. Moreover, many of the musicians failed to produce children.
An investigation of contemporary musicians and students at the Juilliard Graduate School of Music was carried out by Scheinfeld for the first edition of You and Heredity. His virtuosi group in the following table included such oustanding performers as Yehudi Menuhin and Artur Rubinstein.

TABLE 1

Approximate percentage of relatives with some degree of talent Percentage for
No. in r-
Group Group Fathers Mothers Siblings

Virtuosi

37 75 50 50

Opera singers 36

67

40

Students of music 50 58 74 70

An analysis of the incidence of talent in the
three groups showed that where both parents had musical talent, more than 70 per cent of the
brothers and sisters (in addition to the individual reporting) also had talent. Where only one
parent was talented, there was talent in 60 per
cent of the siblings. Where neither parent was talented, only 15 per cent of the brothers and
sisters had talent.
Scheinfeld concluded that a multiple-gene mechanism would be needed to account for these ratios, and the simplest one which might fit the requirements would be, at the very least, two different dominant genes. Such a theory would help to explain the sudden appearance of a highly talented individual in an apparently unmusical family-Scheinfeld quotes the example of Toscanini. Whether great musicians differ from those of lesser talent in possessing special "talent" genes is, however, open to question.
Hurst (1912) seems to have been the first person to apply Mendel's laws to an unselected population. From his observations of parents and children in a Leicestershire industrial village he concluded that musical ability was a recessive trait. Lack of musical aptitude might be due, he thought, to an inhibitory factor preventing the expression of the musical capacity which is hypostatically present in everyone. Do the tone

ER-L

149

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1966, 58, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

deaf, he wondered, suffer from a double dose of less than justice to individuals who have lacked

the inhibitory factor?

the opportunity to learn to play.

In the 1920s several Continental workers sought

to study the inheritance of musical ability, as assessed from questionnaire data. Mjoen (1926) Studies based on Testing

graded his subjects' musical ability on a scale With the development of musical ability

from 0 to 10. In the following table those tests more accurate means of assessing aptitude

described as P (Poor) were rated between 0 and 2; became available. The first standardized tests

at most, their ability was limited to being able to be published were the Seashore Measures of

to recognize a tune. The M (Musical) group Musical Talent (1919). These were intended to

ranged from those who knew when they sang measure capacity to perceive fine differences in

out of tune (3) to being able to improvize a pitch, time, intensity etc. and to judge which

second part (7). The S (Superior) subjects were tone in a sequence had been altered on a second

graded 8 to 10 and were, at the least, able to playing. Their relevance to functional musical

play by ear, while the most talented of all could ability, such as required for success in learning

compose, and play several instruments.

to play an instrument, has been repeatedly

questioned. The pitch and tonal memory tests

TABLE 2

are probably the best from this point of view.

Percentages of children in grades of talent born to parents Since 1930 tests based on musical material

of various combinations oftalent

have been developed, some of which do provide

Number of Number of % of children satisfactory estimates of musical potentiality.

Parents parents children S M P Perhaps the best established and most compre-

SxS SxM
SxP MxM

7
40 9 30

23 72 28 0 hensive battery is the Wing Tests of Musical

175
34 113

60 26
39

34 37 49

6 37
12

Intelligence. Three of the seven tests are concerned with ear acuity: how many notes in a

MxP PxP

21 7

75 22

7 0

40 10

53 90

chord? Have two chords been repeated exactly, or has one note moved up or down? Which note

of a melody has been changed on a second

Thus, the higher the average talent of the playing? Four are tests of appreciation, of

parents, the higher the average talent of the rhythm, harmony, intensity and phrasing. In

children is likely to be. The environmentalist each test a tune is repeated in identical or

might object that the musical environment altered style. The subject has to decide whether

provided by parents is liable to vary roughly the second version is the same or not, and, if

with their own talent or lack of talent. Mjoen, different, which is the better rendition.

however, also presents evidence that where Such tests do not, of course, provide infor-

both parents are musical (grade 5 or above), mation as regards the muscular side of perfor-

the proportion of musical children corresponds mance.

to the number of gifted grandparents, and A pioneer genetic study in which the Seashore

concludes that it is the quality of the stock rather Measures were used was undertaken by Stanton

than that of the parents which is decisive.

(1922). She tested eighty-five members of the

Haecker and Ziehen found that the chance families of six well-known American musicians

that a child will be very musical is 86 per cent and drew up talent profiles for each family.

where both parents are talented, about 60 per Her results seem to confirm that the child from

cent when one parent is musical, and about musical stock has a better chance of being

25 per cent when both parents are unmusical. musical, but her tables are difficult to interpret,

Remarkably similar percentages were obtained since no statistical analysis is applied.

by Heymans and Wiersma (see Revesz, 1953).

Seashore's pitch, loudness and rhythm tests

Such questionnaire surveys depend, of course, and Wing's pitch and memory tests were included

on the accuracy of the replies. Where instru- in the Hereditary Abilities Study (Vandenberg,

mental playing is taken into account, they do 1962). Some thirty-three pairs of MZ and

150

HEREDITARY AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN MUSICAL ABILITY

forty-three pairs of DZ twins were studied.
Significant differences between the two types of twin were found only in the case of the rhythm and of the memory tests. The heritability indices, calculated with Clark's formula, were
as follows:

Seashore Wing

Pitch Loudness Rhythm
Pitch Memory

0-00 0 44 0-52
012 0-42

The Seashore rhythm test is of doubtful reliability, but other evidence suggests that rhythmic capacities are especially resistant to
environmental influences. It is surprising that the two pitch tests should apparently be so little
subject to hereditary control. Vandenberg himself suggests that it may be that only the exceptional talent of the great composers and musicians has an hereditary factor. He adds that possibly defects rather than proficiencies are more properly the concern of hereditary studies.
An interesting investigation of tone deafness was carried out at University College, London by Kalmus and Fry. They developed a distorted tune test consisting ofa few phrases oftwenty-five well-known tunes. In one version the tune was played correctly and in the other the melody was distorted by the insertion of several blatantly wrong notes, the rhythm remaining unchanged. The subjects were asked to decide whether the tunes were played rightly or wrongly. The test discriminated efficiently between 95 per cent of some 1200 adult and adolescent subjects considered normal and 5 per cent regarded as tone deaf (Fry, 1948). Performance of Seashore's memory test was invariably poor among the tone deaf, who were also weak on a pitch discrimination test. The tone deafness appeared frequently to segregate in families and siblings in ratios indicating that it might be caused by a single gene, possibly a dominant. But Kalmus (1952) is cautious in his conclusions and believes that there may be several types of tone deafness and that it is by no means independent of upbringing.
Wyatt (1945) provided ample evidence that really efficient individual coaching could significantly improve pitch discrimination. Practice at singing back notes and phrases can lead to a

lasting improvement among children aged three to five (Updegraff, Heileger and Learned, 1938). How far-reaching would be the effects of a long-term programme of such training is not known. Evidence is, however, available on the influence on test results of a normal amount of exposure to music. Most test authors have tried to produce tests that would be as little affected by previous experience as possible. Wide differences of ability certainly exist among individuals brought up in musically similar environments. In one case a marked difference between two sisters was found even at the early age of eighteen months; their subsequent careers confirmed the difference. Allowing for maturation, scores remain reasonably constant and unaffected by whether the child has commenced studying an instrument or given up music lessons. Again, little real differences in scores are found with groups varying e.g. in sex, race, or cultural background (Wing, 1948; Drake, 1957; Bentley, 1966).
It has been pointed out that many of these results refer to children who may have already passed the stage where training could affect performance of the tests. Holmstrom (1963) obtained evidence that children of eight who come from musically good homes make significantly better scores than those from musically poor homes. This does not, of course, disprove that heredity is a factor.
The Parent-Child Study
Fifty-four pupils of a mixed grammar school and thirteen from a grammar school for girls, both in the Home Counties, and seventy-eight of their parents were tested with the Wing battery. Data on instrumental playing, music lessons, concert-going and home listening were collected by questionnaires.
It would have been desirable to include parents and children at all ability levels. But a volunteer group tends to become a self-selected one, since adults are more likely to attend if they themselves are musical, or have some interest in music, or feel that their children may show talent. The scores showed that the parents were in fact rather above average in musical ability. Many of the children were highly

151

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

talented and had enjoyed superior opportunities rather than the father, who set the musical

to have music lessons and to listen to good environment. Perhaps some subtle selection

music. But even with this select group, the mechanism was at work-conceivably, men may

midparental-child* and the sibling correlations be more likely to volunteer to be tested if they

(Table 3) were very similar to the 0 5 "typically" suspect that their offspring resemble themselves!

reported in studies of intelligence (see Vernon, In any case, the number of cases where both

1960). The low correlation of 0-290 for the full parents could be tested was only twenty-five, so

sample rose to 0-364 when the results from the the results can be considered no more than

girls' school where the self-selection effects were suggestive.

particularly strong were omitted. With a more The data from the parents' questionnaires

representative sample, a still higher correlation were also compared with a total index of the

might have been obtained.

children's musical level. This was obtained by

TABLE 3
Correlations on the Wing Test Correlation
Number coefficient

adding, to their Wing scores, a mark for musical knowledge, a listening score and a combined
score for playing and music lessons. Parental playing and music lessons were the only variables

Midparent-child Each parent-each child

25 0 475 which showed a highly significant (p less than 100 0 290 001) association with the children's musical

Father-child Mother-child Higher scoring parent-child

25 25
25

0.627 0 258 0-394

level. This may be regarded as an example of the interaction of hereditary and environmental

Father-mother Siblings

25 0-331 factors, but could be interpreted as supporting 14 0-496 either side. Thus, it could be argued that those

Considering that an interest in amateur
music-making might lead to meeting a marriage
partner of similar tastes, one might have expected a fair degree of assortative mating among this
sample of parents. The figure obtained, 0-331, is quite low, compared with the correlations ranging from 0 3 to 0-7 reported with married and engaged couples on height, intelligence and a wide variety of other traits (see Cattell, 1950).
Again, any effect of dominance, as shown by musical ability being transmitted by the more talented parent, did not appear prominently in
the results. The striking difference between the father-
child and mother-child correlation was difficult
to explain. Boys make roughly the same scores as girls on musical aptitude tests. It is therefore hard to see how a sex-linked mechanism could be involved in the transmission of musical capacity. The data from the parents' question-

parents who had received music lessons and kept up their playing were themselves musically
talented and that the children had inherited
their gifts. The adults' Wing scores did seem to show, broadly speaking, a positive association with the amount of training they had received.
On the other hand, the environmentalist would say that the parents' playing had contributed to raising the children's musical level and that
parents who have themselves learned an instrument are more likely to encourage their children to learn to play. The correlation between the children's Wing scores and their score for lessons and playing combined was quite high, 0654. This might well have been partly due to the weaker children making slow progress and giving up their lessons. If the subjects had been drawn from a population where few had enjoyed opportunities to learn music, more decisive results might have been obtained.

naires on the amount of playing, the music

lessons they had received, and their listening The Twin Study

habits, were carefully examined for an environmental explanation. However, even with these older children, it seemed to be the mother,

1. Twins Brought up Together. Fifty pairs of
twins, with ages ranging from nine to sixteen, from some twenty schools were tested with

* The parents' scores were averaged; in the eight cases of siblings, the average of both children was used.

the Wing tests. They were classified as identical or fraternal by general impression and by

152

HEREDITARY AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN MUSICAL ABILITY
careful inspection. Questioning the twins The smaller differences are somewhat more proved helpful in clearing up some cases of frequent among the MZ twins and the larger doubt; some superficially alike pairs indignantly among the DZ groups. The extent of intrapair denied that they were ever mistaken for one differences was compared with the twins' another by relatives or teachers. The proportion attitudes to music, amount of training and of of MZ to DZ twins (40:60) was higher than the listening, age and musical level. No consistently proportion in the general population (28:72 significant relationships emerged. Differences according to the General Register Office were slightly greater among the younger, as statistics). This is partly because the writer tried opposed to the older, pairs. With both types of to obtain fairly equal numbers of each type. twin there seemed to be a certain tendency for the

MQ
Points
Difference
0-4 5-9 10-14 15-19 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 Over 45 Totals

TABLE 4

Distribution of Musical Quotient Intra-pair Differences

IDENTICAL

FRATERNAL

Children
1- ---,
Boys Girls
42 12 22
1 32
1

Adults
Men Women
2 1
2 11
1

Children

Adults

A' A - --

Boys Girls Mixed Men Women

131
21 322 214 1 221
1

1
1 1

10 10

53

1 9 12

9

21

Also, many boy-girl pairs would be at different smaller differences to be found among the lower

schools and likely to be missed. It is usually scorers. This might mean that the weaker the

considered better to exclude opposite-sexed ear for music, the less responsive will the

pairs, but, as will be seen, those in the present individual be to any environmental stimulation,

sample were not unduly dissimilar in their or perhaps the more marked the degree of

musical ability.

inherited defect, the harder it is to modify. The

In addition to the child twins, Wing scores of majority of the twins had never had music

eleven pairs of young adults who were being lessons (apart from class lessons at school) and

studied by the M.R.C. Psychiatric Genetics only very few ever attended concerts or listened

Research Unit for another purpose were to classical music at home. Among the identical

obtained.

twins, if one had received music lessons, so had

If the sample of parents and children was the other. A difference of 23 MQ points was

unrepresentative in being more talented than found among a highly talented pair of blind

average, most of the twins were atypical in being boy twins, judged to be identical. Both had been

well below average in musical aptitude. In studying the piano for four to five years and did

particular, the appreciation tests may have been a good deal of practice. On the other hand, the

unduly affected in some cases by guessing. The two pairs of identical girl twins with the most

results reported below therefore are based only discordant scores (differences of 23 and 33) had

on the three ear acuity tests. The Wing never had music lessons. Among the fraternal

scores were converted into Musical Quotients twins, the larger differences were found among

(MQs) by Wing's formula (Wing, 1960). The those who were having lessons and who played

distribution of intra-pair differences for each for about equal periods, as opposed to those who

class of twin is shown in Table 4.

were similar in not playing at all. But the number

153

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was too small to be conclusive as to whether or not the training might have increased the differences.
With one DZ pair, the MQ of one twin was 88 points lower than that of her co-twin. Both had failed to record their answers to the first test in the right place. As their MQs were based only on their performance of tests 2 and 3, it seemed better to omit such an extreme result from the correlation calculations, in the absence

some connection with the higher proportion of boys classified by their teachers as tone deaf. A survey of over 16,500 schoolchildren by Bentley (1954, 1957) found that, at the age of twelve, 7 per cent of boys, but only 1 per cent of girls, are considered "monotones". Bentley himself was inclined to believe that this 4 per
cent of individuals may be the same 5 per cent of the adult population who are tone deaf according to the findings of Kalmus and Fry.

TABLE 5

Intra-pair Correlations of Musical Quotients

MZ (n. in pairs)

r

DZ (n. in pairs)

r

20 child 20 child+8 adult 10 boy

0 838 0 794 0-899

20 child (like sexed) 29 child+3 adult 9 boy

0-719 0-721
0 734

h2
0-423 0-262 0-617

of verification by retesting. h2 was calculated using Holzinger's formula.*
The extent of the MZ/DZ contrast (Table 5) was much less than has been reported on intelligence (see Vernon, 1960). It would be unwise to conclude, however, that hereditary factors are less important in musical ability. The numbers were rather too small for correlations to be really stable; the level of difficulty of the tests may affect correlations (cf. Vandenberg, 1962); and with such unmusical children the Wing tests may well give less reliable results than the best intelligence tests.
Environmental factors, as far as they could be assessed from the questionnaires, did not seem to account for the high h2 among the boy twins considered separately. There might be
* h2 is a statistic devised by Holzinger as a measure of the proportion of the variance of a trait in a given population that is due to heredity as opposed to environment (Newman, Freeman and Holzinger, 1937). It is useful as an expression of the estimated importance of genetic control, but has been criticized because it assumes that the environments of MZ and DZ twins can be regarded as equivalent and does not take into account any interaction between heredity and environment. Holzinger's formula is
rMZ-rDZ h2=
1 -rDZ
where r is the intra-class correlation for MZ or DZ twins. Vandenberg (1962) preferred to use Clark's formula, which divides the variance of the DZ twins minus the variance of the MZ twins by the variance of the DZ twins.
154

However, why some monotones outgrow or
overcome their deficiency before the age of twelve, while others do not, would require
investigation. The scores for the 30-itemed pitch and
memory tests were not intended by Wing to be used separately from the other tests. However, it seemed worth while trying to see whether Vandenberg's results could be verified or disproved. The intrapair correlation on pitch for the twenty pairs of DZ child twins was higher, 0-767, than that for the twenty pairs of MZ twins, 0 558. On memory, however, with
age partialled out, the intrapair correlation was 0 766 with the MZ group and 0 500 with the DZ group. h2 as calculated with Holzinger's
formula was 0 532. If Clark's formula was used, as in Vandenberg's study, the h2 rose to 0 642. The evidence in the literature on the heritability
of pitch discrimination is somewhat contradictory (see Shuter, 1964, pp. 193-5). One might have expected that, if any difference existed at all, pitch would have been more highly heritable
than musical memory. 2. Twins Brought up Apart. Thanks to the kindness of Mr. James Shields of the M.R.C. Genetics Research Unit, five pairs of identical twins brought up apart, who had earlier been studied by him, were tested. The pseudonyms used by Shields in his book (1962) have been
adopted here.

HEREDITARY AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN MUSICAL ABILITY

The intrapair differences in Wing raw scores* were as follows: 2, 2, 12, 15 and 20.
One of the pairs whose scores differed by only 2 points had rather similar musical backgrounds: both claimed to be interested in music; both had one or two years of piano lessons during childhood. Both of the other pair of twins with a difference of only 2 points had grown up in families where other members of the family played in brass bands. But while Francis had actually played the cornet in a band for twentyfour years, Foster had not had the opportunity of learning to play till only two months before he was tested (at the age of thirty-eight). Their scores were very close to the average on Wing's norms. The pattern of subtest results was very similar.
The twins with the difference of 12 marks were aged fifty-seven when tested. The lower score was made by Jim, the twin who was more interested in music than his co-twin and who had the more sophisticated tastes. He liked ballet music and Tchaikovsky: his brother preferred Strauss.
Jacqueline, whose Wing score was just above average while her sister's was 15 points less, had enjoyed a much superior musical background as a child. There was constant music-making at home; she had piano lessons for seven years and later conducted a Townswomen's Guild choir. No one in Beryl's home played and she had never had music lessons.
The largest difference was found with a pair of female twins, tested when aged forty-three. Their father played the piano and had gained diplomas for music. Olive, brought up by her own parents, had two years of piano lessons. From the age of fourteen, she listened to light classical music every evening. Madge was brought up by an uncle and aunt who encouraged her to become a piano teacher. She held an A.T.C.L. diploma, but at the time of testing, had given up music teaching. Both twins scored well above the average and some of Olive's subtest scores were very similar to Madge's. They had similar tastes in music.
* Difference between raw scores=roughly half the difference between MQ points.

Conclusions
The genetic factors that emerged from the present investigation are less strong than those found in studies of intelligence, probably because of the musical level of the subjects that could be tested.
The general conclusion to be drawn from this and other studies reported in the literature is that genetic components do impose an upper limit to achievement and speed of learning in music. How much less than maximum attainment is reached in an unstimulating environment is difficult to determine. The possibility of improving musical ability, as measured by the Wing tests, is suggested by the difference of 20 marks between a pair of MZ twins brought up apart. But this difference occurred where one twin had enjoyed the opportunity of training up to piano teaching diploma standard. It might, moreover, be only among persons with high initial endowment that differences of training could produce such a difference in test performance. Also, the more experienced twin may have felt more confident about tackling the tests. Sensibly used, tests such as the Wing have considerable prognostic value in estimating future success with music.
REFERENCES
Bentley, A. 1954. Children who sing out of tune, Music in Education, March/April, 13-14.
Bentley, A. 1957. Children who sing out of tune, Music in Education, July/Aug. 82-3; Sept./Oct. 114.
Bentley, A. 1966. Musical Ability in Children and its Measurement, London, Harrap.
Cattell, R. B. 1950. Personality. New York, McGrawHill.
Drake, R. M. 1957. Manualfor the Drake Musical Aptitude Tests. Chicago, Science Research Associates.
Feis, 0. 1910. Studien uber die Genealogie undPsychologie der Musikers. Wiesbaden, Bergmann.
Fry, D. 1948. An Experimental Study of tone deafness. Speech, 12, 4-11.
Galton, F. 1869. Hereditary Genius. London, Macmillan. Holmstrom, L. 1963. Musicality and Prognosis. Uppsala,
Almqvist and Wiksells. Hurst, C. C. 1912. Mendelian heredity in man. Eugen.
Rev. 4, 20-21. Kalmus, H. 1949. Tune deafness and its inheritance.
Proc. Int. Cong. Genet. Stockholm, 605. Kalmus, H. 1952. Inherited sense defects. Scientific
American, 186, 64-70.
Mjoen, J. 1926. Genius as a biological problem. Eugen. Rev., 17, 242-257.
Newman, H. H., Freeman, F. N., and Holzinger, K. J. 1937. Twins: A Study of Heredity and Environment. Chicago, Univ. Chicago Press.
155

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Revesz, G. 1953. Introduction to the Psychology ofMusic.
London, Longmans, Green. Scheinfeld, A. 1939. You and Heredity. New York,
Stokes. Shields, J. 1962. Monozygotic Twins Brought up Apart
andBrought up Together. London, OUP. Shull, F. 1948. Heredity. New York, McGraw-Hill. Shuter, R. P. G. 1964. Heredity and environmental
factors in musical ability, Ph.D. thesis, London University. Stanton, H. 1922. Inheritance of specific musical capacities, Psychol. Monog. 31, Whole No. 140, 157-204. Updegraff, R., Heileger, L., and Learned, J. 1938.

The effect of training upon the singing ability and musical interest of three-, four-, and five-year-old children, Univ. Iowa Stud. Child Welfare, 14, 83-121. Vandenberg, S. G. 1962. The hereditary abilities study: Hereditary components in a psychological test battery, Amer. J. hum. Genet. 14, 220-37. Vernon, P. E. 1960. Intelligence and Attainment Tests. London, ULP. Wing, H. D. 1948. Tests of musical ability and appreciation, Brit. J. Psychol. Monogr. Suppl. No. 27, Pp. 88. Wing, H. D. 1960. Manual for Standardised Tests of Musical Intelligence. N.F. Ed. Res. Wyatt, R. F. 1945. The improvability of pitch discrimination, Psychol. Monog. 58, 267, 1-58.

156

