THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

T HE Annual General Meeting was held be modified during the current year by the

at 69 Eccleston Square, S.W.i, on suspension of the annual election of mem-

Tuesday, May 28th, I940, at 5 p.m., bers of Council and that those members of

with the President, Lord Horder, in the Chair. Council who have consented shall remain in office without further election for that

period with the powers vested in them."

MINUTES. The minutes of the Annual General Meeting held on Tuesday, May i6th, I939, which were contained in the
Annual Report, included in the April issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW, and had therefore been circulated to all Fellows and Members of the Society, were taken as read and signed
as correct. ANNUAL REPORT. The Chairman pre-
sented the Annual Report, the adoption of which was proposed by Mr. Bramwell, seconded by Mr. Binney and carried unani-

It was therefore agreed that the Honorary Officers and Council should remain as appointed at the Annual General Meeting held on May i6th, I939, with two excep-
tions: i. Owing to the resignation of Professor Ryle there would be now only
five Vice-Presidents instead of the usual six. 2. The resignation of Sir Mark Grant Sturgis from the Council; this was received: and accepted last September, to take effect in May.

mously.

The Emergency Committee for the ensuing

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE year will consist of the following, with power

SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented to co-opt: The Lord Horder, Sir Charles the Statement of Accounts and Balance Arden-Close, Mr. Binney, Mr. Bramwell,

Sheet for the year ended December 3Ist, Mr. Chance, The Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff,

I939. These were unanimously adopted.
APPOINTMENT OF HONORARY OFFICERS

Mr. Gun, Mrs. Hubback, Dr. Lewis, Mr. Martin, Mr. Titmuss.

AND COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR I940-I. The ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR

following Resolution, passed by the mem- I940-I. It was proposed by Mr. Binney,

bers of the Emergency Committee at their seconded by Mr. Gun, and carried unani-

meeting held on April 2nd, I940, was read mously, that the auditors of the Society,

by the President:

Messrs. West & Drake, be re-elected.

" Since it appears to this meeting that A hearty vote of thanks, proposed by Mr. it is undesirable in present circumstances Binney, to Lord Horder for his work on
to have elections of members of Council, behalf of the Society for the past year was it is hereby resolved that the procedure carried unanimously.

ANNUAL REPORT 194041

In this Report, the accounts relate to the period December 3Ist, I939, to December 3Ist, I940. The rest of the Report covers the period from March 3ISt, I940, to March
31st, I94I. The war and the continued absence on
active service of Dr. Blacker have made the work of the Society difficult during the past

year; but in spite of adverse conditions the Emergency Committee Meetings were regular and well attended. At the October Meeting, however, it was agreed that, in view of the situation arising out of the war, the work of the Society should be placed on a care and maintenance basis, and with great regret it was decided to dispense with the services of

27

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Miss Pocock and Miss Dunn, leaving Mrs.
Collyer in charge of the office.
Homes in Canada Service.-Several sugges-
tions were made early in the year about the
possible war-time activities of the Society, and when in June a cablegram was received from Dr. Hutton, President of the Eugenics
Society of Canada, offering homes in Canada
for the duration of the war to children selected by the Eugenics Society here, it was
unanimously agreed that the offer presented
an opportunity for useful work. A cablegram
of grateful acceptance was despatched, and to deal with the work a committee was formed, consisting of Lord Horder, Mr.
C. F. Chance (Chairman), Dr. A. J. Lewis, Mr. R. M. Titmuss and Miss Pocock (Secretary). Fellows and Members were notified of the scheme, and within a short time
applications were received on behalf of 4I mothers and 266 children. It did not prove
possible, however, to send more than a
fraction of those who wished to go and for
whom homes were prepared. Three parties
consisting in all of 5 mothers and 23 children left between the beginning of August and the end of September. All arrived safely, and judging from their letters are
very happy in their new homes. During the
autumn shipping accommodation became increasingly difficult to obtain, but there was always a hope that the situation would improve after the winter, enabling the Committee to send the remainder of the applicants. Early in February I94I, however, a letter from Dr. Hutton informed us that the Government regulations and restrictions in Canada were so severe that the Eugenics Society of Canada could no longer carry on the work and was obliged to " retire from the field." This left us in a helpless position and, to our great disappointment and regret, we have had to do likewise. Dr. Hutton pointed out that, although the Canadian Society would be unable to receive and place any more children under the Homes in Canada Service, he and the Secretary, Judge Harkness, would keep in touch with us and continue to see that those already in Canada were well cared for.
Eugenics Society of Canada.-We very

much regret to learn that owing to circum-
stances entirely beyond their control the Eugenics Society of Canada no longer exists.
Darwin Research Fellowships.-Mr. Pear's
Report on " Approach to Marriage " was
duly received and submitted to Mr. CarrSaunders and Mr. Titmuss, representing the Committee. It was agreed that no further
action should be taken.
Problems of Population.-In the Annual
Report of I939-40 reference was made to
Mr. Glass's book, which had then been com-
pleted but not published. The book has now
appeared and has been very well received. Thus, taking into account Dr. Leybourne's
book which appeared last year, two books of much importance have been published under
the auspices of the Population Investigation Committee, as well as a considerable number of special investigations. It was mentioned
in the last report that the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust had made a grant for the purpose of assisting an investigation into the
problem of population and housing. During
the present year Dr. Moshinsky has completed a memorandum on housing experiments in foreign countries, and Dr. L. Elsas has finished his part of an inquiry into the
whole subject of the bearing of population
changes on housing needs. It has been decided to postpone the second part of Dr. Elsas's investigation, and he has undertaken
special war work in the meantime. The
inquiry into the demographic problems of the British Colonial Empire is being continued by Dr. Kuczynski. It was hoped that the first part of Dr. Kuczynski's work would be finished during this year; but owing to the growing difficulty of obtaining access to libraries the work, though proceeding satisfactorily, has been delayed. The delay will not be of consequence; the object in aiming at publication in I940 was to bring influence to bear upon the colonial censuses due to be
taken in I94I. Since the taking of these censuses has been postponed, the fact that
Dr. Kuczynski's work will appear later than planned is unimportant.
Population Policies Committee.-In i94o it
became clear that the Committee could not carry on its work, and by Easter all attempts

ANNUAL REPORT I940-4I

29

at further meetings were abandoned for the time being. Members of the Committee were absent or unable to attend meetings through pressure of war-time duties, and it was generally felt that it would be unwise to
attempt to publish a Report on Population Policies in the midst of a war, especially since the Committee was not in a position to
work on the drafts submitted to it by the Secretary. Mr. Lafitte has now become a full-time member of the staff of P.E.P.,
where he is working mainly on research into the social services. This work fits in closely with research on population policies.
It has been agreed that Mr. Lafitte should devote one or two days each week to population work, and gradually to issue outlines for the remaining chapters of the Report. Whenever the Committee is able to resume regular meetings, these outlines can be discussed. They can be edited and written up in the light of war-time developments as soon as
peace is in sight, so that the Report can be
issued as soon as possible after the end of the
war.
Drafts of Chapter I (introductory), Chapter II (causes of the fall in fertility), and Chapter III (statistical survey of population trends) were completed in the period when the Committee still met. Detailed outlines for Chapter IV (consequences of changes in
size and age-composition of the population), Chapter V (consequences of differential fertility) and Chapter VII (principles of a population policy) have been prepared, but the Committee has not discussed them. Many preliminary studies of other subjects were also written, and from these further outlines will be elaborated in due course, beginning with chapters on the provision of skilled services and on family income. After a long delay Mr. Lafitte has begun work on elaborating the outline of Chapter V into a memorandum on the eugenic aspects of family allowances, as was promised to the Society a year ago. The memorandum will, of course, express his personal opinions only. He has also used some of the material in the outline of Chapter IV for an article in the January I941 issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW,
again stating his personal opinions.

Education Department.-During the period between the date of the last Annual Report and the end of October, Miss Pocock
struggled valiantly to carry on the work of this department, but the massed daylight air raids, dislocation of traffic and other
causes led to a serious reduction in the number of lectures she was able to give.
Quite a number were delivered, however, and since Miss Pocock's departure, Mrs. Grant Duff has addressed five women's organizations. Four further lectures have been promised, and it is hoped that these will lead to more invitations. The Society's film, From Generation to Generation, has been out on loan five times this year.
Family Planning Association.-Advice on involuntary sterility is available at all the Association's Birth Control Clinics. Most of these, even in the worst-bombed districts, are still open. The Medical Sub-Committee continues to examine the value of present
contraceptive methods and to report on them to the medical profession and other inquirers. The Association's work in India is not much hampered by the war and, though progress is inevitably slow, ground is being gained. The Family Planning Association retains its London address for inquirers, but since June I940 the main work of headquarters has been evacuated to I90 Old Christchurch Road, Bournemouth. The Association is continually used as a centre of information by public and private bodies, doctors, scientists, and members of the public.
Galton Celebration.-Again it was agreed that a dinner would be out of place during the war, and an informal luncheon was held instead at Pinoli's Restaurant on Monday, February 17th, I94I. This was attended by forty-four members and their friends, and was followed by a discussion on " Eugenics in War Time," opened by Lord Horder, who presided.
Members' Meetings.-The following have been held:
April igth, I940.-" The War-time Case
for Family Allowances," by Mrs. Eva Hubback, M.A.
June 3rd, I940.-" The Importance of the

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Child" (with special reference to the Work each to the Eugenics Societies of Victoria

of the National Council for Maternity and and Canada, though the recently announced

Child Welfare), by Sir Bruce Bruce-Porter, disbanding of the Canadian Society means

K.B.E., C.M.G., D.L.

that the REVIEW will no longer reach

It was decided not to hold further meetings eugenists in that dominion. Particular atten-

until the situation improved, but, after the tion has been paid to the eugenic aspects of

success of the Galton luncheon, it was agreed war-time measures and policies and popula-

to arrange a series of informal luncheons on tion movements both in this country and, so

the same lines. The first of these was held far as data can be obtained, in Europe and

at Pinoli's Restaurant on March 25th, I94I, the world in general.

when fifty people were present and heard an Obituary.-We regret to announce the

interesting address by Mr. Kenneth Lindsay, deaths of the following: Dr. Kenneth

M.P., on " New Slants on British Educa- Aikman, Mrs. Anstruther, Mrs. Barrow

tion." Finance.-The usual statement of Income

Cadbury, Mrs. Leonard Darwin, Mr. T. E. Lloyd, Mr. Frederick Rathbone, Professor

and Expenditure, Balance Sheet and List of J. B. Robertson, Mrs. Stebbing, Mrs. Alec

Investments will be found at the end of this Tweedie, Dr. Douglas White, and Sir Arnold Report, with corresponding figures for the Wilson. The Consultative Council has also

previous year. It will be seen that last year suffered a loss in the death of Professor

there was an excess of expenditure over F. A. P. Aveling.

income of £233 2s. 5d.
The Society has received notification of a legacy of LIoo from the late Mrs. Alec
Tweedie, whose death is recorded elsewhere

Register of Fellows and Members.-An analysis is presented of the Society's Register for the period April Ist, I940, to March 3Ist,

in this Report.

194I:

Library.-Comparatively few books have

Life Fellows Fellows Members Total

been added to the library during the year, Total, March 3Ist,

the total number now being 2,827, an I940 ... ... 7I 234 28I 586

increase of only thirty-one. The Society is Elections, I940-I

3 i6 I9

again indebted to Miss E. Corry for her

valuable services as Honorary Librarian, and to Miss Lane, Review Secretary, who has supervised the library during Miss Less

7I 237 297 605

Corry's months of absence.

Deceased ... 3 4 3 1o

" Review."-Though it has of necessity been Resigned ...

I4 I5 29

much reduced in size the REVIEW has been Lapsed ... ...

8 I3 21

able to retain its characteristic features and

to maintain its circulation. Throughout the Total, March 3ISt,

year 500 copies of each issue have gone to the I94I . ... 68 2II 266 545

American Eugenics Society and IOO copies Affiliated Societies

4

