THE STERILIZATION PROPOSALS
A History of their Development
By C. P. BLACKER, M.C., M.A., M.B., M.R.C.P.

A s far as can be seen at present, it is cal appointments, that the student should

through its advocacy of sterilization see as wide an assortment of pathological

that the Eugenics Society is most conditions as possible. Cases for steriliza-

likely to come before the public eye in the tion exhibit nothing of interest in this way.

near future. It may therefore be of interest For these and other reasons it has been

for readers of the REVIEw to know the inner found by all the birth-control clinics in this

history of how this subject came to be raised country that it is far from easy to get either

and adopted by the Society.

therapeutic or eugenic sterilizations per-

A policy of limited and safeguarded steri- formed on poor people.

lization has always been advocated by Major

Darwin, and in the year I928, he devoted much time and attention to the preparation

A STERILIZATION HOSPITAL

of a Sterilization Bill. A draft of this It occurred to Professor Huxley and my-

appeared in the October number of the self that here would be a useful practical

EUGENICS REVIEW for the year I928. The activity for the Eugenics Society. The

matter, however, was not then pursued Society is sometimes criticized for being too

through lack of opportunity.

much concerned with theory and too little

In June I929 Professor J. S. Huxley and with practice. Could it not meet this criti-

I were spending a week-end on the yacht of cism by starting a hospital for voluntary

Mr. C. F. Chance, who organized the World sterilization ?

Population Conference at Geneva in Septem- In the course of the winter of 1929, Pro-

ber I927. One evening the conversation fessor Huxley went to Africa, and in his

turned to the difficulties of getting steriliz- absence I raised this question at a Council

ing operations performed on poor people, meeting. I was asked to state the proposal

such, for example, as the over-burdened more precisely, particularly in relation to

mother who has had a number of miscar- the legal position and to the approximate

riages and whose health would be en- cost of building a hospital. At the next

dangered by additional pregnancies, and Council meeting, the question of the legality

such as the poor man who wishes to remain of eugenic sterilization was forcefully raised

childless because he suffers from, or carries, by Dr. R. A. Gibbons who, quothing Sir

some hiereditary disease. The difficulties of Travers Humphreys, expressed the view

getting sterilizing operations performed that the legal position was so fraught with

upon such people in voluntary hospitals contradictions and ambiguities that it would

arise partly because those who direct the be quite impossible to raise the considerable

policy of these hospitals do not want to risk sum of money thaf would be necessary to

alienating the sympathies of potential sub- finance this enterprise. People would not

scribers, and partly because sterilizing subscribe to a scheme, the legality of which

operations have little educative interest for was open to question. Before we build hos-

students. The training of the student in the pitals for eugenic sterilization, we should

teaching hospitals is, for the most part, establish that eugenic sterilization is not

divided into a number of periods of three illegal. Dr. Gibbon's arguments carried

months. It is obviously desirable, in the weight with the Council, and the proposal

course of the short surgical and gynsecologi- for starting a hospital was dropped.

239

240 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE BOARD OF CONTROL'S ATTITUDE and December Ist, I930, some io,000 copies

The idea that the Society might then re- have been sent out.

sume its interest in legalizing eugenic steri-

lization had alwavs been present in the mind THE SOCIETY'S POSITION

of Sir Bernard Mallet. The moment for A few comments on the position taken up

doing this seemed to him opportune, and an in this pamphlet may be of interest. It

ad hoc committee meeting was called to con- seemed to us that three points required

sider the question. The Committee met at special emphasis. The first was that the

the Society's Rooms on December 6th, I929, modern methods of sterilization were en-

and had the benefit of the advice of a well- tirely distinct from castration or emascula-

known legal authority whose public position tion; the second, that the Society had never

had familiarized him with the administrative suggested, as many people at this time sup-

problems of mental deficiency and insanity. posed, that sterilization should be indis-

This authority fullv confirmed Dr. Gibbon's criminate; the third, that sterilization was

view that the legal position was at present advocated, not as an alternative to segrega-

such that it would be folly to think of starting tion, but as an accessory to it.

a hospital for sterilization. He further stated

that within his knowledge an application by BIOLOGICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE VIEWS

the superintendent of a mental hospital had In the course of the previous five years, I

been made to the Board of Control for sanc- had attended a number of discussions and

tion to sterilize a mental defective prior to debates on sterilization. From this it was

discharge from the hospital. The sanction clear to me that a wide gulf separated the

was refused on the grounds of the obscurity attitudes to this subject usually adopted by

of the law. To those present at this meeting the biologist and by the administrator. The

it therefore appeared that the Society would biologist sees the problem of the unfit in

be much better advised to devote its energies panoramic simplicity. His vision is cast in

to legalizing sterilization than to starting a the perspective of the race, in which the

hospital. A memorandum was accordingly fate of the individual counts for little. He

circulated to the Council signed by Dr. notices that civilization keeps alive the de-

R. A. Fisher, Professor Huxley, Dr. J. A. fective-producing classes and enables them

Ryle, Mr. E. J. Lidbetter, and myself, ask- to breed more abundantly than any other

ing for authorization to form a sub-com- class in the community. Of the various

mittee, the aim of which would be to secure methods of preventing this biologically

the legalization of eugenic sterilization. The disastrous process, sterilization commends

memorandum was unanimously approved by itself as being simple, logical, medically

the Council, and in this way the nucleus of feasible, humanitarian, and financially eco-

the existing Committee for Legalizing nomical. He may hold this view without

Eugenic Sterilization was formed.

having ever seen a defective.

It was subsequently expanded to its pre- Unlike the biologist, however, the admin-

sent size so as to include about sixteen per- istrator is concerned not with racial, but

sons. with personal issues. He is responsible for

From the start, the need was acutely a number of individual defectives of whom

felt for a simple statement of the Society's he has to dispose to the best advantage of

position which would easily be understood the defectives themselves and of the com-

by the general public. Professor Huxley munity. He well knows that the defective

and I were deputed to write the statement. is not converted into a normal person by

He being at the time very busy, I wrote the sterilization, and that he is not thus ren-

body of the statement, which he subse- dered immune from the many corrupting

quently criticized, emended, and greatly influences to which he is exposed by virtue

improved. Thus came into existence the of his suggestibility and lack of critical

buff pamphlet, of which between July ist faculty. For the administrator, the out-

THE STERILIZATION PROPOSALS

24I

standing problem of the moment is the qualified to speak for the Society is its

shortage of institutional accommodation for former President, Major Darwin, who in his

defectives. To one for whom this shortage Need for Eugenic Reform has written as

is an urgent and unavoidable problem, noth- follows: " Segregation should be regarded

ing can be more irritating than the argu- as the normal method of dealing with all

ment that by sterilization drastic economies aments, and segregation, if properly con-

could immediately be made in the expendi- ducted, does meet all the racial require-

ture of public funds on institutional accom- ments." It was considered that the

modation for defectives. Public meetings Society's statement should be based upon

devoted to discussing sterilization used fre- this point of view.

quently to break up without anyone having

changed his opinion. A few neutral and FOR AMENTS UNDER GUARDIANSHIP

uninformed people who had come to the Two documents published about this time

meeting for information, would go away provided an indication as to how such a view

with their minds confused.

could be given practical effect. The first

The sterilizationist would go away think- was the Report of the Mental Deficiency

ing that his adversary was wilfully blind to Committee (usually known as the Wood

obvious biological facts, that his mind had Report). In this, it was estimated that there

become ankylosed and his vision blinkered were some 300,000 mental deficients in Eng-

by living with defectives. It is to his ad- land and Wales, for ioo,ooo of whom it was

vantage to have larger institutions. He has recommended that institutional provision

a vested interest in perpetuating mental under the Mental Deficiency Acts be made.

defect. He does not care what happens to The remaining 200,000 it was proposed to

the race as long as he gets larger grants and leave in the community under various forms

feathers his nest. His stupidity is one of of guardianship and supervision. The

the leading factors in retarding the progress second document was the Report for 1928

of the race. The segregationist-administra- of the Board of Control. In its brief discus-

tor, his controversial opponent, goes away sion on sterilization, the following passage

wishing to heaven that the other would get occurs: " Roughly speaking, out of 300,000

some experience of living with defectives mental defectives in England and Wales,

and be responsible for them for a few one-third will require institutional provision,

months before he gets up at meetings and and two-thirds some form of community

gratuitously puts spokes in the wheels of care-that is, care outside an institution.

the people who are doing the dirty work and It is in the case of the latter that the risk

know its problems. The gulf is widened and of procreation arises and the case for steri-

mutual irritation is caused.

lization, if such a case exists at all, is

Having begun my scientific training as a strongest. "

biologist, and later gone on to study medi- These two documents, therefore, provided

cine, these two points of view, the racial an indication of how the case for steriliza-

and the personal, were both familiar to me. tion could be put forward without interfer-

I considered that the misunderstanding ing with the requirements of the administra-

could be removed if stress were laid upon tor, and they were made the basis of the

a fact with regard to which much miscon- introductory section of the buff pamphlet

ception existed, namely that the Eugenics and of section 8, in which the Committee's

Society has never advocated sterilization as proposals are set forth. In fact the whole

an alternative to segregation, as many pamphlet was written with the aim of re-

people seemed to think, but as an adjunct conciling the standpoints of the biologist

to it. Many wild statements have indubit- and the administrator, and it is in this

ably been made about sterilization by people respect that it differs most conspicuously

outside the Society and not improbably by a from most previous statements of the case

few in it. The person, however, who is best for sterilization.

242 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

At the beginning of its deliberations, the Of those that did not give support, not one

Committee for Legalizing Eugenic Steri- expressed opposition to or condemnation of

lization was uncertain as to whether «t the proposals. These replied to the effect

should constitute itself as a sub-committee that they wished to take no action in the

of the Council of the Eugenics Society, matter. One authority submitted a resolu-

or whether it should form itself into an tion that the Governmett should be re-

independent and autonomous body. The quested to institute a full inquiry on the

former course was eventually decided upon. question.

It therefore became necessary to obtain,

the sanction of the Council for the Com- THREE HEREDITARY GROUPS

mittee's statement of policy. Proofs of the In the autumn of 1930, a Sterilization

buff pamphlet were accordingly circulated Bill was drafted for the Committee by a

to every member of the Council, and sug- parliamentary draftsman. In giving its in-

gestions and criticisms invited. A number structions for the drafting of the Bill, the

of these were submitted. In not one of Committee was guided by what it held to be

them, however, was the general argument desirable on eugenic rather than on tactical

of the pamphlet attacked. All the submitted grounds. Thus, three groups of people are

criticisms were verbal in nature, with here referred to in the Bill as candidates for

and there a suggested addition, emendation voluntary sterilization. The first group

or omission. A small sub-committee was comprises mental defectives. The second

appointed to consider these criticisms, some comprises persons who have recovered from

of which were incompatible with others, and an attack of insanity, for whom Dr. Lang-

the pamphlet eventually appeared in its don-Down has suggested the name " mental

final form in the middle of June I930.

convalescents." The third group comprises

Of the various arguments set forth in the persons suffering from hereditary disease

different sections of the pamphlet, the one or defect (other than mental deficiency or

about which most uncertainty was felt was insanity) impairing mental or physical

the legal. Statements of a contradictory health or efficiency. On tactical grounds it

kind have been made about the legality of may be thought expedient by those who will

sterilizing operations. Compulsory steri- introduce the Bill to limit its application to

lization of mental defectives had been held the first group, namely mental defectives

by Sir Travers Humphreys to be definitely alone.* Similar considerations apply to the

illegal on several grounds. The question of safeguards proposed by the Committee. It

voluntary sterilization with the consent of may be deemed wisest on tactical grounds

the spouse was clearly on a different footing. to modify these in certain ways. In its Bill,

Hence it was thought desirable that the

Committee should take steps to produce a * A further reason for taking this course has

detailed account of the present state of the been vigorously expressed by a member of this

law towards this subject. The Committee was fortunate in securing the services of

Society in a recent correspondence. It is argued that the legal position with regard to voluntary sterilization undertaken by persons in full posses-

Mr. Cecil Binnev who wrote the green pamphlet The Law as to Sterilization, which is obtainable from the.Society's office, price 6d.
Copies of the buff pamphlet were sent to local authorities and to their various com-

sion of their faculties is wholly different from that in regard to the sterilization of mental defectives under the jurisdiction of the Board of Control. A good case was made out for the illegality of the last procedure by gir Travers Humphreys in 1925 (British Medical Journal, June I925, page 286). It is, however, extremely improbable that the first procedure would be condemned by the courts pro-

mittees. In acknowledging these, many asked for further copies, which were sup-

vided that the consent of the spouse had been obtained. It can thus be argued that by attempting to constitute the legality of voluntary steriliza-

plied. Of those bodies who have hitherto
considered the Society's proposals, a considerable majority have given their support.

tion we should create a widespread and mistaken impression to the effect that voluntary sterilization is now illegal, and progress in this direction might be indefinitely postponed.

THE STERILIZATION PROPOSALS

243

the Committee has confined itself to putting THE PROPOSED ROYAL COMMISSION

forward what it considers on eugenic There are three chief features of the

grounds the most satisfactory Bill, safe- second edition of the buff pamphlet to which

guarded in the simplest and most practical attention might be drawn. The first is that

manner. It wishes to leave those who intro- it contains the text of the Sterilization Bill,

duce the Bill entirely free to modify it in instead of the summary which was included

any way they think is called for by " strate- in Section 9 of the first edition. The second

gical " demands.

feature is that a postcript has been added

containing new matter, under the following

OTHER INTERESTED BODIES

headings: Prohibition of Marriage of Defec-

In the autumn of 1930, the topic of steri- tives; Effects of Legalizing Sterilization;

lization was discussed by a number of Proposed Royal Commission. The last of

learned and expert bodies. A session was these deserves comment.

devoted to it in a course of lectures on A large number of persons and organiza-

" Contraception and Allied Questions," tions now favour the principle of steriliza-

under the auspices of the Royal Institute tion in carefully selected cases. Neverthe-

of Public Health; it was discussed at a less, they think that public opinion is still

meeting of the Mental Hospitals Associa- too uneducated to make it feasible to intro-

tion on September 3oth; it was the subject duce a Bill at present. They therefore de-

of a series of sp.eeches at a Public Health mand that anv legislation in this direction

Congress held at the Royal Agricultural be preceded by a careful inquiry or by a

Hall on November 2 ist, and it was the Royal Commission appointed to investi-

main topic of discussion at one of the gate the causation and prevention of mental

sessions of the recent conference of the deficiency. It is anticipated that this

Central Association for Mental Welfare. inquiry would command such widespread

On Tuesday, November 25th, two dele- attention and respect that the legalization

gates from the Committee, Dr. Langdon- of sterilization would be accomplished with-

Down and myself, were received by the out difficulty on its recommendation. This

Medical Committee of the House of Com- is the view officially adopted by the Central

mons, to which we explained our proposals. Association for Mental Welfare.

As a result of this meeting Major A. G. While clearly recognizing the need for

Church, Member for Wandsworth Central, further knowledge of the inheritance of

said he would introduce our Bill when a mental disease and defect, and while there-

favourable opportunity presented, under the fore fully supporting the plea for an inquiry

ten-minutes rule.

into the subject, the Council does not think

On Wednesday, November 26th, a meet- it necessary to defer the legalizing of steri-

ing was held by kind permission of Lady lization till the publication of the result of

Cory in her drawing-room, at which the such an investigation. This question of

Press was well represented. Mr. J. C. policy was discussed at a recent Council

Pringle, Lady Askwith, and I were the meeting, when it was unanimously decided

speakers, and we put different aspects of to recommend that efforts be made to get

our proposals before a full audience of some sterilization legalized under the Society's

I.50 people. At the end the following resolu- proposed safeguards as soon as possible, and

tion, moved by Lady Shaftesbury, was car- also that the plea for an immediate investi-

ried with only two dissentients: " That gation or Royal Commission be supported.

voluntary sterilization, if legalized and The reason which prompted the Council to

carefully safeguarded to prevent abuses, take this view was that both the questions

could be usefully employed to reduce the of causation and prevention of mental defect,

incidence of grave hereditary defects which are to be investigated in the inquiry,

seriously impairing physical and mental are highly controversial questions. The

heredity and efficiency."

question of causation can be approached

244 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with an environmentalist bias which leads possible. The attitude of the Board of Con-

to the belief that secondary amentia prepon- trol towards sterilization is, for excellent

derates over primary, or with a bias in reasons, so cautious and circumspect that

favour of heredity, in which case it is be- it can be counted upon to give its consent

lieved that primary amentia occurs more to the sterilization of a mental defective or

frequently than secondary.

mental convalescent only if there are excel-

The question of the prevention of mental lent indications for this step being taken.

deficiency is a still more thorny one, in that The Council therefore holds that the policy

it excites religious opposition to the preven- which would bear most fruitful results in

tive measure of sterilization. If the various the future would be that of legalizing euge-

members of the Committee or Commission nic sterilization as soon as possible under

that is appointed to conduct the investiga- the proposed safeguards, and then to in-

tion hold divergent views on these subjects clude, in the scope of the proposed investi-

(as must necessarily happen unless this gation, the limited and discriminating appli-

body is carefully selected from people who cation of the principle of sterilization thus

hold uniform views), it will follow that the made possible. If it is proposed to investi-

investigations will have to be very thorough, gate methods of prevention, it is surely

detailed, and conclusive if the necessary desirable to have something definite to go on

consensus of opinion is to be achieved. in this sphere. If every obstacle be placed

Failure on the part of the members of this in the way of practising sterilization until

body to reach unanimity would result in the the proposed investigation is completed,

submission of minority reports which would there will clearly be nothing for it to in-

largely destroy the value of the investiga- vestigate so far as the operation of this

tion. For such a result would encourage important remedy is concerned.

the view, sufficiently prevalent already, that

the scientific experts were still divided and THE RATE OF ELIMINATION

that it was therefore premature to take steps The third feature in which the second edi-

in the direction of recommending such a tion of the buff pamphlet differs from the

remedy as sterilization.

first, is this. In the first edition, an argu-

if, then, the investigation is to be suffi- ment was put forward (on p. 2I) that a con-

ciently thorough to command the assent of all siderable reduction in the incidence of mental

responsible scientific persons, it will neces- deficiency could be achieved by completely

sarily have to take a very considerable time. preventing the parenthood of defectives,

The Roval Commission for the Care and whether by segregation or sterilization

Control of the Feeble-minded was not asked or any other really effective measure.

to pronounce upon questions as controver- This view was advanced in order to counter-

sial as those that will have to be settled by act an impression widely created by certain

this investigation. Nevertheless, the Royal genetical calculations of Punnett, which

Commission took nine years to produce a seemed to point to the conclusion that it was

report. Moreover, it does not at present impossible materially to reduce the inci-

seem likely that the support of Roman dence of mental deficiency by preventing

Catholics to any recommendation favouring defectives from reproducing. In the first

sterilization will be obtained even by the edition of the pamphlet, it was stated that on

most painstaking and convincing report. the same genetic and social assumptions as

Since the consent of the Board of Control, those made by Punnett, it would be possible

which is one of the sanctions that the Com- to reduce the incidence of mental deficiency

mittee suggests, will have to be obtained by a minimum of I7 per cent. in one genera-

before a mental defective or mental con- tion. The calculation further assumed that

valescent can be sterilized, the Council holds the fertility of defectives is the same as that

that abuses of sterilization as applied to of the rest of the population.

these two categories will be virtually im- Dr. Tredgold and others have frequently

THE STERILIZATION PROPOSALS

245

opposed this calculation on the ground that, prevented from having children (as they

in fact, only 3 to 5 per cent. of defectives are in this country) by segregation, the

have defective parents. Hence, the steriliza- reduction to be attained by preventing the

tion of all defectives in the community a remaining defectives from breeding (say,

generation ago would only have reduced the by sterilization) will be correspondingly

present incidence of mental deficiency by at lowered.

most 5 per cent. On these grounds severe The assumptions of this calculation by

criticisms have been levelled at the position no means justify the view that the complete

the Society has taken up upon this subject. prevention of the parenthood of defectives

THE PARENTAGE OF DEFECTIVES

in England to-day would reduce the incidence of defectiveness from its present figure

The question clearly turns upon the by 17 per cent. in one generation; this for

criteria by which defectiveness is judged the reason that many defectives are already

when it occurs in parents of defective child- prevented from having children by segrega-

ren. If the criterion is that these parents tion and by constitutional incapacity to pro-

have been certified as defective, the inci- create. Very far less do they justify the

dence of defectiveness among them will view, apparently held in certain quarters,

clearly be much smaller than if the criterion that the mere legalizing of sterilization will

is that they are certifiable as defective. effect such a reduction. If these two con-

Only a small proportion of certifiable per- siderations are borne in mind (viz., the

sons are at the present moment, in fact, uncertainty of the criteria by which defec-

certified. Intelligence tests have not been tiveness is judged when it occurs among the

done on the parents of defectives; but if parents of defectives, and the fact that exist-

intelligence tests be rejected as being an ing methods of segregation already reduce to

invalid criterion of defectiveness in com- a certain extent the fertility of our defective

parison with social inadequacy, it may be population) it may transpire that there is not

pointed out that the Mental Deficiency Com- as wide a divergence as superficially appears

mittee gave reasons for thinking that among between the estimates of Dr. Tredgold, who,

the parents of the feeble-minded who com- from clinical experience, asserts that at most

prise three-fourths of all defectives, there 5 per cent. of defectives have defective

is an outstandingly large number of re- parents, and that of Dr. Fisher, who calcu-

tarded and subnormal persons who are in lates that defectiveness could be reduced by

large measure socially incompetent. How I7 per cent. in one generation if all defectives

many of these are certifiable? If such were prevented from having children.

persons had been included in the in- In view, however, of the uncertainty of

ventories of defective parents of defec- the quantitative effects of any social policy,

tive offspring, the incidence of defectiveness and of the undeniable fact of the heritable

among the parents would doubtless be found nature of much mental defect, it was

to be considerably higher than it now thought by the Committee expedient to omit

appears. The figure of I7 per cent. might this argument from the second edition of

well under-estimate the reality. This figure, moreover, is

subject

to

the pamphlet. The argument is not an essential one, and so long as it is included,

further misunderstanding. According to there is a risk of its being made the objec-

the calculation by which it is reached, the incidence of mental deficiency in a given

tive of attacks against this Society, calculated to persuade the public that this is the

community whose defective population mates central feature of the Society's support of

and breeds as freely as other people, is sterilization. The essential consideration

reducible by I7 per cent. by the expedient of preventing its defective component from

upon which the whole argument for sterilization rests has nothing to do with this.

breeding. But if, in this given community, Tt is the very simple consideration that it is

a certain proportion of defectives are already contrary to public policy, both for genetic

246 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and humanitarian reasons, that defectives It should be contended against it, however,

should have children. The Society has yet that our proposals are for voluntary not

to meet the person who dissents from this compulsory sterilization. There is not a

view. single member of the Council of the

A word about the attitude of the Roman Eugenics Society who desires a Roman

Catholic Church towards sterilization may Catholic to undergo sterilization. Hence,

not be out of place. The Church has not the Society would respectfully ask Roman

definitely pronounced upon this subject. Catholic speakers upon this subject to re-

Nevertheless in the last year in this country member that their view in regard to the

a definite attitude towards it seems to be immorality of sterilization is not necessarily

emerging which is, that sterilization is a shared by other people. The Society is

grievous sin which shall in no circumstances merely asking that it be made legally pos-

be condoned by Catholics. This view is held sible for people, especially poor people, to

no less when sterilization is performed with get themselves sterilized when there are

a definite eugenic aim of preventing the good reasons for their so doing, and when

transmission of hereditary disease or defect they do not think it to be wrong. Roman

than when it is used as a substitute for birth Catholics have no more grounds for oppos-

control. I will give three instances in sup- ing non-Catholics being voluntarily steri-

port of this view. At the receDnt conference lized than have anti-vaccinationists for

of the Central Association for Mental Wel- preventing persons from being vaccinated

fare, Father Bagshaw said that the Catholic who do not share their views on immuno-

Church regarded sterilization as " essen- logy. Roman Catholic ethics oppose divorce.

tially evil and a gross crime in the sight of Yet Roman Catholics live happily in com-

God, the guilt of which must be shared by munities in which divorce is easy. The

the willing patient, the operator and by any- divorce laws obtaining in thiese communities

body who in any way co-operated in the need not interfere with them.

action."

A point of psychology, however, enters

An exactly similar view was expressed into this question. It is the desire for a

by Father Henry Davis, S.J., at the Public scapegoat. If a person holds strong views

Health Congress held in the Royal Agricul- to the effect that a given action is morally

tural Hall above referred to. Lastly, the wrong, he will desire to fix the guilt upon

Catholic Herald, in its issue of December a typically miscreant individual or body.

3rd, 1930, referring to the resolution passed By Roman Catholics the Eugenics Society

at the drawing-room meeting held at Lady is being converted into such a scapegoat. It

Cory's house on November 26th, says: is credited with the Machiavellian intention

" As to those dames who, at a recent meet- of utilizing the plea for legalizing steriliza-

ing, were advocating similar methods [i.e. tion as the thin end of a wedge, the thick

sterilization] to diminish the number of the end of which will be the compulsory steri-

'unfit,' we wonder what is their fitness to lization of everybody who does not share its

advise this country on such matters. Pity, views. Thus Mr. H. Robbins, in his

perhaps, that they had not been treated as recently-published book, An Examination

unwanted puppies or kittens are, and they of Eugenics, when discussing sterilization,

would not now be here to poison the minds writes: " Catholics, more than most citi-

and health of millions by their pestiferous zens, may ponder their fate under such a

presence and propaganda."*

system." It is only bv attributing to eugen-

This view, despite its vigorous language, ists such sinister motives as these that a

is a perfectly feasible and logical one in the good case can be made out by Roman Catho-

light of the theological premisses adopted. lics for opposing the legalization of volun-

tary sterilization. For by such opposition

* Since this was written, the Pope himself has pronounced against sterilization.

they are, in their view, nipping in the bud a movement which, in its full state of devel-

THE STERILIZATION PROPOSALS

247

opment, would seriously involve themselves. than it solves, and to be attended by danIn these circumstances there can be no gers which make its extensive practice in-
harm in stating that there is not a single advisable. Why should it be supposed that member of the Council of the Eugenics the Eugenics Society will refuse to form an Society who wishes to push the measure of impartial opinion of this question? Why sterilization beyond the point at which it should it be supposed that it desires comwill be a useful instrument of negative pulsorily to sterilize balf the community? eugenics. It is only by experience that we What is the Society to gain from such a can learn how far it can be employed in this measure? To the dispassionate critic, the direction. It may turn out to have a wide- mere perusal of the names of the constituent spread applicability. On the other hand it members of the Council should dispel mismay be shown to create more difficulties givings on this point.

RECENTLY PUBLISHED.

Demy 8vo.

xos. 6d. net.

Postage gd.

ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES: Sociological, Biological & Psychological

By C. J. BOND, C.M.G., F.R.C.S., Hon. Consulting Surgeon, Leicester Royal Infirmary; Vice-President of the Eugenics Society; Member of the Industrial Health Research Board, etc.

"Valuable and authoritative ... the general view of social activities, seen in relation

to biological truths, cannot fail to be ililuminating."

-The Eugenics Review.

LONDON: H. K. LEWIS & CO. LTD., 136 Gower Street and 24 Gower Place, W. C. 1

Telegrans: " PUBLICAVIT, EUSROAD, LONDON."

Telephone: MUSEUm 7756-7-8.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 4.

