DON BROTHWELL and THEYA MOLLESON
Sub-Department of Physical Anthropology, British Museum (Natural History)
The Frequency of Middle Phalangeal
Hair in Britain
A Pilot Survey with Comments on Some Methodological Problems

AS IT WILL be some time before it is possible movements have taken place in Britain, to collect together further data on mid-phalangeal especially in southern England and more hair in Britain, it would seem advisable to northern industrial areas. This must already make available the results already obtained have blurred the pattern of variation resulting during a recent survey. The reason for this from a number of major intrusive population
short study was twofold; first to see how British movements into the country since Neolithic groups compared with other European series, times. One may best visualize the formation of and secondly to get first hand experience of the this variation by a sequence of superimposed
problems involved in recording this variant on layers through time, each having a different a medium-sized sample. Another factor which shape which inadequately covered the previous might be mentioned and which interested us, one. Thus, Scotland and Wales were not so is that of time needed to record such observa- affected by Roman and subsequent intrusions
tions, always important and sometimes very (except for small-scale Viking landings) and the critical in field studies. This survey also has south-west limb of England not so influenced
some bearing on our present work concerned by the considerable Saxon movements into the with certain "non-metrical" polygenic variables, country. Danish and Norman groups moving including hair distribution and patterns, which in at a more recent date may well have had forms one of the projects of Section D of the most affect upon South-east England and much ongoing International Biological Programme. of the Eastern Coastal area. Serological evidence
In an attempt to obtain the maximum strongly suggests that this pattern made by amount of information on variability indiminish- earlier population movements is still evident to ing modern aboriginal populations, European some extent in modern groups. It would there-
communities have tended to be neglected. In fore seem very worth while to collect unrelated Britain, except for serological reference data genetic evidence to support the blood group and restricted studies on hair colour, colour picture. blindness and PTC tasting, and even fewer As early as 1921, Danforth 6 called attention useful anthropometric studies, we must resort to the variations in the distribution of middle to much earlier publications for regional phalangeal hair, and suggested its likely genetic studies. Although we do not have the pro- determination. Further studies showed that the blem of trying to get large enough sample absence of mid-phalangeal hair varied in human numbers in this country, nevertheless, it is populations from about 20 to 98 per cent. As very debatable whether "indigenous" regional a result of family investigations, Bernstein and groups will remain intact much longer than Burke3 in 1942 suggested that a set of five modern primitive communities. During the past alleles, increasing in dominance, control the two centuries very considerable population distribution of this hair, whereas in a more

ER-K

131
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1965, 57, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

recent study by Saldanha and Guinsburg 10 England. We are stressing this point purely to

(1961) they conclude that absence of hair may show the present perilous nature of trusting

be determined by a pair of recessive genes. In postal addresses when sampling southerners.

any event, the degree of variation displayed by In the Yorkshire sample but not the other, all

this character makes it worthy of continued those with non-Yorkshire parents were excluded

anthropological investigation.

from frequency estimates.

In the case of the ongoing British survey, two As far as the present work is concerned we

regional samples have been so far studied, both have found it necessary to restrict regional

from England. The larger series of 218 is from division to a Yorkshire and non-Yorkshire

Yorkshire and the smaller of 118 is from South- group.

east England (more particularly those living in Regarding the matter of recording data, only

London or within a radius of about forty miles). one or two individuals refused to be examined,

although a number of more "crusty" Yorkshire-

men were sure that they were being "had".

Some of the younger females, on the other

hand, were more concerned about the possible

hormonal implications of their hairiness!

The few cases of asymmetrical hair pattern

in our series occurred in individuals with very

little mid-phalangeal hair, and re-examination

of some of these individuals later demanded

the re-adjustment oforiginal results. In particular

it is important to note that when only a few

thin fair hairs are present and these are only

represented by very short bristle, then their

1.54

presence could be overlooked. For this reason, previous reports as to minor asymmetries seem

open to question.

66.-Z Although data on the density and number of

80

hairs on each middle phalanx might have been revealing, this would clearly have been an

arduous task, demanding far more time than

was available to us. General assessments of

MAP 1

phalangeal hairiness (scoring into "slight",

Parental origins of the southern sample (in percentages). "medium" and "considerable" grades) were

tentatively undertaken at first, but abandoned

The difference in the homogeneity of the two as being too subjective, for the interpretation

samples-as demonstrated by a consideration of these grades was clearly likely to lead to

of the parental origins of the subjects examined much error.

-is interesting. In the case of the sample from We are not aware of any previous worker

Yorkshire, only 3 5 per cent of the parents were recording the time needed to undertake such

born in other counties, whereas nearly 34 per a study, per unit of individuals, although when

cent ofthe southern sample were from outside the contemplating field work it is important to

broad southern English zone terminated by lines know how time consuming each of the variables,

from Southampton to Bristol and thence to potentially worthy of recording, might be. In

The Wash (Map 1). Splitting this down further, the case of the British sample, most of the

8 per cent of the parents were from Somerset, individuals were examined at their work in

Dorset and beyond, 4 5 per cent from Wales one of four institutions (two museums and two

and similarly from Scotland, 1-5 per cent from factories), and although the period of recording

Ireland and 15 4 per cent from Northern was broken up by other work, we estimate that

132

THE FREQUENCY OF MIDDLE PHALANGEAL HAIR IN BRITAIN

not more than six full days were given to
collecting our sample of 336. Excluding those digits where the presence of
hair was obvious, all others were examined by means of a x 10 hand lens. Although there are exceptions to the rule, it is usual to find at least small bristle projections if hair is present at all, and it is significant that such hair stubble remained in males even when they undertook
heavy industrial work. Indeed, there were very few cases in the males series where there was any doubt as to the presence or absence of hair follicles, but the females presented a greater problem, the digital hair often being much thinner in quality. Indeed, it may well be that the significant sex differences noted by a number of observers may be accentuated by the failure to identify rather fine hair bristle in a few female cases. As a sex difference is not present in all world groups studied, inadequate sampling may well be another contributive factor. This is not to say that a sex difference for this trait is unreasonable, especially in groups with marked pilosity. It is significant that growth studies have shown that phalangeal pilosity increases significantly in males at puberty, whereas the different hormonal picture in females is not associated with a similar degree of change.
In the case of the British group there is also a slight sex difference, the female sample, however, being as yet too small to determine with value the significance of this difference (Table 1).

In view of the fact that the final pattern of digital hair is not fully expressed until the pubertal growth phase is completed, only adult or near adult individuals were examined. Only 8 per cent were a little under the age of twenty years, the mean age for males being forty-two years and for females thirty-three years.
Although there is variation in the relative frequency of combinations of types of fingers

TABLE 1

Frequencies of mid-phalangeal hair absence in the two sexes

Group

Sample Sex number Absence Per cent

Yorkshire

d 165 56 33-9
?! 53 23 43.4

Non-Yorkshire c
?!

83 18 21.7 35 6 17-1

Total British

C 248

C+V?

88 336

74 29.8 29 32-9 103 30 7

(Table 2), the frequency order of the middle
digits with hair is the same in all populations so far studied. As you will see in the simple comparison of raw data, the relative frequency order is IV-+III-+V--II; in other words a bilateral gradient from IV is general in all groups (Table 3). Considering the distribution
of this trait on left and right hands, there would appear to be very slight skewing, the left hand being more endowed with hair.
Considering the smallness of the samples,

TABLE 2

Percentage distribution of mid-phalangeal hair combinations (males, and left side only)

Group

II, III,
0 IV II, IV III, IV, V IV, V IV, V

British (Combined series) 29 15 18 (3 7 2

Others 0

American "Whites"

29 20

15 (i)

5

1

0

American Negroes American Indian

83 (6)
60 (2)

1 7

10 0 13

42 00

Gandhabanik (Calcutta)

51 (j

16

7

3

24

133

.KH.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

IA. <w t$I

.9

50
38
52
6
74
MAP 2
Frequencies of mid-phalangeal hair absence in Europe, North Africa and South-west Asia (data from various sources: see References).
134

THE FREQUENCY OF MIDDLE PHALANGEAL HAIR IN BRITAIN

the percental frequencies of this trait for the four phalanges in the Yorkshire and nonYorkshire individuals of both sexes is remarkably similar (Table 4).
Comparing the British combined series frequency for hair absence with published data (Map 2), the present information conforms to
TABLE 3
Digits with mid-phalangeal hair in the combined British sample

This preliminary report on middle phalangeal hair is restricted in the scope of its useful conclusions by the smallness of the samples. It does, however, corroborate previous evidence as regards a sex difference and the apparently universal relative frequency order of digits affected; also it provides further evidence of a trend towards increasing phalangeal pilosity in Northern Europe.
Further studies of this trait in Europe seem very worth while.

Left Right

Sex No. V IV III II V IV III II
c3 248 89 173 130 14 89 171 130 14
y 88 29 58 43 8 28 58 43 8
c+ ? 336 118 231 173 22 117 229 173 22

TABLE 4

Percental frequencies of the hair trait in Yorkshire and non- Yorkshire individuals of both sexes

Group Numbers ,-

V

Yorkshire Non-Yorkshire

3

165 83

22 21

Digits
IV III 42 31 42 32

II
4 3

Yorkshire l 53 20 42 30 5

Non-Yorkshire

35 21 42 30 5

an apparent cline from high to low values which is just discernible in the European, North African and Western Asian data. From values of 52 per cent and 74 per cent in North and East Africa, and a range from 38 per cent to 50 per cent in the Palestinian-West Russian area, there is a general decrease to 30 per cent and under in Northern Europe.

REFERENCES 1. Bat-Miriam, M. 1962. A survey of some genetical
characters in Ethiopian tribes. VIII. Distribution of mid-digital hair. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 20, 196. 2. Beckman, L., and Book, J. A. 1959. Distribution and inheritance of mid-digital hair in Sweden. Hereditas, Lund. 45, 215. 3. Bernstein, M. M., and Burke, B. S. 1942. The incidence and mendelian transmission of middigital hair in man. J. Hered. 33, 45. 4. Boyd, W. C., and Boyd, L. G. 1937. New data on blood groups and other inherited factors in Europe and Egypt. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 23, 49. 5. Boyd, W. C., and Boyd, L. G. 1941. Blood groups and inbreeding in Syria. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 28, 319. 6. Danforth, C. H. 1921. Distribution of hair on the digits of man. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 4, 189. 7. Dutta, P. C. 1963. The incidence of middlephalangeal hair among Gandhabanik. Man, 63, 94. 8. Matsunaga, E. 1956. Erbbiologische Untersuchung der Fingermittelgliedbehaarung bei Japanern und Deutschen. Z. Menschl. Vererb. -u. Konstit. 33, 465. 9. Saldanha, P. H., Frota-Pessoa, O., Eveleth, P., Ottensooser, F., Cunha, A. B., and Cavalcanti, M. A. A. 1960. Estudo genetico e antropologico de uma Colonia de holandeses do Brasil. Rev. Antrop. (Sao Paulo), 8, 1. 10. Saldanha, P. H., and Guinsburg, S. 1961. Distribution and inheritance of middle phalangeal hair in a white population of Sao Paulo, Brazil. Hum. Biol. 33, 237.

135

