326 EUGENICS REVIEW.

It is here that the author finds her inspiration for her work. She

has found in her own experience of teaching in the public elementary

schools, that children not only enjoy a study of plant and animal life

when it is dealt with progressively and is related to human life and its

problems, but that they are thoroughly able to understand the subject

matter of botany and zoology when it is couched in simple terms and

phrases.

In this book, then, she embodies an account of " plant and animal

children: how they grow," intending apparently that the book should

serve as a reading book, or perhaps a simple text-book, for use in the

elementary schools, and should supplement and fix in their minds know-

ledge which they have gained through a study of actual living specimens

in class work.

This book should be very valuable in aiding the specialist teacher

to garb his scientific facts in simple words and phrases; it should also

be very tseful to parents who would desire to help their children towards

an understanding of sex matters.

The author, an American writer, has gained her experience in

American schools; hence some of the types dealt with are not to be found

in our country (though their relatives are) and some of the popular names

given are not those in general use here. Although there are a few

inaccuracies of comparative unimportance (e.g. the rose spoken of as a

honey-bearing flower), the book, as a whole, is an exceedingly useful

departure from the usual trend of nature study literature, and though it

carefully includes the reproductive processes in its account of the various

types, it does not confine its attention wholly to these processes; in fact,

it is broad enough in scope to form an elementary introduction to horti-

cultural and agricultural work.

N. MARCH.

Galloway, T. W. v PH.D. Biology of Sex for Parents and Teachers. Published by Geo. Harrap and Co., 2 and 3, Portsmouth Street, W.C.; price 2S.
IN this small volume Dr. Galloway gives a simple, concise account of many of the facts concerning sex, dealing with them from the biological point of view, utilising the biological illumination with considerable skill to make clear the natural, stimulating and upbuilding nature of the sexfactor. The aim of this treatment of the subject is not so much to supply information to be passed on to children as to give instructors themselves -parents and teachers-a correct view of sex and of the special relation of sex problems to child-life, so that they may be fitted to meet the demands which this phase of education may make. He recognises that sex-education may fall into the hands of parents during the years of childhood, of parents and teachers during the early school period, and may be effectively extended during the high school period. He suggests that parents and teachers themselves should be prepared: lectures for future parents and for future teachers should be given by experts in the colleges and training schools.
The Appendix is an attempt to help parents to meet the particular
problems which may confront them in practical dealings with children,
and very rightly emphasises the wisdom of preparedness. Mere know-
ledge, however, does not constitute a mainstay in face of social peril,
nor will knowledge of facts alone serve to upbuild the moral framework. This the author realises to be a very important point, and he deals with the social and ethical aspects of sex-training, both in a special chapter and indirectly as the main inspiring thought running through the biologic theme.
This is a book which should be very useful to the intelligent thinker on these problems of education. It is singularly free from the diffuse wordiness, so characteristic of the literature of sex teaching, and by its very brevity and conciseness should prove to be a mental stimulant of

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

327

no small merit to those who are already aware of the social need. It is

probably this habit of conciseness in statement which causes the chapter

dealing with Eugenics to appear too abrupt and too definite in state-

ment, for although the author, in dealing in a few paragraphs with

hereditary transmission of taints, states that our knowledge is as yet very

incomplete, he pronounces with a definiteness upon certain points which

does not indicate the present vagueness of our information. This is a

tendency somewhat characteristic of American literature on sex-education.

Qualifying one's remarks, however, with this caution, one has no hesita-

tion in recommending this book as an aid towards instruction of parents,

teachers and social workers.

N. MARCH.

Marett, MR. R. R. The Threshold of Religion. London: Methuen and
Co., Ltd.; price 5s. net; pp. 220.

MR. MARETT'S work is of interest to eugenists, for he places anthropology as a branch of biology, and the one that is likely to bring us to the true meaning of life. This book is a new issue, with additional chapters. It is made up of papers and addresses bearing on the nature and experience of rudimentary religion. The primordial category of religion is held to consist in the notion of power rather than in the notion of spirit. Several positions advanced by Dr. Tylor, Dr. Frazer and Mr. Lang are acutely criticised. Some very interesting things are said respecting Tabu, Mana, and the Bullroarer. Tabu is regarded as the negative side of the supernatural to which Manza corresponds as the positive side. The Bullroarer is " perhaps the most ancient, widely spread and sacred religious symbol in the world."
Very suggestive and original is the chapter " The Birth of Humility."
The volume closes with a fascinating account of a visit to the caverns of Niaux and Gargas. " The spirit of awe and mystery still broods in these dark galleries within a mountain, that are to a modern mind symbolic of nothing so much as of the dim subliminal recesses of the human soul."
J. B.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
ENGLISH. JOURNAL ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY, June, lxxvii., 19I4. Pp. 705. Suggestions for Recording the Life History and Family Connections of every Individual, by Walter Hazell. The author proposes that each individual should be provided with two numbers, that of the registration district in which his birth occurred and an individual number. These two numbers are to be produced by him throughout life whenever a record of marriage or birth is made, and also to appear upon his death certificate. A life card for each person born will be preserved at the general register office, and, with the help of the system of personal numbers, entries of important occurrences throughout his life will be made, as they are reported, upon his life card. The idea is that an interested party, for instance, an intending bride or bridegroom, armed with the numbers could, from the life card, glean particulars of importance, the degree of information available depending upon the minuteness with which the system was carried out. Mr. Hazell justly remarks in favour of his scheme that :-" First, it would tend to raise the life records of men to the level already attained by pedigree animals. This is not sarcasm, as I observe with some shame that we seem to care less for the family history of a man than that of a beast." Mr. Hazell's paper, which was read at the June meeting of the Royal Statistical Society, provoked a lively discussion, to which the RegistrarGeneral and several other official statisticians contributed. Some of the

