N'ORMALA .a.:

O AFFECTED

......~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.
FIG. I. Retinal dystrophy in Irish setters. A comparative series of histological sections at different ages in nlormal
and affected animals. Normal sections arc shown in the left-hand column, and sections from abnormal animals of the same age in the right-hand column. In the affected animals pathological changes began to appear only after a normal and
full post-natal development. (Personal observation.)
[Reproduced by courtesy of the publishers from " Genetics in Ophthalmology," by Arnold Sorsby. London, i95i. JButterworths Medical Publications.]

PROSPECTS IN THE CONTROL OF GENETIC DISEASE

By ARNOLD SORSBY

T WO fallacies have determined the Even the genetic anomaly present at birth

prevailing attitude to genetically deter- shows fundamentally the same process. The

mined disease. It is widely believed only difference is that normal development

that genetically determined affections arise is interrupted at some period in intrauterine

fully developed in the afflicted patient. It is life. This is illustrated by the condition of

also assumed that such affections are anophthalmos (lack of eyes) observed in the

uninfluenced by any other factors. Both mouse. Here normal development persists

these dogmas lead logically to the view that up to the ninth day of pregnancy-halfway

genetic anomalies are beyond treatment, and through the normal gestation period of the

that the most that can be done is to attempt mouse. The severe defect is thus the con-

to eliminate them by eugenic measures. sequence of a failure in development in a

There is no validity for either belief. tissue that had been developing normally up

Genetic anomalies do not arise fully formed; to a particular point. Furthermore, a

they have an evolutionary course of their genetically determined congenital anomaly

own, comparable to the evolutionary course has not necessarily run its full course by

of a disease of environmental origin-or for birth. Figs. 2a and 2b illustrate the lethal

that matter to every other process in nature. consequences observed in post-natal life

The evolutionary course of a genetic anomaly from a genetically determined anomaly of

is most clearly seen in those genetic affections cartilage present at birth.

that arise in post-natal life-the abiotrophies,

a classical example of which is retinitis

pigmentosa. Here the retina is normal at

birth and continues to remain normal for an

unknown period-possibly many years. This

is borne out by clinical observations on

children in families with retinitis pigmentosa.

Such children are normal, but some of them

subsequently develop the affection. Definite

experimental evidence is obtained from a

study of the affection as seen in animals.

Pure lines of Irish setters can be bred to show

the onset of an affection similar to retinitis

pigmentosa some weeks after normal develop-
ment. At birth the retina of the Irish setter

FIG. 2A.-Thoracic basket of a normal rat and a lethal, 22 days old (litter mates).

is not yet fully differentiated, and it takes about a month before the retina assumes the normal adult appearance. In both normal and affected stock this process occurs in an identical manner. Only after the retina has become fully differentiated in both these types of setters do degenerative changes develop in the animals from the pure line carrying the affection. This is illustrated in Fig. i. Similar observations are available for the rat and the mouse.

The second dogma, which holds that genetically determined processes are in fact beyond other influences, is equally illfounded. The whole of modern genetics emphasizes the facts that no gene has just one effect, and that no gene acts in complete isolation from the influences of other genes. The total genetic constitution of an individual plays its part in the manifestation of the effect of any particular gene; and such

177

I78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

concepts as irregular dominance, expression environmental influences once the necessary

and penetrance are all indicative of the knowledge is available.

influences exerted on the manifestation of a particular gene. These influences are not Some Clinical Evidence exclusively genetic, such as those due to Clinical medicine is rich in examples which modifying genes, but are frequently environ- deny the prevalent fatalism that genetic mental in origin. There is much experi- disease is fixed and immutable. Some of the mental evidence to illustrate both these more significant are enumerated: processes. Experimentally one and the same (I) Spontaneous suppression of the manigene in a different total genetic environment festations of a pathogenic gene.-This is may be made to behave dominantly or in a clearly seen in the group of affections which
show " irregular dominance " or " skipping

Anomaly of cartilage

a generation." The fact that an apparently

Narrowed lumen of trachea

Abnormal sternum Thickened ribs Fixation of thorax in inspiration

Slight changes in larynx, nose and other cartilages

normal individual in an affected family may yet transmit the affection shows that such an individual must carry the pathogenic
gene, though it is not manifested. In fact the

Kyphoala Abnormal situs of Retardation of Spur of deltoid gene may be manifest, but such manifestathoraci*s viscera lung development ridge of humerus tions do not take any clearly pathological

Compensating Slow incre of suffocstion red celb and Hb

Increased resistance in pulmonary
irculation

General Blocked form so that the individual is regarded as

arrest of development

nostrils

normal. This is seen in acholuric jaundice:

the normal individual is not quite " normal"

Cimna Expossre noitiOs

Compensatory hypertrophy of right ventricle
of heart

Blunt snout

Inability to suck

as is shown by special tests which reveal that

his blood corpuscles are abnormally fragile.

lIlI

Decompen- Capillary

sation

pulmonary

baemorrhages

It is only when the fragility reaches a certain

Faulty occlusion

Starvation level that the individual becomes handi-

of incisors

capped, and is recognized as suffering from

Difficulties in feeding

a pathological state. Here there is spon-

DEATH taneous suppression sufficiently marked to

FIG. 2B

take the individual out of the pathological

[Figs. 2a and 2b are reproduced by courtesy of the author range. But full suppression can also occur.

and publishers from " Animal Genetics and Medicine," by Hans Gruineberg. London, 1947. Cassell & Co. By courtesy also of The Royal Society in respect of Fig. 2a.]

This is seen in such a lethal affection as glioma of the retina. " Irregular dominance "

also occurs, but the retina of the individual

recessive manner, environmental influences who is himself normal and yet passes on the

being kept constant. Likewise environ- affection shows no demonstrable differences

mental factors may also be brought to bear from the normal.

to modify experimentally manifestations of (2) The inconstancy ofpathologicalfeatures.

some genes: such classical examples as the -A further step in suppression, but one not

development of newly formed black hair in carried to the extent that pathological

the white Himalayan rabbit kept in the manifestations are absent, is seen in the

cold, or the development of white fat in inconstancy of manifestation of a pathogenic

rabbits with yellow fat fed on diets lacking gene. In the Laurence-Biedl syndrome there

particular green stuffs, are instances of many is the bizarre combination of mental defici-

more. In processes approaching pathological ency, obesity, hypogenitalism, polydactyly

states, the suppression in the young rat and retinitis pigmentosa, but only excep-

(genetically disposed to it) of the skeletal tionally does one and the same individual

anomaly known as bent nose by feeding the show all the components of the syndrome.

mother during pregnancy on a diet rich in Partial manifestations are the commoner,

vitamin D, is indicative of what may be and the whole syndrome can generally be

expected from the rational application of reconstituted only by a study of several

PROSPECTS IN THE CONTROL OF GENETIC DISEASE

I79

affected sibs. In each of these suppression The Future

has been partial, and sometimes suppression
is so marked that the affected individual
shows only minimal disturbances. (3) Pathological features brought out by
environmental factors.-Such affections as hyperthyroidism appear to be genetically
determined, but whether a genetically predisposed individual actually develops the affection is frequently determined by such

Enough is already known to make an anachronism of the current fatalism towards genetically determined disease. Further progress depends on detailed knowledge. As a portent of future developments, the studies on phenylalanine metabolism are suggestive. Normally this relatively simple amino-acid becomes converted by a series of steps into

environmental factors as stress. It is likely water and carbon dioxide. This is shown in

that this also applies to such affections as Fig. 3, from which it is seen that such a

high blood pressure, acute glaucoma, and severe anomaly as mental deficiency asso-

many others-not excluding such apparently ciated with phenylketonuria develops if the

exclusively environmental diseases as the

infections. There is much evidence that pre-

PHENYALLININE

disposition to tuberculosis is genetically

determined - and whether an individual develops tuberculosis will depend on his PHENYLKETOURTA AND PRENYL-PYRUVIC AC ID

mode of living.

MENTAL DEFICIENCY

,

(4) Control of some of the pathological

HYDROXY-PHENYL-PYRUVIC ACID

manifestations by environmental agencies.- TYROSINOS IS

I

Diabetes is a widespread affection, generally recessively inherited. Whilst insulin does not

DI-HYDROXY-PHENYL-PYRUVIC ACID

restore the affected individual to normalcy, it does, however, control some of the more

ALBINISM

MELANIN
HO)GENTISIC ACID

deleterious disturbances seen in the affection. It is not beyond all possibility that a fuller

AL1APTONURIA

understanding of the nature of the affection

may give us an agent even more satisfactory

I ACETO-ACETIC ACID
1

than insulin in controlling the pathogenic manifestations. An approach to something

C02 4- H2°

like a radical cure in a genetic affection is

FIG. 3

seen in the effects of splenectomy in acho-

luric jaundice. Here, removal of the spleen acts as a controlling mechanism on the
manifestation of the disease. (5) The prevention of genetic disease.-The
recognition of Rh. blood groups, and the dire
consequences to the newborn child of incompatible blood groups in the parents, is the latest of means available on the basis of adequate knowledge to prevent by simple

conversion process fails at an early stage.
Albinism is seen if the failure occurs at a later stage, and alkaptonuria at a still later stage. To what extent similar disturbances occur in other genetic anomalies remains to be established. What is significant of such
studies is that they open the possibility of modifying these relatively simple chemical

measures ravages that would otherwise be disturbances at a stage before pathological

unavoidable.

ravages have set in.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIII, No. 4

