64 EUGENICS REVIEW.
questions; he urges this plea skillfully and with vigour, and the need for its statement is perhaps great enough even to warrant a certain measure of over-emphasis.
WV. C. SULLIVAN.
THE WORK OF THE MAINE AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION ON EGGPRODUCTION OF FOWLS.
(x) Pearl, R, Surfaee, F. M., and Curtis, M. R. A Biometrical Study of Egg-production in the Domestic Fowl, Parts III. and IV. U.S. Dept. Agric. Bureau of Animal Industry, Bull. Iio, Part III., and Annual Report, Maine Agric. Experiment Station; 1914; pp. 105-136.
THESE two papers deal with the variability and correlation of measurements in the egg of the fowl. The most interesting result is perhaps that there is a close agreement between the fowl's egg and the human skull, both in the degree of variation of corresponding measurements and in the correlation of these measurements. The authors are inclined to ascribe this to a similarity in the mechanical factors involved in the production of the shape in the two cases. The fowl's egg is similar in its variability to that of wild birds; probably egg-shape is not affected in most cases by natural selection. Variability varies with race and with the individual, some individuals laying much more variable eggs than others. The measurements of the eggs of individuals also vary with age, health, and season. (2) Pearl, R., Surface, F. M., and Curtis, M.R. Studies on the Physio-
logy of Reproduction in the Domestic Fowl, Parts VII., VIII., and IX. (VII., Journal of Animal Behaviour, IV.; 1914; P. 266. VIII., Journal Exp. Zool., XVII.; 1914; P. 395. IX., Journal Biol. Chemistry, XIX.; 1914; P. 263.)
THE first of these papers deals with broodiness, which is normally one of the cyclical reproductive activities of the female, following the laying of a clutch of eggs. In the fowl, however, it is very variable, differing in
different breeds and individuals, and is not necessarily even preceded by
egg-laying. There is evidence that it is connected with the physiological functioning of the ovary, but is not influenced by the removal of the oviduct, by which, of course, egg-laying is prevented.
No. VIII. describes experiments in cutting, ligaturing or removing the oviduct. None of these operations interferes with growth of the ovary nor with ovulation, and an oviduct which is ligatured or of which part is removed passes through the changes normally co-ordinated with the changes of the ovary.
No. IX. shows that the corpus luteum substance of the cow, injected into a laying hen, immediately inhibits ovulation. After a varying interval ovulation recommences normally. It is pointed out that it is remarkable that the corpus luteum substance of a mammal should have the same effect in a bird, in which corpora lutea are not produced.
In the American Naturalist, XLVIII., August and September, Dr. Raymond Pearl continues his Studies on Inbreeding (Nos. IV. and V.), the earlier parts of which have already been reviewed in these pages.
In No. IV. he works out a formula for the number of families of any possible constitution produced in any generation from indiscriminate brother-sister mating, starting from an original couple differing in respect of one pair of Mendelian characters. If the characters are X and a the first generation will all be Aa, the second I AA, 2 Aa, T aa, and subsequent generations a mixture of the six types of families, (i) AA, (2) AA+ Aa,
(3) Aa, (4) Aa+2 Aa+aa, (5) Aa+aa, (6) aa. The formula gives the
distribution of these six types for any generation.

