REVIEWS OF BOOKS

second, the estimates made by Rickman, Farr, based on rather shaky assumptions. His con-

Brownlee and Griffiths for the eighteenth and clusion that the long-term decline in French

early nineteenth centuries. Griffiths's hypotheses fertility began somewhere about the year 1770

of the decline in mortality in the eighteenth has not been fully corroborated by the studies

century and the possible causes of such a decline of parish registers described by M. Henry,

are then examined critically in three papers by although the practice of birth control was

Marshall Habakkuk, and McKeown and undoubtedly spreading among certain sections

Brown. The last of these is particularly stimulat- of the population, principally the nobility,

ing. The authors' main theme is the examination during the eighteenth century. The other chapters

of the possible influence of medical science on devoted to France consist of a study of the data

mortality in the eighteenth century, and they available for the sixteenth and seventeenth

reach the challenging conclusion that an exten- centuries by Professor Goubert and a discussion

sion of medical services at that time would have by M. Meuvret of the relationships between on

been more likely to produce a rise than a fall in the one hand the famines and epidemics of the

mortality. In the section of their paper in which Ancien Regime and on the other the fluctuations

they discuss the possible influence of the birth in fertility and mortality.

rate, however, McKeown and Brown are on Professor Glass and Dr. Eversley are to be

rather weaker ground. Statements such as congratulated in bringing together in one volume

"Coitus interruptus . . . to be effective requires such a large range of valuable studies. It should

more self-control than is usually credited to the prove indispensable to all students both of

majority of people" are open to dispute; so are demography and of economic history. Not only

their conclusions on the potential effect of does it bring out the salient points of recent

changes in age at marriage. Detailed studies of research, but it also indicates the lines along

particular areas are provided in the papers by which future investigation should be directed,

Eversley on an area in Worcestershire and by and it should thus provide effective stimulus to

Chambers on Nottingham and the Vale of such research.

Trent; and in an essay on "The Changing

J. G. C. BLACKER

Adequacy of English Registration, 1690-1837",

Professor Krause of Rutgers University puts forward the view that the general quality of the parish registers deteriorated during the eighteenth
century. Part III is concerned with Europe and the

United Nations General Principles for National Programmes of Population Projections as Aids to Development Planning. New York, 1965. Pp. vi+60. Price 75 cents (HMSO, 5s. 6d.).

United States, and comprises eleven contribu- THIS MANUAL, WHICH should perhaps be

tions: four are devoted to France, and the others regarded as a short introductory textbook for

to Ireland, Scandinavia, Finland, Italy, Barmen the developing countries, was planned at the

(a small town in western Germany), Flanders 1961 session of the UN Population Commission.

and the United States. The French studies In 1963 and 1964 it was sent in draft to various

include a paper of outstanding interest and value agencies, institutions and individual experts and

by M. Louis Henry, wherein he summarizes the subsequently it was revised, in the light of their

principal features of the recent analyses of parish observations, before publication.

registers in France. We are also given an English About one-half of the text consists of a very

translation of the paper by M. Jean Bourgeois- useful and thorough bibliography, classified

Pichat on the evolution of the population of according to the different aspects of the subject.

France since the eighteenth century, which was The remainder of the book describes the various

first published in Population in 1951. His types of projections, and the general considera-

reconstructions of the patterns of fertility, tions underlying their preparation and use.

mortality and age-sex distributions in the Technique is not dealt with, and there are no

nineteenth century are of great value; but his examples; thus the exposition cannot in any

extrapolations into the eighteenth century are sense be regarded as complete, but at least the

101

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stage is properly set for a rational approach to volume) to confute the somewhat crude attempts

the understanding and interpretation of pro- to interpret social development as having a basis

jections. For example, the single page devoted to in biological evolution, which were current at the'

the choice of a time-span explains how for some beginning of this century. In this he was fully

purposes it is advantageous to look far ahead justified, but from some of his work he gives the

while for others only the next few years need be impression that he underrated the importance of

contemplated. Similarly the value of a set of the genetic endowment of individuals; in any

alternative projections and the best concepts for case he did not concern himself with those

a range of such a set are expounded succinctly problems which are of special interest to students

and clearly.

P. R. C. of eugenics.

Of the essays in this volume, that on sociology

is the one which will probably be of greatest

SOCIOLOGY
Hobhouse, L. T. Sociology and Philosophy: A Centenary Collection of Essays and Articles. Preface by Sydney Caine. Introduced by Morris Ginsberg. London, 1966. G. Bell for the London School of Economics. Pp. xxvii +340. Price 45s.

interest to readers of THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
This essay, which originally appeared in the Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics in 1920, sets out the task of sociology as Hobhouse saw it, and can be read with profit by those who work in any of the special social sciences, demography, for instance. His view is summed up in a

THIS VOLUME CONTAINS twelve essays and quotation which Professor Ginsberg extracts

articles reprinted from various sources and an from another article, not reprinted here, which

interesting introduction by Professor Ginsberg. appeared in 1908: "General Sociology", he

This reprinting is very welcome; all the papers in wrote, "is neither a separate science complete in

the volume are written with the clarity and itself before specialism begins, nor is it a mere

vigour so characteristic of Hobhouse and can be synthesis of the social sciences consisting in a

read with profit to-day. It is a great service to mechanical juxtaposition of their results. It is

have rescued these writings from the semi- rather a vitalizing principle that runs through all

oblivion of encyclopaedias and learned journals social investigations nourishing and nourished

and to have made them easily accessible to a wide by it in turn, stimulating inquiry, correlating

public. Hobhouse, who died in 1928, was the results, exhibiting the life of the whole in the

most outstanding English sociologist during the parts and returning from the study of the parts

first quarter of the present century. His work to a fuller comprehension of the whole".

covered a very wide range; he was a scholar in more than one field and he also made notable

A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS

contributions to the discussion of the social and

political problems of his day.

ECONOMICS

The topic which inspired his main work was that of social development, a topic which, as Professor Ginsberg says, is again attracting

Meade, J. E. The Stationary Economy. London,
1965. Allen and Unwin. Pp. 238. Price 35s.

attention after having been out of favour for a ALMOST EXACTLY THIRTY years ago Mr. (as

time. Hobhouse was careful not to equate social he then was) James Meade published his

development with progress; for him social successful textbook An Introduction to Economic

development was a process of mental learning Analysis andPolicy in which he expounded, at an

through experience the course of which had to be introductory level, the then new ideas about

traced by establishing the facts while judgement employment and income, and about imperfect

of facts had to be kept distinct from judgement competition. He was concerned to stress espec-

of values. When expounding his view of social ially their implications for policy problems,

development, which can hardly be contested, and he actually used some of the new technical

Hobhouse was concerned in some of his writings concepts in advocating particular economic

(though in none which are included in this policies. This latest volume from Professor

102

