POSITIVE EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

An Account of the First Positive Eugenic Experiment

By ALFRED DACHERT

(The writer, who is Vice-Pre'sident-Ggrant of Les Jardins Ungemach of Strasburg, is both the originator and effective director of a unique attempt to breed a better race. His garden city is devoted to encouraging large families from young parents who have been personally selected for health and other personal qualities. The article has
been freely but, we hope, accurately translated from the original French.-ED.)

H AVING been asked to give an distinguished leaders in this science and I

account of the eugenic aspects of made myself familiar with their writings.

the city, Les Jardins Ungemach, Among the many criticisms which dis-

which it is my privilege to serve, I will tell turb this new science there is one which

the history of the venture, and will leave constantly crops up, and which declares

my readers to pick out for themselves those that eugenics must be opposed to charity.

aspects which are especially significant to But, as I understood, the day is now passed

them. of indiscriminate ' cash down ' charity, and

My first encounter with eugenics was, I we are entering upon an era of a charity

believe, when, as quite a young man, I read which takes longer views. And what else

Darwin's Origin of Species, in which the is eugenics if it be not just that far-sighted

eugenic doctrine, though never explicitly charity ?

stated, is throughout implicit. At that At this time, when the first garden cities

moment, I think, the conviction took root were just being built, I took the oppor-

in me that the human species was capable tunity to visit Port Sunlight, and I read a

of improvement, and that only man's good description of Bournville.

will was required to raise the race to a new and higher level. The idea had an immense THE BIRTH OF AN IDEAL

attraction for me and, realizing its poetical It must have been about i902 that I

and mystic charm, I found these great began to dream of creating a city which

hopes magnificently expressed in Renan's would enable its families to live under the

Dialogues Philosophiques. It was the pleasantest conditions; but I was then only

time, too, when Ruffenach was writing his a very young and modest manager of a

Gazon Prevost and his Val l'Eveque.

small sweetmeat factory, and I had not the

It is not without reason that I thus stress least hope of ever seeing my dream come

the effect of eugenics upon the imagination, true. This dream city I called " Mount

for if the general public some day takes an Hymettus," since it was to be an offshoot

interest in this group of sciences, it will be of the confectionery business; but that was

owing to its religious and emotional attrac- all I hoped to achieve.

tion. There is a profound truth in the Towards I910 the first garden city,

lines of the German poet: " It was Icarus "Stockfeld," was built in Strasburg, and

who led the Wright brothers towards the in watching it grow, I came to the conclu-

sun; and to the unwieldy chariots of sion that this marvellous instrument did

humanity an invisible Pegasus is yoked." not assist, as it should, the progress of the

Later I learned that in England an exact human species. Dwelling there I saw old

science of eugenics was taught, and a Chair maiden ladies, widows, and sundry others

for it founded. I knew the names of the who had been chosen by the purest chance.

'5

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

As time passed, the business I managed tract as to price. Having left business and

grew; it employed over 500 persons, and not being able to devote myself to my new

became a powerful instrument by means of work, I decided to go on tour and to acquire

which important social changes might all the knowledge I should need to get satis-

some day be achieved. But, curiously factory results. My readers may perhaps

enough, it was the War which brought be surprised to learn that, with this object

about the realization of my schemes. The in view, I went to China. Ancestor-

German legislation as to the distribution, worship has considerable influence on child-

sale, and purchase of sugar-stuffs had the bearing and natural selection, and I wished

extraordinary effect of increasing our profits to study for myself the effect of this religioi

by 2,400,000 gold marks. It did not seem on its followers. I spent nearly a year in

to me possible to pocket this money, and I China, studying these problems, and con-

suggested to my company that we should cluded that ancestor-worship is, so to say,

transfer it to a special account, and adminis- the Old Testament which precedes the New

ter it separately with the object of further- Testament of Evolution. It is not difficult

ing some social work. My attitude was to conceive that a time will come when

completely understood by my chief, the eugenic convictions based on a sound science

revered M. Ungemach, who had created the will have considerable influence on the

Societe alsacienne d'Alimentation (the pro- modern life of old-world Europe.

prietory company of the factory I managed)

and in whose honour the city I was to build was named Les Jardins Ungemach. He

A CHINESE GARDEN CITY

supported me valiantly and undertook to Quite by accident during my travels I

persuade our directorate to adopt my views. visited the garden city which is the oldest

But to what social cause should we in the world and which still remains the

devote these funds?

model for all the rest, the Manchu town of

At this juncture my old schemes, matured Pekin; and I also saw another garden city

in my mind by the passage of years, came which is probably the most remarkable of

to life; and I proposed that we should de- our time, New Batavia in Java. In passing

vote the money to building a eugenic city. through Tokio, I was struck at discovering

A low birth rate being the curse of our in the Maruzen library a whole shelf-full of

country, my suggestion was approved. books on eugenics, a discovery which taught

Soon after I decided to retire from business me that a country prepared by ancestor-

in order to devote myself body and soul to worship is particularly favourable soil for

the making of such a city.

the eugenic seed. At home, in France, one

might search a hundred libraries without

FERTILITY-AND ANCESTOR-WORSHIP

finding a single book on the subject. I was also happy enough to come upon an excel-

From that time I prepared myself seri- lent synopsis of the subject, Applied

ouslv for the task which awaited me. T Eugenics, by Popenoe and Johnson, which

got up all the literature on the subject, I read on my journey from Yokohama to

visited all the garden cities which had been Manilla.

built in England and France, and attended When I returned to Strasburg in the

the Inter-Allied Housing and Town- spring of 1921, all the obstacles which had

Planning Congress in London in I920. But stood in the way of our city had disappeared;

when I wanted to get down to work I was and the town of Strasburg, realizing the

met with two great difficulties. First, our significance of our work, put at our dis-

funds, which had been invested in foreign posal the ancient glacis (it was a fortress

securities, had been sequestered; and next, once) of WN acken, which had the double

there was not at that time any contractor advantage of being near to the town and of

who was able to enter into a definite con- being planted with old trees. Very soon I

A POSITIVE EUGENIC EXPERIMENT

started the building of 2oo houses, I40 of HOUSES PLANNED FOR CHILDREN

which are now finished.

The young couples thus selected are

THE PRINCIPLES OF SELECTION
My ideas of the principles which ought to guide us in developing the Jardins Ungemach had matured during my journeys, and I decided that to make the city a means for perfecting the human race, I should have to lay down two rules:
I. The inhabitants should be selected, not from the point of view of their constituting good-paying tenants, but for their

placed in surroundings which are particu-
larly suitable to their mental and physical development. The city, which is in easy reach of the town, is built in an airy, healthy, and quiet place without any shops or public-houses. Each house is detached, and is so planned as to avoid all unnecessary labour for a young housewife who is expected to have children, but cannot afford the help
of a servant.

human qualities

i. All rooms are on one floor.

2. The laying-out and regulation of the 2. There is a big kitchen-dining-room.

city and its houses should be such as to 3. A laundry, which is also a bathroom,

promote the best development of the fami-
lies inhabiting it.
Our object should therefore be not to provide houses for those families which happened to want them, but to help young couples towards self-development. We should not shelter large families, but create
them. And it was essential thus to encourage not only large famirles, but also those whose mentality and physique would be a real acquisition to the country.
But how were we to go about choosing
such tenants ? We must find young couples, in the best
of health, comely and vigorous, and who really wanted children. Consequently, I

adjoins the kitchen-dining-room, so that the housewife, without running about, can attend at the same time to her children, the cooking, and the washing.
4. Water laid on in all bedrooms, to obviate the need for carrying slops.
5. There are regular deliveries of milk, bread, groceries, and meat, so that the housewife need not go shopping.
6. By the same token, the city has a day nursery, where the babies and young children can be left. This also enables the city's doctor to watch every child from its infancy and to warn the parents at the first disquieting symptom.

established a system of selection by four

stages:

Sometimes it happens, though rarely,

The candidate begins by filling up a form that the families thus favoured do not grow.

which contains a series of questions about The Foundation then replaces them with

his age and state of health. Marks are others who are more promising, for the city,

given according to the answers, and the ap- being made for children, must not be al-

plications are classified according to the lowed to be occupied by families which

total marks obtained. I myself then inter- cannot or will not have any.

view the families obtaining the highest Since the birth of the city, seven years

marks. Next, I get to know them and ago, we have only had to take action nine

amplify their previous replies, and there- times. This is the way to deal with the

after a committee visits them at home, in mischief often referred to in eugenic litera-

order to see them in their normal surround- ture, that families with small means cease

ings and to find out their mode of life and to be fertile when transferred to better sur-

the tidiness and decency of their homes. roundings.

When the choice has been finally made, we And what have been the results during

ask for a medical certificate from both hus- the seven years our city has existed? The

band and wife, so that we may have the following figures will give some idea of the

fullest assurance of their soundness.

differences between town and city.

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE RESULTS AFTER SEVEN YEARS

Year.
I927 I928
I929

Number of Houses.
... I23 ... I32 ... I32

Number of Persons per Inhabitants. House.
505 4. I0 569 4.3I 592 4.48

Year.
I927
I928
I929

BIRTHS PER I,ooo LIVING.

Town of Strasburg.
... 16.35 ... i6.8o ... i5.8o

Les Jardins.
39.69
35.I5 37. I6

Year. I927
I928
I929

DEATHS PER I,ooo LIVING.

Town of Strasburg. Les Jardins.

... II.72
... I I.90
... I3.0I

5.94
I.77 i.68

EXCESS OF BIRTHS OVER DEATHS, PER I,OOO LIVING.

Year.
I927
I928
I929

Town of Strasburg.
... 4.6
... 4-9
... 2.7

Les Jardins.
35.6
33-4
35.6

the cleanness and tidiness of the houses. The committee which visits the young couples before they are admitted to the city, gives marks, running from i to I0, to each for tidiness and cleanness. Each
year the same committee visits all of the houses in the city and gives marks, in the
same way, for the state of the interior of each house. In comparing these marks
with those obtained before entry, we find a
rise, on the average, of I.3. In professional
success there has been equal progress. Husbands, freed from the usual worries about the housing of their families and liv-
ing in healthy and quiet surroundings, are
in a state to bring to their toil a lighter heart which makes them better workers. During the seven years of the city's existence only once has a rent been unpaid, and we notice many signs of increased well-
being in almost every family. Families often leave us to remove to better class dwellings or to build their own houses.
It is also clear that the city has not only a social but a moral influence on its inhabitants, though this is less easy to prove.

It is true that these figures are not
strictly comparable, but they give an
approximate idea of the differences. They suggest, in particular, that young
couples, placed in our surroundings, do not shrink from having children to the same
extent that they do when living in a densely populated urban district. This is all the more striking since our citizens belong to just that class which is deemed the
most infertile, the small clerk and small
official class. The figures also show that the sanitation
of the city is good. Indeed, we have had no epidemics, and signs of tuberculosis in the children have been few and slight.
As for the behaviour of the citizens, we find that drunkenness is completely un-
known in the Jardins UJngemach, and that
the police have never been called in since the city's birth. There has only been one quarrel between neighbours.
There has been a steady improvement in

-AND LOOKING FORWARDS?
Can it be said, after this account of the results of our work, that they have justified the efforts made? The question is important, because in I950 the Jardins Ungemach will no longer be administered as a separate estate, but will belong to the town of Strasburg. If during this time of experiment the results achieved are plainly better than those obtained in other cities, the town will continue along the road we have opened. If not, it will not trouble to follow in our steps, and our work will have been in vain.
The field of experience which we have been tilling is not ours alone: it belongs to the whole eugenic world. It is to the interest of all the disciples of eugenics to support us. Up to the present, our results have been satisfactory; but if experts have any advice or suggestions to make, we
should gratefully welcome and apply them to the reinforcement of our own experiment.

