THE PREVENTION OF CRIPPLING

AT a luncheon held on July 22nd Mr. this work, and its success depends largely

Jackson Burrows spoke of the work on the extent of the co-operation between

of the Central Council for the Care of
Cripples. Mr. Bramwell was in the Chair and in introducing the speaker he said that as a
subject was more closely examined it became more complicated and not more simple. To a layman this was the case where the influences of heredity and environment were
concerned, and Mr. Bramwell suggested the analogy of architects' plans, which in the hands of workmen would be translated into a house or ship; it depended on the workmanship whether it was a good or bad house or ship. He thought the terms " design and

non-medical and medical workers. It is
important to realize that only a small minority of cases of crippling are associated
with mental defect; and that it is usually possible to render even the severely crippled useful and happy citizens. My talk to-day will be concerned with prevention of crippling, with due reference to the eugenic question, and the ways in which established
cripples can be helped. One cannot discuss the prevention of
crippling without saying something about the causes.

workmanship" might be more comprehen- i. Congenital infection. Syphilis alone

sible to many people than " nature and requires mention. Congenital syphilis never

nurture."

was a common cause of crippling: it is now

Mr. Jackson Burrows first dealt with the a very rare one, in consequence of the vast

eugenic aspects of crippling. " I propose," diminution in the incidence of the disease

he said, " to start with a couple of definitions, in the last fifty years from better education

which I am afraid is a dangerous beginning and better treatment.

as inviting somnolence or stimulating revolt. 2. Congenital disturbance of development.

First, it may, or may not, have occurred to One example is club-foot, which is a special

you what is the derivation of the word deformity quite unlike that which appears

' cripple.' This is supposed to be a corrup- on the wrappers of certain detective novels;

tion of the word 'creeple,' a person who another is congenital dislocation of the hip.

creeps, but for our purpose we ought perhaps Manifest familial occurrence of these con-

to include a wider range of persons, namely ditions is exceptional, and it is doubtful if

all those who have not full use of their the question of forbearance from childbirth

skeleton or muscles. You will find that our should often arise. There are numerous

interest extends also to those who might conditions, notably of the hands and of the

lose the full use of these structures, failing feet, which are commonly hereditary, but

treatment, namely potential cripples.

most of them are insufficiently important to

The other word that I want to define is justify eugenic control.

'orthopaedics.' Now this is not, as is so 3. Congenital predisposition. There are

often supposed, a mixture of Greek and certain crippling diseases to which patients

Latin, having something to do with the feet, are born with a predisposition. One example

but is derived from two Greek words meaning is haemophilia, the scourge of certain

the straight child. So you will see that the dynasties. Here as you know there is a sex

emphasis is on health and not on disease, and linkage, the women transmitting the disease

on prevention as well as on cure. For many and some of the sons showing its manifesta-

years orthopaedic surgery has been under- tions. Another example is one of the diseases

stood to mean the treatment of adults as in which the bones are unduly brittle. There

well as children. I define the word 'ortho- are several curious and tragic forms of

paedics ' because it has to do with the medical paralysis which slowly progress until they

side of the welfare of cripples. There are also become so generalized as to result in death.

big administrative and educational sides of Many of these are hereditary, but most

8I

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

members of affected families are seemingly 6. Infantile paralysis. Although the cause

unaffected, so that eugenic methods would of this condition is known there is at present

therefore be difficult to enforce, though there no satisfactory method of prevention, in spite

is an almost unanswerable case for their of much research. The disease is notifiable,

application in certain instances. All these but its curious epidemic behaviour does not

diseases are relatively uncommon, and there readily lend itself to control. Early and

remains the fact that very few crippling prolonged orthopaedic treatment is exceed-

conditions are hereditary and therefore ingly important for the prevention of de-

claimants for eugenic control.

formities and the improvement of function.

4. Environmental diseases. It is obvious At one time this treatment was greatly

that diseases arising from a bad environment neglected, and in many localities this is

might be controlled by eugenic methods so unfortunately still the case. In some areas

applied as to prevent the birth of children the patient is the responsibility of one local

into a bad environment, but in fact the better authority while he remains infectious, and

way is to alter the environment, or, if this is of another when he ceases to be infectious;

impossible, to modify its effects. In fact the this does not aid efficient treatment.

incidence of wholly or partially environ- 7. Accidents. Domestic accidents form an

mental diseases has been enormously dimin- important group. The incidence of accidents

ished by these other methods. A case in due to industrial processes and to the motor

point is rickets, which in our lifetime has been car is more easily controlled. Industrial

a very common cause of crippling; nowadays accidents have been greatly diminished by

a severe case of rickets is almost a rarity. factory legislation, but there is still no room

Surgical tuberculosis was formerly one of the for complacency. With the toll of the

great causes of crippling. It is still an import- roads you will be only too familiar. Much of

ant cause but it has greatly diminished, the crippling from accidents arises from

largely because of better habits of life. There severe fractures, the treatment of which,

is unfortunately every expectation that this contrary to common supposition, may be very

war, like others, will increase its incidence. difficult. An attempt is being made at the

About one-fifth of cases in this country we present time to improve the organization of

know to be due to the drinking of infected fracture treatment so that the patient should

milk, and the corollary is that one-fifth of come as early as possible under the care of

all cases of tuberculosis of bones and joints an expert working with suitable facilities and

could be eliminated if pasteurization of all able to supervise treatment until recovery is

milk were enforced, as it is in some parts of complete.

the world. It seems paradoxical that, before 8. Legislation. You will be surprised at my

the war, the Government should have insti- including legislation as a cause of crippling,

tuted a widespread campaign for increasing especially as I have already referred to

the consumption of milk, without taking legislative activities which have the reverse

effective steps to ensure that this should be effect. The defects in the Workmen's Com-

rendered harmless. The dangers of a bad pensation and Employers' Liability Acts do

milk supply are no less real, if less obvious, in fact create cripples by producing a state

than those of a bad water supply.

of mind which prevents recovery of injured

5. Rheumatism. Under this head we have workmen who would otherwise be restored

a varied group of conditions some of which to their former powers. Time forbids my

may be described as crippling. They are so elaborating this statement, but it would not

widespread as to constitute an important be contested by anybody who has to do with

economic, as well as social, problem; and treatment of injured workmen or with the

in spite of a large amount of research medico-legal problems which arise. For-

the prevention and treatment must still be tunately the whole question of workmen's

regarded as notoriously unsatisfactory as a compensation is now under consideration by

whole.

a Royal Commission, before which the Central

THE PREVENTION OF CRIPPLING

83

Council for the Care of Cripples has given extent to which they carried out their legal

evidence. Mr. R. C. Elmslie, chairman of the obligations, were not obliged to do anything

Council's executive committee, was a mem- for non-tuberculous cripples, unless destitute.

ber of the Commission until, a year ago, his The Central Council co-ordinated voluntary

much regretted death left the Commission and official effort and attempted to secure

without a single medical member. In this official action in fields which were closed to

country workmen's compensation makes no voluntary activity. The Central Council also

provision for medical treatment, and for this administered the Lord Nuffield Fund for

the injured workman is largely dependent Cripples.

on charitv."

Mr. Jackson Burrows then went on to Discussion

speak of the work of the Central Council for Replying to a number of questions at the

the Care of Cripples, which, he said, was a close of the talk, Mr. Jackson Burrows said

voluntary body. concerned primarily with that air-raid casualties had not entailed a

the prevention of crippling, with its cure or very great deal of extra work; he reminded

physical amelioration in cases where it has his audience that they did not exceed the

not been prevented, and finally education, number of road accidents. As to the propor-

vocational training, employment and general tion of crippled children in the population,

welfare coupled with medical treatment. these amounted to between five and ten per

Serious work for cripples was only a thing of thousand, including persons needing treat-

the last fifty years and it was not until after ment and who could be cured. No relation-

the last war that active measures were taken, ship had been established between congenital

the most valuable being the establishment of deformities and attempted abortion; reli-

school medical inspection and maternity and able statistics of the latter were difficult to

child welfare centres. Theoretically this obtain.

should mean that a potential cripple could It was too soon to say what would be the

be picked out at any time between birth and effects of evacuation on crippling diseases.

leaving school. It was important that after The break in treatment was always unfor-

school crippled children should pass on to tunate, and, as far as after-care was concerned,

vocational training centres, but, though there sight had been lost of a number of patients.

were centres doing excellent work, there were From the financial point of view there was

too few of them.

frequently a difference of opinion as to

Vocational training was also applied to whether the home or evacuation area local

adult cripples, though these were less authority was responsible for the cost of

adaptable than children. Many cases being treatment. Another query referred to the

the result of accidents, the patients could financing of rehabilitation centres for injured

not always be sufficiently restored for return workmen; these were almost entirely run by

to their own work, but in many other employers, such as the London Midland and

instances gradual work at a rehabilitation Scottish Railway and the Midland Colliery

centre enabled the man to return to his own Owners Association, who carried their own

trade. Unfortunately there were only two insurance. It was not possible to interest the

or three of these in the whole country.

insurance companies in the financing of such

The system for the medical care of cripples schemes because under the present law they

which has been sponsored by the Central were compelled to lower the rate of premium

Council was one in which the country was if they made more than a certain profit out

divided into areas, each having a central of workmen's compensation. It was there-

orthopaedic or general hospital with out- fore not worth their while to assist in the

lying clinics in the surrounding country, so rapid restoration to work of the bulk of

that, after a period in hospital, treatment injured workmen.

could be continued near the patient's home. Mr. Bramwell thanked the speaker most

Local authorities, which varied greatly in the warmly for a very interesting lecture.

