GALTON'S OUTLOOK ON RELIGION*

By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P.

FRANCIS GALTON was born on Feb- reversals through the intervention of divine

ruary i6th, i822, and died on January or lemonic agencies, there could be no

I7th, I9II. His eighty-nine years of life spanned the last three-quarters of the nineteenth century and the first decade of the twentieth. It was a serene and fruitful period wherein economic expansion and
scientific progress generated hopeful expectations about man's future. These sentiments were reflected in the contemporary philo-

science. The same may be said of the laws of heredity. If, for example, it were proved that the birth of intelligent and healthy
children to parents lacking these qualities could be promoted by the exercise of prayer, there would be no object in studying the laws of heredity. Prayers would become a substitute for careful breeding.

sophical outlook and were shared, sustained Galton's paper " Statistical Inquiries into

and stimulated by Galton.t He was for- the Efficacy of Prayer " first appeared in the

tunate to die three years before the outbreak Fortnightly Review of August i872. His

of the first world war, which event will be arguments provdked a minor controversy

regarded by future historians as the begin- and shocked some of his contemporaries, who

ning Qf the twentieth century's period of dis- spoke of him as a flippant free-thinker.

illusionment and disrupted ideals.

Galton's thoughts about religion were cer-

Galton's book, Inquiries into the Human Faculty, wherein for the first time the word " eugenics " was used, was published in
I883-sixty-three years ago. It was republished in I907 in the Everyman Library, F in

tainly free, but they were not flippant; for
Galton was by nature a religious man and there was a religious background to his views about eugenics which we should try to
understand.

which form it is still available. From this Galton believed that eugenics was a

recent edition three of the original chapters science which called for the patient study of

were omitted. Their titles are: Theocratic natural processes; he also believed that it

Intervention, Objective Efficacy of Prayer, was a practice which should guide social

arid Enthusiasm. Galton notes these ex- policy; and he further believed that it

cisions in his preface to the Everyman should be a factor in religion.

edition, which he concludes with the words: These three aspects of eugenics are con-

"After all, the omission of these chapters, sistent with each other and are derived from

in which I find nothing to recant, improves, Galton's reactions to the evolution theory.

as I am told, the general balance of the His essential views changed little throughout

book."

his active life, for the same themes recur

Yet these chapters give a valuable insight throughout the works of his middle and old

into Galton's outlook on religion, wherein the age.*

belief in theocratic intervention and in the I will begin by trying to summarize

objective efficacy of prayer found no place. Galton's views in a few simple propositions,

For it is clear that if the laws of planetary which will then be elaborated.

motion, of gravity, of light, heat, sound, etc., i. Tribal religion serves an evolutionary

were subject to arbitrary suspensions or * A paper read before the Eugetnics Society on
March igth, I946.
t Few men have had better biographers than Galton.
Professor Karl Pearson's four carefully compiled,

* His views are given in Hereditary Genius (I869: Galton 47 years of age); in Human Faculty (1883: Galton 6i); in an article published in the National Review, August I894, entitled " The part of Religion in Human Evolution" (Galton 72); and in the 1abt

beautifully illustrated and faithfully indexed volumes decade of his life when Galton was much concerned

have been of inestimable help to me.

with eugenics. His Memories were written when he was

I J. M. Dent & Sons.

87.

69

70 - THE EUGENICS REVIEW

or biological purpose in giving cohesiveness to the tribe, thereby increasing its efficiency and its chances of survival in inter-group struggles. All tribal religions are closely concerned with the processes of birth, marriage and death.
2. Within historical times, man has exerted enormous effects on the surface of the planet and on the distribution of human races thereon.
3. Mental and moral qualities are inheritable as are physical, and like them are malleable. A great power is here to hand.
4. Man's faculties are increasingly unequal to the requirements of his civilization.
5. Very severe competition and struggle may produce unde'sirable results and are not therefore necessary either .for evolutionary or for social progress.
6. Religion should be concerned with the furtherance of human evolution.
7. Lastly I will say something about Galton's mysticism and about his outlook during the last years of his life on Christianity and Prayer.
I. BIOLOGICAL VALUE OF TRIBAL RELIGIONS
The derivation of the word religion is uncertain; it is thought by some to be derived from the Latin Ligo, I tie together. From the same root come such words as ligature, ligament, etc. During Galton's life there was much discussion of social anthropology; Herbert. Spencer was engaged on his monumental Principles of Sociology; and T. H. Huxley was writing about evolution and ethics. Tylor's Primitive Culture was first published in i87I; Frazer's Golden Bough in I890. Galton had, moreover, gained first-hand experience of primitive tribes in south-west Africa during his early manhood.
The earliest function of religion, Galton held, was to give cohesion and a common social consciousness to the tribe.
Many influences that bind barbarians are illusions, such as totems, tutelar deities, and much else, but, for all that, they supply sufficient cohesive force to unite them into organized bodies. Whenever a struggle arose between a compact tribe and an equal number of separate

individuals, the former would win, however their compactness may have grown into existence. Or again, between two barbaric nations, the one that was the most superstitious of the two would generally be the more united, and therefore the more powerful.*
The smaller the tribe and the greater the danger of its being overrun, enslaved or culturally absorbed, the greater the need of a tribal religion which would knit together its members and weld them into a singly reacting whole. For biological reasons it is
necessary that the processes of birth,
marriage and death should be regulated by custom and religion, and that they be celebrated by impressive rites, often of a sacramental character, which stress the ulterior significance of these events and bring home to us that their implications reach beyond our limited selves.
2. INFLUENCE OF MAN UPON THE PLANET AND UPON THE HUMAN RACE
The powers which man has displayed, not by design but as a by-product of his day-today life, are immense. They are to be seen
on the surface of the globe, and in the distribution of plants and animals. He [man] has cleared such vast regions of forest that his work that way in North America alone, during the past halfcentury, would be visible to an observer as far off as the moon. He has dug and drained; he has exterminated plants and animals that were mischievous to him; he has domesticated those that serve his purpose, and has transplanted them great distances from their'native places.t
A chapter in Inquiries into the Human Facultys is devoted to the influence of man upon race. The standpoint which, despite Herbert Spencer and the anthropologists, prevailed in the eighties is alluded to.
One of the most misleading words is that-of "aboriginees." Its use dates from the time when the cosmogony was thought to be young and life to be of very recent appearance. Its usual meaning seems to be derived from the supposition that nations disseminated themselves like colonists from a c6mmon centre about four thousand years, say 120 generations, ago, and thenceforward occupied their lands undisturbed until the very recent historical period with which
* The National Review, August I894, p. 755. t Human Faculty, p. 197.
$ pp. 200-7.

GALTON'S OUTLOOK ON RELIGION

7I

the narrator deals, when some invading host we may scarcely realize how hesitatingly the

drove out the " aboriginees." This idyllic view of the march of events is contradicted by anQient
sepulchral remains, by language, and by the

lessons of Darwin's Origin of Species were
applied to man. The views on heredity,

habits of those modem barbarians whose curreht during Galton's middle life, were

history we know.

vague and contradictory. Galton wrote of

Galton goes on to point out what changes them:

of race and population have occurred within

Speaking generally, most authors agreed that

historical times. He cites Spain, where, all bodily and some mental qualities were

among the early Iberians and Basques, colonies were formed by Phoenicians and by Greeks. Carthaginians, who later invaded the country in the third century B.C., were

inherited by brutes, but they refused to believe the same of man. Mofeover, theologians made a
sharp distinction between the bodt and the
mind of man on purely dogmatic grounds. A few
passages may undoubtedly be found in the works

supplanted by Romans who ruled it for of eminent authors which are exceptions to this

700 years. Spain was invaded in the fifth century A.D. by a succession of German tribes, and was then overrun by Visigoths,

broad generalization, for the subject of human heredity had never been squarely faced, and
opinions were lax and contradictory. It seems hardly credible now that even the word heredity

who ruled it for 2oo yearg. Then came the was then considered fanciful and unusual. I was

Moors, who were in their turn displaced.

chaffed by a cultural friend for adopting it from

The present population consists of the rem- the French.* (My italics.)

nants of one -or more tribes of ancient Iberians, That the author of the Origin of Species

of the still more ancient Basques, and of relics of all the invaders who have been named. There is besides a notable proportion of Gypsies and
not a few Jews.

shared the prevailing uncertainty is shown by a letter to Galton wherein Charles Darwin records his first reactions on reading Heredi-

Galton mentions the remarkable migra- tary Genius. The letter contains the following

tions of Gypsies and describes how, in the passage:

territories of Africa which he had explored,

You have made a convert of an opponent in

negroes had been displaced by bushmen, who one sense, for I have always maintained that,

were later supplanted by Bantus; these, at the time he visited them, were being pushed aside by the superior Namaquas, themselves
a mixed race. Changes of race and population in Siberia,
North and South America, the West Indian Islands, in Australia and New Zealand are then described. From all this Galton concludes that man has unconsciously exercised an enormous influence, both quantitative and qualitative, on himself. He writes:
The power in man of varying the human stock vests a great responsibility in the hands of

excepting fools, men did not differ much in intellect, only in zeal and hard work; and I still think this is an eminently important difference.t
It is remarkable that Darwin records himself as doubting that men differed much in intellect. The reading of Hereditary Genius probably helped him to extend his theory, for in The Descent of Man, first published in i87I, Galton's work, which was unnoticed in the Origin, is several times quoted.
Galton's views on the hereditary nature of mental qualities were first advanced in I864

each generation, which has not been recognized in two papers published in Macmillan's

at its just importance, nor deliberately employed. It is foolish to fold the hands and to say that nothing can be done, inasmuch as social forces and self-inrterest are too strong to be resisted.

Magazine, entitled " Hereditary Talent and Character." Karl Pearson refers to the argument there developed that psychical and

They need not be resisted: they can be guided. physical characters are equally inherited-as

3. MENTAL AND MORAL QUALITIES ARE INHERITABLE LIKE PHYSICAL, AND ARE MALLEABLE
That mental and moral characteristics are inherited is to-day so taken for granted that

the " foundation stone of Galton's anthropological work." Large vistas were suddenly disclosed. "We cannot," wrote Galton,
* Memories, p. 288. t A facsimile of this letter is given in Volume I, opposite page 6, of Pearson's Life.

72 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

"doubt the existence of a great power ready from poverty, toil and an unduly large contin-

to hand and capable of being directed with vast benefit as soon as we shall have' learnt to understand and to apply it." *

gent of the weakly, the inefficient, and the born
criminal classes, and that the existing social
arrangements are acknowledged to be failures. Further, again, I will make the reasonable

supposition that socialistic experiments on

4. MAN'S FACULTIES INCREASINGLY UN- various scales and in various ways had been

EQUAL TO THE NEEDS OSF His CIVILIZATION
What would Galton have thought of

largely tried and confessedly found ineffective owing to the moral and intellectual incompetence
of the average citizen. There would then be a widely-felt sense of despair; there would be

modern socialism ? He mentioned the sub- ominous signs. of approaching anarchy and of

ject little in his writings, which, as far as they go, suggest that he would not have sympathized with the school of eugenists which
condemned socialism as " anti-biological."

ruin impending over the nation, while a bitter
cry would arise for light and leading . . . In the imagined event, preachers of all sorts of nostrums would abound, mostly fanatics who
could see only one side of a question, and on that

Galton seems to have thought that to be account they would be all the more earnest in successful socialism would require human their opinions and persuasive to the multitude.

beings to be mentally and morally superior Does not the last paragraph evoke before

to those then experimenting with the idea. our eyes the picture of pre-Nazi Germany ?

An article, written in i894,t contains a Throughout the whole passage runs the

reference to socialism which Karl Pearson thought that the present moral qualities of

says is the only one he can recall Galton to civilized man are unequal to the task of

have made. The article has an almost social organization which to-day confronts

uncanny bearing on recent events. Here are him. Needed are more independence' of

some passages:

mind, more tolerance, more co-operativeness.

It has now become a serious necessity to better Strengthen these qualities, and the socialist the breed of the human race. The average citizen dream of a state sustained by voluntary co-

is too base for the every day work of modern civilization. Civilized man has become possessed of vaster powers than in old times for good or ill, but has made no corresponding advance in wits and goodness to enable him to direct his
conduct rightly.

operation rather than by intra-group competition comes nearer.
Weaken them, and we head for the servile state, its citizens driven by the whip and sustained by the cult of the God-like leader:

Galton saw around him an increasing we revert to " the tyrannies under which scepticism of dogmatic religion, and -he men have lived, whether under rude barbelieved that a re-statement of religious barian chiefs, or under the great despotisms principles was needed. But he doubted of half-civilized Oriental countries." * whether human beings had yet acquired the Here is another passage written in i873:

intelligence and moral balance necessary to Great nations, instead of being highly organ-

tolerate the change. If traditional beliefs
were swept away before men were mature enough to accept better alternatives, there would be a period of -feverish and unsuccess-

ized bodies, are little more than aggregations of men severally intent on self-advancement, who must be cemented into a mass by blind feelings of gregariousness and reverence to mere rank, mere authority, and mere tradition, or they will

ful experiments, socialist experiments among them, which would end in failure.
Let us suppose a nation whose established ... religion, whatever it may be, has become dis-
credited by the majority of its people, including most of those who were trusted as leaders of opinion. Further let us suppose the nation to be suffering in a still more acute form than our own,

assuredly fall asunder. . . . But the case would be very different in those higher forms of civilization, vainly tried as yet, of which the notion of personal property is not the fouhdation but which are, in honest truth, republican and cooperative, the good of the community being literally a more vivid desire than that ot selfaggrandizement or any other motive whatever.
Professor Karl Pearson has shown how

* Essays in Eugenics, 33.

Galton's interest in anthropology and psyc'ho-

t " The Part of Religion in Human Evolution," National Review, August I894, pp. 755-65.

* Human Faculty, p. 55.

GALTON'S OUTLOOK ON RELIGION

73

logy grew out of his experiences as a geo-
grapher. That these human interests, cen-
tring on the essential problem of freedom, were present very early in life may be seen from an interesting quotation, topical in other contexts to-day, from his book Tropical South Africa, published in I853 when Galton was thirty-one. He is speaking of the
Damaras.
These savages court slavery. You engage one
of them as a servant, and you find that he considers himself as your property, and that you are, in fact, become the owner of a slave. They have no independence about them, generally speaking, but follow a master as a spaniel would. Their hero-worship is directed to people who have wit and strength enough to ill-use them. Revenge is a very transient passion in their character; it gives way to admiration of the oppressor. The Damaras seem to me to love nothing: the only strong feelings they possess, which are not utterly gross and sensual, are those of admiration and fear. They seem to be made for slavery, and naturally fall into its ways. Their usual phrase with reference to the missionaries is, " Oh, they are wise but weak "; but Jonker and the Hottentots are, I could almost say, their delight. They wonder at their success.
All over Africa one hears of " giving " men away: the custom is as follows. A negro has chanced to live a certain time in another's employ; he considers himself his property, and has abandoned the-trouble of thinking what he is to do from day to day; but leaves the ordering of his future entirely to his employer. He becomes too listless to exist without a master. The weight of independence is heavier than he likes, and he will not bear it. He feels unsupported and -lost if alone in the world, and absolutely requires someone to direct him. Now, if the employer happens to have no further need of the man, he " gives " him, that is to say, he makes over his interest in the savage to a friend or acquaintance; the savage passively agrees to the bargain, and changes his place without regret; for so long as he has a master at all, the primary want of his being is satisfied. A man is " given " either for a term or for ever; and it was on this tenure that I held several of my men. Swartboy gave me his henchman; Kahikene, a cattle-watcher; Mr. Hahn, a very useful man, Kambanya. As a definition of the phrase " giving a man," I should say it meant, " making over to another whatever influence one possesses over a savage; the individual who is given not being compelled but being passive."
One last quotation will show how Galton's opinions about slavish instinct's and original

sin crystallize in the view that man's faculties are increasingly unequal to the needs of his civilization:
I hold that the blind instincts evolved under those long-continued conditions have been deeply ingrained in our breed, and that they are a bar to our enjoying the freedom which the forms of modern civilization could otherwise give us. A really intelligent nation might be held together by far stronger forces than are derived from the purely gregarious instincts. It would not be a mob of slaves, clinging together, incapable of self-government, and begging to be led; but it would consist of vigorous, self-reliant men, knit to one another by innumerable attractions, into a strong, tense and elastic organization. Our present natural dispositions make it simply impossible for us to attain this ideal standard, and therefore theslavishness of the mass of men, in morals and intellect, must be an admitted fact in all schemes of regenerative policy. The hereditary taint due to the primaval barbarism of our race, and maintained by later influences, will have to be bred out of it before our descendants can rise to the position of free members of a free and-intelligent society.*
5. VERY SEVERE COMPETITION UNDER HARSH' CONDITIONS MAY RETARD PROGRESS
In the last quarter of the nineteenth century, there was much public discussion of the social implications of the evolution theory. Nobody doubted that there was a "struggle for existence " among wild animals and plants, and that this struggle had been a factor in evolutionary change. But how far was a continuation of such struggle necessary -for the further progress of man ? Civilization, culture, tradition, depend on the social instincts of man. Literacy and even speech itself are parts of our social inheritance. If we derive everything that makes us human from social tradition and co-operation, how far, we may ask, is the continued struggle between man and man necessary for the development of humanity?
Diverse answers were given by the controversialists of the period, and discussion turned much on the effects of two kinds of struggle-that inside social groups and that between social groups, or, as they were called,
* "Gregariousness in Cattle and Men," Macmillan's
Magazine, I872, pp. 353-7.

74 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

intra-group and inter-group struggle. Accord- to illustrate this standpoint. I will confine

ing to one school of thought whereof Benja- myself to one. It is the penultimate para-

min Kidd, author of Social Evolution, was a graph of Galton's Memories, and was there-

leading exponent, intra-group struggle was fore among the last things he wrote:

necessary for the evolutionary progress of man. Both Galton and Pearson* opposed

Man is gifted with pity and other kindly feelings; he has also the power of preventing

Kidd's thesis and disputed the conclusions he many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall

drew from it.

well within his province to replace Natural

The effects of a struggle for existence on

Selection by other. processes that are more merciful and not less effective.

man depended, in Galton's view, on what the This is precisely the aim of eugenics.

struggle Was against. Some of the features

of civilization were injurious to the race, and of these Galton regarded two as especi-
ally harmful-wealth and urbanism. After

6. RELIGION SHOULD BE CONCERNED WITH THE FURTHERANCE OF HUMAN EvoLu-

discussing the adverse effects on fertility of

TION

urbanism, Galton wrote:

"The creed of eugenics is founded upon

Again, the ordinary struggle for existence under the bad sanitary conditions of our towns,

the idea of evolution," * wrote Galton in I905. The picture of evolution-as Galton saw

seems to me to spoil and not to improve our it was awe-iilspiring to the point of being

breed. It selects those who are able to withstand frightening. It is a " spectacle of a vast eddy

zymotic diseases and impure and insufficient food, but such are not necessarily foremost in the qualities which make a nation great. On the

of organic turmoil, originating we know not how, and travelling we know not whither.

contrary, it is the classes of a coarser organiza- It forms a continuous whole from first to last,

tion who seem to be, on the whole, most favoured reaching backward beyond our earliest

under this principle of selection, and who survive to become the parents of the next
generation. . . . So again, in every malarial country, the traveller is pained by the sight of the

knowledge and stretching forward as far as we think we can foresee . . . Its elements are in constant flux and change, though its

miserable individuals who inhabit it. These have general form alters but slowly." Both

the pre-eminent gift of being able to survive fever and therefore . . . are apt to be deficient in every quality less useful to the exceptional circumstances of their life.t
And in another context:
When the severity of the struggle for existence is not too great for the powers of the race, its action is healthy and conservative, otherwise it is deadly, just as we may see exemplified in the

Galton and T. H. Huxley illustrated by similes this picture of change within con-
stancy. Huxley compared it to the static waves, unmoving in positions and unchanging in contours, at the foot of Niagara; Galton
to the " curious stream of cloud that sometimes seems attached to a mountain top
during the continuance of a strong breeze;

scanty, wretched vegetation that leads a pre- its constituents are always changing, though

carious existence near the summer snow-line of the Alps, and disappears altogether a little
higher up.:

its shape as a whole hardly varies." The two similes convey exactly the same idea.

Far from regarding intra-group struggle as
a necessary condition of human progress, Galton strongly held that such struggle -should now be reduced to a minimum. Man's
advancement can be brought about by the simultaneous ube of his intelligence and his kindliness. Several passages could be quoted

Evolution is " a grand phantasmagoria."t
Galton does not seem to have believed that
the phantasmagoria had a purpose in the
sense that the human mind is purposive. He describes the process as " mechanical"; in its wastefulness and ruthlessness, in its blundering steps of trial and error and in the immensity of its scale, it is inhuman and

* " Socialism and Natural Selection," by Karl

Pearson. Fortnightly Review, July I894.

* Essays in Eugenics, p. 68.

t "-Hereditary Improvements," Fraser's Magazine, t Phantasmagoria: a medley of shifting series of

I873, p. ii6 et seq.

imaginary figures, illusive images of real appearances:

+ Hereditary Genius, p. 333.

a shifting manifold assemblage of things seen.

GALTON'S OUTLOOK ON RELIGION

75

terrifying. But its culmination on this earth theism." I will quote from Galton's writings

is man.

in chronological order.

On the one hand, we know that evolution has The following passage is taken from the

proceeded during an enormous time on this earth, under, so far as we can gather, a system of rigorous causation, with no economy of time or of instruments, and with no show of especial ruth for those who, in pure ignorance, have violated the condition of life.
On the other hand, while recognizing the awful mystery of conscious existence and the inscrutable background of evolution, we find that, as the foremost outcome of many and long birththroes, intelligent and kindly man finds himself in being. He knows how petty he is, but he also perceives that he stands here on this particulatr earth, at this particular time, as the heir of untold ages and in the van of circumstance.*
Little of human comfort is to be found in the grand panorama of evolution until we

last page of Hereditary Genius published when Galton was forty-seven:
We may look upon each individual as something not wholly detached from its parent source-as a wave that has been lifted and shaped by normal conditions in an unknown, illimitable ocean. There is decidedly a solidarity as well as a separateness in all human, and probably in all lives whatsoever; and this consideration goes far, as I think, to establish an opinion that the constitution of the living Universe is a pure theism, and that its form of activity is what may be described as co-operative. It points to the conclusion that all life is single in its essence, but various, ever-varying, and inter-active in its manifestations, and that men and all other living animals are active workers and sharers

come to man. Man " may use his intelligence in a vastly more extended system of cosmic

to discover and expedite the changes that are necessary to adapt circumstance to race and

action than any of ourselves, much less any of them, can possibly comprehend. It also suggests that they may contribute, more or less un-

race to circumstance, and his kindly sym- consciously, to the manifestation of a far higher

pathy will -urge him to effect them merci- life than our own, somewhat as-I do not pro-

fully." Man has " already furthered evolution very considerably, half unconsciously and for his own personal advantages, but he

pose to push the metaphor too far-the individual cells of one of the more complex animals contribute to the manifestation of its higher order of personality.

has not yet risen to the conviction that it is his religious duty to do so deliberately and systematically." The following is the con-
cluding paragraph of Galton's Inquiries into the Human Faculty:

In the year I872, when he was fifty, Galton published in the Fortnightly Review the paper whose omission from the Everyman
edition of his Human Faculty has .already been noted, " Statistical Inquiries into the

The chief result of these inquiries has been to elicit the religious significance of the doctrine
of evolution. It suggests an alteration in our

Efficacy of Prayer." Briefly the argument of this paper is as follows.

mental attitude, and imposes a new moral duty. The new mental attitude is one of a greater sense of moral freedom, responsibility, and opportunity; the new duty which is supposed to be
exercised concurrently with, and not in opposition to, the old ones upon which the social fabric
depends, is an endeavour to further evolution, especially that of the human race.

We are encouraged to ask for blessings, temporal as well as spiritual, in our prayers. Dr. Hook, the then Dean of Chichester,
stated in his Church dictionary under " Prayer" that " the general providence of God acts through what are called the laws of nature. By this particular providence God

interferes with those laws, and he has

7. GALTON'S MYSTICISM: His ATTITUDE TO promised to interfere in behalf of those who

PRAYER

pray in the name of Jesus."

Galton had a sense of the one-ness of life and of the visible universe. This " sense"

Galton declares that the efficacy of this kind of prayer is a legitimate subject for

might be called an emotion or a conviction; scientific inquiry; and he casts in various

or it might be described as a mystical intuition. Pearson describes it as "pantheistic." Galton himself speaks of a " pure

directions for evidence, all of which is negative. The kin of prayerful people do
not recover from illness more often or

* Human Faculty, p. 2I8.

more rapidly than the kin of unprayerful.

76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Royalty, for whom long lives are much Thus Galton concludes his attack on the

prayed for in anthems and in churches, " are belief in theocratic intervention with an

literally the shortest lived of all who have the affirmation of his mystical faith. The effort

advantage of affluence " (Galton cites eleven to become aware of the solidarity of the self

comparable classes). Missionaries, who pray with all life i;s akin to the effort to commune

much and are much prayed for, often die in with God.

the alien climates of the peoples they set out In his Human Faculty, published in i883,

to convert before they have had time -to when Galton was sixty-one, he wrote (page

master their language. There is no difference I96):

i the infant mortality rates of prayerful and It is difficult to withstand a suspicion that the

non-praying classes.

three dimensions of space and the fourth of time

Before issuing policies, Life Assurance Companies do not include among their confidential inquiries questions such as: "Does he habitually use family prayers and private devotions? " It was once thought
to be an act of mistrust in an overruling

may be four independent variables of a system that is neither space nor time, but something else wholly unconceived by us.
These words were written some forty years before Einstein's work was generally known. Galton again writes:

providence to put lightning conductors on
churches; but Arago's collection of accidents from lightning showed them to be sorely needed. Many items of ancient faith are now

Our part in the universe may possibly in some distant way be analogous to the cells of an organized body, and our personalities may be the transient but essential elements of an immortal and cosmic mind.

relegated to the domain of superstitions.
The sovereign no longer lays hands on the
sick; witches are no longer burned; ordeals and duels are not now regarded as reasonable solutions of complicated difficulties; and the miraculous power of relics is now scouted.

The following is a passage from Galton's Memories written when he was over eighty:
I will mention here a rather weird effect that compiling these Memories has produced on me. By much dwelling on them they became refurbished and so vivid as to appear as sharp and

The onus probandi that prayers for temporal definite as things of today. The consequence has

benefits are efficacious, Galton held, rests with the other side. Such arguments shock us less'to-day than they would have seventy
years ago.

been an occasional obliteration of the sense of
Time, and to replace it by the idea of a permanent panorama, painted throughout with equal vividness, in which the point to which attention is temporarily directed becomes for that time the

But Galton, while not believing in the objective efficacy of prayer, believed in its subjective efficacy. This is how he concludes the article. Those who enjoy a sense of
communion with God can, he says,

Present. The panorama seems to extend unseen behind a veil which hides the Future, but is
slowly rolling aside and disclosing it. That part of the panorama which is veiled is supposed to exist as vividly coloured as the rest, though latent. In short, this experience has given me an

dwell on the undoubted fact that there exists a solidarity between themselves and what surrounds them, through the endless reaction of physical laws among which the hereditary
influences are to be included. They know that they are descended from an endless past, that they have a brotherhood with all that is, and have each his own share of responsibility in the

occasional feeling that there are no realities corresponding to Past, Present and Future, but that the entire cosmos is one perpetual Now. Philosophers have often held this creed intellec-
tually, but I suspect that few have felt the possible truth of it so vividly as it has occasionally appeared to my imagination through
dwelling on these Memories.

parentage of an endless future. The effort to familiarize the imagination with this great idea
has much in common with the effort of com-

The following are extracts from the Recollections of Francis Galton,* written by

muning with a God, and its reaction on the mind his niece, Mrs. Millicent Lethbridge, whose

of the thinker is in many important respects the religious views were more orthodox than

same. It may not equally rejoice the heart, but those of her uncle.
it is quite as powerful in ennobling the resolves,
and it is found to give serenity during the trials * Quoted by Karl Pearson: Life of 1'rancis Galton,
of life and in the shadow of approaching death. Vol. III B., pp. 446-9.

GALTON'S OUTLOOK ON RELIGION

It would be hard, she wrote, to find anyone EUGENICS AS SCIENCE, RELIGION AND SOCIAL

with so high an ideal of duty as his, and I do not
hesitate to affirm that nothing-not self-interest, praise, blame, or anything else, would have made

POLICY The subject of this lecture is Galton's

him swerve a hair's breadth from what he outlook on religion. I remarked at the begin-

conceived to be right. To that which he believed ning that Galton conceived eugenics not only

to be true, he felt bound to give utterance, even though it caused him the disapprobation and even the deep sorrow of some whose love and sympathy he most valued. This was especially

as a component of religion but also as science and social policy. The critic might demur.
" Science, politics and religion," he might

the case when his work on Human Faculty came argue, " belong to such entirely different

out in I883, with a chapter on prayer. . . . I have heard him called hard names-" Atheist," " Unbeliever ". and so on. My own description of his creed would be that of a Religious Agnos-

spheres of human activity that they cannot
be confounded." I believe that such a criticism would be based on a misunderstand-

tic. Faith was denied him, and, as he often told ing of Galton's position. Let me try to make

me, all intuitive witness to the Divine. The this point clearer by an analogy drawn from

question of the reality of this " intuitive witness," however, interested him deeply, and he would have given much to convince himself that
it was real or imaginary, subjective or objective.

the physiology of the central nervous system.
The spinal reflex has three components: first we may consider the sensGry, afferent

James's Varieties of Religious Experience was a or centripetal component, wherein the im-

book that occupied his thoughts a great deal.... pulse travels up the sensory pathways of the

He has told me that, at one time of his life (I imagine when he was very young) the asceticism of the Roman Church appealed to him very
strongly. His admiration for the uncompromis-

peripheral nerves to the spinal cord. Next is
the central component within the spinal cord itself; this structure is comparable to a

ing monotheism of Mohammedanism was recur- telephone exchange where complicated con-

rent. I imagine that he was latterly much
attracted by Spinoza. But early love and sentiment were,all on the side of Quakerism. He
would sormetimes ask where such or such a

nections and intercommunications are made.
Thirdly we have the motor, efferent or centrifugal component of the reflex arc whereby

parable or discourse of Our Lord was to be found the impulse is carried outward to a group of

and he would read it aloud, saying, half to him- muscles which are caused to contract or relax.

self, as he shut the book, " Perfect-very perfect." William MacDougall has ingeniously com-

He was scrupulously careful not to say anything
on religious topics that could possibly distress or injure the faith of anyoneespecially the

pared these three components of the simple reflex to analogous components of an instinct:

young-and I never knew him say anything that but here the nervous mechanisms are more

was not absolutely reverent. . . . In spite of complicated because the brain is involved.

his much abused chapter on Prayer in Human
Faculty, I know he used to pray himself; indeed in one of his letters to me he wrote (May I2th,
I907): " Did I ever tell you that I have always

The sensory or centripetal element of the spinal reflex he compared to the cognitive phase of the instinct; the central or tele-

made it a habit to Pray before writing anything phone-exchange component of the reflex he

for publication, that there may be no self-seeking compared to the affective or emotional phase

in it, and perfect candour together with perfect respect for the feelings of others ? " . . .
There were many beautiful traits in my uncle's character, upon which I cannot now

of the instinct; and the efferent, centrifugal or motor component of the reflex he compared to the conative phase of the instinct which

expatiate. His old-world courtesy, displayed usually, consists of some appropriate mus-

not only in society, but still more at home, to cular action or movement of the animal in

those with whom he was in daily intercourse and to his servants . . . his almost exaggerated dread of appropriating any laurels due to others, which feeling led him to the opposite extreme of

relation to the outside world.
We will be helped to an understanding of Galton's position by extending the analogy

magnifying the achievements of others while still further than did MacDougall. We may

minimizing his own-his horror of self-advertisement. coupled though it was with a nalve
delinght in unsought appreciation-all this is famliar to those who had the privilege of knowing him....

allow ourselves to apply it to social processes. To effect a social change, three phases are necessary. We must first collect necessary information, by ascertaining and assembling

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

relevant facts; next we must interpret these I believe, have changed if he had lived longer.

facts in such a way that the public will react Much has happened in the world since

to them emotionally in the desired manner; Galton's death in i9II to alter his outlook.

and thirdly we must direct along appropriate We have been convulsed by two planetary

channels the social actions which are initiated wars; the birth-control movement has

by the feelings we have aroused. These are arisen ;* the chromosome theory has been

the three phases of eugenics as conceived by propounded by Morgan and elaborated by a

Galton. Eugenics as science produces the host of other workers; the human blood-

required information; eugenics as religion groups have been discovered; the slump of

evokes in us the appropriate emotional our net reproduction rate below unity has

responses to the facts; and eugenics as effected a change-over from an overpopula-

social policy translates the emotions which tion to a depopulation scare; socialism has

have been aroused into needed practical come; and the world has become familiar-

measures.

ized with how the principles of eugenics can

Eugenics as religion therefore corresponds, be perverted by dictators and totalitarian

in our analogy, to the central or telephone- governments. It is interesting to speculate on

exchange phase of the reflex, and to the what Galton would have thought of these

affective or emotional phase of the instinct. events.

This is, in a sense, the most important I draw attention to these and other

phase: in the sense, I mean that, in the omissions. Nevertheless, I hope you will

sequence facts : values : actions, values agree with me that Galton's outlook on

hold the central place.

religion enables us to understand why

eugenics meant so much to him and why, in

TO-DAY'S PERSPECTIVE

the last decade of his life, it was his main pre-

I conclude this lecture with a word about occupation and besetting thought.

what I have omitted. I have said nothing His views on religion, morebver, give us an

about Galton's numerous contributions to insight into his character. Surely we, in this

science outside eugenics. I have said nothing Society, are fortunate in having as a founder

about how Galton conceived eugenics as one whose character no less than whose

science or as social policy. His views as to the intellect we can so whole-heartedly respect.

former-eugenics as science-would require

several lectures to outline; his views on the
latter-on eugenics as social policy-would,

* I do not know of a single reference in Galton's writings to birth control; not does he ever refer to sterilization.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
Artices appearing infordhcoming issues: FISSION AND DISINTEGRATION IN STTLARIA FOSSULARIS AT DIFFERENT TEMPERATURt.
By T. F. TsuI, J. CHU and S. PAi, National University of Chekiang Meitan, Kweichow, China. THE EFFECT OF PEANUT OIL ON THE DESICCATION OF DIAPAUSE AND POST-DIAPAUSE:
PUPSE OF THE MOTH, CALLOGAMIA PROMETHEA DRURY. By Daniel Ludwig, New York University. THE INTERRELATIONS OF THYROID AND GONAD IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS IN BROWN LEGHORN ROOSTERS. By BEN B. BLIVAI, University of Chicago. AN ANALYSIS OF THE FACTORS INFLUENCING THE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE MAMMALIAN REPRODUCTIVE TRACT. By Dorothy Price, University of Chicago.
Edited by W. C. ALLuz, Professor of Zo6logy, The University of Chicago. Published
Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press. Subscription: 57S. 6d. per year. English Agents: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Eugonica Review, Vol. Z]JIII, lNo.

