EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS*

By SIR JOSIAH STAMP, G.B.E., LL.D., D.Sc., F.B.A.

C AREFUL examination of the aims advantage must follow, with immensely

and scope of eugenics convinces me potent results. The aim that stands in the

that they all must issue in effects upon forefront is, of course, the improvement of

the size of population, i.e. its total numbers, the individual himself, to live and lead the

its distribution and its stability. Put nega- good life, and the changes in the distribution

tively, I cannot find that any eugenic aims, of the population in quality are an inevitable

effectively secured, will leave the numbers corollary.

and dynamic quality of population un- But suppose that the population has been

affected, and influence merely its moral or brought by eugenic methods to an ideal state

social structure, its standard of life, or its for potentially enjoying the good life, it may

individual happiness. A society having, be that the methods would then actually

unitedly or individually, eugenic aims will prevent that enjoyment, if they were so

ultimately almost certainly result in total inhibitory, so drastic, so contrary to ideas

numbers different from what would result of liberty, that life is hardly worth living.

if, collectively or individually, it had no Eugenics would then be like the mother

eugenic knowledge or objectives. Even if taking her blubbering small boy out: " I

one realized the mathematically almost brought you here to enjoy yourself, and

impossible and the two totals were identical you've got to enjoy yourself, so shut up."

at some point of time, they would almost If the only conditions on which the position of

certainly diverge in the course of time. It is perfect enjoyment can be attained are those

not necessary to make any Malthusian which prevent its being enjoyed when it is

assumptions about an unchecked tendency reached, if we must go on enduring them,

to multiply to the limits of subsistence in then the population and distribution we

this argument.

secure will be unstable and not durable. I

The aims of eugenics, while no doubt distinguish sharply between reaching a state

having quantitative effects, are actually and establishing a process.

directed at qualitative improvements-a If we could quantify the individual

smaller proportion of defective individuals physical fitness of the population, I imagine

and a larger of competent ones; what is it would give the normal curve of error, with

loosely called negative eugenics being aimed a very large mode of average quality and

by common acceptance at the former, and relatively small numbers on either side of

positive eugenics, less commonly received, exceptional fitness and unfitness. But quan-

at the latter. But it nowhere appears tifying individual mental capacity (above

whether it is an aim to balance the repression the deficiency level) would I think give a

of every birth below the modal line by the different distribution, despite the brain-

gain of an extra birth above it, so that the capacity normal curves given by such

numbers of the population remain un- observers as Dr. H. L. Gordon, writing on

changed, and I should imagine that no " Amentia in the East African."* Like the

eugenist has any programme so precisely empirical Pareto law for the distribution of

quantitative.

wealth, I believe it would be found to be

But we aim at eliminating anti-social along a diagonal line practically straight,

elements, and so a higher average quality of except for the two extreme ends, when

the race for social action to the common plotted againsf a vertical axis representing

* The Galton Lecture, delivered before' the Eugenics

Society on February I6th, I934.

* EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. XXV, January 1934, P. 223.

I07

io8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

degree of mental capacity, and a horizontal improving quality, but they prescribe nothing

axis for the numbers exhibiting that degree as to total numbers. Total numbers must

or more, both axes being expressed logarith- be what they will be, as a result of this

mically. Now the slant of this line would be process.

of immense eugenic significance. If great Does eugenics demand a continually

intelligence were in rather high proportion, increasing total, or a stationary or a falling

and small intelligence relatively low, the population ? I imagine that if there is a

straight line would tend to be more upright. continual upward shift qualitatively in its

If great intelligences were few and small component parts, any one of these will

intelligences were more numerous, the line satisfy eugenic aims, although there is -an

would slant more severely, i.e. have a more implied preference for the increasing total

acute angle with the base. If birth control if it is equally compassable without giving

knowledge and habits are confined to the anything of this qualitative change away.

professional, educated, and most able classes But if the eugenists were presented with an

the effect is dysgenic, and the distribution alternative between a rising total with a

line gets more acute. If it eats away at the moderate upward qualitative shift, and a

mass of lower intelligence, it tends to be stationary or slightly falling total with a very

eugenic, and the distribution line becomes great upward shift in quality, they might

more upright. If it applies equally through differ among themselves as to the true choice.

all classes of the population, the index, or They would almost inevitably be driven

slant of the line, may be restored to its to apply some such tests as are involved

original degree, but, the total population in the economic concept of the optimum

being then so much less, it must lie strictly population.

parallel to the first, in a position considerably Sargant Florence declares that what really

to the left. I am not sure then that con- distinguishes the economist from the eugenist

traceptive practice can be called strictly is his concentration upon quantity rather

eugenic at all, for eugenics has had so little than quality of population. His marginal

to say upon the absolute numbers of the man is not one who is inferior in industrial

population. So long as birth control is being capacity, but any one of a group of given

advocated in certain classes to compensate size. It is the given size that matters.*

the dysgenic influence elsewhere, or so long In economics, we conceive at any par-

as it applies solely to the less developed ticular point of time, and for a particular

intelligence, it is eugenic, and as that is the area, a population large enough when

predominant case at the present time, birth applied to the natural resources of that area,

control tends to rank as a eugenic aim. The to get a total production which, when

day may easily come when it will not be so divided by the numbers of the population,

readily accepted.

gives a maximum quotient or standard of

EUGENICS AND TOTAL NUMBERS

life. Every additional person taken into an under-developed area can increase that

The truth is that the main body of eugenic average, but every additional person in an

teaching has not yet crystallized around any over-developed area lessens it. The economic

specific doctrine of population. Birth con- optimum is the maximum average. Now

trol, in certain circumstances, birth encour- obviously, this is not necessarily stable.

agement in others, and a continually The natural resources may be increased, or

improving social environment which, how- new ones discovered, by science, the resultant

ever kind to the individual during his life, birth-rate may move the population higher

will not unduly endow the weaker, from an or lower than this optimum number. More-

heredity point of view, nor burden the over, the resultant density of population and

stronger from the point of view of spoiling average income will vary greatly in the

his environment or affecting his heredity:

all these doctrines lead to a continually * EUGENICS REVIEW,VOI. XIX, April I927, p. 66.

EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

I09

different areas. Free trade may increase the portions. If the eugenic aim of the highest

quotient for some much more than for others, good life is identical with the economic

and the increase in standard may be pur- optimum in sections, it would have to vary

chased at the cost of great instability in the with the abolition of national boundaries, it

standard. An area may choose a lower would have to postulate wide variations in

optimum point, with less risk of disturbance its own ideal, and the anomaly would not be

from outside forces. This is aimed at in removed until the population of the world

the most respectable types of economic were looked at as a whole, with an identical

nationalism.

standard of life.

I am by no means sure that the eugenic It is possible to view the ideal in another

optimum is the same. The eugenist will way, that of a population in numbers and

probably say that he is not bigoted about quality ideally fitted to the physical and

the absolute size of the population. In so far intellectual demands of a smooth working

as life is a good thing and full of opportunity society, without waste of ability or shortage

for self-realization, not necessarily by exces- of it. A good population requires a supreme

sive leisure leaning to over-indulgence, but leader, a number of high administrators, a

biologically stable, then let there be as many certain quota of professional men (in medi-

people as possible to enjoy that good life. cine, etc.), an appropriate number of

But when numbers become so great as to machinery experts, of industrial leaders, of

endanger the social or national conditions of educationists, of scavengers and cleaners and

this life, then possibly the eugenic optimum manual workers. If there are a thousand

is passed. We can conceive a community Mussolinis there is waste; if not enough

with the ideal density and concentration for intelligences for certain grades, there is

adequate and happy government, becoming, ineffective adjustment, and if too many of

without loss of economic well-being, by the lower range, excessive population, judged

increase of population, too cumbrous for the by fitness of means to ends. It may be the

methods and organization in force. Taking eugenic aim to produce a highly differ-

an analogy, consider a succession of cars entiated and yet integrated organism, rightly

along a highway, the occupants perfectly adjusted in its parts, so that each is of

happy and free from care and well provided maximum service to the whole, and no part

with provisions. Now multiply the number a has unused or unoccupied ability, and no

hundredfold, each car's occupants just as function is under-manned. Dr. Dublin says:

well provided as before with good things, " Experiments are being made to demon-

but the congestion and discomfort of the strate that the most effective society is that

traffic rendering the journey unhappy and in which every man is a significant unit-an

anxious. As material economic progress end in himself-irrespective of class, station

frees our leisure and attention for the other or tradition. If this aim is realized, the

values of life, the conception of a good life individual will come into his own. Under

will contain more and more of those values in such conditions, if the people of Russia,

proportion, and an optimum population India and China continue to people the earth,

from an economic point of view is less and they will in all probability dominate it also."

less likely to coincide with the optimum Sismondi said: " Statesmen should endea-

population from the other points of view. vour to find the relation between wealth and

Again, in the absence of complete free population which shall ensure the greatest

trade, and free movement of surplus popula- sum of happiness to the human race." A.

tions to the areas relatively most eligible, Landry* defines a maximum population

those parts of the world with the best really in terms of saturation, when in-

developed natural resources will have a crease in births entails a larger increase in

higher density of optimum population, or, deaths. This is virtually now an unrealistic

at any rate, a higher standard for their

optimum density than the less favoured

* Scientia, XLV.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

conception. His idea of an optimum popu- fitter in mind and body, with greater oppor-

lation is economic, because it depends upon opportunities for self development and

a standard of living and not of culture.

expression. "'*

Professor Pearl's suggestion that eugenics

preaches the freedom of birth as restricted THE ECONOMIC OPTIMUM POPULATION

to superior people only, was indignantly That being so, we ought perhaps to stay for

repudiated in the Eugenics Journal. " The a while and examine more closely the econo-

mediocre are obviously as necessary for the mic doctrine. This concept lines up to-day

world's work as the superior. A too great from beginnings with Malthus. He thought

increase in the supply of the latter might of two absolute quantitative series coming

indeed result in a lack of employment worthy into conflict-absolute numbers of people and

of their capacity; but on the other hand, absolute quantities of food, with a limiting

any absolute decrease in their number would factor rather than a causal nexus. That an

be a real calamity."

increase of general prosperity should be the

In proportion as getting a living tends, result of an increase in population, did not

under progress, to become more and more a enter his head-his concept was agricultural.

subordinate part of total life, I do not regard John Stuart Mill and others strengthened the

it as calamitous that intellectually a great argument by bringing in the law of diminish-

many people may be better than their jobs. ing returns for agriculture. Ricardians had

The gillie in Barrie's Mary Rose was none the not distinguished the time element-what

less living the good life because he kept may be true for instantaneous variation at

Euripides in his pocket, the while his well- any point of time, may not be true for a

born employer didn't realize that he knew gradual change over a period. " From the

Latin. If the intellectual and emotional life fact that if at any time, the population

is fully extended in leisure, the best brains exceeds a certain definite size the additional

may, without deterioration, be engaged upon work it is able to do will not be commen-

relatively minor and unexhausting duties. surately productive, they quite illegitimately

German writers have expressed the view inferred that as population actually grows,

that we insist too much on the value of con- so the return to its efforts must diminish.

traceptive ideas in the sections having the They elevated, that is to say, what is pro-

lower wage-earning capacity, bringing about perly a law of static economics, into a law of

a reduction of numbers and racial improve- dynamic or historical development."t

ment. They prefer a different angle-a About a hundred years ago, however, in

certain population density is the necessary another connection, viz. the defence of

biological foundation of any sort of culture, machinery against the charge that it created

and this " density is severely threatened by unemployment, we find the Society for the

the fall in the birth-rate, so that they cannot Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, in a volume

obtain a qualitative race improvement by The Working Man's Companion, openly

quantitative reduction in population." basing their exhortations on the causal

But these close adjustments are idealisms principle. For example, in the Results of

and in the meantime the economic is still so Machinery they say: " Inasmuch as the

dominant a factor, that the optimum popula- steam engines increase the productions by

tion in each present given area, regardless of which men are maintained, they increase the

the variations, may be taken as probably the men. What has increased the population of

unconscious eugenic aim for that area.

England nearly tenfold during the last five

It is latent in Colonel Sir Charles Close's hundred years, but the improvements of the

conclusion to his lecture on " The Situation arts of life, which has enabled more men to

in South and East Asia": "Should a live within the land? ... The multiplication

philosopher statesman prefer an India of 350

millions of shortlived, underfed, uncultured people, or an India of half that number, but

* Population, Vol. I, No. I, June I933, p. 67.
t L. Robbins: " The Optimum Theory of Popula-
tion," London Essays, p. 107

EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

III

of produce multiplies the consumers of might be over-populated in an economic

produce. There are probably upon the sense, if the elimination of one millionaire

average no more hats made in the year than increased the per head return to the rest.

there are heads to wear them, but as there 2. The wages fund or lump of labour

are fifteen millions of heads of the British theories, are much affected-less labour may

subjects of King William IV and there were not mean a rise in wages.

only five millions of the British subjects of 3. " It may quite well be that a population

Queen Anne, it is self evident that the hat- which was at the optimal point with a

makers have three times as much work as certain amount of property distributed in

they had a century and a quarter ago. one way would be either too small or too

What has given the hat-makers three times large with same amount distributed in

as much work? The trebling of the popu- another way." The changes in numbers may

lation. And what has trebled the population? mean a change in the form of organization.

The trebling of produce-the trebling of the 4. Professor Robbins points out the fallacy

means of maintaining that population."* of supposing that a steady increase of average

J. S. Mill, to some extent, combined the real income per head (as in England in the

concepts: " Improvements counteract the nineteenth century) is evidence that there

law of Diminishing Returns, but they do not was no over-population. It may have been

make increased numbers any less undesir- below the point of maximum return through-

able." Mill's optimum was a stationary out because of over-population, but less so at

fixed one, whereas the modern concept is of one point than another; or it may have

an optimum always shifting. Mill thought been unequally distant from the changed

that if the population had not increased so optimal point. " Over-population may be

much with the improvements, there would present long before real incomes begin to go

have been a larger per capita quotient. The down."

late Victorian economists got slowly away 5. Particular inventions may shift the

from this, and Robbins thinks Sidgwick was optimum one way or the other.

the genuine forerunner of Cannan, in bring- 6. A community cannot have an optimal

ing out the true implications of the optimum point independent of all others. " An

in i888. By I903 he stated the principle of agricultural invention in the Antipodes, a

maximum production " constantly shifting, stable government in a Central American

generally in the direction of increasing State . . . may affect the point of maximum

the population which is consistent with the return for the most parochial central Euro-

maximum productiveness possible at the pean statelet."

time." Later " maximum return" was the 7. A distinction has been made between

expression used. Robbins says that Wicksell absolute over-population and relative over-

first used the term " optimum population." population when a unit of labour is less

Some developments of the concept may be productive than elsewhere. Nationalism is

briefly noted, since they are of high signific- often a struggle to prevent any equalizing

ance when determining the relation between tendencies where differentials exist.

a eugenic and an economic optimum.

8. It may be necessary to give a com-

i. Pressure on subsistence is not a deter- modity equivalence to leisure in order to

minant. On the modern theory an area is weight it in with physical satisfactions in an

over-populated when total returns per head economic total, or otherwise comparison

are less than they would be if the population between two optimal points may be meaning-

were a little smaller, and this is a point which less.

may be reached long before there is any All these concepts are impossible to

question of such pressure. Theoretically, a quantify, in the present state of our statis-

community with a millionaire standard tical knowledge, and the very rapid flux

in which we live. But they serve to show

* P. I90.

us some of the issues involved in making

1I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the economic and eugenic optimal points scientific and industrial progress and con-

coincide.

scious social direction.

What is the attitude of the eugenist

THE COMING OF A STATIONARY POPU- towards a stationary population ? Is it

LATION

possible to raise that population steadily in

There are three rapidly changing factors: first, total size of population; second, differential birth-rates, and the quality and density of those populations, and third, natural and scientific resources. We are now
in sight of the time when one of these three
will become relatively stable in several large
countries. In Britain the maximum popula-
tion between 48 and 49 millions is due
between I940 and I950, and it remains practically stationary for many years-the
disproportion between the sexes will diminish, the age distribution will give a shift upwards, so that the oldest classes will be
in a higher proportion. (Bowley's results
quoted by Carr Saunders: Encyclopadia
Britannica.) In America the maximum comes a little later, between I960 and I970, at I48 millions, sinking to I40 by the year
2000. The proportion of persons 50 years old and upwards will be 352 per cent. against
23 in I950 and I5 in I920, and America will
be a population of old people instead of youthful as it is now.* Belgium's maximum
comes in I940 at 8,iio,ooo and gets to 6,725,ooo by I980 according to Professor Baudheim.t Germany, contrary to most views, is also on the same road. It has been computed that her maximum is reached
about I940 at 65j milions, and one
authority+ roughly estimates a rapid decline
to 59 millions by I960 and 49i millions by
I975. He gives the economic consequences as increasing real wages and a rising standard of life, culture expenditure increasing considerably, with agriculture and building depressed.
Now this represents a phase, not indeed new in all history, but new in such a stretch of modern experience as is covered by

average value, or is it better to aim at some
continued upward movement because of ultimate general gains on the economic side, at the sacrifice of average quality? It is probable that by then, the problem of
defectives as dynamic dysgenic agents will have been largely solved and the tasks of
negative eugenics mainly achieved. Shall we have made enough advance in the knowledge
of human genetics to formulate a positive
programme ?
The economics of a stationary population
will certainly present some important differ-
ences from those of populations that have been growing steadily for a long period of years, and where the economic structure and habits have accommodated themselves to progressive increase. This is not the place to
develop that theme in any detail, but one or two broad indications may be given. First, let us assume that with increasing capital wealth, the unit dividend of the stationary
population continues to rise. A total pur-
chasing power may double because a stationary number of people have twice the
average income, or because double the,
number of people have the same average income. The direction and intensity of the purchasing power, and its effect upon
supplies of different kinds will be profoundly different in the two cases. Where two people are demanding instead of one, they naturally duplicate demands over a
considerable range of essential products. Where one person has a double income his
elasticity of demand for the first essentials changes rapidly, and his additional demand passes into a totally different range of com-
modities. I anticipate a profound change in this respect within the next 30 or 40 years.
In the second place, the whole tempo of

of progress, particularly for the introduction

* Dublin, L.: " Outlook for the American Birth of new things, is altered, and the supply of

Rate," Problems of Population.

those products for widely expanding markets,

f Ibid., p. 247: " Future of the Population of
Belgium."
+ Kahn, Ernst: Der Internationale Geburtenstreck.

dependent upon increasing population, may be completely changed. Within a zone of

EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

time from any particular point of time, it of present tendencies. Professor Warnring,

may be said that the purchasing power is a University of Copenhagen, gives as the

fixed quantity and demand for every new economic effects of birth control in Denmark: *

attraction is a subtraction from the demand for some prior one.
Third, apart altogether from the outlook for innovation in a marketing sense, there will be quite a different degree of adjustability, without human suffering, to innovations successfully received. 'When there was
a constantly expanding market through an
increasing number of new mouths and new bodies, there was a capacity for adjustment
to an altered stream of supply, which intro-
duced a very elastic element into society. But now that so many civilized countries are heading for a stationary population, this
safety-valve no longer exists, and the full
force of every change in demand, through innovation, is expressed in an alteration in the demand of a certain fraction of the
population and a corresponding immediate derangement of a certain fraction of supply. The suit that is no longer wanted by Jim
cannot be passed on to his younger brother, Bill; Elsie's frock is no longer cut down for
Mary Ann, and the alteration this introduces
into the tempo of economic change is farreaching and makes the modern problem all

i. Progress of all kinds will become slower. 2. The rate of interest will become lower;
the supply of capital will be greater, and the demand smaller.
3. The land rent will not increase. 4. A smaller proportion of the population
will be engaged in the trades, producing capital goods.
5. When we install plant, build factories, schools, etc., we should be very careful not to build them on too great a scale, or they will tend not to be used to full
capacity.
6. Adjustment to new structural conditions will be more difficult and expensive, when relative decrease for a certain trade also means absolute decrease.
7. But the periodic depressions will be milder when the towns do not grow, their growth cannot be discontinuous.
8. Migrations will be fewer. 9. A greater proportion of the population
will be in the older age-groups, supported by old-age pensions.

the more difficult. Change is more rapid and Generally, conditions will become so

the capacity to meet it more restricted. Thus altered that we older economists and statis-

i,ooo workers supplying a commodity to ticians, familiar with constant conditions in

I0,000 consumers might formerly have the growth of population, will have much

become, on a 2o per cent. increase in popula- difficulty in understanding the new age.

tion, I,200 supplying it to I2,000 consumers. Again, as regards the United States, P. K.

If an innovation had lessened demand by i6 Whelpton has depicted the situation, now

per cent. the increased population would unescapable, in the near future: population

want no more than could be supplied by increasing at a slower and slower rate up to

I,ooo workers, but no actual unemployment an estimated maximum of i44*6 million in

would result, and the additional 200 new I970 and declining thereafter.

young men would go into the innovating The age group 20-49, which includes the

industries. But with a stationary popula- best period for physical work, will show little

tion, an innovation that reduces an existing relative change, amounting to about 43 per

demand by i6 per cent., puts that percentage cent. of the estimated I980 population as it

out of work until they can learn new jobs, now does. The group 50-69 will amount to

move their homes, and perhaps even change about 24 per cent. in I980 against I3-9 per

their nationality and become citizens of cent. in I930, and those 70 or over nearly

other countries.

7 per cent. instead of 3 I' per cent. It will be

While I must not spend time on this, it is as though one-third of the children and

interesting to give the conclusions of one or

two of the writers upon the economic effects * Trends in Agricultural Production in Denmark.

II4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

adolescents of to-day were transformed over- THE DEMANDS OF STATIONARY POPU-

night into men and women all past middle LATIONS ON EUGENICS

age-some in their dotage. The effects, he says, are that it will be hard on extreme optimists and boosters. The idea of rapid
population growth as being the normal thing, is so firmly engrained that it will be a shock.
I, personally, should liken it sociallyf to
treading on the top step of the stairs that
isn't there. He goes on to say that the spirit of optimism engendered by our rapid and continuous population growth has been suggested as partially responsible for the efficiency of their industrial development. If this disappears, it may lead to great caution in many ways. For example, there

Whatever may be the economic situation and tendencies for stationary populations, one thing is clear to me, that it will make
even greater demands than in the past upon leadership, organization, power of co-opera-
tion, socially and internationally. That
beautiful momentum that has come about
by processes I have described, due to increases in population, being no longer available, if civilization is to prevail, its
component parts must be of finer material. Here then come in the ideals of eugenics. The necessary components are:

may be less readiness to allot funds to install (i) the elements of genius;

up-to-the-minute equipment in place of (2) an adequate contribution of mass and

highly serviceable but slightly obsolete

specialized talent;

methods. It is likely to make competition
increasingly keen in industry and commerce. He refers to the additions now being planned to production units which will not be justified, and sees the proper outlet, an
increase of the purchasing power of the bulk

(3) higher intellectual and moral qualities
in the mass of the people, and ability to make use of a growing complex social heritage without being dangerously and
vulnerably parasitic upon it.

of the population through a more even The facts for I940-50 are unalterably

distribution of income, a goal which seems before us at a short distance of time. Eugenic

difficult to reach in the present capitalistic changes can operate only slowly. It seems

structure. There will be increased U.S. to me therefore that any formulation of a

competition in the export trade. But there eugenic programme must be suited to the

will be offsets such as educational facilities new outlook and the economic probabilities

at last catching up, and less necessity for of stationary and ageing populations, and is

Treasury grants for paving, and building already belated and ought to be vigorously

sewers, so that there will be more available pursued. May I sketch briefly under these

for beautifying cities and providing ameni- three heads what I imagine to be the

ties. The changes in age composition will immediate position of eugenic thought?

make for greater conservatism, the con-

tinuation of older men in positions of control GENIUS AND INSANITY

and a check on the rapid rise of youngsters.
If older workers are kept profitably employed
in future, the change in age composition may work to increase economic prosperity. The ageing will have a marked effect on the
consumption of various products and possi-
bly on the system of taxation. The spread of a differential birth-rate is a
more significant fact for the future of

There is a strong-almost incurablepopular sentiment that genius is akin to madness, not only in character and habit of life, but also genetically, and that it is a pretty close thing whether a person goes over the border of general sanity or remains on the right side of it with abnormal powers. Two hundred years ago Dryden wrote:

society than any discovery of physical "Great wits are sure to madness near

science or other solvents of the old social

allied,

order-at present national but soon inter-

And thin partitions do their bounds

national.

divide."

EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

II5

The suggestion is that if, through eugenic mixture be and hope for the best." Dr.

aims, we had no epileptic, neurotic, or other- Marshall rejoins: " But there is genius in

wise abnormal people, we might get no the mixture, too, Charlie, we mustn't let

Keats, Shelleys, Popes and other geniuses. that . . ." Cameron: "Let it be then;

In this sense, it is urged the birth of a great what sort of a man are you to bring genius to

number of doubtful lives is the price we pay heel and teach it dog's tricks! "

for an occasional genius, and if we cut off the Even if it were true that an occasional

supply of the one, we risk getting none of the genius seems to be the reward for suffering a

others. There are no doubt problems of great mass of defectives, we certainly can

definition, and the aim of positive eugenics state that not all genius has been so evolved,

might be achieved by the constant increase and there is no evidence that we cut off the

in the number of talented people and an whole supply, or possibility of supply, of

improvement in their talent, but it might be genius by the elimination of defectives.

quite unable to control or encourage the Eugenists do not generally admit any

production of that subtle quality we call association of this kind between genius and

"genius."

mental deficiency. Professor Ruggles Gates

For the purpose of further analysis, let us speaks very positively: " The loss of a whole

assume this to be true. From an economic feeble-minded stock would not involve the

point of view how important is it ? Genius in suppression of a single genius. No record

music, poetry, art, literature, however impor- exists of the birth of a genius among the

tant, has no immediate bearing on improve- offspring of feeble-minded parents."* In his

ment in the economic standard, but genius Galton lecture several years ago, Dr. Tredgold

in science and engineering and government asserted roundly that there is no correlation

certainly has. A Newton, Faraday, or between genius and insanity.t

Mussolini makes a profound difference in

this field. It is, however, still open to ques- THE BURDEN OF DEFECTIVES

tion whether more is not going to come as
the result of a mass attack of high talent, all along the front, than of individual genius in the future, and if we had a certain alternative between a eugenic system which guaranteed the increase of advanced talent on a wide scale, or the possibility of an occasional genius, we might well, in the economic field, choose the former. I would not tilt at this to
such an audience, but for the fact that no eugenic address ought to risk leaving it out.
This popular view is of course receiving a great stimulus by that arresting play, A Sleeping Clergyman. In the third (or more) generation of abnormality, the eccentric Dr. Cameron, whose genius saves the country and gets him world honour, is the standing type for this argument. His guardian declares: " Laddie, you're the son of a bad man and a foolish girl-and it gets worse as it goes back. If I'd been one of those eugenic madmen, I'd have drowned you when you
were a pup." Cameron declares heredity to

It may be that if eugenics could produce one genius that would otherwise never have been born, it would do more for economic standards than shutting the door of birth upon a potential ten thousand mental defectives.
What is the actual economic burden of defectives ? They represent a certain proportion of the population as a burden upon the rest, for food and clothing and perhaps social services, such as specialized education, taking from the general heap of production without adding to it any essential items for the general standard of life. In this they are akin to an addition to a standing army, except so far as the presence of an army is an essential feature in allowing the general heap of production to be piled up in security, and to be larger than it might otherwise be in an unprotected state. But he would be a bold man who asserted that the additional production due to this cause is greatly in

be rot. " You say I'm a mixture of blackguards and idiots, well, you'll have to let the

* Heredity in Man. London, 1929. t EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. XIX, April 1927, P. I.

iI6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

excess of the unseen subtraction from pro- would no longer exist, and there would be

duction, due to the withdrawal of the a clear deduction of that number from the

soldiers from the productive field. Now I population. But defectives do not result

may take as a parallel, any class kept in wholly from the mating of people all defec-

idleness, through unearned income drawn tive. A defective may be born to parents of

from the general production. In this case, whom one only would count as defective,

however, the existence of such a class, and and the eugenic fulfilment would leave the

the possibility of joining it, may act as a sound parent in being as the potential mate

general incentive to enterprise and effort of another sound person. In other words,

affecting a considerable number of producers, the birth of defectives is not wholly additive,

so that general productivity may not suffer it stands in part in place of potential sound

to the full extent. But the burden on the births that do not take place. How many

standard, due to the defective population, is sound people mate with defectives, and if

a dead weight burden, without any such there were no defectives, would mate with

compensating secondary counterweights. sound people at present unmated ? As there

What is its magnitude, as a subtraction is a surplus of women already, this process

from the ordinary order of the standard? could only make additions to their ranks,

Let us take the direct burden. According to and give no further births. But in so far as

recent reports there are 300,000 defectives sound mates are now mating with female

of all ages in England and Wales. If they defectives, they would then be able to mate

were all non-producers, at about f65 per with sound females, who are now surplus,

annum each they represent a total deduction and additional sound population would

of £19,500,ooo. This represents a maximum, result.* This addition would add to the

because of course by no means all the workers total mass of production, but only a per-

are non-producers, and many are earning head addition, and would scarcely raise the

something. We must remember that many of standard of life of all the rest of the workers,

them are either below or above the earning and the calculation already made is not

age, but I make no deduction because I really affected.

assume that in a eugenic scheme they would The discussion has so far been on the

not exist at all. So I assume some £&5 static influence of mental deficiency. Its

million is the dead weight burden. This is progressive influence, now assumed to be

less than 6d. a week from the ordinary checked by eugenics, might be far worse.

income as a deduction, and may be taken as Some people see nothing but a kind of racial

the direct effect. I ignore the direct costs of genetic entropy ahead of us, and a stock

criminality, etc., as it is unproven whether of deficients, not only increasing absolutely,

the proportion is greater from this section. but also, in a relatively stationary popula-

(Vide Mental Hygiene, January I929.)

tion, becoming a progressively larger frac-

But there are two considerations at this tion of the population, with a general depre-

point. The taxation or other deduction ciation of the quality of the stock which is

from wealth to supply the fund, is not merely mentally competent. The Brock report was

a reduction of income, it is a depressant to reassuring, so that this appears an exag-

general enterprise. It is easy to exaggerate gerated view. On the other hand, it is quite

the effect of taxation of this range, and there possible to conceive a society in which the

are some counter-effects which would take standard of life is continually being raised

me too far into the field of economic psycho- by individual genius and mass scientific

logy. In general, there is no direct relation talent, and enjoyed by the mass of people

between height of wages and intensity of who themselves contribute less and less to its

work-the only real depressant is a direct efficiency, and are more and more parasitic

tax consciously paid and resented.

upon their environment and social heritage

The second point is more material. I have assumed so far that the section of defectives

* Vide EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. XXI, April 1929, p. 69,
on the statistical tendencies of these mixed marriages.

EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

II7

for the good life. It is not possible, therefore, generation." He was to do this, I know, not

to make any economic assessment of the so much by inborn heredity as by social

long-run effects of the removal of defectives, heredity, which he said had been inextricably

as distinct from a general qualitative change. confused. But unless the infant life was

But there is no reason to suppose that that taken from its mother instantly at birth, the

effect in the long run will be less than in the whole complex of fears and aptitudes was

short run.

mysteriously conveyed to it in a few moments

of time. At any rate, however defective his INHERITANCE OF ACQUIRED TALENT experiments, or his reasoning from them,

If genius is elusive, but certainly not in any may have been, they led opinion to the ex-

danger from the elimination of aments, what treme educability of the race. Pink, on the

shall we say of talent and general educa- other hand, is the arch pessimist. The vast

bility ? It is natural for anyone nursing any mass have now only the most limited

doctrine of social progress to cherish a belief educability, and never can have more. Non-

that somehow the inheritability of acquired heritability has such a blind hold on the

characters must eventually be scientifically race that democracy is a pathetic impossi-

established, despite all the abortive or bility, education having the most complete

negative attempts that have piled up in the finality in diminishing returns. But increas-

effort to revert from Weissman to Lamarck. ing the proportion of educability by breeding

If rats obey Professor McBride, the outlook is a possibility, and as Aldous Huxley says

gets rosy. If they are obstinate, we may in his preface to Pink's Realist Looks at

decline to acknowledge that what obtains in Democracy, education can only bring increas-

physical or physiological reaction has any ing returns on one condition. No form of

necessary relevance to the possibilities of social progress is possible unless there is a

human intelligence. We welcome Mr. continuous improvement of individuals. We

Dufton's recent contribution to the British can, of course, acknowledge that Spiller's

Association, indicating that capability is in " interlearning" is the great agency of

no small degree an acquired character, and improving life. The best of each generation

is directly transmitted, so that there is a may contribute an advancing body of

significant correlation between the age of knowledge to the continuous environment,

parents and the ability, or rather attainment, and the mass of each generation may,

of the sons and, less emphatically, of the without any innate advance, enjoy a steadily

daughters.*

advancing standard of life. On the other

I will not indicate where my own sneaking hand, the environment may be conceived as

fancy lies. The Spencerian doctrine of social relatively stationary, and each succeeding

progress, from which we have now well generation inherently improve in its ability

emerged, certainly rested implicitly on a to absorb and utilize, and make that environ-

high degree of such inheritance. But we ment subjectively valuable. I cannot con-

may take our position anywhere on the long ceive that these alternatives are really

line from, let us say, Benjamin Kidd at one independent. The more complex the en-

end to Alderton Pink at the other, both of vironment, the more qualities must be

whom have applied the latest biological or demanded by the average man and the

genetical findings of their day to the social civilization to master and manage it-it is

problem. Kidd, in the Science of Power, not a matter merely of absorption, but even

had a pathetic belief in the power to make if it were, he must be a continuously better

an almost instant change in the mass: man to withstand the processes of moral

" Give us the young and we will create a deterioration.

new mind, and a new earth in a single

THE EUGENIC PROGRAMME

* EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. XXV, Jan. 1934, P. 245.
Vide also Major Hinton on " Habit and Environment," EUGENICS REVIEW, VOl. XIX, July I927.

We must persevere, even at the risk of over professionalization, encourage and keep

ii8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
up the birth-rate in the section of real London School of Economics, having a mental achievement. This is valuable which- certain sum with which to increase annual ever of the four agencies is valid and emoluments, decided to apply it in the form dominant, i.e. whether we are depending for of children's allowances, and thus to afford our results upon genetic transmission of the the maximum real satisfaction with a sum natural ability which has led to the achieve- which, evenly spread over all, might have ment; or upon some degree of transmission had little general effect. The Wesleyan of the talent acquired by exercising such Methodist Church have for long had such education, intensely and professionally; or a connexional system. This seems to be upon the family environment and nurture thoroughly sound eugenically. I am not
created by the parents; or upon maintaining saying anything against the theoretical the aggregate of workers in the field of economic soundness of the general scheme, talented research and management. But if practical ways can be found of working it. even if it be proved that the doctrine held by Society has in some way to maintain every Fisher and others is true, that the present factor of production, not only in its existing type of society tends to " couple genetic form, but also for its continuation and qualities, making for economic and social wastage. It does this clumsily now in a wage success, with those making for low fertility," to every worker alike, which has this even if it is true in the extreme event that renewal allowance in it, whether he has those making high contributions to their responsibility for renewals, i.e. children, or
generation are pro tanto less likely to make not. The family allowance system would
contributions by fertility to the future, I pay direct the net personal reward of the should not despair, provided the flow of new worker, and, through a central renewal ability from the other ranks is kept strong fund, a children's allowance quite separately. and encouraged by every known device. Now if some renewals are of a type not so This may be, indeed, the way nature intends socially desirable as others, it may certainly, to work, and the idea that every grade should if not actually dysgenic, be not as highly be self-supporting genetically, seems to me eugenic as a more discriminating scheme. not the only possible one for stable progress. Children's allowances by way of taxation are
I have been discussing the influences of not based on eugenic considerations, but eugenic aims upon economic conditions. I upon the faculty principle of taxation in an can only touch for a moment upon economic attempt to adjust the marginal incomes to means of promoting eugenic aims, in the equality of sacrifice, according to unescapwell-worn topics of family allowances, migra- able subsistence obligations incapable of tion and differential taxation. If it is true bearing taxation. There is all the difference that the method of computing unemploy- between a subsidy of the tax upon the ment relief, however justified from a humani- allowance, and the amount of the allowance tarian point of view, is dysgenic* it must itself. As a eugenic stimulus it is negligible, probably be also true that a family allowance because negative, though as a removal of a system in the lower paid ranks, not far dysgenic discrimination, it is not to be desremoved in reward from unemployment pay, pised. A bonus of the same sum, given would be almost equally so. It might, there- positively, would have greater effect. Death fore, be considered desirable to limit the range duties differential by kinship are too involved of allowance to several children or make it for mention here. on a diminishing scale for additional births. Much more is to be done by keeping open But if it is desired to encourage the birth- the educational ladder, and facilitating rise rate at a different level, the system seems to for the slightest promise, not merely into be more defensible in the strata of pro- black-coated ranks, but also into technical fessional and higher manual workers. The accomplishment. Still more may be done by
raising the dignity of home service and help * Vide Economic Journal, Supplement, Jan. I929. as a calling, so that young wives on not over-

EUGENIC INFLUENCES IN ECONOMICS

II9

expansive incomes can rear several young children without the nightmare of domestic over-pressure. We must be prepared for a good deal of educational waste-people being as the Duke of Wellington said, " educated beyond their brains," in the hope that a slow deposit of general mental power may indeed be laid by each successive generation, but still more in the less theoretical and less unproved assumption that we shall get every promising personality on to the next rung of the ladder. The effect of promotion by seniority delaying marriage in the higher earnings and blocking the ladder of promotion is also important. How far the smallness of birth-rate in such classes is due to infertility is doubtful. American writers attribute the apparent correlation between fertility and social status to a real direct association between marriage age and social status ;* while a Swedish investigator finds the true fertility rate is 20 per cent. higher in the highest social class than for the next, and the next is I5 per cent. higher than the two lower classes, or that the sterility percentage is 24 per cent. lower in the highest than the next, and that is I2 per cent. lower than the lower middle class, which is 20 per cent. again below the lowest.t
Meanwhile, let us make an ever-improving
* Dr. Frant Notestein in Problems of Population.
t Edin, Karl, Problems of Population, p. 89.

environment, not by means of cushions and buffers, but by eliminating, sifting, and sorting; by punishing, exacting standards, rewards and incentives; also let us try experimental genetics in all directions, and then testing in human affairs by scientific means, even if free agency is retained. Perhaps we may realize the hope of my predecessor: " The power acquired by civilized man to control to-day, perhaps only the quantity, but to-morrow the quality of human life, will also enable man to change human nature and to raise mental and moral capacity to a higher level." Or even justify Dr. C. C. Hurst's peroration that man's destiny depends entirely on his response to the new knowledge, that if he so wills he can " create a race of supermen to enjoy life in a more
comprehensive way than we can hope to do."* It is difficult to pass beyond Lucretius:
"So, nought is lost that seems to pass away.
Nature is aye rebuilding, and there comes
Nothing to birth untouched by what is gone."
My plea is that before every eugenic programme we pose the imminent question: What do I want to do in a stationary
population?
* The Mechanism of Creative Evolution, p. 322. t Denis Turner's translation.

eRiview, Vol. XXVI, No. 2.

