URSULA PHILIP
M.Sc., D.Phil. University of Newcastle upon Tyne
Genetics, and Eugenics in Post-War Germany

PROFESSOR HANS NACHTSHEIM, the on the statute book though it has never been

eminent mammalian geneticist, has during invoked since the fall of the Nazis.

the last twelve years reopened in Germany It is Professor Nachtsheim's aim to clarify the

a discussion on eugenic policy. He advocates legal position of medical practitioners who want

legislation to allow voluntary sterilization of to carry out eugenic sterilization at the request of

people in danger of producing handicapped patients or their guardians.

offspring.

In this form the legislation deals mainly with

It needs the courage and steadfastness of an the alleviation of individual suffering and does

old fighter to tackle these problems in Germany not act in the interest of a consistent eugenic

two decades after the fall of Hitler's r6gime. policy. It may incidentally help to reduce the

Only a scientist who maintained his independence number of abnormal people, or prevent break-

of Nazi doctrine is in a position to do this. down and institutionalization of mentally defec-

tives, who could usefully look after themselves,

Eugenic Steriliztion: Legislation

but on whom the bringing up of a family would

During the last twelve years Professor Nachts- impose an intolerable burden.

heim has written a pamphlet: For and Against But Professor Nachtsheim demands a more

Eugenically Indicated Sterilization and a number forceful eugenics policy in order to make the law,

of articles in general and public health medical which he envisages, fully effective. To somebody

publications. In these he discusses legal who has as profound a respect for human

aspects and the need for a positive eugenics dignity as he, it is only possible to operate

policy. Legislation for voluntary sterilization had eugenic measures on a voluntary basis. This

been in preparation in 1932, the year before presupposes, as he states again and again, a

Hitler came to power. It contained all the safe- populace imbued with a will to eugenics, based

guards needed in a democratic society and on an understanding of human genetics and its

resembled the laws passed in Scandinavia and application, which is almost totally absent in

some of the states in the U.S.A. The law which Germany (and for that matter in England).

eventually reached the Statute Book had

enforced sterilization substituted, but contained Human Genetics

powerful safeguards against misuse. This was Is Professor Nachtsheim justified in saying that

essentially a eugenic measure and was, according knowledge of human genetics is now so well

to Professor Nachtsheim, never abused. The founded that one could train medical men,

wholesale sterilizations and extermination of nurses, social workers, teachers and priests to

unfitpersons were carried out underdifferent laws. educate the public?

After the war the Control Commission There is no simple answer to this question. We

revoked the racial laws, but left the one dealing know a great deal of the inheritance of clear-cut

with eugenic sterilization in being, probably factors and their possible eradication. But we

because such laws exist in the United States. The are also, in my opinion, very ignorant as to the

LUnder Bavaria, Hessen and Schleswig-Holstein function of often widely distributed genes in

abolished it, whereas the remaining ones left it populations, for instance the allelomorphs of the

9' THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1964, 56, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ABO bloodgroups. The genotype of future carbohydrate metabolism. Diabetics have this

generations depends on what the present one factor in greater quantity. From this follow a

hands on, both qualitatively and quantitatively. number of predictable conditions. High level of

Alterations to the genotype are to some extent "anti-insulin factor" stimulates higher insulin

due to mutation. New allelomorphs arise, which production in compensation. The islet tissue in

may or may not be detrimental. All natural the pancreas works at a higher rate and may,

populations carry a certain genetic load without under stress conditions, break down, leading to

being handicapped by it. The effect of the overt diabetes. Before breakdown, it causes fat

genetic load is being studied in a number of storage. "High level anti-insulin factor" is

organisms, but we are rather ignorant of it in inherited as a dominant. So far it has not been

man. It is however probable that this load is possible to identify the homozygotes. They may

added to by the use of mutagenic agents in be lethal. It is to be found in the parents, sibs

medicine, agriculture, food processing and and children of diabetics. It occurs in at least 20

industry in general. In addition to the ionizing per cent of the population.

radiations, Professor Nachtsheim lists forty-nine If confirmed it would explain many aspects of

chemicals in general use which have proved diabetes which have defied analysis.

mutagenic in Drosophila, some plants and some In the present context it allows one to pose the

micro-organisms. None has been used in following questions. Can a dominant gene of such

experiments on mammals, but it is unlikely that a frequency be regarded as detrimental ? What is its

fair proportion will not alter the gene material in functioninthegenetic structure ofthe population ?

man if deposited near the gonads. He advocates It might be safe to say that ability to store fat

that careful watch be kept on these substances. can be an advantage under a "fast and feast"

Another factor likely to increase the genetic load nutritional r6gime though possibly not under a

is the advances in medical practice, which by "four square meals a day" one.

compensating a genetical defect, allow procrea- Attempts to eliminate "diabetes" by eugenic

tion at a more or less normal rate, where it had measures can have the consequence ofmaking the

been impossible before.

populationasawholelessabletowithstandfamine.

With rare genes this would make numerically little difference, at least within a limited time.

Conclusion A new assessment of eugenics in the light of

Diabetes The situation changes with genes present at high frequencies. Professor Nachtsheim is particularly disturbed at the success of insulin treatment in restoring fertility to diabetics.
I think this is a fair example how an apparently good case can be made by using incomplete information.
Arguments have been advanced to say that diabetes is inherited as a dominant with reduced
penetrance; as a recessive; as a recessive with some action in the heterozygote. In short we do not know what the basic facts are.

recent advances in genetics is very necessary. But in order to yield results "population"
thinking in Mair's definition has to be used as a basis. Before any progress can be made we have to understand to what extent important features of mankind are determined by heterozygosity in
general and what is the function of single genes. I feel that Professor Nachtsheim has over-
estimated the progress which has been made. Before it is possible to educate the teachers who
can educate the people and convince our legislators, we need to have much firmer ground
under our feet.

What is certain, is that 4-5 per cent of western populations have overt diabetes and that the

REFERENCES EVANS, D. A. P. 1963. Amer. J. Med., 34, 639-662. NAcHTSHEim, H. 1952. Fur und wider die Sterilisierung

gene has to be looked for in as many as 30 per cent of the people.

aus eugenischer Indikation. Georg Thieme Verlag, Stuttgart; 1963. Fortschritte der Medizin. 81, 711-713; 1963. Bundesgesundheitsblatt. 18, 277-286; 1963. In Der

In recent years Vallance-Owen has isolated an Arzt des offentlichen Gesundheitsdienstes. Georg Thieme

"anti insulin factor" probably a polypeptide which seems to be a part of the physiology of

Verlag, Stuttgart. VALLANcE-OwEN, J. and LILLEY, M. D. 1961. Lancet i, 804 and 806.

92

