LUCIEJN MARCH

AN APPRECIATION

ASPARE man of ddle height with Paris, where as the leading French eugest

finely moulded head and aristocatic he acted as a courteous and most gracious

features, but of angularly modest host and arranged a series of receptions to

bearinga figure which in any crowd ex- which were invited some of the mot promi-

pressed the retiring disposition of the man, nent men in France, thus setting a standard

seeming to slip unnoticed from place to place for the meetings of the Aebly which was

-this was the exterior of Lucien March,when not easy to emulate in succeding years.

he held the high position of Director of the At that meeting he gave many hours of the

Statistique G&n6rale de la France; and was most careful and conscientious work to the

far more than the highest registration official, task of setting out the constitution of the

in that he had made for himself an inter- Federation in English and French, so that

national name and was as great and creative the two versions should be exactly compara-

a personality in the world of demographic ble; this labour contributed very greatly

studies as his contemporary, Sir Benard to harmonious working ever since. That

Mallet, then the chief registrar in our own meeting was the last attended by Monsieur

country.

March. He left the Federation in order to

It is of Monsieur March's part in the devote himself to research tasks, self-

development of Intemational Eugenics alone imposed. His counsels were sorely missed, as

that I am entitled to write. In his passing well as his gracious and friendly persality,

we have lost one ofthe earliest of our leaders. which showed its greatness in mking no

Already in the first International Congress, distinction whatever between the great and

London 19I2, he appeared as an exponent the humble who came in contact with him.

of the sociological studies which form such a At the time of the World Population Con-

vital part of our science, when he read a ference at Geneva (1927), Monsieur March

paper on " the fertility of marrages accord- was Professor of the Institute of Statistics

ing to profession and social class." This fact in the University of Paris. Those intimately

alone is an idication of his independence as concerned with that conference will remem-

a thinker, for biological aspects of sociology ber that it was made the occasion of a vigor-

have at no time been a popular study in his ous anti-birth-control propaganda in which

country. His influence has, however, estab- a number of Parisians tooik a prominent part.

lished a method of census-taking which has This had no effect whatever on the quiet

made the bulletin of the " Statistique G*ndrale detennination of Lucien March, who assisted

de la France " still one of the most important with advice in preparation of the programme

sources for such data in Europe.

and cane personally to Geneva to read his

The reality of his attachment to eugenic paper on " the differential increase in the

work was further proved by his contributing population in France and in the world." He

a paper to the Congress in New York in 1921, appears on the extreme left of the frontis-

this time on " the consequences of war and piece to the published proceedings.

the birth rate in France." It was in New France has the reputation of showing little

York that, under the name of International concern for questions of Human Biology and

Commission of Eugenics, the Federation has an antagonistic outlook on eugenics, yet

really took birth, and Monsieur March contri- she has given to the world some ofthe earliest,

baustoeudnidncloanrsgteitmuetaisonurfeorttohethoergbauniisladtiionffiu.ZIonf

most profound and truly scientific studies existing. Amongst these the works of Lucien

I926, shortly after his retirement from the March find their place.

Statistique Gen&rale, the Federation met in

C. B. S. HODSON.

26I D

