REVIEWS OF BOOKS

slabs by the dissecting microscope; this may prove to be of greater value than the examina-

tion of conventional decalcified sections by the ordinary light microscope.

Jaffe gives some useful critical comments on the diagnosis of lesions in ancient bones

and Johnson emphasises that there are no such things as infallible diagnostic criteria.

Johnson believes strongly in morphologic examination of specimens with reliable charting

and holds that repeated contemplation and direct handling of dried bone specimens is

essential before essaying a diagnosis. Anderson sounds a warning note that palaeopatho-

logical discoveries are of no great intrinsic interest but are extremly valuable if they throw

light on the population in which the diseased individual lived.

Moseley rightly points out that before the results of modern cranial radiography in

thalassaemia and related diseases can safely be applied to ancient remains further surveys

of the entire skeleton are mandatory. In this he is supported by Blumberg and Kerley who

have shown that involvement of the finger bones in patients with sickle cell anaemia may be

due to low grade osteomyelitis and not to the anaemia. These workers also strongly advocate

routine radiography of the whole specimen and of cut slabs in all cases of bone disease.

Frost outlines some of the concepts of the biomechanics of bone which might prove

to be of value in the study of palaeopathological specimens. These studies are of great

theoretical interest but the non-mathematically minded reader may find them difficult to

follow. Blumberg and Kerley, while not quarrelling with Frost's fundamental principles,

suggest some caution in accepting his methodology.

In sum, this work will be of considerable value to all those interested in the biology of

earlier human populations and to workers in medical and historical fields who are concerned

with a temporal appreciation of human health and disease.

A. T. SANDISON

ECONOMICS
Baldwin, Robert E. Economic Development and Growth. New York and London, 1966. Wiley. Pp. xi+133. Price 38s. cloth; 15s. paper.
THIS VOLUME IS one of a series which the editors describe as constituting
a COMPLETE Introduction to Economics course which is based on the pedagogical premise that students should be introduced to economics by learning how economists think about economic problems.
The premise is ambiguous. It could mean either that students should be introduced to economics through the history of economic thought, or that the author should explain to his readers how he personally thinks about economic problems. The latter approach could be of pedagogical value to certain types of student; the former leads the reader to the subject by a roundabout route, and he can easily get lost unless the characteristics of the actual economies in question are clearly described. Professor Baldwin opts none the less for the first interpretation: Chapters 2 and 3 present a Readers' Digest-style history of economic thought on growth from Adam Smith to Harrod and Domar. The next two chapters survey contemporary trends in theorizing on development, and the remainder of the book is devoted to presenting some of the present day's broad arguments about policy for economic development. Too few facts are adduced to permit the reader to assess the merits of the arguments. Only the barest sketch of the anatomy of underdeveloped countries is given, in Chapter 1. The author's own opinions remain in the background throughout: each two to three page section in the non-historical chapters presents a balanced statement of conflicting views.
Adam Smith, Ricardo and Schumpeter were seeking to explain the process of growth in the peculiar cultural, institutional and physical circumstances of Europe. Although
127

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
circumstances are different in the third world-particularly in that the goal of growth here is to achieve the consumption standards already ruling in the developed countries-the great theorists of the nineteenth century have some valid advice for it. Professor Baldwin however does not show clearly what this advice is; instead he concentrates on their relevance to the country and time in which they were writing.
In a volume introducing beginners to the major trends of thought about economic development, and given the importance of population growth to the economies of the third world, the reader might expect a statement and assessment of Malthus's views; but the only mention of him is that "The crude Malthusian theory of population growth did not apply in developed countries". Admittedly, the population trap, which is a refinement of the Malthusian theory, is described. This theory points out that population increase can slow the growth not only of income per capita, but also of total income, by increasing the share of consumption in national expenditure.
Professor Baldwin is not impressed by the seriousness and intractability of the problems of population growth and unemployment in underdeveloped countries. He states, for instance, that "technological unemployment has been an occasional problem, but it has by no means occurred on a mass scale". If the enclosure movement in Britain can be regarded as a technical innovation, large-scale technological unemployment has been known even in the UK. Many sugar islands, like Jamaica or Mauritius, are threatened today with technological unemployment on a large scale as a result of innovations in sugar cultivation or handling.
It is also stated that "the adverse effects of this discrepancy (between high research expenditures in the developed countries and low ones in the rest of the world) are mitigated by the comparative ease with which technological knowledge moves internationally".
This is only a half-truth. Although imported techniques-and desires-are at the root of whatever development the underdeveloped countries have already enjoyed, because they are evolved in areas where labour is short and growing scarcer while capital is abundant and growing more so, the third world often has little choice but to use ever more capitalintensive and thus inappropriate techniques.
The reader is also told that the evidence collected so far indicates that surplus labour not just in a seasonal sense, but over an entire production cycle, does not exist. This may be regarded by the wary as a broad generalization subject to the usual tacit reservations, but are students in an introductory course that wary? In Mauritius, at the height of the 1966 sugar crop, known unemployment amounted to over 15 per cent of the labour force.
The most astounding statement in Economic Development and Growth appears on page 8:

There now seems to be a fairly wide acceptance of the value judgment that, if the less developed countries increase their populations at rates much beyond those in the
developed nations, this is a matter of their own choosing and not one of putting them at some special disadvantage because of their poverty.

Apart from being inconsistent with the "population trap" theory sympathetically described

later in the book, this view could not be held by a social scientist aware of the vicious circle

of poverty, ignorance and high birth rates.

Professor Baldwin has a distinguished reputation for his work in the field of economic

development; he is joint author, with G. M. Meier, of a deservedly well-known textbook on

economic development. Economic Development and Growth, unoriginal and larded with

unsupported generalizations, is disappointing (but it may be unfair to judge it apart from

the companion volumes of the series).

E. C. DOMMEN

128

