I02
NL
V

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
I-IA
It
6)jj
6-4
'04

CO ba Cd (D
4D

bZ cd
Cd

ci
Cd
Cld 4)

Cd

En
0

C.:! o

Cd

4--
+' .1n,

DcJd

(14
Cd cd
ID, 2
C'd

44 (>d"b (7) C'.

0 b.0

= CO cd

Cd

C'a

0 H(L) 0 - tj

0.4,

0o

cb,)o tu -'g e
CM) bOZ

Cd >1 (L) cd

(1) 'n 43

4
4J

0.
C'd

Cd
=,

0" 5-4 -.:. g:.00'H
o

cd
Q

.0 ,

.01.

0 cn

Cd

00 m c.d.COd .5-Z0
cd cd

a
o

".

:Czd'5bO
Cd 4-)

I '!.
Zcn 0
Q_C44d)-- .0

(D 0
0

b(tD.2
cd

cd Cd

>;
g
Z

=1

cd

z

CO
'i
(L) Z
41
cis

>
cn

14 1.4 rA

60
1.4 4-4
.TA (D
.0
-4---
Cd Ch .- 0

b'O En 4--l

'84

ho

-t;!:2
(L) 0

Cd

CO 0 :.' n
'no
.0 CO 0 cn
(IDn Id)

0 Cd .0
cd
4-) cd

0 cd cd

cd

14
0

O.'a

17,
-a

'C"d

'0,0

'm
Cd
0 CO 0.
O'Z bo cn
cis -A bi)

0

cd -0

,'X 4--
04

e-
0
O,- s
cd

O cd cd
cn 4-- 4-10
CC 44
C'd

Cd

1:5>:

C's
C's

(1)
1-.'

0
4

Rw .0

COJ

Id.4 4--
z

Q0
z "A

0 to

O

>4

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX1K- No. 8

THE MEASUREMENT OF SOCIALLY

VALUABLE QUALITIES

By H. J. EYSENCK
Psychological Department, Maudsley Hospital

T OWARDS the close of his life Galton But on the other hand, certain debits must

wrote a book in which he described a also be recorded. There has been a failure for

eugenic Utopia, called Kantsaywhere. psychology to become socially recognized,

In this im4ginary country " a system of
competitive examination for girls, as well as

and in consequence of this failure there has been an almost absolute lack of public sup-

for youths, had been so developed as to embrace every important quality of mind

port. A mushrooming of pseudo-scientific, "'intuitive," subjective, literary " depth "

and body"; on the results of this examina- psychologies has succeeded in attracting the tion depended the status of the individual, attention of a public eager for plausible

as well as the number of children which he " explanations " of its present ills, and un-

would be permitted to raise. Reproductive willing to bear with the cautious, restrained

functions were to be regulated by an oli- and complex views of more scientific workers,

garchy selected by tests; social status was phrased in terms of probability rather than

decided by four tests which together took of prophetic certainty.

only four hours. Plato's republic, with the -Such public neglect has had certain inevit-

philosopher-kings selected by psychological able consequences. The old view that good

tests-this is not an. unfair description of scientific work could be done in laboratories

Galton's Utopia.

run on the " shoe-string and sealing-wax"

Kantsaywhere was projected into a distant principle might have been applicable fifty

and visionary future when scientific methods years ago in physical science, but in these

of psychological assessment had not only days when shoe-string is rationed and

been statistically validated, but also gener- sealing-wax is only sold under the counter

ally recognized and accepted. The present the maxim loses much of its force. This is

paper, written some thirty-five years after particularly true in the social sciences, which

Galton's fantasy, may be regarded as a demand large-scale planning for the solution

progress report; it attempts to answer the of any of the complex problems they may

question-just how much nearer have we be asked to attack.

come to a state of knowledge which would As an example of this necessity for large-

make Galton's Utopia more than an attrac- scale research in the psychological field let

tive but utterly impracticable conception? us take the measurement of a set of rela-

The answer to this question must be partly tively simple, straightforward abilities, viz.

in an optimistic, partly in a pessimistic, vein. those involved in accurately aiming a bomb

On the one hand, psychology has to record at a target. The selection of bomb-aimers

tremendous advances, both with respect to was one of the tasks which psychologists were

methodology and to factual knowledge. called upon to perform during the war, and

While the advances in knowledge have been they finally succeeded in this task beyond

made mainly in the field of intelligence test- expectation. Yet the solution of even such a

ing, advances in methodology extend to the relatively simple problem involved the ex-

fields of temperament and character as well. penditure of millions of dollars, the participa-

We now know what are the important ques- tion of hundreds of psychologists, and the

tions to ask, and what are the methods of testing of hundreds of thousands of subjects.

investigation which will enable us to return It is easy to see that the much more complex

the correct answer.

problems involved in the measurement of

103

I04

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

" civic worth," say, or of the severity of trained by making the child learn by heart

mental disorders, or in the inheritance of innumerable lines of Virgil, or by training

nervous stability, would involve large-scale him in the supposedly logical Latin language,

organization of research in order to make is definitely false, and that training has re-

successful solutions possible. Yet for every sults which are very specific. A child trained

pound given to the physical sciences -for re- to learn by heart stanzas from Milton's

search of one kind or another, the social Paradise Lost would in all probability be

sciences obtain a miserly few pennies, hedged better in the future at learning by heart more

round with restrictions, and devoted as often stanzas from Paradise Lost, or possibly even

as not to severely practical problems of no from Paradise Regained, but he would not

fundamental importance. Under these con- improve in his ability to learn by heart

ditions the promises held out by our ad- Swinburne's Atalanta in Calydon, or Grey's

vances in methodology may turn out to be Elegy, or Shelley's Prometheus Unbound.

only dead fruits in our hands.

The extension of this belief in specificity

What then are these advances in method- of learning to the sphere of conduct was

ology? Ultimately they stem from the made by Thorndike, Watson and other be-

original inquiries of Galton, Pearson and haviourists; it found an apparently com-

Spearman, and relate to the solution of one plete proof in the investigations of the

of the most fundamental psychological prob- Character Education Enquiry. In this en-

lems in the field of personality measurement. quiry hundreds of tests were administered to

The problem in question is that of the thousands of school children, in which they

existence of psychological qualities. To the were given the opportunity to lie, to cheat,

layman, whose mind is conditioned by the to steal, to behave in a co-operative or a

semantic training of mediaeval " faculty " competitive fashion, to behave in various

psychology, this question may appear non- socially desirable or undesirable ways. The-

sensical-of course, he will answer, there are children were under the impression that their

qualities such as honesty, imagination, sug- actions were not being observed, and con-

gestibility, intelligence, memory, intuition, sequently acted as if social sanctions for

and so forth. To this assertion a powerful undesirable behaviour had been removed for

and influential school of psychology, com- the time being. In actual fact, of course,

posed of believers in the specific nature of every detail of their activities was strictly

conduct, has answered that " there are no controlled by extremely ingenious experi-

broad, general traits of personality, no mental procedures.

general and consistent forms of conduct When the data of this enquiry were

which, if they existed, would make for con- analysed, it was found that the correlations

sistency of behaviour and stability of per- between different tests were very low on the

sonality, but only independent and specific average; in other words, the child who

stimulus-response bonds or habits." In other cheated in one type of situation showed very

words, a person may behave in an honest little tendency to cheat more than any other

manner on one occasion, in a dishonest child in a second or third type; the child

manner on another, depending on the specific who told the truth in one set of circumstances

nature of the situation in question; it is was almost as likely to cheat, or to steal, as

denied that there is any mythical quality of the child who told a lie. In other words,

" honesty " or " dishonesty " Which prompts behaviour was shown to be specific to an

his action.

extraordinary extent.

This view, which grew out of the " transfer This conclusion has been criticized on two

of training" experiments of William James, main grounds. In the first place, it has been

has much to be said for it. James, and many suggested that the traits studied were

others after him, showed that the ancient wrongly chosen; that honesty is an ethical

belief that certain " faculties " of the mind, and a social, not a psychological, concept,

such as memory or logical aptitude, can be and that therefore the conclusions arrived at

THE MEASUREMENT OF SOCIALLY VALUABLE QUALITIES I05

on a basis of analysing honest and dishonest
behaviour may have no relevance to more
psychological types of variables. In the second place, it has been pointed out that
traits such as honesty are presumably
acquired through social learning, and that
such learning has not had much time to take place, and to create a firmly integrated type
of character, in a young child; conclusions
based on young children may not be true for
adults. Experiments have shown that indeed
for adults correlations are very much higher
than for children, and that for them at least the doctrine of specificity only applies to a
relatively small degree.
These results appeared to favour the school of " generality," i.e. those who believe in the existence and importance of those
broad, general traits of personality which the " specificity " school deny. Theories of generality have in the main taken two forms
-that of " type" psychology on the Continent, and that of "trait " psychology in the
U.S.A. The differences between these two ways of systematizing one's thinking about common or general factors in behaviour have been much over-stressed in polemical writing; they are of no great practical importance.
The outcome of this great battle between
" specificity " and " generality " has been, as so often in scientific matters, a recognition that -both schools were right in what they asserted, and wrong in what they denied; human conduct is both specific and general. Our acts are determined both by broad, general traits of personality, and by the specific features of any particular situation; our problem is to find out (a) what are the proportions in which specific and general elements are active in any particular situation (test), and (b) what precisely are the general factors we have to deal with, and how can they be measured. Both these tasks can be accomplished by the use of a statistical technique called " factor analysis," and various subsidiary developments of this technique, such as analysis of variance, for instance.
It is impossible in the compass of this paper to describe in detail the nature of these

techniques, but it is perhaps not too in-
accurate to say that factor analysis attempts
to argue from the pattern of relations found
between a number of tests to the underlying
causes which may have been instrumental
in originating a pattern of such a kind. It is
thus firmly based on John Stuart Mill's law
of " concomitant variation," deducing causal
relations (though not necessarily direct and
obvious ones) from significant co-variations
of different tests. Put very simply, the factor
analyst argues that when he finds that a
number of tests all using verbal problems
correlate very highly together, while another group of tests all using non-verbal material
of the perceptual type also correlate highly
together, and that these two groups of tests
are themselves correlated to a significant but rather lower degree, then it appears
likely that all the tests concerned involve a rather general type of mental ability, and that in addition the verbal group requires a more specific " verbal " ability, while the non-verbal group of tests requires a visuo-
spatial type of ability. In the intellectual field several such
factors, covering certain areas of considerable
breadth, have been discovered in addition to Spearman's general factor of intelligence, called " g." The pioneer work in connection with these less broad, but equally important, so-called " group factors " or " primary abilities " was done by Sir Cyril Burt; confirmation has recently come from American workers like Thurstone and Holzinger. Thus there appears general agreement that there are broad abilities making for proficiency in dealing with spatial relations, perceptual speed, verbal relations, attentive processes, word fluency, numerical relations, mechanical or practical problems, aesthetic judgments, and so forth. The isolation of these qualities, which are undoubtedly " socially valuable," is one of the proudest achievements of modern psychology.
When it comes to the application of factorial methods to non-intellectual problems, we find a much less developed state of affairs. Here again, Spearman and Burt were the first to give a broad survey of the field; Webb, one of Spearman's students, Burt, in

io6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a paper written at the time of the first to be bright, throwing out all those tests

World War, and Garnett, in a re-analysis of which do not differentiate adequately be-

Webb's data, showed that we may reason- tween the two groups, so in the field of

ably regard the non-cognitive field as struc- temperament and character also the experi-

tured around two main independent axes, menter starts out with groups of known

factors, or general qualities. First, we have neurotics and known " stable " persons, say,

a scale of integration, leading from the highly trying out tests which to him appear likely

stable person, through the ordinary, run-of- to differentiate between the two groups.

the-mill type of person, to the highly un- Successful tests are retained and improved;

stable, neurotic patient in the mental hos- other tests are discarded. In this fashion it

pital. Secondly, we have a scale of extraver- is possible to build up a battery which in

sion-introversion, also leading from one ex- efficiency of diagnosis is hardly inferior to

treme, through an intermediate belt of rela- intelligence tests. Similar considerations

tively ambiverted persons, to the other apply also to the measurement of introver-

extreme. Thus the role which Spearman's sion-extraversion.

' g " plays in the cognitive sphere is played The writer (I947) has given detailed

by the general factor of " neuroticism " in accounts of the more usual tests which are

the conative, and by the general factor of used in this connection in his book Dimen-

" extraversion-introversion " in the affective sions of Personality.

field (Eysenck, I947). It is likely that other Unfortunately they cannot be described

broad general factors may still remain to be in brief, but reference to just a few of them

discovered, and indeed in a recent book may make clear the rationale on which they

entitled The Description and Measurement of are built. Thus psychiatrists tell us that

Personality, R. B. Cattell (I946), has shown neurotics, particularly hysterics, lack per-

good reason to believe that about a dozen sistence in pursuing their aims, and are easily

altogether have already been identified with diverted from the steady work required to

sufficient accuracy to permit of attempts at reach these aims. A miniature situation is

measurement.

therefore created in the laboratory in which

With respect to measurement, it may be the subject may or may not show persistence

said that here we have reached a stage rather when diverted from the pursuit of some

less advanced than that of the intelligence arbitrary task by fatigue, boredom, or posi-

tester. While in the field of personality tive counter-attractions. To take but one

integration and extraversion-introversion we instance, the task may be that of "-word

are still in the strictly empirical sphere, in- building," in which the subject is given a

telligence testing has succeeded in elaborat- number of letters and has to build up as

ing principles (e.g. Spearman's neo-genetic many words as he can from these disjointed

principles) which permit of more rational letters. No time limit is set, and it is found

methods of test-construction. At the mo- that while the non-persistent hysteric gives

ment we can measure such a factor as per- up after a few minutes, the persistent person

sonality integration with relatively high may go on for a very long time indeed.

accuracy; however, our tests are not based Or again, it is often said that neurotics are

on any fundamental, rational, underlying more suggestible than normal persons, and

principle, but are merely of an empirical consequently the psychologist may devise

kind, i.e. they are tests which have been a miniature situation requiring the subject to

found in trial-and-error practice to give dis- react in some way to a frequently repeated

criminative results.

suggestion. Thus the suggestion may be that

This trial-and-error method follows rather the subject is falling forward; although he

closely the validation methods of the in- tries to stand still and erect the neurotic is

telligence tester. Just as he starts out with found to be incapable of resisting this simple

a group of children of known dullness, and suggestion, and in quite a high proportion of

compares them with a group who are known cases actually falls forward, or at least sways

THE MEASUREMENT OF SOCIALLY VALUABLE QUALITIES I07

violently. The normal person usually has" ology will have succeeded in giving at least

little difficulty in resisting the suggestion. a preliminary answqr to these burning ques-

Other types of tests involve the measure- tions-questions fundamental to psychiatry,

ment of the reaction of different subjects to sociology, and indeed all the social sciences.

experiences of success and failure, or the This, then, is the conclusion of our

measurement of the neurological concomi- progress report; psychology has made

tants of emotional excitement. Others again astonishing progress in the few years since

rely on the tendencies of individuals to Galton wrote. It has shown that the slogan

" project " their own desires, wishes, and under which it began its career-" Every-

problems on to others; the subject on being thing that exists, exists in some quantity,

presented with a picture showing some and can therefore be measured "-applies

rather indefinite situation involving a man equally to the mental as to the physical

and a woman is likely to invent a story based world, equally to the field of character and

to some extent on his own personal experi- temperament as to that of intelligence.

ences and difficulties when asked just what These advances may rightly give us grounds

he thinks is happening to the people in the for satisfaction; at the same time they must

picture.

not blind us to the enormous complexities

While we can thus measure our main per- and the terrifying extent of the field still to

sonality factors, we know little about their be investigated. The methods for solving

genesis, their distribution in the population, these problems are fairly well understood,

their connection with age, sex, social status, and their spheres of usefulness known; it is

birth order, and so forth. Indeed, it is prob- up to society to use them, and to help

ably one of the main research tasks which psychology to advance to a state where

face us here: to make use of the newly Galton's vision will not appear a remote

acquired methods of measuring personality prophetic dream, but merely a statement of

variables, and conduct crucial and funda- the obvious!

mental experiments into the factors which determine the position of a given individual on these trait-continua. The methods for
carrying out this research are at hand;

REFERENCES
Cattell, R. B. (I946). The Description and Measu4rement of Personality. New York:
World Book Co.

given the requisite social support there is Eysenck, H. J. (I947). Dimensions of Personlittle doubt that within a few years psych- ality. London: Kegan Paul.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

In the July 1947 issue: SOME RELATIONS BETWEEN TERRITORY, SOCIAL HIERARCHY AND LEADERSHIP IN
THE GREEN SUNFISH. By BERNARD GREENBERG.
EFFECTS OF CERTAIN DEPRESSING AGENTS ON INTRACELLULAR OXIDATION OF
INDICATORS IN HYDRA. By C. M. CHILD.
AN ANALYSIS OF THE FACTORS INFLUENCING GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE
MAMMALIAN REPRODUCTIVE TRACTS. By DOROTHY PRICE. ORIGIN OF PIGMENT CELLS FROM THE NEURAL CREST IN THE MOUSE. By MARY E.
RAWLES.
THE EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON THE INTERSEX CHARACTER OF DAPHNIA. By
KATHERINE K. SANFORD.

Edited by W. C. ALLEE, Professor of Zoology, The University of Chicago. Published

Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press.

Subscription: 57s. 6d. per year.

EnglishAgens: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIX No. 8

