REFORM OF VITAL STATISTICS
Outline of a System of National Rei3istration

By SIR BERNARD MALLET, K.C.B.
(President's Address at the Annual General Meeting of the Society, May 8th, I929.)

AS long ago as in November, I9I8, to deal with them will deny that in

Major Darwin read an important many directions it requires amplifying

paper before the Royal Statistical and strengthening.

Society on " Eugenics in relation to Econo- As regards differential fertility, the

mics and Statistics," and at the meetings of official statistics in this country could, as I

the International Commission of Eugenics shall mention later, easily be improved; and

(as it was then called) in London in I925 a as regards mental defectiveness, as Pro-

discussion on the question of Registration fessor Carr-Saunders informed the Popula-

was initiated by Dr. van Herwerden with tion Conference at Geneva two years ago

an account of the Dutch scheme of registra- and has recently again stated, there is little

tion through a personal analysis card, when reliable information which enables us to

Dr. Mj6en also described the Norwegian compare the relative contribution to the

system for the identification of the indivi- population of mental defectives (or of the

dual known as the Norwegian Identity Book. criminal class) with that of the rest. Upon

The subject again came up at the meeting the answer to this depends the greater or

of the Federation of Eugenic Societies at less desirability of measures for sterilization

Paris in I926.

and segregation. Another very serious gap

But it hardly requires the quotation of is the lack of information concerning the

authorities to justify the importance of good endowment of different social groups in a

statistics, the need for which is continually community. This could only be obtained

confronting our Society in the course of its by means of some kind of census of physical

every-day work. There is hardly a question and mental capacity kept up over a series of

in the whole range of population problems- years, which is also necessary if we are to do

whether we are thinking of quantity or more than guess whether a given popula-

quality-on which we do not feel the want tion is or is not deteriorating, as a result of

of more accurate statistical knowledge and the disproportionate multiplication of in-

research. I may mention such questions ferior stocks, the prevalence of birth control,

as the causes of the growth and decline of the intermixture of nationalities or races,

populations, the question whether a sta- and so on.

tionary or declining population is, or is not, I have only indicated a few points requir-

favourable to quality, or to economic pro- ing further research and statistics, and it

gress, the effects of contact and intermixture would be misleading to suggest that the best

between different races and civilizations; all of registration systems would take us very

the questions connected with the phenome- far at first, or supersede the necessity for

non of the differential birth rate, in this and supplementary ad hoc investigations. It

other countries, sterility, still-births, abor- will be at once admitted that good vital

tion, and mental deficiency. The differen- statistics are the basis of all eugenic

tial birth rate and mental defectiveness are research; and I had better now go on to

questions of special interest to this Society indicate in what respects our present vital

at the present time, and though I should be statistics, excellent as they are compared

the last to hint that our present information with those of many foreign countries, and

does not fully justify the strong stand we the foundation of all the work which popula-

are taking on them, no one who has occasion tion experts and eugenists have so far

87

88

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

accomplished, might be extended and im- such a date, there would be something

proved if our politicians and administrators resembling a complete identification of the

could be persuaded of their importance, or deceased man and indications from which

if private eugenic research were properly the family history could be traced by any

endowed, as it is in the United States. interested person. In the same way, the

As long ago as in November, I9I6, in my birth entry of John Smith tells us only that

first Presidential Address to the Royal he was born at such a place on such a date

Statistical Society on the " Organization of and that he is the son of John Smith and

Registration in its bearing on Vital Statis- Mary Smith, formerly Jones, but it gives no

tics," I expressed the opinion that we were clue to the next step backwards in the

nearly at the end of what purely administra- family history. If, however, the entry con-

tive action under our then existing powers tained the date and place of marriage of his

in the General Register Office could do in parents it would direct us at once to the

the way of obtaining further information on documentary record of that event."

which statistical research might be based, The defects to which I drew attention on

and gave an account of the particulars in that occasion remain so far unremedied.

which the records necessary for the im-

provement and extension of our vital statis- LESSONS OF THE WAR

tics were either " altogether wanting or defective in accuracy." To remedy these defects we required (and still require) two things: (i) power which could only be given by legislation to obtain fuller information by way of " questionnaires " on the occasion of the registration of births and deaths by members of the public; and (2) a very considerable reorganization of the registration service of the country. Under the first head I will do no more than refer to one suggestion, among many made in that address, i.e., that of fertility tables which might be derived from fuller birth registration information. But I may also quote-
just as one instance-a paragraph which has
a direct bearing on eugenic study. " As a record," I wrote, " the present
entry is defective in that it either fails to identify completely the person to whom it relates or fails to point directly to the next step in tracing the family history. Thus in the death entry of one of the hundreds of John Smiths, there may be no clue to the marital condition or to any family relationship of the deceased man, and all we can learn from the record is that a certain John
Smith, aged 54, a carpenter, died at such a place on such a day of such a disease. If, however, the entry contained statements as
to the date and place of his birth, and that
he was the husband of Mary Smith, formerly Jones, to whom he was married on

The outbreak of the War revealed the weakness of our system from the point of view of the organization of the man-power of the country. No means existed of computing, except by estimates from the preceding Census, the number of men in agegroups or occupations; and in less than a year from the beginning of the War it was found essential to pass through Parliament the National Registration Act of I915, by means of which it became possible, within a very few weeks, to furnish accurate figures to the Government of the number of men, with their addresses and occupations, available for the Army, for the provision of munitions of war, and for the maintenance
of essential civil services. The Act was made to apply to women also; and the foundations were accordingly laid of a permanent Registration, which, taken in conjunction with reforms in our registration of Births, Marriages, and Deaths and with Census taking, would certainly, as I shall indicate, have placed Great Britain in the forefront in the questions with which I am dealing to-dav. It had always been held that the British population would never tolerate the use of identity papers, but the experience of the Act of I9I5, which obliged every adult individual to carry a National Registration Certificate and to register every change of address, completely disposed of this assertion; and no difficulty of

REFORM OF VITAL STATISTICS

89

any kind was found in the administration of money. It was recognized that these special

this temporary Act.

registers would have in some measure to be

As I was responsible for the Act I was retained, and others, such as a special regis-

therefore soon led to consider the possibili- ter of persons in receipt of the public assis-

ties presented by a permanent organization tance from rates and taxes administered by

on these lines, and particularly the idea that various authorities, would have to be

a General Register might be made to sub- created. It was considered, therefore, that

serve the purposes, amongst others, of Births all these special and separate registers

and Deaths Registration and of the Census should be co-ordinated by the institution of

in a more complete and reliable form than at continuous registers of the whole popula-

present, and I suggested this solution in the tion, kept locally (on the lines of the then

address to which I have alluded. In I9I8 existing National Register of I9I5) by the

I succeeded, in the last year of the War, in same authority as was responsible for births

persuading the Government to appoint a and deaths registration, which would link

committee of experts, of which I was Chair- up the special registers into one coherent

man, to draw up a permanent scheme for register by fusing the canvasses at present

registration. This was done, but unfor- undertaken for the electoral and school

tunately the matter got no further, for the attendance registers into one comprehensive

Government, in the press of other preoccu- inquiry, as well as such information for the

pations at the close of the War, did not see use of special registers as could most con-

their way to carry out its recommenda- veniently be obtained in this way; and also

tions; and the temporary measure, having by making all the registers mutually access-

served its purpose, was allowed to lapse, and ible by a system of reference marking. The

an opportunity lost which may not soon general register would further enable all the

recur.

others to be kept free from errors whether of

The Report, however, remains presum- duplication, omission, or the retention of

ably on record at the Ministry of Health, " dead " entries.

and supplies ample material for the study of

the registration problem in England.

THE NEED FOR CO-ORDINATION

We found in existence in England a The advantage of this from a statistical

very considerable number of registers point of view is obvious. It is generally being kept at considerable expense the association of facts which is found to be for various special purposes, some of them lacking when further statistical information covering very large sections of the popula- regarding the population is called for. We tion. These registers are kept under differ- have now no organized means of collating

ent Acts of Parliament, by various autho-
rities, in cvarying areas, for independent

the numerous items of information collected and recorded as a result of the many pater-

purposes, without any provision for their co- nal activities of the modern State. By the

ordination one with another.

means indicated, the numerous official in-

The most important of these numerous special registers in relation to the system of

quiries and registers, now made and maintained independently of each other, would be

general registration were the Electoral co-ordinated into a single system which

Registers for Parliament and Local would provide a dossier for each individual

Government, the school attendance regis- containing those particulars regarding him

ters, the Census (decennial only) and the which the State is concerned to know. For

registers of births, marriages, and deaths, identification purposes (the primary object)

which afford much of the material required for general registration. Our particular problem was therefore largely administrative; how to relate them to one another and

the new local general register would contain all the essential particulars as to each individual. One or more cards or sheets devoted to each individual, showing his

prevent overlapping and waste of labour and record from its commencement with the

90 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

entry of birth, would furnish evidence both received. The larger the responsibilities, of his age and identity. (There are many the more extended the rights, the more

John Smiths, but presumably only one born diversified the communal services, the more

at a certain address on a given date, to imperative becomes the need for full and

parents of recorded names, ages, and occu- accurate identification of all the inhabitants.

pations, etc.) To this would be added as With an extended franchise, universal and

time went on the chief registrable events compulsory schooling, insurance for health

of his life-changes of address, occupation or unemployment, the treatment of infec-

(as already registered under the National tious diseases, infant welfare and protection,

Unemployment Insurance Act), marriage, compensation for accidents, old age pen-

the birth of children, etc.,-most of the in- sions, widows' pensions, and War pensions,

formation required being already recorded the necessity of safeguarding the marriage

in one official register or another, but with- ceremony, not to mention police and

out any provision for the association of the military service, the identification of each

whole.

citizen in the locality in which he resides

IDENTIFYING THE INDIVIDUAL
Further, each individual was to be furnished (as under the National Registration

becomes an essential condition alike of any assurance of personal rights and of the effectual and equitable administration of national and local services.

Act) with an Identity Card or Certificate reproducing from the Register all the par-
ticulars necessary for identification which
would have to be produced on such occasions
as change of address, school entry, factory employment, health and unemployment insurance, marriage, birth certification, etc.
The scheme was to be completed by the creation of a Central Index Register, having for its primary purpose the maintenance of the local general registers, so far as concerned removals and prevention of duplicate entries; and would thus serve to keep accu-
rate other special registers, such as those for health and unemployment insurance, old
age pensions, and so on, and it could, as I shall indicate later, be made the main instrument for obtaining information interesting to eugenists.
Such, in the barest outline, were the proposals of our Committee. It would not be
worth while to go into further detail. All
that need be done is to indicate in very general terms the principle to which any
good system should conform. The first of
these is the identification of every individual within a community in order (a) that he
shall be made responsible for the fulfilment of his obligations to the community, and (b) that he shall be ensured his rights as a citizen, whether these take the form of franchises to be exercised or dues to be

Upon this identification of every citizen in his own community depends the second great object of a Register, that in which eugenists are interested, viz., the acquisition of statistical information about the population (or any particular section of it), partly for the purposes of research, and partly to promote legislation and administrative action for social progress and the benefit of the community. I need only allude to the value of the data obtained from the questions asked in the British Census of I9II as to fertility, and the establishment of certain facts as to the differential birth-rate which we owe to researches on our vital statistics by such statisticians as my former colleague, Dr. Stevenson. The most important practical aims of our Eugenics Society are founded on such statistics as these. Further progress is checked and hampered by the fact that in England we have to work under a system of Births and Deaths Registration instituted before vital statistics were thought of. Not only would the creation of a general simple comprehensive registration system give boundless possibilities of extension in the matter of information obtainable, but a great improvement in the validity of our existing data. I may give one illustration of how this would occur. The information now supplied by the public on the occasion of the registration of

REFORM OF VITAL STATISTICS

9I

Births, Marriages, or Deaths would be enable us to face another problem of great

checked and supplemented by the records of complexity, but of very considerable and

the individual or family which would direct interest to eugenists, namely the

gradually be accumulated in the General transference of individuals or families from

Register; and the production of the identity one class to another. In his Galton lecture

card, containing name, address, occupation, this year Major Darwin made clear how

etc., on each occasion of the registration of great in absolute magnitude this trans-

any one of these events would ensure a uni- ference is; his conclusions are, however,

formity of statement as to occupation, which based primarily on the contrast between the

is one of the principal difficulties met with in birth rates, as modified by infantile and

the preparation, for instance, of occupational child mortality, in the different classes.

birth and death rates. Further, the registra-

tion of births and deaths has to be related to ANALYZING SOCIAL SELECTION

the size and make-up of the population in which they occur, in order to provide satisfactory evidence of the trend of natality and mortality. This information is supplied at present in Great Britain only by the decennial Census; and in the intervening years by

The effect in which eugenists are most directly interested depends, however, not only on the fertility of the married, but on the proportion of celibates and the age of marriage. These factors probably heighten the contrast in reproduction between social

estimates of the probable numbers, which are often very far from accurate. The existence of a Register which would enable us to ascertain the population of any local area

classes, while full allowance for mortality will tend somewhat in the opposite direction. Full data as to births and deaths in consistently classified occupational groups would

at any given date, not only in mass but in full detail of age, sex, and marital condition, would at once remove the difficulty which largely vitiates the calculation of local birth rates and death rates-calculations upon which sanitary progress in great measure depends. It would, in fact, provide us with an elementary census annually or as often as might be required, at a minimum of trouble and expense.
I look upon this perfecting of our vital statistics as perhaps the most fundamental advantage we should get from the Register. There are so many directions in which hygienists and eugenists would benefit from more accurate and extended statistical information, that I have no time to touch on this branch of my subject. But I may just quote one example which has been suggested to me.
Uniformity in occupational classification would enable us, as I have already suggested, by comparing the number of deaths or births registered under the heading of, let us say, Colliery Carters, to be sure that these events are really to be referred to the existing population registered under that occupation in the Census. It would also

supply a direct answer to the questions of very considerable eugenic urgency, as to which occupations are producing more children than are needed to maintain their numbers, which classes are producing less, and in each case by how much. If it appears, as has been estimated, that the professional and clerical groups of occupations are producing no more than half the children needed to maintain a stationary population, it is evident that any eugenic policy which does not recognize the need for effective action in increasing the natality of these classes, is in this respect seriously incomplete.
The analytic data necessary for making both precise and detailed calculations as to social transference analogous to those quoted by Major Darwin, would become available shortly after the establishment of effective registration. Some fifty years later, however, a new source of information more direct and detailed in some respects would begin to emerge. The comparison of the occupations of men then living with those of their fathers and grandfathers would supply, after the event, an analysis of the selective processes at work in our society, both in the action analogous to natural selection, in

92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

modifying the predominant type of man in might be recorded, most valuable results

the population at large, and in their effects could be obtained.

upon the constitution of the social structure. In view of the knowledge we already

The effects of immigration and emigration possess on the subject of the differential

would be taken fully and automatically into birth rate, and of the measures advocated to

account, and we should have not merely, prevent the disproportionate multiplication

with respect to occupations such as the of inferior and undesirable stocks, it is vital

physicians', the gross fact that their num- that eugenists should have the means of

bers cannot be all drawn from parents of the discriminating more scientifically than has

same occupation, but the detailed statement yet been possible between the stocks whose

of the actual occupations of their parents. increase should be encouraged and those

PEDIGREES AND SOCIAL PROMOTION

whose heredity, or heredity combined with environment, make their reproduction harm-

A particular question which has been brought to the notice of eugenists, and one

ful to the community. If we had the means of tracing from our records indivi-

which a satisfactory system of social statistics should be capable of answering, lies in the relative importance in social promotion of, on the one hand personal ability, and on the other comparative freedom from the bur-
den of offspring. It is arguable, as indeed -our Malthusian friends strongly argue, that in all classes the limitation of offspring to a few children gives to those few great advantages in their upbringing and education:

duals of families which had been, perhaps for more than one generation, in receipt of some form of public assistance, of those who had a record of criminality, or had been lunatics or mentally defective or suffered from certain forms of disease, we should be on even more certain ground than we are at present in advocating the necessary measures for limiting the fertility of such individuals and classes.

-they have, in fact, a better start in life. It should be possible to determine whether
-or not this better start in life is an important factor in determining the relative composition of the different social classes.
I will now turn to a point which bears -even more directly on eugenic study. It will be remembered that our scheme involved the creation of a simple, skeleton, central index register of the whole population, fed from the local register, for the
purpose of maintaining the accuracy of these
registers in the matter of removals and so on. It is that aim which might give great opportunities. For if, to the particulars required merely for identification purposes -there were added notes of the parentage, marriage, births of children, change of occupation and cause of, and age at, death, -information would be afforded by which the genealogical history of each family could in time be traced. The mere possibility of tracing pedigrees for three or more generations, indeed, would be of little eugenic importance taken by itself. But taken in ,conjunction with other data which would or

An objection might be raised in England, from the " strong and widespread feeling," as Major Darwin has expressed it in his work on Eugenic Reform, " that no individual should be, as it were, branded for life on account of any disability discovered or misdemeanour committed in youth, and with this sentiment all must sympathise."
I see no insuperable reason, however, why, under proper safeguards a good part of this programme should not be realized, if once we could secure the establishment of the General Register with the co-ordination to it of the special registers which already exist and which will be created, and of the Census. It will no doubt be necessary sooner or later to have a register of persons in receipt of public assistance from the various authorities. We already get information, inadequate no doubt, from the Census as to feeblemindedness and blindness; and causes of death in death registration combined with morbidity statistics which could be made available from health insurance, will supply some of the information wanted as to disease. If such informa-

REFORM OF VITAL STATISTICS

93

tion were linked up by the General Register in supporting proposals for the creation of

we should have data, which could in time be Registration accompanied by Personal Iden-

extended and improved, related to the tity Cards wherever such a system is not in

individuals registered.

existence.

I have perhaps dwelt on the desirability

THE PROPOSED DUTCH SYSTEM

of General Registration longer than the

Whether we could secure sufficient information for our purposes about crimi-
nality, certain transmissible diseases, etc.,
from other extraneous sources which could
be incorporated in a General Register or from direct inquiries, would depend very
much on how far societies like ours were able to inculcate a eugenic conscience in the public and in governing authorities. It is at all events encouraging to know that certain other countries are hopeful of obtaining information of eugenic importance from genealogical registration and personal cards. I need only allude to what Dr. van Herwerden told us in I925 in London, when she quoted from the description given at the meeting of the Institut International de Statistique at Brussels in I923 of the Dutch system proposed by M. Methorst. She

possibility of attaining it at the moment warrants. We missed a great opportunity in I919; but my hope is that the complexity of modern social conditions may in time make a general registration system an administrative necessity.
For the present, however, we can at least expect a gradual improvement in our present
system of registration of Births, Deaths, and Marriages and in the Census. It is good
news in this connection that a recent Act has at last removed the legislative bar (of which I spoke earlier) to obtaining fuller information from the public and to the reorganization of the registration service. Outside bodies like our Society should therefore have a better chance of a hearing in the future than they have had in the past, and should not relax their efforts to press reasonable demands.

mentioned some of the results to be expected from the tabulation of the cards-the influence of the age of the parents on the death-rate of the children; the influence of consanguinity; the correlation of male and female births; the superiority or inferiority of the first-born; death-rate in relation to occupation; family and hereditary diseases; the same occupation running in a family; the frequency of twins. M. Methorst stated, in addition, that efforts should be made to
add informnation as to individuals from other
sources and from special inquiries-such as information about deafness, blindness, criminality, mental infirmity, capacity, income.
Part of the information we require can no doubt be derived on broad statistical lines from an improved registration of births, marriages, and deaths; but for tracing anything like a life history of the individual and linking up his history with that of his parents and grandparents general registration of the population is essential. Eugenists, therefore, have the strongest interest

In this connection, I may recall Major Darwin's letter nearly two years ago-in July I927-to the Ministry of Health, asking for the careful consideration of certain demands.
The first of these was for the inclusion in the Census for I93I of a repetition of the questions asked in the Census of I9II (but omitted from that of I92I), as to the duration of marriages and the numbers of children born and surviving, which provided material, on a national scale, for analyzing the fall in fertility since I876, the year of our highest birth rate, by social class, occupation, birthplace, and locality of residence. The repetition of these questions would give us invaluable information as to the changes in fertility now taking place in social classes.
Secondly, Major Darwin asked for improved methods of determining, from the
data obtainable from Births and Deaths Registration, the rates of population growth or decrease among the different social clases of the community. A paper by Dr. Stevenson, the greatest authority on the subject

194 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

-indeed I may say the greatest of living lems, and its component bodies the National

medical statisticians-read in February, Committees in all the principal countries in

1928, before the Royal Statistical Society the world, of which the British Population

clearly showed how the information required Society is one. I think that this Union,

could be obtained by a few small changes which commands important scientific sup-

in the tabulation of Birth and Death Certi- port in many countries, should have a

ficates.

powerful influence in stimulating research

These are very modest requests, but we into all these questions, and should be able

shall not get what we want, let me empha- to bring effective pressure to bear in the

size, unless we continue to press for them. matter of Government statistics, particu-

WVhen we consider all we want (including larly in the direction of standardization.

other requests made by Major Darwin at the I notice that Professor Thor Anderssen

same time), and what we have any practical of Norway, in a paper he printed last year

chance of getting, the difficulties, it must be on the Geneva Population Conference, ex-

admitted, loom large. But I think that pressed the opinion that scientific statistics

statistics, in spite of the distaste which they should be the first consideration for the new

inspire, have a way of coming by their own. Union, and that civil registration of the

Directly you have a policy to advocate or a populations should be their basis. If the

position to defend you must use figures. Union should display activity in this

And with the lively and growing interest matter, as I believe it will, it should be able

there now is in the public and the Press in to give a powerful stimulus to the cause

biology and heredity, and all the questions which I have been advocating this afternoon,

covered by these terms-birth control, steri- and it is my hope, that in this country at all

lization, mental deficiency, family endow- events, the Eugenics Society and this new

ment, and the increasing urgency of popula- British Population Society will be of mutual

tion questions in the broadest sense-I assistance to each other. If the new Society

believe the public demand for guidance in in time succeeds in obtaining sufficient sup-

these subjects will make it impossible for port, financial and other, to enable it to do

Governments, however reluctant, to stand its part in promoting research under the

aloof for many years.

International Union, it should be of great

I have lately become connected with the value to us by providing some of the

formation of an International Union for the material upon which our educational work

Scientific Investigation of Population Prob- depends.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.

