The New Regional Survey of Mexico.*
A Study of a Mixed and Hybrid Population.
The Department of Anthropology, established by the Republic of Mexico in 1917 under the direction of don Manuel Gamio, issued in 1918-19 an important programme of work "for the study and improvement of the regional populations of the Republic." The main heads of this programme were "(1) The gradual acquisition of knowledge concerning the racial characteristics, material and intellectual culture, languages and dialects, economic situation, and environmental and biological conditions of the regional populations of Mexico, past and present; (2) The investigation of what really practical and adequate means should be employed by official bodies (federal, local and municipal) as well as private institutions (scientific, altruistic or labour associations, the Press, masonic lodges, the Church) in order to stimu late the physical, intellectual, moral and economic development of the people; (3) The encouragement of racial approximation, cultural fusion, linguistic unification, and economic equilibrium between our various groups, which thus only will ever form part of a coberent and definite nationality."
A DECADENT POPULATION.
The Department, under the direction of don Manuel Gamio, has now completed and published its investigation of the first region chosen for study, the Valley of Teotihuacan, as typical of the population of the States of Mexico, Hidalgo, Puebla and Tlaxcala. TeotihuacAn is a gently sloping basin of about 350 square miles, surrounded by hills and rising ground, and lying 28 miles to the north-east of Mexico City. It includes important archaeological remains. The population is 8,330 souls, of whom all but 10 are natives of the region. Ninety per cenit. ou the cultivable land of the valley is held by seven proprietors (hacendados) almost all non-resident; the remaining ten per cent. is in the hands of 416 small owners, leaving 7,914 inhabitants landless. There is one small town, and twenty-eight villages or hamlets, most of which have lost their commons and the greater part of their agricultural land and are hemmed in by the estates of the hacenda.dos, who also engross altnost all the water available for irrigation.
Practically the whole population is employed in agriculture, the 416 small proprietors on their own land, the rest as day-labourers for
[*MANUEL GAmio. La Poblacidn del Valle de Teotihuacdn: El medio en que se ha
desarrollato su evolucirn 6tnica y social: Iniciativas para procurar su me3oramiento. (The population of the Valley of Tetoihuacdn: the historical conditions of its ethnic and social development: with some suggestions for their amelioration.) Mexico; Secretariat of Agriculture, Department of Anthropology; 1922. 2 vols., and an abridgment in English.]

THE NECW REGIONAL SURVEY OF M14XICO.

33l

them and on the haciendas. Weaving, pottery and tilemaking are subsidiary industries of small importance. The diet of the peoplemaize and beans-is fairly satisfactory in its constituents, except for
an excess of carbohydrates and a total absence of "tonic foods " (meat, eggs, milk), but absolutely insufficient in quantity. Large quantities of pulque (fermented sap of the maguey) are drunk to supplement this diet. Pulque is rich in vitamines, but the quantity consumed-3 litres per head daily by adult males-produces almost universal drunken-
ness. "The hopelessness and physical misery of the people is heart-
rending, especially of the women and children. The men are forced to take the greater part of the ration on account of the hard labour they
endure (12 hours a day) in order to be able to earn their miserable
wages." In good years the available dailv ration of cereals per head, locally produced, would seem to be only 500 grammes. In bad years the men emigrate in large numbers in search of work; some of the
inhabitants import corn at exorbitant prices; many fall ill or die of starvation. In the dry years of 1912 and 1915 the majority were obliged to mix their corn with the woody fibre of rnaguey: there was an
epidemic of influenza, and the mortality in several villages was 25%
of their population. The revolutionary wars of the past ten years have intensified the general misery, since practically all the live-stock of the valley has been carried off by raiding bands.
The effect of political conditions on the material welfare of this population is shown by a comparative table of census-totals (Vol. ii. p. 140). Between 1894 and 1910, a period of tranquillity, the total
rose from 7,550 to 10,799; during the civil wars from 1910 to 1917 it
fell to 8,330.
Professor Mendieta y Nufiez, whose chapters on the Census, on the Economic Organisation of the Valley and on the Agrarian Problem are some of the most interesting in the Report, makes certain suggestions for the improvement of this unhappy population, such as the develop-
ment of an adequate supply of water for irrigation, with a properregulation of water-rights; the restoration of village lands, and the
compulsory breaking-up of the large estates; the establishment of farm schools and an experimental station and of a land-bank. But, he adds, the population will grow in direct proportion to the local resources; and if these measures are carried out and produce greater prosperity, the increase of population will before long bring back the agrarian problem in the same acute form. The remedy lies in the provision of technical education concurrently with the other reforms, in order that
the surplus population may be withdrawn from agriculture.

VITAL STATISTICS.
The;proportion'of the sexes is normal (males 4,215, females 4,115);
marriages take place from the age of twelve, but usually from fifteen upwards. There is practically no prostitution. The number of miiarried persons is high-2,613; of these nearly five hundred have united without religious or civil ceremony, for financial reasons, but these unions are said to be as permanent as the regular marriages. Adultery in the usual sense of the word is rare, but married couples often separate by consent and contract fresh unions, which, again, are-

382" SUGHNICS RAVIRW.

monogamous while they last. Statistics of the birthrate do not seem to be available: the authors imply that it is high; but the infantile
death-rate is enormous, 75% to 80% of the children born dying in the
first year of life. The causes given are lack of food, infantile diseases,
and smallpox. The following table shows the number of living individuals at
various ages:-

POPULATION OF VALLEY OF TEOTIHUACAN BY AGES.

0-30 days 30-60 ,, 60-90 ,, 90-120 ,, 120-150 ,,
150-180 ,, 180-210 ,, 210-240 ,,
240-270 ,, 270-300 ,, 330-365 ,,

33 31 23 23 17
20 15 13 11 7 83

Total under 1 yr. 284

1-5 years 1005 *5-10 , 1315 10-15 ,, 911 15-20 ,, 755

20-25 years 626

25-30 ,, 776

30-35 ,, 521

35-40 ,, 612

40-45 ,, 330

45-50 ,, 394

56-55 ,, 185

55-60 ,, 287

60-65 ,, 98

65-70 ,, 95

70-75 ,, 52

75-80 ,, 44

80-85 ,, 18

85-90 ,, 15

90-9.; ,, 3

95-100 ,,

1

Urnknown age '8

It is noticeable that of the living children under twelve months old, more than one half were born in the two months preceding the census and in what corresponds to the following month of the year before. This suggests a seasonal distribution of conceptions, possibly following the harvest; but unfortunately, the time of year at which the census was taken is not stated.
THE SPANISH-INDIAN CROSS.
The component elements of the population of Teotihuacfan in the colonial period were four: the native Indians; Spaniards, both immigrants from Spain and criollos, the American-born offspring of Spanish parents; possibly negroes, who accompanied the Spaniards to America; and the "castes" produced by the crossing of the other three groups. Crossing between Indians and Spaniards, producing mestizos, undoubtedly took place from the first arrival of the Spaniards, but was limited to some extent by the prohibition to Spaniards to reside in the Indian villages. Nevertheless, apart from clandestine and casual unions, marriages undoubtedly took place between the races.. The multiplication of "castes" seems to have been disapproved by the authorities. In 1768 Indian fathers of families were authorised to marry their children to other Indians, to Spaniards and to castizos (the offspring of Spaniards and mestizos); but they were urged not to mix their children with the great variety of castes that existed, "because by so doing they disturbed the peace of their villages and lost their privileges before the

THIC NJW REGIONAL SURVICY OF MEXICO.

888

tribunals. " It will be observed that the Spaniards felt no antipathy to
unions between their own race and the Indians.* Students of heredity may be interested in "Notes on the Genealogy
*of the Lords of Teotihuacin" (Chapter vii. vol. I., part ii.), in which Professor Ignacio del Castillo traces the genealogy of a noble local family from 1439, when Netzahualc6yotl, king of Texcoco, married his
daughter Tzinquetzalpoztectzin to Quetzalmamalitzin, lord of Teoti-. huacin, to the present day. In 1561 European blood was brought into the family by the marriage of donia Cristina Francisca Verdugo. Quetzalmamalitzin-Huetzin Ixtlilx6chitl with Juan Grande, a Spanish interpreter; and their daughter, to whom the lordship of Teotihuacbn descended, also married a Spaniard. One of the sons of this marriage was don Fernando de Alva Ixtlilx6chitl, the author of various historical works, an antiquary, a translator, and an authority
on Mexican hieroglyphics (1578 ?-1648). The lords of Teotihuacan fell into poverty in the seventeenth century; and the living representa-
tives of the family "which, " says Del Castillo, "has produced kings,
warriors, poets, historians, grammarians, priests, lawyers, clerks,
interpreters and architects " are labourers and small-holders, not much above the general Indian level of poverty and ignorance. Even in this generation, however, there is one member who shows unusual
ability-can read and write, studies arithmetic, geography, geology and history, possesses maps, 'and has named his youngest child after the hero of Thermopylae.'
The census taken by the Department of Anthropology in 1917 divides the 8,330 inhabitants of the valley into three classes: Indians,, 68 per cent., mestizos 25 per cent., white people (Spaniards and others) 6 per cent. The figures for these classes seem to have been determined
mainly by inspection, the Indian women and the mestizos and whitesof both sexes being generally unwilling to be measured; and it is obvious that no hard-and-fast line can be drawn between classes so determined. The Indians and mestizos are said to differ from each other in skin colour, skin texture, amount of serous secretion, nature
and distribution of hair, shape of forehead, cheekbones, nose and lips;

* Readers who are interested in the Mexican classification of castas may refer to a XVII century series of type-pictures described by Director Franz HIeger, "Eine Neue Serie von Oelbildern zur Veranschaulichung der Rassenmischungen in Mexico" (Proc. Internat. Congress of Americanists, London, 1912, p. 146). This series of ten pictures (originally nineteen) is in the possession of the Ethnographical Department of the Natural History Museum in Vienna. Eaeh painting represents a
family, including the parents and their offspring, while the occupations and dresses. represented indicate the typical social status of each caste. Labels on the paintings
give the following classification: From Spanish man and negress-mulato. Spanish man and mulato woman-morisco. Spanish man and morisco woman-albino. Negro man and Indian woman-lobo. ,, Lobo man and Indian woman-lobo. ,, Indian man and lobo woman-grifo. Spanish man and Indian woman-mestizo. Spanish man and mestizo woman-castizo. Castizo man and Spanish woman-Spaniard. ,, Mestizo man and Indian woman-coyote. ,, Mulato man and mestizo woman-mulato.

384 EUGECNICS REVIIEW.
but as these characters were themselves taken as a criterion of race, the observations cannot be entirely satisfactory. The mestizos are slightly taller than the Indians (M. 163.5 cm., I. 161.9 cm.), slightly higher in the bust, narrower in the shoulders, and the thoracic index is lower; their hands are larger, their feet smaller, their thighs thicker. The Indians are predominantly mesaticephalic, the mestizos sub-brachycephalic.
The muscular force of both classes is low, but the mestizos are slightly superior in that respect.
Practically all the inhabitants speak Spanish; 448 also speak Mexican. All are Catholic, but the niestizos are said to be superior in culture and intelligence. Professor S. Siliceo Pauer, who contributes the section on Physical and Biological Conditions, advocates the -encouragement of cross-breeding between white and Indian inhabitants as the best means of raising the physical and cultural level of the Indians and of producing "a population racially, culturally and linguistically homogeneous. " He considers that the early cross between Spaniards and natives was a beneficial one; that there are no physiological obstacles to successful interbreeding, no repugnance between the races, no physical impediment, no want of sexual affinity, and that such aversion to intermarriage as exists at the present day is due to social and economic causes. The Indians are despised because they are poor and ignorant, while isolation and ill-treatment have made them reserved and suspicious. If once the economic status- of the Indian is raised, mestixaje, he thinks, will become general (vol. ii. pp. 195-201).
In the Ethnographical Notes (vol. ii. p. 249) Mr. C. Noriega Hope describes an usual physical type which occurs sporadically. "Sometimes a pure-bred Indian woman will have several children, all of her own ethnic type, but among them there will be one entirely different from the rest. The eyes are grey, the hair dark brown or red, the skin almost white, and only the prominent cheekbones suggest the presence of Indian blood. The mother will protest vehemently that this is a child of the same father as her other children." Mr. Hope says positively that these contrabandos are the result of adultery with white men: whereas the natives themselves say that children are born red'headed or hair-lipped if the mother looks at the moon during her pregnancy! But the phenomenon seems to deserve further study: we may compare the sporadic occurrence of grey eyes among the Navajo, the white-skinned, grey-eyed Hopi family at Oraibi (distinct from the well-known albinos of that tribe), and perhaps even Stefansson"'s "Blond Eskimo."
BARBAR A AITKEN.

