DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.1
By LUCIEN MARCH,
(Directeur de la Statistique Generale de la France).
(Translated from the French in Eugenique, January-April,
1913, by the Hon. H. Onslow.)
VI.-Social Renascence by means of large families holding land.
Large families seem to be able both to persist and to progress, aptitudes which restricted families do not possess in the same degree. What sturdy generations have been born in troublous times, when the voids caused by a heavy death-rate have been filled by a large birth-rate! Does this mean that one must disregard the economic factors of existence? " Ubi sunt homines, ubi substantiac et vires," said Leibnitz. Without accepting this formula, one is not driven to admit that of Malthus and his followers, which is, indeed, contrary to fact. Such formulae are too simple adequately to describe the complex effects of the struggle for life.
If one would arrive at a mean, in which the exigencies of the race and its economic necessities were both taken into account, one must not lose sight of the fact that the aging of a society is not in any way similar to the senescence of an individual. In the individual the cells have to a large extent a joint liability and are destined to destruction. In a society the cells are in competition and are capable of replacing one another. A society does not die unless through some external catastrophe; but even if it does not die, considered as a community of individuals it may lose its national and human value, by decaying, or even by ceasing to progress.
Examples of this process are not lacking, and in some cases we have been able to show that decadence has been preceded by a restriction of births, by an insufficient renewal of the stems by which the life-giving sap rises. The problem is how to ensure that this renewal shall take place under the best possible conditions; and its solution must be sought, without
' Continutd from Vol. V., No. 3, p. 25I.

344 EUGENICS REVIEW.
preconceived ideas, with a care only for the end to be attained, since this end is of all things the most important, " Primo vivere."
As we have seen, the changes which accompany the growth of town life are followed by a series of pathological symptoms, and by the increase of certain defects. Thus the rejuvenation of society must be sought in what M. M6line has called a return to the land, and to the simple life of the country. If, indeed, signs of degeneracy have already appeared in certain country districts, it is in just these districts where the fertility of marriages has for a long time been insufficient. But by what means can young and old be brought back to the land which they have left? No illusion is possible, such a return can never be effected. The only means of increasing the rural population is by maintaining there a higher degree of fecundity. Among the other measures which might serve this purpose it is important to examine what can be done by means of a further reduction in the death-rate. But, even if this reduction is imperatively desirable for other reasons, in itself it could only encourage a fresh reduction in the birth-rate, and would not increase the number of parents.
If the death-rate at the end of the nineteenth century be considered in the twelve countries for which tables have been given, it will be seen that France occupies a favourable place in the classification according to the percentage of children born who survive to the age of twenty. For she is placed immediately after the three kingdoms of Scandinavia.
It will be seen from Fig VIII. that the classification according to the birth-rate is approximately in the inverse order of the classification according to the percentage of survivors at the age of twenty.
Further, if one considers the number of boys, born in a year, to an equal number of individuals in each of the different countries, and then calculates the average number of those boys,who will survive to the age of sixty, and will thus be able to exercise their reproductive functions for forty years, it will be found that this number varies little from country to country. For the heavy death-rate is compensated for by a heavy birth-rate, and vice versa. France

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.
IA1 88A1CN 3?T SUR VIB DBS GAR Q ON$ BN DIVERS PAYS

345

lO0 1000

900 900 800 800

700 700

600 600

500 500

400 400

300 300

200 200

100 100

00

a e§=x ;1i aee lX 5Di e

FIG. VIII.
Fig VIII.-From Le Bulletin de la Statistique Ginfrale de la France, January, 1913, p. 145. The heavy line represents the number of men in various countries who reach the age of 2o among every thousand boys born at the same time. The twelve countries are arranged in descending order according to the number of individuals that survive. The fine line represents the number of boys born yearly for every 50,000 inhabitants. The large dots joined by a broken line show the average numbers of those boys who survive from the age of twenty to the age of sixty years, that is to say, during forty years of the reproductive period.

346 EUGENICS REVIEW.
however, is an exception, and on account of the very low birthrate, the number of those with powers of reproduction, indicated
by the lower line in the diagram, is far less than elsewhere. It might be surprising to see that France occupies so high
a position in the table according to those who live to the age of 20, seeing that the number of deaths per thousand inhabitants is so high. But this last fact is due to the large proportion of old men, larger than anywhere else. A country whose birth-rate has been declining during a long period naturally tends to become a country of old people.
The reduction of the death-rate alone cannot be relied on to maintain large families, nor can one count on an increase of the marriage-rate, since we see that the birth-rate diminishes when marriages become more numerous, and that the departments where the marriage-rate is highest are often those where marriages are least fertile.
Nor can anything be hoped for from an increase in wages, or an improvement in the general conditions of life. A decrease in the birth-rate accompanies an increase in comfort, even in the homogeneous classes of the population, as is shown
from the family statistics drawn up in France in I906(I907.1
Must we then be content to await a change in the customs of the people? A doctor called in to see a patient will certainly recommend better hygiene; sometimes he hopes for a crisis from which may come recovery. In any case, if he perceives some permanent condition that aggravates the symptoms, the bad effects of which may be diminished without endangering the general health, he will attempt to deal with it.
So in all ages we have seen the father of a family regulating the number of his children in proportion to the moral and material burden which they represent, and one can scarcely blame him without being pharasaic.
When this burden is caused by the manner of life he leads and which he means his children to lead also, the community can hardly be held responsible. It has no further duty than to avoid placing unnecessary burdens on the large families
X Statistique G6nirale de la France. Statistique des familles en I906. Paris.
Imp. Nat.

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

347

which are the pledges of its future prosperity.' But when the burden arises partly from a constraint exercised by the State, in view of higher interests, it is only just and wise that the State should compensate for the weight added to the already heavy burden of the father of a family.2

VII.-State Compensation for large families.
A Bill, introduced by M. Henry Ch6ron, and recently passed in the Chamber of Deputies, has for its object the institution of a
system of compensation. The head of a family without sufficient
means is to receive 5 francs a month for every child, under 13 years of age, after the third child under this age. If this measure
be passed by the Senate, the principle of pecuniary compensation will have been introduced into the legislation. The recognition of another principle of great importance from the point of view of our Society will also be secured by it. The monthly grant is to be increased by half, if the head of the family belongs to a Sick Benefit Society; that is to say, if he reaches a certain degree of moral and physical health. In towns, and in large industrial centres, these grants may, indeed, occasionally fail to benefit those for whom they are primarily intended, that is to say the children, and they may even encourage some undesirable births.3
It is evident that the grants mentioned are too small, and it will be found necessary to increase them in order to make them effective. This, however, may be done without great outlay if the amount is raised experimentally little by little, and if it is not made uniform for the whole country, but left to each department to fix the amount of its own grant.
, L'Alliance Nationale pour l'accroissement de la Population Franfaise (president, Dr. Jacques Bertillon), La Ligue Populaire des peres et meres des Families Nombreuse de France (president, Captain Simon Maire), and other societies are
devoting their efforts to the defence of large families.
2 On the same subject, see Pour la Race, in the November number, IgIo, of the
Revue du Mois. 3 Since the publication of this article in Eugenique, this Bill has become the
law of July x4th, 1913. Special advantages given to members of Mutual Insurance Societies are not provided for by this law, which makes it obligatory for the parishes to grant assistance. The State contributes to the grants to the
extent Of 7.50 francs per mnonth for each child after the third. For widows
assistance commences with the second child, and for widowers with the third. The grants may be made in kind.

348 EUGENICS REVIEW.
To induce the poorer and less populated departments tc take the matter up, the State should contribute a part of the outlay, according to a sliding scale, by which the percentage paid by the department would increase proportionally with its wealth and the density of its population.'
Under these conditions the mountain departments would receive from the State almost the whole cost, they would be the first to give effect to the law; and as it is from these departments that there is already most emigration, the renewal of the population would continue, but with a greater intensity than at present. In the second -place, as the departments would only adopt the new system one by one, the State would be in a position to judge of its efficacy before involving itself in too heavy expenditure.2 Moreover, the system would admit of the maximum result being obtained by the minimum financial outlay.
Finally, if there is some risk that the relatively small grants may be used to ill-effect in urban and in well-to-do country districts, by tempting more particularly the less desirable fathers, there would be no risk of this kind if they were reserved for districts in which the families for the most part are on the same level of poverty, and in which poverty is not a sign of social ineptitude, as it is just in these places that selection plays a very small part. Of course, in every case it would be advisable to benefit families which give some guarantee of fitness, for example, families belonging to Friendly Societies. As the upper classes, with a few exceptions, owe their position only to the acquisition of wealth, we cannot admit that they are likely to have especially desirable progeny. And I should like to understand why certain eminent persons should wish to increase the fertility of the official classes in particular, as if the latter possessed in a high degree those qualities which the nation most needs!
x As a basis for the sliding scale the "centime territorial" might be taken, that is to say, the quotient obtained when the total of the departmental taxes have been divided by the area; a unit which was considered when the Old-Age Pensions Bill was being prepared.
2The poorest departments, and those whose population is most scattered, would find their expenses almost entirely repaid by the State. As the State funds increased the local wealth, the departments would be induced to organise their administration, just as the poorer communities have benefited by the application of the law for the relief of the old.

DEPOPULATION AND EUGENICS.

349

VIII.-The Organisation necessary for Research in Eugenics. A Model Laboratory.

It will certainly be the duty of the French Eugenic Society
to check the observations which we have considered in the pre.
ceding pages. It ought also to collect further data dealing with the influence of heredity, of race, of environment and of social
classes; so that it may contribute its share to the researches which in other countries are beginning to bring a little order and method into our ideas on the problems intimately connected
with the question of population.
Up till now the negative conclusions on these obscure questions have far more weight than the positive conclusions. But the former are very valuable in one respect, in that they enable us to reject, as without sufficient foundation, many asser-
tions which we are too prone to believe.
Until we have found a reliable method of selecting men or of obtaining healthy progeny from any material, the wisest course is, without doubt, to imitate, from afar, the gardener or the breeder who observes and feels his way; only we must
observe and feel our way methodicallv. Indeed, true biological research is fertile in useful sugges-
tions and a number of other sciences are accumulating materials of which eugenics will reap the benefit; but eugenics, most of all, requires a special means of collecting facts on human
heredity. Not long ago I visited a laboratory close to New York,
organised by the Carnegie Institute with the help of the American Breeders' Association, a section of which is devoted
to eugenics.1 This laboratory, conducted on the most scientific lines by
Drs. Laughlin and Davenport, employs a staff of skilled inquirers, generally women, whose business it is to enter on special forms, information concerning the inmates of workhouses, lunatic asylums, deaf and dumb or blind schools, hospitals, colleges, and prisons. The information, of course, is given voluntarily; but the representatives of the laboratory
' Another laboratory, working under different conditions, has existed in London for several years, under the direction of Professor Karl Pearson.

350 EUGENICS REVIEW.
are able to point out to the families, that apart from the general interest of the enquiries it is to their special interest to make known the antecedents of such of their members who need care, or who have cause to fear infection. These schedules are preserved and used bv the laboratory.
The expenses of such an institution (the staff of which is always insufficient) are, of course, heavy; but, as Dr. Davenport has remarked, when so many millions go to the relief of the poor, could not a little money be spent on researches which may prevent poverty.
In addition to collecting information for itself the laboratory receives it from doctors, and the heads of institutions, etc. It is thus a sort of clearing-house for data relating to human heredity and the influence of environment, a common centre for research.
In particular it proposes to ascertain the characteristics of the people living on American soil, while it records indications of heredity. It popularises those conclusions that are eugenically favourable, and often gives advice, for instance, on marriage, in cases where those who are engaged to be married are prepared to face honestly the risks of their union.
Finally, the researches of this laboratory take for their starting point pathological cases, for they realise that it is these cases that most urgently need study. At the same time, were it only to obtain a solid basis for comparison, pedigrees of normal families seem also to present considerable interest.
Ancestral pedigrees are most carefully kept by aristocratic families; breeders likewise possess the hereditary history of their best material. Why then among democratic societies does not each individual have a similar desire to hand on to his descendants the principal features of his origin ?
Such a custom would have a two-fold advantage. In the first place it would strengthen the love of family and lineage and the feeling for the ties that bind successive generations. It would also, I believe, strengthen an important element in our morality, namely, patient confidence in the future.
For the rest, a genealogical analysis of normal and abnormal people (the latter completed and checked by enquiries

GALTON DAY.

351

entrusted to a skilled staff) would furnish infinitely more exact data than that which we alreadv possess on human heredrty, and on the manner in which the influence of heredity is combined with other influences.
In the meantime our society should seek the aid of other associations to elucidate as fully as possible those questions, still so obscure, upon which depends the life of the nation. The importance thereof grows day by day in proportion as we claim to substitute for the too rough proceedings of nature a method in which reason has its place, and in which human feeling plays the largest part.

GALTON DAY.
IT has been felt for some time that steps should be taken to insure that the name of Sir Francis Galton may be permanently connected with the eugenics movement so that, as the public becomes more and more familiar with the word, the meaning which he attached to it may not be lost sight of. For this reason the Council of the Society have decided to hold annually on February i6th, being the anniversary of his birth, a Galton lecture and dinner in commemoration with that event, hoping thereby not only to further the objects defined above but also to provide an opportunity for friendly intercourse between eugenists. The first lecture and dinner will take place on Monday, February i6th, at the Hotel Cecil. The dinner will begin at 7 p.m. and the lecture at 8.30 p.m. Sir Francis Darwin, F.R.S., has kindly consented to deliver the lecture. The price of dinner tickets will be 7s. 6d. each. The issue of tickets, which entitle the holder to a seat at the lecture, is not restricted to members of the Society. Members and associates who do not wish to be present at the dinner may attend the lecture without payment and are invited to bring friends. Applications for tickets and all enquiries should be addressed to the Hon. Secretary, Galton Celebration Committee, Eugenics Education Society, Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C.

