THE POPULATION UNION
Its Formation, Scheme, and Future Work

T HE following letter from Sir Bernard appointment of a General Secretary and the

Mallet appeared in The Times of opening of an office in Paris early in the

September i8th:

coming year. The objects of the Union

"Sir,-Questions connected with population, its growth or decline, whether in numbers or in efficiency, mental or physi-
cal, are attracting less serious attention in this country-the country of Malthus and the pioneer in vital statistics-than in many others, notably the United States. For us, however, with an alleged over-population in Great Britain, coupled with an undoubted lack of suitable population of British stock in most parts of the Empire, the problems presented for study are at least as various and practical as those confronting the United States. For the world as a whole the problem is not less urgent if there is any probability of the increase of population
conitinuing in the future at anything like
the scale of the past ioo years, with the im-

are, briefly, to organize and encourage re-
search, whether depending on international co-operation or within the separate national
units; to co-ordinate such researches, and to hold a 'General Assembly' every three years. The Union is bound to 'confine itself strictly to scientific investigations,' and to ' refuse to enter upon religious,
moral, or political discussions, or, as a Union, to support a policy regarding population of any sort whatever, particularly in the direction either of increased or of diminished population '-a provision which will appeal to all those who are aware of the
multiplicity and intricacy of the questions, whether statistical or biological, upon which accurate knowledge is required before sound opinions upon policy can be formed.

plications of such increase of pressure upon RESEARCH COMMISSIONS

food supplies and of consequent possibilities " Meanwhile the Union has made a start

of national and racial conflict.

by appointing three Commissions to deal

" It was in response to the growing con- with certain fundamental aspects of the

viction of the need for organized study of population question. The first, on ' Popu-

these questions that an ' International Union lation and Food Supply,' with Professor

for the Scientific Investigation of Population E. M. East (U.S.A.) as chairman and Sir

Problems ' was formally constituted in Paris Henry Rew as a British member, will be

last July, at a meeting of scientific repre- concerned with a number of questions of the

sentatives of most of the leading countries greatest importance to this country, ques-

of the world, as the direct outcome of the tions only touched upon at the Geneva Con-

World Population Conference held at ference, such as biology of population

Geneva in August, I927. The establishment growth, the ' optimum ' density of popula-

of this new International Union is therefore tion, the part played by artificial limitation

a fact of significance and importance, to of families, and the actual and potential food

which I should be glad to be allowed to draw resources of the world, a matter upon which

the attention of your readers, especially the utmost diversity of opinion at present

with reference to its bearing on the study of exists. The second Commission, presided

our own domestic and Imperial problems. over by Dr. F. A. E. Crew, of Edinburgh,

" Professor Raymond Pearl, of the Johns with Professor Carr-Saunders among its

Hopkins University, the distinguished British members, will deal with ' Differen-

Director of the Institute for Biological Re- tial Fertility, Fecundity, and Sterility,' on

search at Baltimore, was elected the first which I need only note that, although the

President of the Union, and it is confidently effect of the differing fertility of sociaI

hoped to begin practical work with the classes in this country on the character of

179

I80 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

our population has been clearly indicated tion. The Eugenics Society, for instance,

by the work of the Eugenics Society based whose sphere is mainly educational, might

on the official vital statistics, much remains probably welcome close association with a

to be done before definite conclusions can be Population Committee which could assist

reached. The third Commission, with Pro- and encourage research essential to their

fessor Corrado Gini, of Rome, as chairman work. The Royal Anthropological Insti-

and Professor Malinowski and Captain Pitt- tute, to quote another example is, I under-

Rivers as the British representatives, is stand, contemplating an appeal for funds

to deal with the ' Vital Statistics of Primi- in order to carry out, in conjunction with

tive Races.' Much attention has of late Dominion scientists, a programme of ex-

years been given to such questions as the tended research among primitive races, an

causes of the de-population of the Pacific object vitally interesting to the third Com-

Islands, and the effects of their repopulation mission of the International Union above

by immigrant races; and to Great Britain described; and it is possible that their,

and the British Dominions, who are respon- appeal might be strengthened if it could be

sible for the existence of native races, they linked up with the wider activities of the

are of the greatest practical and political International Union through its British

importance.

Committee.

AVOIDING OVERLAPPING

ENGLISH AND FOREIGN FINANCES

" Finally, I should like to say a word on "National committees composed of lead-

the part which it is hoped this country may ing economists and scientists have already

take in the work of the new International been formed in France, Holland, Belgium,

Union, of which a leading feature is that it Spain, Switzerland, Scandinavia, Italy,

is based on and supported by national com- and the United States. The American

mittees now in process of formation in each Committee, which has taken the leading

of the countries represented in it. These part from the first, is backed by the two

national committees ' will promote and co- great American Research Councils; and the

ordinate in their respective countries the in- Italian Committee is magnificently sup-

vestigation of the various scientific questions ported by bankers, associations of industrial

pertaining to their population, more espe- employers and labour, and agriculturists,

cially in relation to their international and both are therefore able to give substan-

needs.' Just as in the case of the Inter- tial support both to the International Union

national Union, a primary duty of the and to research within their own borders.

national committees will be to focus the As regards the British Committee, I have

activity of the various institutes and workers during the past year obtained encouraging

on cognate subjects. The founders of the support for its formation from leading mem-

Union are strongly impressed by the neces- bers of the Royal Statistical and Geographi-

sity of avoiding duplication and overlapping, cal Societies, the London School of Econo-

and will aim at establishing working rela- mics, the Royal Anthropological Institute,

tions with existing powerful institutions, the Royal Colleges of Physicians and Sur-

such as the International Statistical Insti- geons, and from men eminent in biology

tute, the International Institute of Agri- and other kindred sciences. It is intended

culture in Rome, and the International early in tne autumn to proceed to the formal

Labour Office with its immense documenta- constitution of a British National Population

tion on, and active interest in, questions of Committee, which will have to promote simi-

migration. Similarly a British Population lar Committees in India and the Dominions.

Committee will have to consider the possi- We shall then have to appeal for support

bility of affiliation or co-operation with other and recognition to all who are interested in

established institutions whose interests the question I have outlined above. The

touch on some aspect of the population ques- British Committee will be second to none

POPULATION UNION

I 8i

in the scientific standing of its members; but without the support of many members of the general public it cannot hope to make substantial progress; nor will it be able to take its proper place in the business of the Union without adequate financial backing. We cannot, perhaps, vie with the United States in this respect, but it is not too much to hope that a question of such great national importance will excite as much intelligent and public-spirited interest in this country as in America or Italy.
" I may add that I write as an ex-President of the Royal Statistical Society, a
Vice-Chairman of the Eugenics Society, and a Vice-President of the new International Population Union.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
"BERNARD MALLET. "8, Eccleston Square, S.W.i."
THE BRITISH COMMITTEE
There is little to add to Sir Bernard's letter and to what has already been said in Notes of the Quarter. A meeting of the British Committee will be held at the rooms of this Society towards the end of the month, when it is hoped to enlarge the membership of the Committee, to discuss means of raising funds, and to arrange for co-operation with other bodies.
The temporary address of the British Committee is c/o the Eugenics Society, 20 Grosvenor Gardens, S.W.i, and Mr. Eldon Moore will act as Hon. Secretary.
We give below the names of the Executive Committee of the International Union:
President: Professor Raymond Pearl (U.S.A.).
Vice-Presidents
Professor Leon Bernard (France) Professor Corrado Gini (Italy) Sir Bernard Mallet (Great Britain).
Sir Bernard was also elected Honorary
Treasurer.
The Statutes of the Union agreed upon in Paris will in due course be published and communicated to the national committees. It is provided that the self-governing Domi-

nions, Australia, Canada, Dutch East Indies, India, Irish Free State, Newfoundland, and New Zealand shall have separate committees and representatives.
THE NATIONAL COMMITTEES
A few of the national committees, those for Belgium, France, Holland, Italy, Spain, and Switzerland have been completely constituted, though their full membership has not yet been reported to us. Many committees still remain to be formed.
BELGIUM: Prof. Ernest Mahaim (Chairman), Prof. Eugene Dupreel, Le P6re Valere Fallon.
BRITISH DOMINIONS: Dr. Charles H. Wickens (for Australasia).
DENMARK: Prof. Soren Hansen. FRANCE: Prof. Leon Bernard (Chairman), Prof.
Caullery, Prof. Huber, Prof. Jordan, Prof. Landry, M. Lucien March, Prof. Georges Risler, M. Andre Siegfried. GERMANY: Provisional names-Profs. Erwin Bauer, A. Grotjahn, and Zahn. GREAT BRITAIN. Among those who are being invited to become members are: Sir William Beveridge, K.C.B., Prof. A. L. Bowley, Prof. A. M. Carr-Saunders, Sir Charles Close, K.B.E., F.R.S., Dr. F. A. E. Crew, Lord Dawson of Penn, Dr. R. A. Fisher, Prof. J. W. Gregory, F.R.S., Dr. David Heron, Prof. Julian Huxley, Sir Arthur Keith, Mr. J. Maynard Keynes, C.B., Prof. B. Malinowski, Sir Bernard Mallet, K.C.B., Prof. J. L. Myres, Capt. G. H. Pitt-Rivers, Sir Henry Rew, K.C.B., Sir Humphry Rolleston, Bart., K.C.B., M.D., Dr. T. H. C. Stevenson, C.B.E., M.D., Mr. Udny Yule, C.B.E., F.R.S. GREECE: Dr. Stavros Zurukzoglu-Kunz. HOLLAND: Dr. H. W. Methorst (Chairman), Dr. G. P. Frets, Dr. M. A. van Herwerden. ITALY: Prof. Corrado Gini (Chairman), Prof. Marcello Boldrini, Vincenzo Castrilli, Franco Savorgnan, Signor Carlo Valenziani (Sec.). JAPAN: Prof. Kiyo Sue Inui. NORWAY: Prof. Lundborg. RusSIA: Prof. V. Bunah. SouTH AMERICA: Prof. J. H. de Paula Souza.
SPAIN: Prof. Severino Azuar, Dr. Joaquin Espinosa.
SWEDEN: C6sta Bagge, Dr. K. A. Edin.
SWITZERLAND: Prof. W. E. Rappard, Prof. 0. Schlaginhaufen.
U.S.A.: Prof. Raymond Pearl (Chairman), Prof. E. M. East.
The members of the commissions, which
follow, may likewise be enlarged.

182 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

COMMISSION I: POPULATION AND FOOD SUPPLY Chairman: E. M. East (U.S.A.) Vice-Chairman: Lucien March (France). Members: Sir Henry Rew (Great Britain), Prof.
Brize (Italy), Albert Henry (Belgium), 0. E. Baker (U.S.A.), Erwin Baur (Germany).
COMMISSION 2: DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY, FECUNDITY, AND STERILITY
Chairman: F. A. E. Crew (Great Britain). Vice-Chairman: Severino Aznar (Spain). Members: Raymond Pearl (U.S.A.), W. W. Will-
cox (U.S.A.), A. Mahaim (Belgium), T. H. C. Stevenson (Great Britain), A. M. Carr-Saunders (Great Britain), Lucien March (France), A. Grotjahn (Germany), H. W. Methorst (Netherlands), Corrado Gini (Italy), F. Savorg-

nan (Italy), S. Zurukzoglu-Kunz (Greece), K. A. Edin (Sweden), Eldon Moore, Sec. (Great Britain).
COMMISSION 3: VITAL STATISTICS OF PRIMITIVZ RACES
Chairman: Corrado Gini (Italy). Vice-Chairman: B. Malinowski (Great Britain). Members: G. H. Pitt-Rivers (Great Britain),-
Schmidt (Austria), Roquetto Pinto (Brazil), Schlaginhaufen (Switzerland), Ales Hrdlicka (U.S.A.), Carlo Valenziani, Sec. (Italy).
Commissions 2 and 3, if not also Commission I, have-made some progress in sketching out lines of research.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.

