THE PHYSIOLOGY OF GENETICS

Recent Work and its Bearing on Human Problems By E. B. FORD

T HE physiology of genetics has only been studied in comparatively recent
years. Indeed, it could not have been
investigated until a considerable body of evidence bearing on the mechanism of in-
heritance had been obtained. Such evidence
we now possess.
Much light has been thrown on genetic factors and on the behaviour of the charac-
ters for which they are responsible, but we are still largely ignorant of the developmental processes by which such characters are produced. Professor Goldschmidt in Germany was one of the first workers to bring forward evidence on this part of the problem 7 8 '. He was led to postulate fac-
tors controlling the rate of sex-differentiating substances in his study of sex determination, and later in other characters, in moths. However, these are animals which pass through sudden metamorphoses, so that the characters of the perfect insect appear only when it leaves the pupa, after
which no further change can take place. The effect of the factors can thus be detected only at a single point in the life-history of the animal. Such species are therefore somewhat unsuitable for an investigation of developmental processes.
This difficulty has in part been met by Professor Goldschmidt himself by a study of the larval forms, and by other workers who have used as material an Amphipod Crustacean, Gammarus chevreuxi, which grows and differentiates throughout life. Mrs. Sexton at Plymouth was the first to describe genetic factors in this species"2, and her valuable work on the subject has been continued up to the present time. In addition, it has been investigated with reference to the problem under discussion, that of genetic physiology, and has yielded certain rersuUlttsS1°04 ov 66 11 n
The eyes of normal Gammarus chevreuxi

are black with white inter-facetary pigment.
A red-eyed mutation exists, and Mrs.
Sexton noticed that the red darkened to a brown or chocolate shade in certain of the older animals. Another recessive mutation " no-white " inhibits the appearance of the white inter-facetary pigment, and this form
has been used in all experiments involving estimation of colour changes in the eye,
since these are more easily detected when
the facets are not separated by the white pigment.
In Gammarus the young are hatched in a brood pouch and extruded a few days later. If the eggs be removed from the female and
hatched in well-aerated water, the earlier
stages in development can easily be observed. It is thus found that the eyes are at first colourless and then become bright
red; later they darken through shades of brown and chocolate to black, which they reach about the time of normal extrusion. Thus the young are born, and always remain, black eyed. If the red-eyed mutant
form is kept at a high and constant temperature (230C.) the eyes begin to darken and become a deep chocolate shade. Darkening in both cases is due to the deposition of a stable black melanin pigment; the red being easily soluble in alcohol, to which the black
is resistant. Thus we find that the red-eye mutation is
not in reality a mutation for the production of red eyes, but that it simply slows down a normal process in the body, that of melanin deposition. About the same amount of melanin is deposited in three weeks as is normally laid down in two days. Here we have a factor controlling the rate at which pigment is produced.
The speed at which the red eyes darken is, however, not constant. It depends both upon the genetic constitution of the individual and upon the environment. These

"14

PHYSIOLOGY OF GENETICS

two considerations must be dealt with quite a light brown. Even in the standard

separately.

conditions general body growth has a

In a given environment, with a constant marked effect. The eyes of the larger

temperature of 230C., the rate of melanin animals darken more slowly than those of

deposition has been found to vary consider- the smaller, for a given quantity of melanin

ably owing to the action of certain genes. A has presumably to be spread over a larger

pair of factors is concerned in speeding up or area.

slowing down the rate at which melanin is It is therefore to be expected that the

deposited in red eyes, the faster deposition factor for slow growth previously mentioned

being nearly dominant. No effect can be should interact with those for pigment depo-

detected in the wild type black eye, presum- sition to influence the eye colour. This is in

ably owing to the rapid saturation with fact the case, and its analysis throws some

black pigment which in any case occurs. light on the mode of operation of the factors

Such a pair of factors as these will segre- concerned. The eyes of the slow growing

gate normally, the difference between the form rapidly darken to a jet black, but

two classes being at first nil; the divergence facets formed later, as the eye enlarges,

between them gradually increases until darken at the normal speed. It has been

about the 23rd day, after which it suggested, therefore, that a melanin pre-

diminishes. Finally, the two phenotypes cursor is formed in the eggs. This will be

reach equilibrium positions which are close in excess of that required by the slow grow-

to each other and lie within their normal ing animals, since the eggs are of normal

range of variation. Segregation is thus once size. Later supplies will, however, be pro-

more obscured, except that a slightly bi- duced in proportion to body size, and the

modal curve can be obtained by plotting the eyes will darken at a rate characteristic of

numbers against the colour.

the factors carried. This suggestion receives

The action of this pair of factors can be considerable support from the work of

complicated by an accessory pair having a Sexton and Pantin1' who were led to postu-

similar but less marked effect. Segregation late a pigment precursor in the egg of

in this case is not apparent, owing to the another mutation in this species.

number of phenotypes produced; true breed- It is probable that rate factors controlling

ing strains can, however, be extracted at the the speed and time of onset of processes in

ends of the series in the F2 segregation of the body, such as have been detected in

a cross involving both pairs.

Gammarus, play an important part in mam-

It will thus be seen that these two pairs malian development. Attention may in par-

of factors, as in the original case of black ticular be drawn to those cases where specific

as compared with red eyes, are wholly con- differences are dependent upon develop-

cerned with the rate and time of onset of mental rates. Thus the Harp Seal (Phoca

pigment production.

groenlandica) is born covered with a white

Two other types of factors may here be stiff wool which falls off in two or three

considered. One slows down the rapid de- weeks and is replaced by the ordinary hair.

position of pigment in the red eye until The young of the Hooded Seal (Cystophora

sexual maturity; the other controls the cristata) also has the woolly coat, but it is

whole growth of the body. This is a reces- shed and replaced by hair before birth'.

sive, its action being to retard growth but Comparable conditions exist in coat colour

not to alter size at maturity.

differences between two species of African

The effect of the factors enumerated above buffaloes'. Further examples, and some dis-

is greatly influenced by the environment. cussion of this part of the problem, will be

The conditions described obtain at a con- found in Ford and Huxleys.

stant temperature of 230C.; at I30C. In the human species such factors should

melanin deposition begins only after five or be of special importance. It has recently

six months and the equilibrium position is been pointed out' how many of the adult

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

human characters represent those possessed by the young of apes, and that the differences between man and the anthropoids are quantitative rather than qualitative. Such differences are presumably to be interpreted
as depending on the action of factors controlling the speed or time of onset of processes in the body. Some such cases are already well known as, for example, human eye colour. Coloured eyes may either be brown or blue, depending upon a single factor pair, brown being dominant. All
babies are, however, born with blue eyes which (according to the factorial composi-
tion) may either remain in this condition or gradually darken, owing to the deposition of brown pigment. Thus the study of the
behaviour and physiology of such factors as

these should throw 'much light on the prob-
lemns of human inheitance.
REFERENCES.
I. Bartlett, R. A. (1927). Journ. Mamm. Viii, 207.
2. Bolk, L. (I929). Amer. Journ. Phys. Anthrop.
xiii, No. i. 3. Christy, C. (I924). Big Game and Pigmies.
London. 4. Ford, B. B. (I928). Journ. Genet. xx, 93.
S. Ford, E. B. and Huxley, J. S. (I927). Brit.
Journ. Exp. Biol. v, II2. 6. Do., (1929). Arch. f. Entw. mechan. (in press). 7. Goldschmidt, R. (1923). Mechanism and Physio-
logy of Sex Determination. Trans. by W. J. Dakin. London.
8. Do., (1927). Physiologische Theorie der Vererbung. Berlin.
9. Do., (1928). Einfiihrung in die Vererbungswissenschaft. Berlin.
io. Huxley, J. S. and Ford, U. B. (1925). Nature,
cxvi, 86i. ii. Sexton, E. W. and Pantin, C. P. A. (1927).
Nature, cxix, xI9. 12. Sexton, E. W. and Wing, M. B. (I916). Journ.
Marine Biol. Assn. xi, x8.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.

