ON CATHOLICISM

As Revealed in the latest Encyclical of His Holiness Pope Pius XI

IN this, the Casti Conubii, the Pope This can scarcely mean less than that delivers an comprom g ultimatum Catholic electors should seek control of nonnot only to eugenists, but to all who seek Catholic marriages.

to order their own affairs in the light of

science and human judgment. It is a defiant retur to medievalism and by far the most courageous of recent Papal utterances; for
it will undoubtedly drive many from the fold and deter many more, while it will regiment the faithful into a compacter body of ardent

THE SUBJECTION OF THE WIFE
Of less moment, but more surprising, is the Pope's uncompromising return to the
mediaeval attitude towards the mutual relations of man and wife.

and well-disciplined militants. It is charac- " Domestic society being confirmed,

terized by that beauty and dignity of lan- therefore, by this bond of love there should

guage which are the peculiar prerogative of flourish in it that ' order of love,' as St.

them that believe they are but the vehicles Augustine calls it. This order includes

of thoughts greater than themselves.

both the primacy of the husband with re-

It was to be expcted that the Church gard to the wife and children, the ready

would reairm the sacramental and indis- subjection of the wife and her willing

soluble nature of marriage, and there is obedience, which the Apostle commends

nothing surprising in the renewed unquali- in these words 'Let women be subject

fied condemnation of divorce, as not only to their husbands as to the Lord, because

sinful, but impossible, since the sacrament the husband is the head of the wife, as

is eternal.

Christ is the head of the Church.'"

But what is both new and disturbing is

the declaration of all marriage, Catholic or Howsoever the pill is later gilded by a

Protestant, Chnrstian or Pagan, as equally glorification of wifehood, it requires courage

sacred and indissoluble. His Holiness calls to command an educated modern woman to

upon the civil power to respect this law of recognize her husband as her master. This

nature and God, and he thereby implicitly command will probably do more than any

adjures the faithful in all lands to exercise other to make apostates, deter the wavering,

their influence against measures of divorce, and strengthen the hearts of the truly

whether or not they affect Catholicgs

faithful.

" Hence it is clear that marriage even in the state of nature and certainly long before it was raised to the dignity of a sacrament was divinely instituted in such a way that it should carry with it a perpetual and indissoluble bond which cannot therefore be dissolved b.y any civil law.

Also of more moment to general humanity than of particular eugenic interest is the unqualified denouncement of abortion. In no circumstances may the " innocent ' be murdered; and neither may the mother die to save her infant, nor the fcetus be killed to
save her pain, her health, her life. While thus condemning many a woman to die in

" Wherefore, both for the pnvate good of husband, wife, and children, as like-
wise for the public good of human society, they indeed deserve well who strenuously

the hopeless agonies of childbirth, His Holiness reminds her that, however great those sufferings, she will be amply rewarded in Heaven.

defend the inviolable stability of matrimony."

" However much we may pity the mother whose health and even life is

41

42 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

gravely imperilled in the performance of because recent research has thw yet

the duty allotted to her by nature, never- further doubt on its safen, but mainly

theless what could ever be a sficient because, in so far as it is effectivC, it

reason for excusing in any way the direct deliberately frustrates the results of inter-

murder of the innocent? This is precisely course no less than does contepton.

what we are dealing with here. Whether It is strange that Catholics so sedom,

inflicted upon the mother or upon the if ever, advance the stngest, least

child, it is against the precept of God and answerable, and surely most 'natural'

the law of nature: ' Thou shalt not kill.' objection against contraception -4th

The life of each is equally sacred, and no aesthetic objection. If an act is repugnant,

one has the power, not even the public there's an end on't.

authority, to destroy it."

But many as are the other imconsistencies

The attitude recalls that which, for the integrity of the Church, condemned Joan of
Arc to the stake.

in Catholic attitude and writings, even within this little Encyclical, it is not our aim here to expose Catholics to themselves, nor to dispute on the debatable premisses

they adopt. As eugenists, our interest lies

BIRTH-CONTROL-AND THE SAFE PERIOD in the practical effect of their doctrines; and

The same attitude characterizes the renewed condemnation of birth control in any circumstances whatever, whether the family is already over-large and poverty acute, whether merely to space the births, or even when another confinement would cause an abortion, a defective child, or the death of the mother.

this Encyclical deals the final blow to our hopes of coming to an agreement with them -writing as long ago as 1921,* indeed, the
Dean of St. Paul's said that such an agreement was no longer possible. But though a few eminent theologians had hitherto
strongly supported sterilization, though others had theoretically admitted its moral justification, and though many had long

" Holy Mother Church very well under- been opposed to the marriage of mental

stands and clearly appreciates all that is defectives, the Pope here issues an unquali-

said regarding the health of the mother fied condemnation of both sterilization and

and the danger to her life. And who the prohibition of marriage.

would not grieve to think of these things?

Who is not filled with the greatest admiration when he sees a mother risking her life

SERILIZATION TO BE ILLEGAL

with heroic fortitude, that she may pre- Voluntary sterilization he declares to be

serve the life of the offspring which she unholy, partly because, like birth control,

has conceived ? God alone, all bountiful it frustrates the procreative act, and partly

and all merciful as He is, can reward her because it is permitted to none to mutilate

for the fulfilment of the office allotted to her by nature, and will assuredly repay

himself.
wrtes:

As for State action, His Holiness

her in a measure full to overflowing."

" Finally, that pernicious practice must

The reason given is that the reproductive be condemned which closely touches upon

act is itself as sacred as marriage and must the natural right of man to enter matri-

not be performed to its own frustration. mony but affects also in a real way the

Hence celibacy, abstinence from intercourse, and -curious inconsistency- the 'safe

welfare of the offspring. For there are some who over solicitous for the cause of

period ' are the only alternatives for good eugenics, not only give salutary counsel

Catholics.

for more certainly procuring the strength

This renewal of the licence of the ' safe

period ' is doubly surprising, not so much

Umuomcs Rxvmw, Vol. Xfl, No. 4.

ON CATHOLICISM

43

and health of the future child-which, indeed, is not cay to right reasonbut put eugenics before aims of a higher
order, and by public authority wish to
prevent from marrying al those who, even though naturally fit for marriage,
they consider according to the norms and conjectues of their investigations, would,
through hereditary transmission, bring
forth defective offspring. And more, they wish to legislate to deprive these of that
natural faculty by medical action despite
their unwillingness; and this they do not
propose as an infliction of grave punishment under the authority of the State for

Surely what the State can do by force, is

still more permissible with the consent of

the object? And if the major operation of

castration is allowable, how much more so

must be the minor operation of sterilization ?

But this is another lapse into dialectics on

premisses agree. The

with which no important point

non-Catholic can is that Catholics,

who have hitherto been in many ways

strongly sympathetic with eugenic aims,

though disapproving of some eugenic

methods, have now declared themselves un-

alterably opposed to the two remaining

methods, whether they affect themselves or

those of other faiths.

a crime committed, nor to prevent future
crimes by guilty persons, but against

But there is more than that.

every right and good, they wish the civil authority to arrogate to itself a power over a faculty which it never had and can never legitimately possess....
" Those who act in this way are at fault in losing sight of the fact that the family is more sacred than the State, and that men are begotten not for the earth and for time, but for Heaven and eternity.
Although often these individuals are to be dissuaded from entering into matrimony, certainly it is wrong to brand men with the stigma of crime because they contract

SCIENCE AND LIBERTY OF THOUGHT

At the beginning of this survey it was

written advisedly that the Encyclical was a

return to the Middle Ages. Its mediaevalism

is carried logy, all

so far history

as to ignore all anthroponot contained in Genesis,

and to attack not only the practice of

eugienics, but also the underlying biological

ftbiahcseaelswl.hyoaltetNaotcektxetdou,nrlbeyuotifsasnccuiorenrnseclenatuagnbhidtoltioshgemyalidsbpeeercoitn-y

of thought. Witness these passages:

marriage, on the ground that, despite the fact that they are in every respect capable of matrimony, they will give birth only to defective children, even though they use all care and diligence.
" Public magistrates have no direct power over the bodies of their subjects; therefore, where no crime has taken place and there is no cause present for grave punishment, they can rneyer directly harm, or tamper with the integrity of the body, either for the reasons of eugenics or for any other reason...

" They are greatly deceived who having

underestimated gious] means

or neglected these [reliwhich rise above nature,

think that they can induce men by the use

and discovery of the natural sciences, such

as those of biology, the science of here-

dity, and the like, to curb their carnal

desires. We do not say this in order to

belittle those natural means which are not

dishonest . . . for God is the Author of

nature as well as of grace, and He has

disposed the good things of both orders

for the beneficial use of men. The faith-

The authority here quoted is St. Thomas Aquinas (Summ. theol. 2a, 29e, q.To8oa 4 ad 2 Um.), which is curious, since the Angelic Doctor himself, in a much more relevant
passge, gives express permission to the
State to protect itself even by castration (see
the January 1930 issue of this REvIw).

ful, therefore, can and ought to be assisted also by natural means. But they are mistaken who think that these means are able to establish chastity in the nuptial union, or that they are more effective than supernatural grace....
" But everyone can see to how many fallacies an avenue would be opened up

44 THE EUGENICS RVIEW

and how many errors uld beoe
mixed with the truth, if it were left solely
to the light of reason of each to find it out, or if it were to be discovered by the private interpretation of the truth which is revealed....
" . . . it is necessary that a filial and humble obedience towards the Church should be combined with devotedness to
God and the desire of submitting to
Him. . . . " Wherefore, let the faithful also be on
their guard against the overrated independence of private judgment and that false autonQmy of human reason."
A CALL TO A CRUSADE
While we must admire the beauty and dignity of the language, the courage which inspires it, we must sadly realize that there can henceforth be no truce between ourselves, who seek our own salvation by our own way, and the crusaders of Rome. For this seems much more than a call to individual Catholics to revert to medisevalism: it is, if our reading is ct, a call to a crusade against freedom of thought and action in the modern State. Not only may no Catholic procure or allow abortion, even to save the woman's life, but all Catholics seem to be adjured to force that prohibition
on their governments;, not only may no Catholic seek dissolution of marriage, but
none, it appears, may support a government which allows divorce; not only is contraception declared unholy, but seemingly it must henceforth be made illegal; not only may no Catholic be sterilized compulsorily, but no
free-thinker apparently shall seek the operation for himself.
That, at least, is our interpretation, for the attitude seems to be implicit in many of the passages already quoted, and to inspire the tone of the whole Encyclical. See-
" But especially, as we have pointed out, Venerable Brethren, the daily increasing facility of divorce is an obstacle to the restoration of marriage to that state of perfection which the divine Redeemer willed it should possess.

" eThe advcates of the neo-paganim of

to-day have

i f the sad

state of affairs, but i day by day,

more and more vehemently, they continle

by legislation to attack the indissolubility

of thie marriage bond, p mig that

the lawfulness of divce must be recog-

nized, and that the antquated laws should

give place to a new and more humane

legislation....

" Opposed to all tes ess

ions, Venerable Brthren, stands the un-

alterable law of God, fully confirmed by

Christ, a law that can never be deprived

of its force by the decrees of men, the

ideas of a people or the will of any

legislator: ' What God hath joined to-

gether, let no man put asunder.' . . .

" Moreover, these words refer to every

kind of marriage, even that which is

natural and legitimate only; for, as has

already been observed, that indissolu-

bility by which the loosening of the bond

is once and for all removed from the whim

of the parties and from every secular

power is a property of every true

marriage. . . o

" Now all those arguments that are

brought forward to prove the indissolu-

bility of the marriage tie, arguments

which have already been touched upon,

can equally be applied to excluding not

only the necessity of divorce, but even the

power to grant it...

[The italics are ours.]

And again, " Just laws must be made

for the protection of chastity, for recip-

rocal conjugal aid, and for similar pur-

poses, and these must be faithfully

enforced.

"Hence we earnestly exhort in the

Lord all those who hold the reins of

power that they establish and maintain

firmly harmony and friendship with this

Church of Christ so that through the

united activity and energy of both powers

the tremendous evils, fruits of those wan-

ton liberties which assail both marriage

and the family, and are a menace to both

Church and State, may be effectively

frustrated.

ON CATHOLICISM

45

"Governments can assist the Church Such must be the thoughts of any free

greatly in th exeution of its important citizen who reads this Encyclical with a

office if, in laying down their ordinances, mind attentive; while if he be also a

they take aunt of what is prescribed by eugenist, he will find yet further confirma-

divine and eleastical law, and if tion of his fears in the recent Vatican

penalties are fixed for offenders... decree. Issued since the writing of this

tAgain, the italics are ours.]

article, the text of the decree had not

reached us at the time of going to press.

WHAT THE CHURCH DESIRES As an illustration of what the Church
desires, the following quotation from the Lateran Pact is given in the Encyclical:

But the newspaper e'xtracts make it amply
clear that sex-education--which inevitably implies biology-of the young is condemned,
as are all " . . . eugenic theories tending to improve the human race." We gather

" The Italian State, desirous of restor- from the Press that such improvement is

ing to the institution of matrimony, which considered by the Vatican to be " amply

is the basis of the family, that dignity provided for by Divine, ecclesiastical, and

conformable to the traditions of its people, human laws regarding marriage and the

assigns as civil effects of the Sacrament rights of the individual."

of Matrimony all that is attributed to it

in Canon Law."

As the Catholic Times (January x6th, One final query-Is this Encyclical the

1931) says, the Pope is here speaking to fruit of the personal wisdom and experience

" the whole human race." He seems to of His Holiness Pope Pius XI, and thus

demand that the Catholic view of right and liable to be set aside by a later Pope or a

wrong shall be legally enforced upon us who do not share that faith. The public must

General Council; or is it indeed the ex cathedra pronouncement of the Vicar of

henceforth wonder whether all Catholic Christ?

attacks, however well argued, upon eugenics A copy of this REviEw is being sent to

and upon other things more old and dear to our hearts, are not veiled efforts to resume the world-supremacy of the Pope.

the secretary of His Holiness, with a request for a definite answer to this question.

Eugemics Reviw, VoL XXIII No. 1.

