THE MENACE TO THE ENGLISH RACE AND TO ITS TRADITIONS OF PRESENT-DAY
IMMIGRATION AND EMIGRATION.
By G. P. MUDGE.
to tbe £Oemorv of tbe En1ltsb bops wbo bave fallen in
tbe Mar, tbts article ts written.

"Eugenics is the study of agencies under social control that may

improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations either

physically or mentally."

-SJR FRANCIS GALTON.

" The worth ot a State, in the long run, is the worth of the indi-

viduals composing it.'

-JOHN STUART MILL.

" There is no boy like the English boy-I mean the young men, of

course."

-GENERAL SIR WILLIAM ROBERTSON.

"Among studensts of heredity there is an almost unanimous belief

that the inborn characters of future generations will be affected by any

change which is now taking place in the rclative rates ot multiplication

of the different types of mankitd."

--MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN.

" The great things of the world are accomplished by races which have
4 strong race-personality." . . . " Great men are scarce; the group personality is becomting indistinzct and the personality of the race, by which suiccess was attained in the past, is therefore on the wane, while the forces of chaos are once more being manufactured in our midst, ready to break loose anzd destroy civilisation when the higher types are no longer sufficient in numbers anad effectiveeness to guide, control or subdue them."
MR. AND MRS. WHETHAM.

"Traditions go far towards the formation of character. An Empire or nation or school without traditionzs is a body without a soul."
-GENERAL SIR HENRY S. HORNE.

"We do not know why life should be a continual struggle between

nations, as in the rest of Nature, we are only persuaded that it is a fact;

and that if we ignore that fact we place ourselves in imminent peril of

destruction."

-AIorning Post, Jun-e 28th, I9I9.

In the 'history of every great nation, there comes a time when it is expedient to take stock of itself. This introspective survey should take account not only of physical attributes, but of the mental qualities from
which the traditions of a nation spring. A people can, if it desires to do
6,o, detenmine i,ts destiny wit;hin certain broad limits. These limits will be determi-ned by the original material of which the na.tion was composed, ag well as by material which may arise wi-thin it in the course of its history, either by way of biological mutation, by variant individuals produced

THE MENACE TO THE ENGLISH RACE.

203

through gametic combinations, or by immigration of alien races, and by the evolutionary influence of good or bad traditions, including social
customs.
To many Englishmen, the time seems long overdue, when it is expedient to take an eugenic review of the human material in these Islands, out of which the future English race will be evolved and the destiny of England determined for good or ill. It is possible, if we desire it, to re-habilitate in England and elsewhere, the great race that has carried its trad;itions of culture, sportsmanship and justice to every quarter of the globe. But, if our wish be otherwise, we can also let the last of this race pass out of effectual existence. In slow measure it is already being done, wi-thout positive effort upon the part of the race itself. The first step in t.hee process was the decline of conscious racial existence. Englishmen
had almost forgotten they were Englishmen; they seldom spoke or thought of -their race and its achievements except among a dwindling section of English society where its traditions were consciously maintained and venerated. On.ly among this small section di,d an atmosphere exist in the home-life which inculcated the virtues of the race and its tradition,s. So far had thi.s conscious remembrance of the rac.e and all that it means been forgotten, th.at in p.resent-day literature the chief traditions of the race are mainly to be found formulated in military textbooks and' in some of the works of Rudy.ard Kipling. It is true that some time before the war a series of articles appeare,d in the Daily Mail, from the pen of " An Englishm.an," in which some of the English tradition,s were inculcated. But apart froim this, the Morning Post seems to be th.e only one of our great newspapers that has consistently reminded us of an, England, having a great weal-th o.f national traditions and ideals.
There are many signs that the real England is at l,ast awakening. She is doing so, it is mournfully true, over the graves of her best and noblest sons. The public expression by General Sir Willia-m Robertson'
of his faith " that there is no better -boy than the English boy," and the similair expression by Lieut.-General Sir W. Furze2 "'that the word ' England' h.ad acquired a new meaning as the result of the experience of the last four and a half years of war," are portenits that speak well for our race if we take heed in time. And among the signs th.at England is awakening to the significance of her racial worth and all that it has meant in the culture, chivalry, justice and sportsmanship of the world, we cannot fail to rec.all the recent poems of Rupert Brooke. Other indications, having the same meaning, are the formation of societies like the Boy Scouts and the Girl Guides. Even more significant and equally welcome is the facit that it is not only among the real leaders of England that we find this re-awakening of her racial expressio!n, but also *amoingst the rank and file of her people. I could give many instances to illustrate what I mean, but I will content myself with two. In 1917 a band of Northumberland miners, recognising that their sons and brothers were in France, laying down their lives in the defence of England, decided that they too would give voluntarily to their country such
1 Morning Post, March 4th, 1918. Address on "What we are fighting for."
2 Morning Post, June 2nd, I9I9. Lecture on Verdun.

204 EUGENICS REVIEW.
savings as they possessed. So they publicly bur.nt their " War Bonds." These men of the English breed gave willingly all they possessed in che material things of life. By such a deed they showed that there was
speaking within them the race-consciousness-the voice that impels sacrifice for the welfare of the race and the ennoblement of iits traditions. The other instance I should like to give of the awakening English spirit was of purely chance occurrence. On the morning when Captain Alcock's
and Lieut. Brown's feat in, flying the Atlantic by the direct and continuous route for the fir,st time was announced in the press, I was travelling
through Dorsetshire, and I read of it while i.n a railway compartment with several Dorset men, apparently of the agricultural and farmig class. I passed the remark to them, " The Atlantic has been flown." The first question put to me in reply was: " Is it an Englishman who has done it?" When, I replied in the affirmative, there was obvious racial pride expressed in the words, " I am glad it is an Englisa:nan." And time after time .since 19I4, I have come across signs of this reviving E:n.glish consciousness, and correlatively with it a reviving spirit of comradeship among men of our race. The real and imperishable spirit of the people of England is shown by instances of this kind, and it is one worthy of preservation, by maintaining the race as pure as possible in both the ethnic and anthropological sense. In other words, preserving, as far as can be, an eugenic English race.
It may be, however, that we are awakeni.ng too late. It may be possible, too, but conditionally, that we shall awaken in time. There are two conditions, it seems to me, which are viital. We must possess English leaders in sufficient number and with intimate knowledge of the menace which faices us, -and the English people must realise with their leaders the nature of the danger, and be prepared for the necessary effort to avert it. Every age brings with it the necessity for leaders of a certai.n metttle. In the critical period through which we are passing, England needs as leaders men with the instinct and of the courage, decision, -and indomitable will of Edward I. and Queen Elizabeth. The production of such leaders, and of other English types equally valuable as leaders, from the remnant of the le.adership class of the English race, is a problem which eugenics applied in the English fashion, consciously or uncon*sciously, can probably solve.
A nation is a community of individuals not on.ly of similar racial characters, but imbued with common traditions, impelled by a common purpose and the willing subjects of -a common law. The question of tradition in the evolution of the race is just as important as the physical characteristics of the race. Indeed, in the light of history and its biological interpretation, the one seems to be the correlative of the other. Just as " the leopard has its spots, and the Ethiopian his dark skin," so too the traditions of a nation depend upon the inborn physical and mental attributes of its meinbers. They are the floral jewels of its growth, and as the plant is so will the flowers be. It is needful to bear the problem in view from this standpoint and to remember that it is men which make traditions rather than traditions which make men. And this is true in the vital sense that some traditions appeal only to men of a certain

THE MENACE TO THE ENGLISH RACE.

205

inborn temperament and can be responded to by such men alone; while
other men are physically and mental:ly attuned to quite differenit traditions and can only appreciate the traditions appropriate to their consti,tution. The capacity of responding to a given traditional outlook is inherited. This is a c.ardinal fact in the making of a race and it is also its noblest heritage. Hence the imperative necessity, in maintaining the cohesion of a people, of ensuring that its individuals are of the right inherent sort, pihysically anid mentally. The individuals must be capable of responding to a common traditional outlook. In its application to national welfare, this, it seems to m-e, is one of t.he eugenic tasks. Biology teaches that blood is always thicker than ink, an.d history has demonstrated that heritage, in the vicissitudes of nations, is more endur-
ing than graphic inscriptions and legal formalities. If the history of the world instils us with the faith that in all-round
virtues and atttributes our own race is the bes,t, and if, as we know our race, we believe it to be one of the mcore splendid flowers of the hiuman growth, then there rests with us a g.reat trust which I presume to say we ought not to betray. Nowhere within the broad zones in which that race
ha.s raised and extended its civilisation ought this trust to be forgotten; and assuredly to be disloyal to it in that small sea-girt isle which was the cradle, and 'the nursery of the race would be a deed incompatible with the glorious records of its history. But if in the tragic epoch through which we have passed, when by hundreds of thouisands the best and most chivalrous of our English sons laid down their lives foxr the preservation of English traditions, firm in the faith th.at the honour of those who remained behind, would never be di.sloyal to the supreme sacrifice which they ma,de, we still, either t-hrough intention or .supineness, betray our English heritage and our dead, assuredly we shall deserve the f.ate which eveT overtakes great races who have ceased to accept the responsibilities
of greatin-ess.
And that is the menace which I fear is before us. We are in danger of unwittingly allowing our traditions to be forgotten and ou,r race betrayed. We may be only at the beginning of the process.; but the silent fac-t is before us that we are already on the inclined plane of national demora.lisation through the agency of racial betrayal. I will endeavour as far as possible within the restrictions imposed by the limits of the present article, to indicate my meaning.
Since {the time of Oliver Cromwell a race of Oriental origi.n and traditions has been landing upon our Englisgh shores; and concurrently in even larger volume some of the best of our own race have been, departing. From 1876 to 1913 a net population of British blood has left Great Britain to the exten1tof 6,282,IIO, of whom 58 per cent. were English,
30 per cent. Irish, and T2 per cent. Scotch. To this total we should add the chtildren and grand-child,ren they would have had if they had Temained in this country. And it is a question we shall have to consider seriously whether we are, wise in substituting for these men of British stock the foreign immigrants I shall describe. A-t such a rate o.f exchange, under the sole influence of this dysgenic factor it is merely a matter of time befoire the type of civilisation in England will be definitely and

206 EUGENICS REVIEW.

irretrievably altered. Coincidently with this foreign inflow and British

outflow, there is a marked change in the social and political life of

England, which itself is dependent upon biological changes of a signi-

ficant kind. Though the consideration of this change is outside the
present purppose of this article, it is nevertheless desirable that it should
be borne in mind, because it is favourable to the supp.lantation of our own race by an immigrant stock of different anthropological and ethnic

qualities. The foreign inflow which I have mentioned as going on since the

time of Oliver Cromwell was at first insignificant, but it h,as in recent years assumed increasing proportions. This fact is obvious to anyone who

has knowledge of the conditions in the East-end of Lo.ndon and of a large

part of Manchester. Almost daily, families of immigrants could be seen

befoTe the war landing at the docks. They were in strange garb and of facial fea;tures not Caucasian. Anything more un-English in aspect it

would be difficult to imiagine. I should not like to depict them in the

positive terms that would best describe them. In gentler phraseoology we

are justified in saying that they are not among the jewels of the denizens of earth. Equally we are ju.stified in saying that they can add nothing to,

but will certainly take from, the physic,al and moral character of the

people of this country. It seems impossible to ascertain from official figures, unti. at least the
year 1907, how many of these people annually and permanently setfled

in England. But from this year onwards a most valuable series of facts respecting immig-ranits 'became avai.lable. It is very necessary to bear

in mind that until the Aliens Act, Ioo5, came into o.peration immigrants
were able to land in this country without inspection. It is also desirable

to remember thait eve.n now, under certain conditions, it is possible for

immigrants to enter this country for permanent settlement without inspection and' without our authorities having any knowledge of their

antecedents. Undesirable immigrants may and undoubtedly do iin this

way enter the country. The annual ,returns of the prisons, workhouses

an.d infirmaries, and the political activities of some of the immigrants,

show only too well that this is the case.

Bearing these facts in mind, we can examine the statistics that are

now available in the annual reports o.f His Majesty's Inspeictor under the

Aliens Act, 1905. Accepting the correction and qualific-ation which he

makes each year from the balance of ".alie.n passenger movement "
inwards over that ou,twards, the net total of immigrants for the following

years are:-

1907 ... ... ... ... 32,000 immigrants.

IC108 ... ... ... ... 22,000

,,

I9o9 7,000...

...

...

...

,,

8,500I9I2

...

...

...

...

I91i .. ...*- - ...

5)500

,,
,

19I3 30,000...

...

...

...

,,

The figures for I9o6 are incomplete, but such as are available seem

to indicate an immigrant entry of about 30,000.

THE MENACE TO THE ENGLISH RACE.

207

This gives an average of about Ig,ooo peT annumi. These figures
require, however, some analysis before they can express the biological or racial aspect of the situation. By mexely totalling up the successive entries of each year we do not reach any understanding of the raci.al qualities of the immigrants concerned, nor even of the number of them
now actually in the country. They belong to different races, some of East-ern and some of Western origin, -and while they have been here, the ocular eviden.ce that they have prolifically increased their seed, is clear. This is especially true of the races that aTe ultimately of Asiatic origin. It is difficult, of course, to arrive without laborious investigation. at an accurate idea of what 'this natural increase is. It is an investigation well worth undertak;;i.ng in 'the interest of our kith and kin. But it is not, at all uncommon, on holiday occasions, to see families containing some seven oLr eight children, and frequently a greater number, between whom there are but slight differences in age. With the aid o,f a friend I was recently enabhed to obtain some figures concerning the size of iI of these Orienital families taken at random. The figures came out in the order in which
they were ascertained at 7, 7, 4, 3, 13, 2, 5, 4, 7, ii, an.d I. This giveis an
avera.g-e of seven child,ren per family. It does not repTesen,t the real
capacity of these parents, because most of them are still within, the childbearing period of life. If we attempt to deduce approximately the population of foreign elements now in England and the possibilities of the futuire, we shall have to, take account of the following factom-rs: There
are, as we have seen, something like I52,500 immigrants who. have enter-ed since I906, subsequent to the Aliens Act coming into operation. We can assumethat the average annual entry would not have been less, but was probably greater, in the years preceding the operation of this salutary if stil:l not wholly efficient Act. If we go back oinly as far as i9oo, this would g-ive us another I14,000. The total, therefore, of actual immigrants since 1900 will be about 266,500. Assuming that their marriage-rate is no greater th.an our own, i.e., one m.arried 'couple to every fouar members of the population, and that the averag,e of their families is seven children, we ge-t something like -an additional 466,300 to add o-n as the result of natural increase. This gives us, therefore, a possible total of 732,800, or three-quarters o,f a million of people of foreign extractioni qu.ite half of which a.re of Asiatic origin. Certain corrections .should of cour-se be made, suich as death-rate and the impossibility o,f the more recent immigrants having as miany as -seven children. But the deduc'tions to be made
for these corrections will be more than balanced by the fact thtat these immigrants have been coming into England long previously to the year I900, and that their marriage-rate is probably higher than I have assumed. It should be (borne in mind t.hat the next three-quarters of a millionowing to the l.aw of geometrical increase-will be produced much more rapidly than 'the first. One mill-ion people-to deal wi'th round numbersof foreign extraction will give us 250,000 married couples (on a conservative estimate); and a,n average of seven children to each of these will give us within the next 20 to 30 yeaTs ainother I,750,000 persons; the following 20 to 30 years would see another additional increase of 3,o62,500 persons. of foreign blood. The next 40 to 6o yeairs wil.l thu's see a

2o8 EUGENICS REVIEW.
populaton of foreign origin of about s,ooo,ooo in our midst. This statement takes no account of 'the annual entries that will in the meantime be going on from now until, say, 1959. This will give us, say, an additional 8oo,000, plus a naitural increase of I,400,000; a total roughly of 2,200,000 added on to the 5,ooo,ooo derived from the people already with us. It is a serious problem deserving anxious inquiry and appropriate action. Certai.n political consequences will accrue from this large number of foreign elements in England, but as this article is not concerned with political conside.rations, they wi;ll not be discussed hiere. A consideration of the British birth-rate will ait once convince us thtat a siilent supplantation of our race by other races largely of Eastern origin i,s relentlessly p,roceeding, without our realising its significance; for the average size of an English family nowadays does not approach such a figure as seven children. In most ranks of English society the birth-rate is falling rapidly. Among the more thrifty members of the artisan class it has 'halved itself in a period of 24 years,' and at the present time the average size of the family of parents whose children attend the elementary schools appears to be about four.2 The professional classes, excluding the military and clerical families, h.ave a still smaller average of about three. Members of the otld Regular Army have declined still more, and produce only about 2 per family. The landed gentry are only slightly better than. the professional classes as a whole, and their average is only 3.13 children per family. Clerical families seem to have declined the least with an average of 4.2 children.3 Thus it appears that no class in the English community is doing more than merely maintaining its position. None are increasing in numbers, while the military, landed and professional classes generally are gradually but surely dwindling. For, as Mr. and Mrs. Whetham have pointed out, " it is necessary in order that a population shall maintain its numbers, foir every family to produce four children. On the average of large numbers, two of these four children will die early or have no offspring themselves, and the other two are left, merely replacing their parents." But after all, such an aveirage only maintain.s the number of people who marry. It does not suffice to replace those
people who never marry. Such an average birth-rate is only sufficient to
maintain. equilib.rium in the population as a. whole if the death-rate does not exceed somewhere about i5 per i,ooo. If the death-qrate rises above this, then the birth-rate of even, the more efficient portions of the artisan cl.ass i.s no longer sufficient to mnaintain its numbers. The more desiraible sections of the English race .are thus in an unenviable position. They are bareily holding on, and on top o,f this they have suffered casualties
in, the war that ,run into nearly three millions, of which 620,000 represent killed.4 The rest of the 3,000,000 include a large proportioi of maimed
and disabled men who will never marry.
1 Returns of Friendly Societies.
2 Dr. Tredgold. 3 Mr. and Mrs. Whetham.
4 The 620,000 represents the British contribution and does not include the Dominions or the Colonies.

THE MENACE TO THE ENGLISH RACE.

209

Every year a large number of English emigrants leave our shores. The net loss in I9I3, fo-r insta-nce, was I07,000. Yet on the whoile, our population increases. In the decennial period I9OI-I9II it increased in
England by three and a half millions. What is the meaning of this increase? It is a question that ought to be most accurately and exhaus-
tively examined. I do not pretend to fully examine the problem. My experiences of the foreign population in the East-end of London, and of information I have gleaned of the conditions in Manchester, impel me to say there are some questions which men of the English race should
answer while there is still time to avoid the consequences of the indifference shown to this problem in the past. If the more efficient portion of the race is only just maintaining its numbers, while some part of it is actually dwindling and ano,ther part of it i;s emigrating, it does se.em necessary to inquire into the nature of the material which gives us fthis increase in our;population. When we bear in mind that i9,ooo immigrants, have annually settled in this country and have produced large families in recent times, and we recollect that under present political conditions -the tendency will be progressively upwards, it is not difficult to see where one of th,e factors of our increased population comes from.
If it be true that type of mentality is inherited and tha,t the capacity of conforming to certain traditions is a product of racial evolution and is also inherited, it is clearly expedient, in the interests of the Enrglish race, to carefully analyse the racial characteristics and behaviour of the immigrants who co,me to ouTr shores. Are they physically as sound as our own people? Is their mentality of a desirable type? Are their morals su,ch as our race endorses? Are they capable of commingling and merging with our people ? Are they loyal to traditions, laws and customs t'hat find ready acceptance by men of English blood? Unless we can. answer these questions affirmatively the time is surely ripe and the need imperative to consider the situation fairly and justly in the interests of our own kith and kin.
The information which is given i.n the eighth report of H.M. Inspector under the Aliens' Act of 1905, shows th.at these immigrants are a very diverse collection of people, and include Russians, Pojles, Germans, Dutch, Norwegians, Swedes, Danes, Belgians, French, Austrians, Hungarians, Italians, Swiss, Spaniards, Portuguese, Bulgarians, Roumanians, Servians, Montenegrins, Greeks, Ottomans, Chinese, and " other nationalities." And if it is permissible to add one's -own, recent observations, there seems to be additionally a certain and rapidly inc.reasing number of African negroes.
Consideraition of the information cont.ained in this report brings us face to, face wi-th a question which sooner or later our people must deal with, or perish. And the question is this: Upon what basis are we going to accept raciail identification ? Is it to be the biological or the legal basis ? Are we to regard a man as Russian simply because he says he is a Russian, or 'because he has lived in Russia, or has become naturalised as a Russian ? And, if after he has become naturalised in one country, he removes from that country and elects to be natuxalised again, are we to believe that he i,s an Englishman? Or are we to stand fast upon the

210 EUGENICS REVIEW.
certain grounds of physical racial qualities, and if the immigrant shows Eastern characteristics make up our minds that he is an Oriental and not a Caucasian? It is the more necessary to determine at once which alternative we a-re going to accept, because as we do the one oir the other, so will our efforts in the interests of the English race be futile or fruitful. The legal basis of definition asks us to believe that " a man born i'n a stable has thereby become a horse." That is a conception quite unthinkable to the biologist. I therefore propose to proceed' upon the anthropological basis which rests upon racial characteristics.
Upon this basis, an examination, of the foreign immi.grant population in OUT midst shows that we may divide it broadly into two categories, the C.aucasian' group and -the Asi,atic or Oriental group. It is with the latter that I intend to deal in this article, for it is of that group among the imrnigrants that I h.ave had the most persona.l experience, and on account of its Eastern origin, affinities and activities, it presents tihe greater menace to our own race and traditions. It is a st-range fact-showing the divorce of legal forms from bioilogical realities-that in none oif the official communic.ations whi,ch I have consulted is the existence of this Asiatic group in any w.ay adequately indicated. My experience, backed by evidence derived from very reliable sources, shows tha-t go per cent. of the immigrants who are officially classified as Russians, Poles, Germans, Austrians and Hungarians, are not really members of these peoples at all, but have had their origi.n in certain areas of Asia. The great, teeming masses of foreign immigrants in the East-end of London and in North Manchester, as well as elsewhere in England, have certain well-marked, unmistakable physical attributes and temperamental dispositions.
The Asiatic, racial origin of a large part of the immigrants pouring into England is of very gra.ve impo,rtance, because the " Eas'terner " is not a " Westerner " and never can be so. His intellectual outlook, mentality, traditions and customs are not ours. They aire poles asunder. Physically, these particular immigrants differ from us as much as they do mentally. There are ce.rtain diseases which they are liable to contract and thereby increase the opportunities of infecting our own people. But apar,t from disease, they differ markedly from our race in what we may call the normal physical equipment. The first thing that strikes eveiry observer -is an Asiatic type of countenance. It is marked by ithe prominent cheek-bones, the sallow complexion, the fu,ll, rather protruding eyes; and occasionally by the so-called " oblique-eye," the thick lips-especialily the lower orne-and the very coarse, dark, in many cases black, hair of some Asiatic races. The " obilique-eye " and the pro-minence of the cheekbones vary a good deal in degree. Bu,t the co-arse hair, especially as seen on the nap.e of the neck, seldom varies. This foreign element can, on t.his tccount, be detected by inspection from behind with the same ready facility as in front. The sallow, often swarthy, complexion is present in practically every case. The " oblique-eye " is a little evasive. One would not, strictly speaking, like to call it by that name. It can. more
1 I use the term Caucasian to 'include the three great European races, i.e.,
Nordic, Mediterranean and Alpine.

THE MENACE TO THE ENGLISH RACE.

21Ir

accurately be described, I think, by saying that the lower eyelid, and -occasionally the upper, has not the marked concave curve of the European. But there is something, too, about the features and general behaviour which nwark ithese immigrants as belonging to a particular branch of the Asiatic stock. This is bo.rne out at once if we consult a Po,stal Directory
for the East-end of London and read the names there revealed in the
light of historica.l records as they bear upon Europe in the Middle Ages, -and in ithe light of contemporaneous experience. To permit any admixture of this immigrant race with our people, whether by marriagemonogamous or polygamnous-or by interpolation, is to produce, a hybrid
*community of very undesirable character, to deteriorate the physical and mental equipment of our race, and eventually to end the English race in
England. The immigrants are not gametically or solmatically constituted
as our people aire. There is little sportsmanship about them. They do not love manly games and exercises as the Englishman, does. The contrast between 'the two in their at'titude to sport-both in athletics an.d in general bearing towards life-marks them at once as divergent products -of evolution.
The Englishman's idea of sport is to stand up to punishment an,d to
take ,risks. FoTr " Viking blood " like his there is no spor-t unless there is
an elemenit of adventure. That is why as a race we are explorers, pioneers, footballers, horse-masters and y.achtsmen. In a biological fact
of 'this sort we may find 'the explanation as to why it fell to two Engli,sh-
men to accomplish the first flight across the Atlantic by the dixrect and continuous croute, and the first flight from Englan,d to Australia. It i.s innate in 'the gametic constitution of our people to -do these things.
The conception of sport and chivalry of this Oriental race, as we have seen it manifested, especially since 1914, is the very antitheisiis of that of the Englishma.n. It is the desire of these immigrants to avoid punishment, even at the price of dignity and honour. They prefer to run no risks. They seek the sa,fest possible manner of getting the better of theiir opponents or competitors. And if on,e may judge by experiences
in the East-end of London throughout the years 1914-IgI8--and it is a
very good test--one is forced to the conclusion that these particular thnmigrants could ha.ve contributed, as a race, practically nothing on the field of battle to winning this war, and that to its name no heroic deeds worthy of an, epi'c can be recorded. An.d biologically there is no-thing
surprising in this, for they are of a race which is hereditarily incapable of anything else. They resoirted to every possible device and mis,statement, even disowning all nationality, in order to evade military service. Our race played the game vvhile these immigrants fattened in safety and' under a double prrotection. In their frenzied efforts during the air raids to p,re;serve their own skins, they frantically pushed through women and children, severely crushing them and even trampling upon them if they fell. These fine specimens of immigrant manhood cared not who sank so long as they reached shelter first. Their frantic cries of fear were even more c.raven than their deeds-if that were posesible-and it wa,s necessary to hear them and to see them in. contrast with our own people to comprehend how wide the hiatus which separated the twoi races.

212 EUGENICS REVIEW.
And we who love England, who remember her past and look to her future, contemplate -with indignation and xepugnance the permanent settlement in this country of -a race so craven that it manifests no chivalry and will not fight. From the eugenic standpoint this is a fact which, in the interests of our race, our honour calls upon us to face. The presence of such people among our own, the hereditary itraits which they hand on to successive gene.rations, and the increase by prolific births, will in the long run impair our race.
So long as a race retains even a part of i,ts most virile and gifted class it has a chance of revival. There are not many m.en of the typically English type remaining. The price of Empire and of self-defence has had to be paid in the lives of such men. But there is still with us a great reservoir of that English character we want, in the women of that type. England still contains a large percentage of the tall, well-built, blonde,. blue- or gray-eyed type, who recall to us the men that fashioned England,
who were among the first to go to France in 1914 and I915, and who l.aid the traditions of our national life, of our statecraft, and of our fighting-
services. We know enough of the inheritance of human characiteristics to feel sure ithat a deliberate attemipt-but in the English way of doing itshould be made to increase, among our race, this Nordic type of Englishman and Englishwoman. But a recognition of this eugenic truth, the desire to produce for England those boys whom Sir William Robertson eulogised, the determination to face a strenuous life in the Trearing of a family for the sake of England', are necessary before even a start can be made aloing the chief road by which England's future and her world-wide Empi.re may be assured. Upon the tall, blonde type which still remains within these Islands there is thus imposed by the fate of circumstance, a grave and noble responsibility. For this is the type that must at all costs not only preserve itself ag.ainst extinction, but must multiply until all the needs of the Empire are met. The lessons of history and the teachings of biology indicate, in unison, that this is the only way by which Enrglish civilisation may endure and extend for another epoch in
the history of mankind. " The worth of a nation in the long run is the worth of the incdividuals
composing it." And when we recall the history of our race we shall be
iticlin.ed to agree with General Sir William Robertson, " that there is no
boy like the English boy" with which to replenish our depleted stock. Bearing in mind that " life is a continual struggle between nations, as i.n the rest of N.ature, 'and that if we ignore that fact we pl.ace our-selves in imminent peril of destruction," we cannot fail to recognise that if the " English boy" is sup.planted in these Islands by a race devoid of sportsmamnship and the chivalry that is associated wivth martial qualities, our end cannot but be otherwise than incompatible with the great and glorious heritage of the English race.

