EUGENICS ABROAD

IV.-IN AMERICA, by PAUL POPENOE

T HE movement toward education for a former Rhodes Scholar at Oxford. This

parenthood continues to grow. Both is a compilation of views from representa-

the Young Men's and Young tives of many schools of thought, and its

Women's Christian Associations have purpose is to give clergy and laity alike an

adopted it as a major part of their pro- idea of what representative modern writers

grammes, and it is steadily gaining a foot- are saying about family life.

hold in the schools.

The Roman Catholic Church has, of

The nursery schools, which take children course, not been behindhand in this field,

before the ordinary kindergarten age, and in which it has always asserted a particular

in some cases as early as eighteen months, authority. The first of a series of text-

are ostensibly intended more for the educa- books announced for college use is An Intro-

tion of the children's parents, than for the ductory Study of the Family, by Edgar A.

training of the infants themselves. Since Schmiedeler, a Catholic sociologist. While

experience shows that a large part of failure it tends to ascribe all social progress to the

in marriage, or even of failure to marry, is Catholic Church, and of course takes the

due to the individual's faulty education and official view of such conttoversial problems

home influence in early years, these schools as birth control and divorce, its emphasis

will indirectly help to promote wise mating on wise mating is worthy of any eugenic

and successful marriage.

society. A detailed discussion of hereditary

Systematic instruction is centring more traits which should be avoided in marriage

and more in the high schools. A text-book is one of the features.

on Home Making, by Willie Melmoth The Family in the Present Social Order,

Bonar, is now out; another is under way by Ruth Lindquist, is a thoughtful study

with the collaboration of Ernest R. Groves, from the University of North Carolina.

Professor of Sociology at the University of From the same institution Ernest R. Groves

North Carolina, an acknowledged leader in has issued Sex in Marriage, the best of the

the field of education for marriage and recent ' sex books.' A more detailed study

parenthood. The progress of the last is One Thousand Marriages, by Robert

decade was reviewed in a report of I36 Latou Dickinson and Lura Beam of the

pages, prepared under the direction of National Committee on Maternal Health-

Louise Stanley, for President Hoover's a study of case records from Dr. Dickin-

White House Conference.

son's long practice as *a gynaecologist.

The churches, too, are taking steps to Isabella H. Smith has edited a collection

regain a part of their leadership in this of addresses before a Philadelphia audience,

field. The Federal Council of the Churches under the title, Are You Ready for

of Christ in America, an organization com- Marriage?

prising a majority of the Nonconformist Recent legal decisions have opened the

churches, has made this a fundamental part door to the free circulation of several

of its work. The Presbyterian church has familiar foreign books that have hitherto

had in the field for some time an active been restricted here, such as Th. Van der

committee, one of whose products has been Velde's Ideal Marriage, Marie Stopes's

a volume entitled Twenty-four Views of Married Love, and Helena Wright's The

Marriage, edited by the secretary, the Sex Factor in Marriage.

Revd. Clarence A. Spaulding of California, Six hundred pages are occupied by a col-

315

3I6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lection of excerpts which E. B. Reuter and Jessie R. Runner have brought together and entitled The Family: Source Materials for
the Study of Family and Personality. Dr. Reuter is a sociologist with a bias against eugenics, and has allowed this bias to interfere with his fairness in this case. Aside from a casual kick eii passant once in a while, the only discussion of eugenics is a few pages borrowed from W. S. Thompson,

another hostile sociologist, who naturallv makes it out to be a poor and mean thing indeed. In a compendium of this sort, it would seem that room might have been found for a fair statement of the case from
someone who knew something about the
subject. The book is also criticized as showing a bias against the family in general, radical and pessimistic writers having been given free rein.

THE INSUFFICIENCY OF EDUCATION

A summary of the paper by C. Wicksteed Armstrong in Section L of the Centenary
Meeting (I93I) of the British Association.

T would be a mistake to expect very great in demonstrating, to a very large extent,

practical results in the betterment of the that the differential birth rate is not due to

race from educational efforts alone, not, any sinister and mysterious natural law,

at least, if we take the word education in but is, rather, simply a result of our man-

its narrow sense-since we have not only made laws and conventions, and more espe-

first to convince the educational world that cially of our false economic theories and

eugenics is a fit and necessary subject in practice, which involve the progressive

which to instruct the rising generation, but, penalizing of procreation among the more

even if knowledge could be immediately and energetic and useful sections of the popula-

universally imparted, we should still, to a tion, for the benefit of parasites.

certain extent, have to change human nature Now, the most important results to be

itself before we could expect the instructed noticed at the Jardins Ungemach are to be

people to act in the interests of posterity, found in the birth rate and in the health and

instead of, as heretofore, in those of self or beauty of the children there being raised,

of class.

results which, as years go by, must become

But if we can educate public opinion by more and more pronounced. The incidence

means of concrete example, rather than by of disease was nil, and the anthropometric

precept alone, in the meaning of far-sighted statistics among the school children were in-

charity (which is eugenics), we may perhaps comparably superior to those of any other

attain our ultimate goal more rapidly.

school in Strasbourg, or even, I believe, in

Such an attempt at education by practice France.

I have just visited at Strasbourg, where, last That Distress tends to press upon Relief

week, I saw the Jardins Ungemach, whose I believe to be an economic and psychological

founder and administrator, Monsieur Alfred law as regards the present, and a biological

Dachert, showed me, with justifiable pride, law as regards the future. Its firm founda-

his Garden City.* He has there succeeded tion in truth and its very grave significance

to Humanity I have been at pains to demon-

* See Monsieur Dachert's article in the REviEw of
last April and the further figures which here appear in " Notes and Memoranda."

strate in my book The Survival of the Unfittest; and once this law is recognized

