64 EUGENICS REVIEW.
questions; he urges this plea skillfully and with vigour, and the need for its statement is perhaps great enough even to warrant a certain measure of over-emphasis.
WV. C. SULLIVAN.
THE WORK OF THE MAINE AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION ON EGGPRODUCTION OF FOWLS.
(x) Pearl, R, Surfaee, F. M., and Curtis, M. R. A Biometrical Study of Egg-production in the Domestic Fowl, Parts III. and IV. U.S. Dept. Agric. Bureau of Animal Industry, Bull. Iio, Part III., and Annual Report, Maine Agric. Experiment Station; 1914; pp. 105-136.
THESE two papers deal with the variability and correlation of measurements in the egg of the fowl. The most interesting result is perhaps that there is a close agreement between the fowl's egg and the human skull, both in the degree of variation of corresponding measurements and in the correlation of these measurements. The authors are inclined to ascribe this to a similarity in the mechanical factors involved in the production of the shape in the two cases. The fowl's egg is similar in its variability to that of wild birds; probably egg-shape is not affected in most cases by natural selection. Variability varies with race and with the individual, some individuals laying much more variable eggs than others. The measurements of the eggs of individuals also vary with age, health, and season. (2) Pearl, R., Surface, F. M., and Curtis, M.R. Studies on the Physio-
logy of Reproduction in the Domestic Fowl, Parts VII., VIII., and IX. (VII., Journal of Animal Behaviour, IV.; 1914; P. 266. VIII., Journal Exp. Zool., XVII.; 1914; P. 395. IX., Journal Biol. Chemistry, XIX.; 1914; P. 263.)
THE first of these papers deals with broodiness, which is normally one of the cyclical reproductive activities of the female, following the laying of a clutch of eggs. In the fowl, however, it is very variable, differing in
different breeds and individuals, and is not necessarily even preceded by
egg-laying. There is evidence that it is connected with the physiological functioning of the ovary, but is not influenced by the removal of the oviduct, by which, of course, egg-laying is prevented.
No. VIII. describes experiments in cutting, ligaturing or removing the oviduct. None of these operations interferes with growth of the ovary nor with ovulation, and an oviduct which is ligatured or of which part is removed passes through the changes normally co-ordinated with the changes of the ovary.
No. IX. shows that the corpus luteum substance of the cow, injected into a laying hen, immediately inhibits ovulation. After a varying interval ovulation recommences normally. It is pointed out that it is remarkable that the corpus luteum substance of a mammal should have the same effect in a bird, in which corpora lutea are not produced.
In the American Naturalist, XLVIII., August and September, Dr. Raymond Pearl continues his Studies on Inbreeding (Nos. IV. and V.), the earlier parts of which have already been reviewed in these pages.
In No. IV. he works out a formula for the number of families of any possible constitution produced in any generation from indiscriminate brother-sister mating, starting from an original couple differing in respect of one pair of Mendelian characters. If the characters are X and a the first generation will all be Aa, the second I AA, 2 Aa, T aa, and subsequent generations a mixture of the six types of families, (i) AA, (2) AA+ Aa,
(3) Aa, (4) Aa+2 Aa+aa, (5) Aa+aa, (6) aa. The formula gives the
distribution of these six types for any generation.

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

65

In No. V. Pearl points out that there are two really distinct kinds of inbreeding, (i) when the two parents are closely related, (2) when they are unrelated but each closely inbred. The two types may be combined to varying extents in any individual case. Since repeated inbreeding of the first kind leads to the increase of homozygous characters, while the second does not, the two types are very distinct in their genetic effects, and to estimate these, in addition to the co-efficient of inbreeding given in the earlier studies, there is needed a co-efficient of relationship which is provided in the present study. The co-efficient is the percentage for any generation of the mother's ancestors which are also ancestors of the father.
L. DONCASTER.
Grotjahn, PROF. A. Geburten-Ruckgang und Geburten-Regelung.
Berlin, 1914.
THERE is at present in all civilised countries a tendency towards a decrease of the birth-rate, which in most countries is by no means counterbalanced by a proportionate decrease of the death-rate. The author gives us in the above book an excellent survey of the whole problem of the decline of the birth-rate, and discusses exhaustively the remedies. With many modern writers, he comes to the conclusion that the chief cause of the evil lies in the conscious restriction of births which is prevalent in the advanced classes of all civilised countries, and must nowadays be reckoned with as a permanent cultural possession. It is here that the book brings before us a fresh and frank treatment of the problem, so different from the prudish attitude which is still considered appropriate in this country. The author does not shrink from taking into consideration the sexual factor of procreation, which after all is the gateway to propagation. Finding that preventative measures have become the rule with most responsible men and women, he discusses the various methods of prevention.
Not only this, he ventures to suggest, perhaps against the presentday general opinion of the medical profession, that individuals have not only the right, but the duty, under certain conditions, of using these restrictive measures; nay, that it should be the doctor's duty to instruct his patients in certain cases. iIost eugenists will, of course, agree with the proposal that preventatives should be used in all such cases of physical or mental degeneration where segregation is either inadvisable or still impossible. It is here that the instruction in the proper use of the means at disposal should become a commonplace among modern medical men.
An important point which shows the utter waste of excessive births is the fact that, wherever there is a high fertility there is also a high deathrate; while, vice versa, a low birth-rate generally goes with a low deathrate; so that the rate of the renewal of a population is dependent on both factors. Now, the establishment of the second condition, i.e., a low birth-rate with a low death-rate, is certainly not only the more humane, but also the less wasteful; and this is the state of affairs to which all advanced civilised nations are tending. As the average of progeny for each couple, Prof. Grotjahn posits at least 3.5 children, this being the minimum for the upkeep of a population. The author discusses the various means of encouraging propagation under our present conditions, such as the endowment of motherhood, social insurance, graduated taxation, etc., measures with which we cannot but agree, as far as they go. What seems doubtful is, whether such means-short of a complete economic solidification of the poorer classes-will ever have much effect.
There is perhaps one point which may suitably be raised here. How far is a population-surplus a condition sine qua non of social progress? It is implied as a necessity by every writer on population statistics, and the argument often assumes, as in the author's case, the form of racial

