The Home and the School

A REVIEW

T HERE HAS RECENTLY been published
the third volume based on a follow-up of children born in Britain in one week in
March 1946.* The first volume was concerned with medical aspects of the maternities, the second with the health of the children, and this third volume deals with the educational experience of the English and Welsh children up to the age of eleven, with some additional information on school leaving. The sample is one-quarter of the children born in the week, except that children born to non-manual workers and farm
labourers are included in full; it totals over 4,000 children.
Two special examinations were made of the children for the purposes of the survey at age eight and eleven, consisting of an intelligence test and tests of school achievement. Average scores on these tests are fifty, and the standard deviation of the summed tests are 8-4 at age eight years, and 8-9 at age eleven years.t Dr. Douglas uses these findings to study the influence and interactions of five main socioenvironmental factors on the child's score, his progress between eight and eleven, and his success at winning a place at a grammar school. The five social factors were social class, parents' interest, housing, completed family size and academic record of the school.
The most marked association, expectedly, of test score at age eleven was with social class. In the upper-middle class (defined as father's occupation non-manual, one parent having a middle-class background and secondary education, the other having at least one of these characteristics) children averaged 56'99. In the lower-middle class (remainder of those whose
* Douglas, J. W. B. The Home and the School. London,
1964. MacGibbon & Kee. Pp. xxv + 190. Price 36s. t The tests at age eight were a non-verbal picture
test, a reading comprehension test, a mechanical word reading test, and a vocabulary test. At age eleven the latter two tests were the same, but for the first two were substituted a verbal and non-verbal ability test, and an arithmetic test.

father's occupation was non-manual) the average was 53-88. The upper-manual class (father's occupation manual and at least one parent with a middle-class background or secondary education) averaged 50 05, the lower-manual class (remainder of families where father's occupation is manual)* averaged 47-55.
Less expectedly, perhaps, an equally marked association was with the parents' interest in the child's education. Where parents' interest was high the average score at age eleven was 57 36, where it was average the average score was 52-61, and where it was low the average score was 48 14. It is impressive to see how children of the lower-manual class, whose parents show a high degree of interest, score as high as children in the upper-middle class whose parents show a low degree of interest (though it should not of course be assumed that this is necessarily an environmental effect, parents who take most interest in their child's education will tend to be the most intelligent parents in each class).
The association with academic record of the school is rather less marked, the average scores at age eleven being 53-69, 50 26 and 47-73 respectively for children in schools with a good, fair and poor academic record. The average scores where housing is satisfactory is 53 40, where it is unsatisfactory it is 48-26. Of special interest for eugenics are the scores in relation to completed family size, which are-for one child, 52 96; two children, 52-16; three children, 50-41; four children, 48-57; five children, 47T51; six children, 46-04; seven or more children, 42-49.
A sophisticated statistical analysis of these results was carried out by Mr. H. R. Simpson, and is shown in tabular form in Appendix II. This measures the significance of these associations independently of each other, within the two main social class groups and by sex of child.
* This will include most of the skilled workers in the Registrar General's Class III, as well as those in IV and V.

93 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1964, 56,2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The association with parental interest is highly eight and eleven. This impression is intensified by

significant, and the association with housing is a table in the text (page 47) showing, not the

significant, in both occupational groups and in changes in average scores, but the changes for

both sexes. The association with family size is children scoring at various levels. This table is

significant, except in middle-class girls. The reproduced below. For example, the table shows

association with academic record of school is

significant, except in working class boys. As is often the case, it is difficult to know to what

MIDDLE CLASS

MANUAL

WORKING CLASS

extent associations of this kind are due to cause and effect, and to what extent they merely reflect

Change in score Change in score Score at eight to eleven years eight to eleven years eight years Upper Lower Upper Lower

an association with parental ability. The more

capable parents within each occupational class will also be those who tend to take more interest

40 or below

41-45 *

46-50

+3A44

+2-52 +184 +2-38

+0.50 +0 90 +0 59

+0-68 -0 23 +0-02

in their children's schooling, achieve better housing for their children, choose the better of

51-55 +1-81 56-60 +1F52 60 and over -2-32

+1-71 +0-62 -1P94

+0 19 -0-81 -3'17

-0-78 -2-27 -460

two available local authority schools, and are

more successful in planning the size of their families. It is unfortunate, but understandable in

* Fewer than 20 children in these groups. + = improvement. - = deterioration.

view of the technical difficulties, that Dr. that of the children scoring 46 to 50, at age

Douglas has no information on the intelligence eight, the upper-middle, lower-middle, upper-

of the parents. It is noteworthy, however, that manual lower-manual have gained 3 44, 2-38,

children in the upper-middle class are relatively 0-59 and 0-02 points respectively. The impression

free of these associations with socio-environ- given by such figures is very misleading, and

mental factors, whereas the associations are may have mislead Dr. Douglas himself. They

strongest in the lower-manual working class. will in large part be due merely to regression,

The upper-middle class parents will be a the tendency of the child on any second test to

relatively homogeneous group for intelligence, return towards the average of his group. The

whereas the lower-manual class parents, the distribution of scores on a second test, if both

largest group, as here defined will include tests are well standardized, will alter little but

parents who range from highly skilled craftsmen the children who score, for example, very much

to unskilled labourers and cover very great above the average of their group will not be

variation in natural intelligence.

entirely the same children in the two tests. Dr.

The associations of the socio-environmental Douglas mentions the principle of regression,

factor with changes in score between eight and but does not make clear that the regression is

eleven are also instructive. Taking first social towards the average of the group (for example

class, it may be seen from Table VI d in Appen- of upper-middle class children), and not to the

dix III that the average score of upper-middle average of the whole sample. The upper-middle

class children rose by 035 points. The lower- class children scoring 46 to 50, at age eight, will

middle class children showed a gain of 092, be expected to improve their scores in the

the upper-manual a gain of 006 and the lower- direction of their group average of 56 to 57 on a

manual a loss of 05. These changes are small second test at age eleven simply as a result of

and, though Dr. Douglas does not make the regression, and they do. In contrast, lower-

point, would in part be due to the increase of manual children scoring 46 to 50 at age eight

spread of scores on the second test, shown by are at their group average, would not be expected

the increase of the standard deviation from 8-4 to show any appreciable change at age eleven

to 8-9 points. These changes are tucked away in from regression, and they do not. Dr. Douglas

the Appendix and Dr. Douglas's text gives a even writes (page 46) "the middle-class children

very different impression, which is that the improve their scores and the working class

middle classes have gained and the manual children deteriorate-this holds at each level of

classes have lost ground substantially between ability". His own table (page 47) shows that this

94

THE HOME AND THE SCHOOL

statement is not correct, and that the changes are though small, would be expected to be in the

in the directions one would expect from regres- direction of the mid-parental intelligences.

sion. Middle-class children who scored above Further changes in score after the age of eleven

their group average scored lower, not higher, on would be expected in the same direction until

the second test (-2-32 points in the case of test-score ceases to improve, which will be

upper-middle and -1-94 for lower-middle class somewhere between the ages of sixteen and

children who scored 60 and over on the eight- twenty.

year-old test), whereas working class children With parental interest there is a better case for

who scored well below the average of their the view that there is real association between

group scored higher, not lower, on the second parental encouragement and change in score

test (+0 5 points for upper-manual and +0-68 between eight and eleven. Yet Dr. Douglas's

for lower-manual class children who scored 40 text and his table (page 56) showing changes in

or less on the eight-year-old test). It may be score by child's score at age eight are unsatis-

that the distribution of scores in the four social factory for precisely the same reasons as the

class groups showed significant changes between text and table on social class. Once again he does

eight and eleven, for example an increase in not give the actual distribution scores at the

upper-middle class children scoring more than two ages. But Mr. Simpson's analysis in Appen-

one standard deviation above the mean score of dix II shows that there is a consistent difference

50, though the Table (IV d) showing average in the direction expected between the average

scores makes this unlikely, but the distributions scores at ages of eight and eleven and parental

are not given. It is unfortunate that Dr. Douglas interest, which though trivial in the case of

should publish these misinterpretations of the middle-class boys and small in the manual class

changes in special groups and not publish the boys, is over 1 point and meaningful in the case

actual distributions, which would enable the of the perhaps more malleable and docile girls.

reader to work out for himself what real changes The association of academic record of school

there had been.

with change in score between eight and eleven is

It is important to realize however, that if there almost certainly real, the difference between

were real changes these would not necessarily be children in schools with a good academic record

for environmental reasons. It is an important and those with a poor academic record increas-

principle of the genetics of growth and develop- ing by 1 point in manual class children and by a

ment that polygenically determined resemblances little more than lj points in middle-class chil-

between child and mid-parent will be expected dren. In the case of housing, the associations

to increase as the child grows up. A child's are small, the difference between the scores of

stature at eight may be measured precisely but middle-class children in satisfactory and unsatis-

provides limited information on the genetic factory housing decreasing between the ages of

factors which will determine growth between eight and eleven in both sexes, while there is a

eight and eighteen. Mid-parental height might small increase in the difference in manual class

provide more information. If two groups of boys children. The associations of family size with

have the same height at age eight, but one group changes in score are small and inconsistent.

has, say, 6-foot fathers and 5-foot 6-inch The association with academic record being

mothers, and the other group has, say, 5-foot the most convincing, Dr. Douglas has collected

6-inch fathers and 5-foot mothers, the first group information on the effect of streaming. Once

will on average be substantially taller at age again his text and the table in the text take no

eighteen. In the same way, even if tests at age account of regression. The tendency is for the

eight could measure precisely the genetic upper stream children who score well below the

component of a child's intellectual capacity high average of their class at eight to improve

developed so far, this would provide limited several points towards the class average at age

information about the genetic factors influencing eleven, while children in the lower stream who

the child's further intellectual growth. And any score well above the low average of their class,

changes in test score between eight and eleven, deteriorate several points towards the class

93

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

average. Both tendencies will largely be due to regression. This is shown by the fact that the change in mean scores, +0 7 for upper stream children and -0 5 for lower stream children, is little more than one would expect for the greater standard deviation of the scores at age eleven. The finding that middle-class children gain more than manual class in the upper stream, while middle-class children gain slightly and manual class children showed a small deterioration in the lower stream, is also probably a regression phenomenon.
In each section, Dr. Douglas is concerned to estimate the "wastage" of ability: in particular
to estimate how many more children might benefit from a grammar school type of education if, say, manual class children scoring well at age
eleven, or at age eight, were as often chosen for grammar school places as middle-class children
making the same scores or if, say, high-scoring children whose parents show little interest in their education get as many places in grammar schools as children scoring equally well whose parents show much interest. His estimates are unrealistic for the reasons given above. For example, he notes that of the group scoring 56-60, which is the borderline for grammar school entry, about a half of upper-middle class, a third of lower-middle class, one-fifth of upper-manual class and one-eighth of lowermanual class children get into a grammar school. Dr. Douglas accepts this at its face value. However, the children were not selected for grammar schools on Dr. Douglas's test, but on the local authorities' own tests. Upper-middle class children scoring at the borderline level of 56-60 are scoring at about their group average. On any reliable second test, therefore, about half of them would be expected to score higher and be selected, and about half would score lower and be rejected, for a grammar school place. In contrast, lower-manual class children scoring 56-60 are about 10 points above their group average, therefore on any reliable second test, because of regression only a minority will score as high and be selected for grammar

school, the size of the minority depending on the correlation between scores on Dr. Douglas's test and the particular local authority's test.
If they had been given, the distribution scores in the four social classes, would show if there was any real tendency formiddle-class children to be unfairly preferred in selection for grammar
schools. One test of this will come when the
children take their "O" level school certificates. If more children of low borderline ability have been selected from the middle classes, middleclass children should contain a greater proportion who fail to get 5 or more "O" levels in academic subjects. One suspects that the reverse will be true, both because of regression to group
means and because of a greater average genetically determined gain of the middle-class children.
The reviewer does not want to suggest there is no wastage of ability, but merely that Dr. Douglas has much overestimated it. It may be that the socio-environmental influences which he has studied in such detail have had their full influence before the age of eight. It is more likely, however, that-exceptional instances apart-the wastage in selection for grammar school is of a different kind. The real wastage is probably of children who will be in the top 20 per cent of ability at age eighteen, but do not perform at this level at age eleven for more fundamental reasons than social handicapsreasons such as minor neurological and psychological disorders, especially those affecting reading ability, emotional disturbances, or just slow biological maturation.
Despite these criticisms there are much valuable data in the book, especially in the Appendices (it is for example interesting and surprising to see that social class differences in. age at menarche have disappeared). The misinterpretations in the book should have been eliminated by criticism in departmental seminars. It is very much to be hoped that Dr. Douglas will continue this survey. It is also be hoped that he will publish his data in full in future.
C. 0. CARTER

96

