INCOMETAX REBATES

The Birth-Rate and our Future Policy

By R. A. FISHER, Sc.D.

We have now almost all we can ask for in the way of income-tax rebates for children, Dr. Fisher points out, and they are necessarily insufficient to control the birth-rate. He foresees the coming of family allowances eventually-but will the change be made in time? In thirty years, with their present birth-rate, the upper and middle classes will be halved.-Ed.

T HE rebates of income-tax for de- remitted for the first child, and the remain-

pendent children in the I928 budget der for the second; there is, therefore, no

represent the final stage in the relief available for the third and subsequent

gradual adoption of this form of relief; children.

relief for which the Eugenics Society has The position is not, of course, such as to

been actively pleading since the period of encourage fertility; each child will, over the

pre-war taxation.

dependent period, cost at a low estimate,

The amount of income freed from taxation something like £40 a year, and even the £6

in respect of the first child has now been allowed for the first child will not go far

raised from £36 to £6o, and for subsequent towards diminishing the economic motive for

children from £27 to £so. These increases preferring childlessness. Still less is done to

are very considerable, and it is the conten- encourage the arrival of subsequent chil-

tion of the writer that they represent sub- dren; but all this is not the fault of the

stantially all that the Society ought to ask Treasury. If more were remitted for the

for in respect of this particular form of first child there would be even less to remit

relief. This is not to say that, viewed from for the second, whether the additional re-

a purely eugenic standpoint, the incidence mission were based on income or, as has

of income-tax upon taxpayers with different been suggested, on educational fees. From

numbers of dependent children could not be this point of view tax abatement for the first

readjusted with advantage, but that such child has, at this low level of income, gone,

readjustments must be regarded as of very on the whole, too far; for the purpose at

minor importance compared to the main least of diminishing the economic motive for

reform now established; moreover-since small families. Subject to a readjustment of

income-tax reform could never do more than taxation, so that the poorer salary earners,

touch the fringe of the great problem of the as a class, should not be more heavily taxed

economic burden of parenthood-of still less than now, the production of children in this

importance compared to other and more group would be favoured by abolishing the

direct attacks upon this problem.

present exemption of £90 for a childless

SHORT AND FAT

wife.

Let us examine the present position at the -OR LONG AND LEAN

typical income levels of £6400, £6oo, £i,ooo, At £6oo a year the rebates work some-

and £i,5oo a year. We shall suppose the what better, because there is more to remit.

whole income to be earned, and the taxpayer The amount liable to taxation is £275, Of

to have a wife living, but no other dependent which £225 pays at 2s. and £50 at 4s. in the

relative, in addition to children. After de- pound. This makes £C32 ios. tax for the

ducting one-sixth of his income and £225 for childless man, of which £'i is remitted for

the married couple, there remains of £400 the first child, and f,5 each for subsequent

only £io8 liable to taxation. The childless children down to the sixth; there are even

man pays £io i6s. 8d., of which £6 is thirty shillings left for the seventh child!

80 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The size of the family provided for seems Income £C400 £66oo zi,Oo0 £1,500

adequate, but the amounts provided are lamentably small. The cost per child cannot at all moderate income levels be far from
io per cent. of the gross income, or 66o a year in this case. The especially insufficient

First child Second child Third child Fourth child Fifth child

£6 LII £4. i6.8 £s
Nil £5
Nil £s Nil £s

-6I2
£Io LIo LIo £-IO

LI2 £Io
£io
£IO £I

remission for children subsequent to the first The relief for the first child nowhere

is as striking in this as in the previous case, exceeds 2 per cent. of income, and for subse-

and is not altogether irremediable; it is quent children it is rarely above I per cent.,

apparent that the abatement for the first although io per cent. is a moderate estimate

child should, from the eugenic standpoint, of the cost. Nevertheless, increased reliefs

be less rather than greater than that for within the bounds of the present system can

subsequent children, especially since the amount exempted for the latter is more fre-
quently either untaxed, or taxed at a lower rate.
At £i,ooo a year taxation is sufficient to allow with advantage of more substantial rebates than those at present in force, provided it were made clear that the increased exemption should fall upon the childless taxpayers of the same income level, and not

scarcely be regarded as eugenically desirable. The advantage of increased relief for income levels above L6oo a year is set off by an increasing disadvantage below that level. If it be granted that salary earners of more
than £66oo a year represent, on the average,
a higher level of mental ability than do taxpayers at lower incomes, it must yet be borne in mind that we have the same evidence for believing that these latter are on the average distinctly more intelligent than

upon poorer classes. The amount liable to the general population, and that there are

taxation is £6o8, of which £383 pays at 4s. many more taxpayers to be influenced at the

in the pound. Relief for the first child is lower income levels. It would be bad eugenic

£i2, and the full Lio for subsequent chil- policy to sacrifice the reproduction of a

dren down to the seventh. It would large class moderately endowed with valu-

evidently be an advantage at this and higher able gifts, for that of a smaller class more

levels to increase the relief per child, for highly endowed. The point is one which has

the total tax is nearly £99, which would been carefully examined in Major Darwin's

provide a relief of £2o per child down to about the fifth; moreover, at this level of income a relief of £io per child is becoming not merely an insufficient, but a negligible set off to the cost of the increased family.
The same considerations apply with even more force at £1,560 a year. The tax pay-

The Need for Eugenic Reform, in which he concludes that for purposes like the present the most important class may be typified roughly by the highly skilled artisan, or the elementary school teacher, in fact, by the lowest salaries paying income-tax.
Perhaps the most that could be got out of income-tax abatement for eugenic purposes

able by a childless man is here £I82 IOS., would be to remit a fixed fraction, say, one-

which could be made to provide relief at the fifth, of the tax payable on earned income,

rate of £30 or £35 per child over a reason- for each dependent child. Such a system

able family. The actual relief of £x2 for the should work simply, but the alteration in

first, and £io for subsequent children, can method is comparatively drastic, and the

have no appreciable economic influence at change would have to be accompanied by

this level of income.

a readjustment of taxation as between different income levels to compensate for the

THE PRESENT RELIEF

greater relief afforded to the higher incomes.

The table shows the relief afforded by the NEED FOR EQUALIZATION

i928 budget for the first five children at these typical incomes:

The salient fact, however, of the present situation is that the Eugenic Society's

INCOME-TAX REBATES

8i

policy in respect of income tax, a policy increase progressively in the (socially)

which we have consistently urged not only higher classes, while leading ultimately to a

on eugenic but on economic grounds, has relatively diminished birth-rate in the

been virtually adopted, and that there will working class.

be, quantitatively, comparatively little to

gain by further modifications. We are, THE DIRECT METHOD

therefore, in a position to see how much
more there is to be achieved by other means, in mitigating the economic burden of parent-
hood. For though our vital statistics do not at present show with exactitude just how rapidly the tax-paying class is dying out, they are sufficient to indicate clearly that reproduction has already fallen to a level somewhat above or below one-half of that required to maintain a stationary population; and that the birth-rate is still falling in this class with the same astonishing rapidity (at least) as in other classes.
It will not be doubted, among those to
whom these facts are familiar, that the fall
in the birth-rate will not be checked, still less a more adequate rate of reproduction
established, by any economic measures much short of a complete equalization, in economic status and standard of living, between the parent and the non-parent, and between the parent of a reasonably large against the

Many years ago, with remarkable foresight, Professor MacDougall suggested the necessity among University teachers of an allowance per child of io per cent. of the basic salary. Now that the system of pooling the liability for such allowances among the different employing bodies is well understood, there is no economic reason why such a system should not be widely adopted. The teaching profession and the govern-
ment services, together with the clergy, offer suitable examples. The London School of Economics has already given a lead by paying family allowances on a substantial scale to its professors and lecturers. Such a system, whether in the form of universal insurance, or, for salaried positions, more simply, as direct allowances, will doubtless in time be adopted merely on its economic advantages, as these come in time to be appreciated.

parent of an unreasonably restricted family. The writer would urge, however, that

How far such a complete equalization would time is an essential element in the present

be effective in producing an adequate quotum of children from the professional classes
may be doubted; however, since these classes are admittedly much influenced by prudential considerations in limiting their families, somewhat better results might be

problem. In about thirty years, more or less, with our present birth-rate, whatever is worth keeping in the genetic potentialities of the upper and middle classes, in England and Scotland, will have been reduced to half its present quantity. The fall in the

expected than would be inferred from the failure of very substantial family allowances in increasing the birth-rate of the French artisan. The writer has already given reasons* for the opinion that though the direct effect might be small it would

English birth-rate, both in the nation at large, and in the taxpaying classes in particular, has taken the world by surprise; and we cannot, as in most social problems, readily afford to wait until a fresh generation has grown up, alive to the new situation. The cost in human values of each

* " Eugenics: Can it solve the problem of the
decay of civilizations ?" EUGENIcs RzviEw, XVIII, 120-136, July, 1926.

ten years' delay is larger than we can readily imagine.

