NEUROLOGY AND EUGENICS

The Role of Experimental Genetics in their Development
By OSKAR VOGT
(From the Kaiser Wilhelm-Institut fi4r Hirnforschung, Berlin-Buch)

T HE neurologist, who is so often help- Doubtless many of the diseases of the

less to check the development of central nervous system which appear

insane or criminal tendencies, is ' sporadically ' (i.e. in proportions which fit

naturally interested in the theoretical no known mendelian ratio) in certain

possibility of modifying the expression of families are caused by such 'weak' genes.

undesirable genotypes, and is therefore led My collaborator Patzig, for instance, has pub-

into making genetical experiments with that lished an account of monozygotic twins, now

object. The first part of this article deals 43 years old, one of whom manifested in

with such experiments.

youth a hereditary predisposition to de-

As long as genetical research was mainly mentia praecox, while the other has

concerned, as it was until recently, with dis- remained sane.+

covering the mechanism of gene transmis- Recent experiments of Gabritschewsky, as

sion, it dealt with the genes which we can call well as earlier work of my colleagues N. W.

' strong '-those, that is, which cause the and H. A. Timofeeff-Ressovsky, have shown

expected ratios to appear, and which equally that it is possible to modify the Penetranz of

affect all individuals. But there is also a a gene by environmental factors, one of which

second type of gene, a 'weak' type, which is nutrition. Gabritschewsky found that in a

we find, with variable frequency, in plants well-nourished culture of the giant mutant

and animals, and of which no doubt there (Drosophila melanwgaster) go per cent. were

are many in man. The weakness is charac- giants, though there were only io per cent.

terized by the fact that some individuals in a badly fed culture. We can see from

carrying this type of gene go through their these studies that there may be a possi-

whole lives without manifesting the char- bility of influencing gene manifestation by

acter, a phenomenon which is described in chemical means.

German as a lower Penetranz* of the gene

involved. Morgan's analysis has shown that EFFECT OF ONE GENE ON ANOTHER

abnormal abdomen of Drosophila melano- The manifestation of a gene may also be gaster is a character of this type, since its differentially affected by the ' remainder

transmission is according to mendelian laws, genotype,' by the influence, that is, of the

though it is only apparent in a certain per- complex of all the other genes. In Gabrit-

centage of the individuals carrying the gene. schewsky's work the effectiveness of the

If that gene were one for some illness or criminal tendency, only a proportion of the
carriers would exhibit it-the rest being healthy or normal-while all of them would transmit it according to the appropriate
mendelian expectation. t

same giant mutation varied in cultures of different 'remainder genotypes '-40 per
cent. giant in one culture and 70 per cent. in another. Further, N. W. Timofeeff examined in Drosophila funebris the mutation

* There is no English equivalent for this word, but the description should make its meaning clear.
t The reference, of course, is not to an ordinary recessive character.

' Perhaps, however, this rermarkable instance is
due to the asymmetry mechanism which causes somatic segregation in identical twins. See the studies of Professor H. H. Newman, and especiallv the notice of his recent work on page 66 of this REvIEw.-ED.

'5

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

venae transversae incompletae (Xvti), a particular, a type of 'specificity' which may

gene which causes an interruption or failure later be of eugenic importance, is what we

of the cross veins in the wings. In most may call ' polar specificity.' Genes of this

cultures this gene mutation is only manifest type can cause deviations from the normal

in a few individuals; but if it is crossed with in either a positive or a negative direction,

a culture of flies showing another gene and they may provide an explanation of the

mutation radius incompletus (ri: shorten- fact-if fact it be-that highly gifted and

ing of the second longitudinal vein of the subnormal (or mentally unbalanced) person-

wing) its Penetranz may rise to ioo per cent. alities occur in the same family. The fact,

In this case one gene profoundly affects however, has not yet been substantiated,

the manifestation of another. We may per- though the subject, under some such

haps expect in the future to employ this intriguing title as " Genius aiid Insanity,"

type of mechanism for eugenic purposes, is a popular one for somewhat uncritical

though our present knowledge of human discussions. Our experience at this Insti-

genotypes is inadequate, and, even if it were tute seems to indicate that the 'remainder

not, it would still be difficult to choose the genotype' can, again, affect the numbers of

appropriate combination of genotypes for positive or negative variants.

this or that purpose.

Another phenomenon to be observed in DIFFERENT EFFECTS ON VITALITY

'weak ' genes is a tendency to be more I would call attention, too, to a further

markedly manifest in some individuals than set of experiments by N. W. Timofeeff,

in others.* Though perhaps of less signi- who had been testing different mutations as

ficance, this is surely not unimportant to to their vitality. When he crossed two

eugenics. N. W. Timof&eff has shown that such strains of low vitality-different

variations in the degree to which a gene mutants, that is, but each with reduced

manifests itself are something other than viability-he usually found that the via-

variations in Penetranz. He has proved that bility of the offspring was even lower than

lower Penetranz may be combined with an that of either parent stock, the reduced

increased degree of manifestation in both ri vitality of one mutation being added to that

and Xvti. The character, that is, may appear of the other. But in some cases the con-

in fewer than usual of its carriers, though in trary occurred, each mutant apparently

some of them it will be more than ordinarily compensating for the defects of the other,

strongly marked. The decreased Expres- with the result that the vitality of the off-

sivitdt of a disease or of an anti-social spring was greater than that of either

tendency would be manifested in a milder parent stock. Eugenics must therefore

form of the complaint or in a weaker reckon with the possibility that the crossing

tendency to anti-social actions.

of two genotypes may in some cases balance

According to the same worker, the degree certain disturbances of the inner organs,

of manifestation may be modified both by although the exterior characteristics of both

the ' remainder genotype ' and by environ- genes are manifested together in the

mental factors; and the eugenic attitude hybrids.

towards the phenomenon must therefore be There is one further point of eugenic

the same as that towards the phenomena of importance, best illustrated by such a dis-

Penetranz in genes.

ease as Huntington's chorea. If one parent

A third type of ' weak ' gene is that which is heterozygous for this complaint, which

lacks specificity and which may therefore is due to a dominant gene, 50 per cent. of

manifest itself in more than one way. In the offspring will inherit the predisposition

and, since the Penetranz of the gene amounts

* In German this is described as a variable Expressivitdt, which might perhaps be translated as a vari-

to ioo per cent., will sooner or later succumb to the disease. Since, however, its

able ' potency.'-ED.

onset may be delayed for many years, it is

NEUROLOGY AND EUGENICS

I7

very important for both eugenic and of the unlimited development of all kinds

therapeutic reasons, to distinguish, as of cells, the hypertrophy of some groups

early as possible, between these children must be accompanied by the hypo-trophy of

who are inevitably doomed to the disease others; and the function of neurology is to

and the remaining 50 per cent. of the family discover precisely how each different com-

who are entirely free from it. Experi- bination is reflected in the mental abilities

mental genetics has indeed shown that such a of the individual. What combinations, in

hereditary predisposition may be associated particular, of groups of cells provide the

with certain other characters, the so-called basis of socially valuable qualities, and why

'stigmata.' Pearl observed, for instance, is it that those qualities, when possessed by

that the recessive gene mutation in Droso- only one of the parents, are, as we all

phila vestigial (wings) is always accom- know, so seldom transmitted to the chil-

panied by reduced vitality when it is dren? The reason is that a marked talent

homozygous, but that the vitality of the of this type, being the immediate product

heterozygous carriers of it is unaffected; and of a certain individual combination of nerve

N. W. Timofeeff found exactly the same cells, is fundamentally due to another and

when studying the mutation miniature in very complex combination of genes which

Drosophila funebris.

is almost inevitably broken up in the reduc-

By the aid of stigmata, therefore, it may tion division at oogenesis or spermato-

sometimes be possible to recognize in genesis. The very process of breeding

advance those individuals who carry the shatters the peculiar combination which

hereditary predisposition to a disease. C. creates the talent.

Vogt, indeed, has already pointed out The problem of positive eugenics is there-

that the skulls of sufferers from Hunt- fore how to conserve such gifts.

ington's chorea are very often unusually There may be less loss when marriages

small, while Meggendorfer found that chil- occur between men and women with similar

dren with the predisposition can at an early talents; and certain circus families can show

stage be distinguished from the normal by a conservation of their particular gifts over

their psychopathic character.

several generations, because each husband

It can be seen from the foregoing that and wife have been similarly talented workers

experimental genetics may throw light on at the same craft. The same phenomenon can

eugenic problems, as well as on those of be seen in some families of artists. The social

general heredity, and by materially assist- trend of to-day, which eugenics should sup-

ing the study of the diseases of the central port, favours this sort of conservation of

nervous system (and, indeed, of other com- talent, since the increase of women in in-

plaints) may sooner or later be of practical dustry tends to encourage marriages between

use in eugenics.

people with kindred gifts.

GENETICS AND THE BRAIN
Having now indicated some of the ways EUGENICS AND BIOLOGICAL HARMONY in which experimental genetics can assist Finally, surely eugenics should not be neurology, we will turn to those questions concerned only with mental qualities, but which the eugenist would gladly see should aim at fostering harmonies of genes, answered by the neurologist. Above all, and at the same time take into account the what sort of brain is socially valuable? highly relevant fact that some genes have
The brain consists of an unexpectedly manifold effects ('polytopic manifestation '). large number of kinds of nerve cells which We know, for instance, that a single gene differ morphologically and physiologically mutation in a wild species of Drosophila from each other, and which together con- may lower the vitality of the organism. The stitute the physical basis of mental activity. probable explanation of this is that the Since the size of the brain does not allow occurrence of the mutation automatically
B

I8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

creates a new genotype, a new combination The gene fundamentally responsible for

of genes which is less well balanced and these associated changes must have a ' poly-

therefore less well adapted to the environ- topic ' effect, not only causing the alteration

ment than was the old genotype whose in the external character, but also dis-

-harmony of genes produced strong and organizing the harmonious development of

resistant individuals.

the internal organs. It is impossible to tell

A disturbance of this harmony, leading beforehand whether the gene for some

to an impairment of viability, may be valuable mental quality may not have un-

accompanied by external changes which are favourable effects on other organs; and

not themselves the cause of the impairment eugenic wisdom must therefore regard the

-like, for instance, the larger number of general physiology and metabolism of the

head-bristles in Drosophila, a mutation human being, instead of merely concentrat-

which is accompanied by a loss of vitality. ing upon some special mental gifts.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 1.

