4IO EUGENICS REVIEW

be achieved by measures directed to the environment. We could wish

that the contents of this booklet might be carefully studied by all medical

officers of health and the army of officials called into being by the

Insurance Act.

(2.) The second lecture was originally delivered to the West London

Medico-Chirurgical Society. It is an eloquent plea for the creation of

medical mathematicians and, pending the realisation of that ideal, for an

entente cordiale between the statistician and the public health officer.

Among the topics dwelt on are the influence of natural selection on

man and the inheritance of certain special defects, such as achondroplasia.

Some beautiful plates are reproduced from the " Treasury of Human

Inheritance.'

M. G.

Zizek, Privatdozent. DR. FRANZ, von Statistik und Rassenbiologie

einschliesslich Rassenhygiene. (Sonderabdruck.) Statistische

Monatscrift, 1912; pp. 43 I-460.

THIS is a summary of the results reached by various workers in the de-

partments of racial biology and hygiene with the aid of statistical

methods. The article will be of use to many who desire an introduction

to the literature, but the author's knowledge of statistical processes, if

we may judge by his remarks on page 44I with respect to the meaning

of a coefficient of correlation, is somewhat superficial, and safer guides

may be found in this country.

M. G.

Davenport, CHARLES B., M. D. Eugenics and the Physician. (Reprinted from the " New York Medical Journal," June 8th, I912.)
IN this address, delivered to a medical audience, Dr. Davenport points out the valuable help which physicians might derive from the
systematic study of family traits in their patients, as bearing, for instance,
on individual differences in susceptibility and mode of reaction to infective agents; and he further appeals to medical men to co-operate with students of heredity in accumulating data concerning the inheritance of normal and morbid characters in man. The natural affinity of Mendelian methods to the individualist attitude of medical practice
should secure a sympathetic response to Dr. Davenport's invitation. Though it ought to be well known by this time, it may be worth while to repeat that the Eugenics Record Office at Cold Spring Harbour, New York, will furnish printed schedules for recording such data, and will welcome information with regard to familv histories. Dr. Davenport mentions that he is at present studying the heredity of cleft palate and harelip, and would be glad to receive data hearing thereon.
W. C. SULLIVAN.

MtpttpaTngdmpapseionrhsaaoeuioHuoCsteersmnvIncsioatteieh,osSiqthnarsnuanbumbnuithfdcelieehttewffmeekttnahsoelceotyotnotrrsolenort.fetiorrt,omkwirnyfDro.taehgtreefriihi.tndnneiiehRcctOifnsdnse.,e.ntahMeunae,thmccctIefeieCiethhtiMtnolasLnioadhht.iussnofntseei,eartiindnhaotrrrtmdseenseehoybfetaoamerPtleautlcetnhihleslntplhfeain..',hmnadmyeonrnesDerooaarn.tsrimmshbtittdJitaoanenhaehlieotofre,nneayslfirhgtoltdaioeofenua,ccCfofncarttmtclrrfo.ttheenMeeeerieihneadupesncmpaced,htrtiuocewabaesrsnnnhxbpoyFkndacaaioaolirdrefnlylsimeobklpasondhf;ieosttsmnmRavtacitodeaerhoii1othionstaienl9tnhsfeepttisttnIhusecxmoyue,2oigmuhbh,nbsr;nesteaeesjeons.oxuoie3isieneacscbt3onnnhxswmlttiif9qgachuneilausetiisgpivlintpwhDtcoipterybteehefhvy.lyfeheafo,e;yotearefisqhahrnxfiovnbipueedenpmceasnieritiiidsnaonithsacaiihdbciemgwcltodsifieclehuSiosneane.sipooraclmrg7osnccusveltefe,.ihnosiruotdmbapepiifdh6arlepewuteseIhdseirmct,nsesh.eitnetibxmCmrsasstipteniaooehtbetaiihebrnsnnalhnytvoaaui,td-ts.eestfe-t-s

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS

411

tion, which implies religious sanctions lying outside the social purview, has a part in the wider conception which sees in social utility the real foundation of punishment. Now, is this foundation just? Has society a right to punish? This question leads to a detailed discussion of the problem of free-will, in which it is maintained that while freedom of the will may be necessary to the theory of moral accountability, and may therefore be a ground for the ethical justification of punishment, it is at the same time incompatible with the idea of its practical utility, inasmuch as it is impossible to conceive that punishment or reward can influence a will which ex hypothesi operates irrespective of motives. On the other hand, the determinist, though recognising the inevitableness of the criminal act as of any other event in nature, is not thereby logically precluded from the approval of punishment; on the contrary, he will naturally accept punishment and reward as determining motives which society deliberately introduces for the purpose of influencing conduct to conformity with its own interests. So that in brief, " society's right to punish is based upon the necessity of punishment from the viewpoint of social utility, a necessity imposed by the struggle for existence " (page 326). If we accept this doctrine of thorough-going determinism, we must obviously regard all law-breakers as socially accountable irrespective of differences in mental capacity and the like. And this is, indeed, to the logical mind a recommendation of the view which Dr. McConnell defends, for, as it makes efficacy the sole test of punishment. it requires that punitive treatment in all cases, and not merely in the case of the insane, should be adapted to the individuality of the offender, being modified in kind and degree according to the character of the criminal and the nature and extent of his anti-social tendencies. From this point of view the criminologist will find himself in full agreement with the eugenist in regard to the treatment of the incorrigible offender and the moral idiot. Dr. McConnell has given an admirably clear and convincing presentation of the view which is coming more and more to be recognised as the only tenable position in penology.
W. C. SULLIVAN.
Guifrida-Ruggeri, DR. V. Sulla Digniti Morfologica dei Segni Detti " Degenerativi."
IN the first part of this work the writer argues that there is a close relation between an abnormal physical condition and abnormalities of a mental or moral nature, and proceeds to show how the theory of atavism, put forward by Lombroso to account for degenerates, has Piven place to
the pathological theory established by the arguments of Virchow, F&6,
Jelgersma, Koch, Dallemagre, and others. Fere is quoted as asking:
" If it is contended that imbeciles and microcephalous idiots represent from a physical point of view some one of our ancestors, will it be said also that the sterility belonging to these same classes is also the reappearance of an atavistic character ? " Or, as another scientist puts it, " Can it be said that a civilised man who loses the power of speech through some disease is subject to the influence of remote ancestors who could never talk at all? "
The second part discusses in detail various physical abnormalities or "degenerative stigmata "-twenty-six in number-and part three attempts to show how far each is indicative of a particular mental or moral disorder. Statistical and other tables illustrate parts two and three, and the stigmata are dealt with on the basis of sex-distribution both in conjunction with and apart from the special disorder.
Careful and original work of this nature cannot fail to be of great value. If we may permit ourselves one small criticism, we should say that we should have preferred actual numbers in Table i to percentages. If, in the case of hysteria, with a total of ig cases we were told that one case was found of facial symmetry instead of five per cent. one would be more likely to see the matter in its true proportion.
H. R.

