THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY*
By "ADMINISTRATOR"

D URING the last decade surveys have generally is not without some insight into his

been made of the social and economic own mental state, will admit that he argues

conditions in several of the large not from facts but upon a priori grounds.

towns of Great Britain. Mr. Caradog Jones, We may console ourselves with the thought

Director of the Merseyside Survey, in his that what little truth there is in this argu-

introductory note to the Report asks the very ment is to be attributed to a highly selective

pertinent question: " What purpose do such study of the past and may have very little

surveys serve ? " His reply that they consti- bearing upon the future.

tute the first step towards social reform in

giving some idea of the problems to be solved SOME CHECKS ON IMPARTIALITY

is so modest that most persons will readily agree with him.
But the man of practical affairs will doubtless press for a reply to the more definite
question: " Can it be shown that the actions of any political party or local authority have been based upon the results of any of these
surveys ? " The cynic will affirm that group or mass actions are never based upon what is known but upon what is desired. He will go farther and state that all political and social
propaganda are merely the rationalizations
of individual ambitions. For instance, im-
perialism, on the one hand, is simply an endeavour on the part of those who have power and wealth to hold fast by what they have and if possible to add to it; reforms of
society and industry, on the other hand, are advocated by those who have nothing to lose and much to gain by any form of change. The statistics of any social survey, however formidable and convincing, will not affect in the least the attitude of the men and women of public affairs. They will scan the reports to find items that support or appear to support their political point of view. Against all unpalatable data they are well fortified beforehand by the principles of their political party. Thus saith the cynic.
The time of the readers of this REVIEW
is much too valuable to justify any attempt to refute such reasoning. The cynic, who

What are the distinctive features of the scientific approach to social and economic
problems? Mr. Caradog Jones states that
" the survey claims to be scientific in the sense that observations are made in an
impartial spirit." The psycho-analyst will not regard this as a modest claim. He would
say that impartiality is not a human but a superhuman attribute. When we attempt to avoid allowing conscious desires to prejudice
our judgment, we simply become the victims
of our unconscious and more instinctive
desires. When the psycho-analyst has completed his examination of the works of poets he will probably turn his attention to those of the scientist and even those of the statistician; and he will doubtless unmask many pretensions to impartiality.
To those who have not specialized in psycho-analytic criticism the standpoint of the& Director of this survey appears most
reasonable, especially when he adds that "the whole object has been to arrive at and present the true facts." Although the scientist has to have his starting-point or hypothesis, he regards it as his function to
test it and not to prove that any particular hypothesis is right. This objective standpoint can do much to present our social and economic problems in the light that will enable our legislators to see more clearly the right line of action.

* The Social Survey of Merseyside. Edited by D. The encouragement given to the social

Caradog Jones. University Press of Liverpool. Hodder & Stoughton Ltd., London, 1934. Vol. I, I5s., Vol. II, 21S., Vol. III, 25S., set of three volumes, 45S.

surveys that have been undertaken in recent years goes far to prove that this scientific

I99

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

attitude is being adopted more and more in " In the second volume, therefore, a de-

regard to social problems. Not only univer- tailed examination is made of the industrial

sity teachers, but the men and women who character of the Merseyside. . . . An esti-

have to deal with practical administrative mate is attempted of the present and pros-

problems co-operate most heartily in these pective surplus of labour in the area.

surveys. They realize that many of the " In the third volume attention is directed

problems cannot be solved by the empirical to other aspects of life no less important,

methods of the party politician, but that including the use of leisure and church

they must be tackled by the methods adopted attendance. Selected normal groups of the

by the mathematician, biologist, physicist, population pass in review: infants, school-

and other scientific investigators.

children, adolescents, families without a male

THE GROUND COVERED

head, pensioners, various subnormal types such as the deaf and dumb, the blind, the

The Merseyside Survey was undertaken by mentally deficient, the physically defective

the School of Social Science and Administra- and the destitute. Since the majority of these

tion of the University of Liverpool and was (subnormal) classes are dependent generally

made possible by a generous grant from upon others for support, their study is pre-

the Rockefeller Foundation. Mr. D. Caradog faced by a brief account of public administra-

Jones was appointed Director, and he had the tion and certain typical social services and a

assistance of four colleagues. The area sur- discussion of the extent to which they over-

veyed included the four county boroughs of lap. In the course of the survey cumulative

Liverpool, Bootle, Birkenhead, and Wal- evidence is presented of the marked differen-

lasey, together with a part of the adjacent tial class fertility and its bearing on the

urban districts. The survey included a num- quality of the future population is indicated."

ber of special inquiries of specific problems; The Report covers such a wide range of

but one of these, referred to as a " household subjects that one person cannot be expected

sample," was more general and comprehen- to write an authoritative review on all of

sive than the rest and it enabled norms and them. Only a team of experts on the various

standards of various conditions to be estab- subjects dealt with in the Survey could do it

lished. The Director and his colleagues made justice. In this article attention will be

full use of the mass of statistics published in restricted to those matters (mostly in the

the reports of various departments of the third volume), which are likely to be of

local authorities and of voluntary bodies the greatest interest to the readers of the

operating in the area.

EUGENICS REVIEW.

The work of the reviewer of this Report is

much simplified by the outline of the survey PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICES

which is given at the beginning of each of the The second chapter of the third volume

three volumes, and a few quotations from this gives a most helpful survey of the reorganized

outline will give the clearest conception of public health services. Recent legislation

the range of problems discussed in this allows the local authorities so much scope in

Report.

the organization of these services that much

" The first volume opens with the history care is required when comparing the reports

of the development of the area and the con- of various authorities. Those interested in

tribution of different nationalities to the public health work wiU welcome the lucid

population. The existing inhabitants are though brief account given in this chapter of

analysed as to age, sex and marital condition. the public health services in the Merseyside

Discussion centres on problems of overcrowd- area.

ing and poverty, and the evolution of muni- Some of the outstanding statistical data

cipal housing in Liverpool is traced. . .. relating to the " personal " as distinct from

Unemployment emerges as a factor peculiarly the " environmental " public health services

responsible for the present-day poverty. are discussed in this chapter. The data in the

THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

20I

section relating to maternity and child children of these ages receive full-time educa-

welfare are of special interest. The pre-natal tion in public elementary schools. Children

and post-natal clinics seem to be well under five years of age on the other hand have

patronized. In no fewer than 68 per cent. of not been well provided for; only i 6 per

the total births in Liverpool during the year cent. of these children receive full-time educa-

I93I the mothers had attended the pre-natal tion. Similarly in regard to the children

clinics; and in the Birkenhead area 59 per between the ages of fourteen and eighteen;

cent. of the mothers had attended the post- only Io-9 per cent. of these attend schools.

natal clinics.* Since these clinics have been These latter figures afford a good example of

functioning actively only during the last few statistics elucidating in a clear manner what

decades, the decline of infantile mortality most of us thought we already knew but in

during this period may reasonably be fact did not fully appreciate. Much is written

attributed to some extent to the services the and said about the disappointing results of

clinics have rendered. But it should be noted public elementary and secondary education.

that the decline has been greatest in the better The figures just quoted go far to explain the

residential area of Wallasey where the clinics failure. The system is most incomplete; it is

are least patronized. In the Liverpool district merely a half measure. For go per cent. of during the quinquennium I906-I0 the death- the children education begins too late and

rate of infants per I,000 live births was I47, ceases too soon. Educationists are much

whereas for that of I927-I930 the numbers concerned at present about the proper

fell to 94; but even this figure is still con- preparation of youth for the right use of the

siderably higher than the mean figure of 69 leisure they will have when they become

for England and Wales.t The maternal mor- adults. Would not closing up the two impor-

tality rate for the Merseyside compares tant gaps of the education system for children

more favourably with that for the whole under five and those between the ages of

country. Mr. Caradog Jones rightly warns his fourteen and eighteen be the best prophy-

readers not to attach much significance to the lactic measure ? Large numbers of children

apparent large variations from year to year acquire physical and mental habits (during

of this rate, because the number of deaths these neglected periods) that render them

in childbirth in any one year is very small in incapable of pursuing healthy and cultured

comparison with the total number of births. leisure-time interests when they reach the

GAPS IN THE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM adult stage.

Of all modern institutions none has a PUBLIC ASSISTANCE SERVICES

greater, if indeed as much, influence in The fact that since I930 Liverpool has determining the welfare of the next genera- figured consistently as one of the four or five tion as the school. Two chapters, one on districts in the country with the highest ratio elementary education and the other on social of poor relief to total population must of factors in secondary education, deal with the itself make the section on public assistance functions of the schools in the Merseyside services as one of the most valuable parts area. Educationists will find much food for of the Report. It is impossible to read this thought in these two chapters. We will section without feeling that the duties im-
restrict our observations to the tablet which posed upon the public assistance committees gives the proportions of various age groups are far too onerous. Although much is heard
under nineteen years of age attending the of the break-up of the poor-lawsystem in this
schools in Liverpool (I3I). This table shows country, large and important social services
that the provision for the education of are, for some reason which is not clear to children between the ages of five and thirteen most people, still administered by a system is almost complete; 95 per cent. of the originally designed to deal merely with

* Volume III, p. 32. t Volume p. III, 35. t Volume III, p. 64.

destitute persons. To what bodies many of the duties of the public assistance committees

202 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

should be delegated is clearly indicated by present a contrast in several respects. For

the classification of persons in receipt of example, congenital deafness was more

indoor and outdoor relief.

prevalent than the acquired disability in the

proportion of 53 to 47 per cent., whereas the

INFANT MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY ratio of acquired to congenital blindness was

The chapter on infant welfare gives the 69 to 3I. Again, acquired deafness occurs

results of a well-devised special inquiry to most frequently in early childhood, whereas

ascertain the health and progress of a random acquired blindness comes comparatively late

sample of infants. The sample was com- in life. These and other contrasting features

prised of 7I7 births registered in Liverpool explain to some extent how it is that the deaf

during the first fourteen days of February and the blind present very different problems

I930. For a period of two years visits by to the doctor, teacher and employer.

statutory and voluntary workers were made to 576 of these infants and careful records SURVEY OF MENTAL DEFECTIVES

were kept of their progress.

The chapter on the mentally defective type

The following are some of the chief deduc- deserves to be studied carefully, chiefly

tions Mr. Caradog Jones and his colleagues because the Director and his staff have shown

make from their data. Male children are much ingenuity in collecting the data and in

much more likely than female to feel the presenting the results. A comparison is made

effects of a poor environment, the disparity of two groups of defectives: (i) an S.S.

between the male and female infant mortality Group, comprising children aged five to

being greatest in those parts of the city with fifteen in special schools for mental defectives

the highest proportion of persons living below (most of these would be of the feeble-minded

the poverty line and with the highest propor- grade and educable); (2) an M.W. group,

tion of overcrowded homes. The fact that a comprising mentally defective persons under

child is born in a good type of artisan family the supervision of the West Lancashire

seems to double its chance of progressing well Association of Mental Welfare (a large

and to divide by four its chance of dying, as proportion of these would be imbeciles or

compared with the child in the poorest type idiots and therefore ineducable).

of family. Again, the records of illnesses On examining the family records of these

show that children in the poorer homes often two groups of defectives it became evident

die or suffer permanently impaired health by that there was a considerably higher propor-

such illnesses as pneumonia and bronchitis- tion of mental defect among the relatives of

and these are illnesses which could be pre- the S.S. than among those of the M.W. group.

vented if the children received more efficient This result lends support to the view put

care and a healthier environment.

forward by previous investigators that the

severer forms of mental defect are in many

THE DEAF AND BLIND

cases sporadic and not familial in character.

The student of genetics will naturally be Another conclusion akin to this is in connec-

much attracted to the chapters dealing with tion with social status. The M.W. group of

the subnormal types in the population-the families was fairly representative of the

deaf, the blind, the physical and mental general population, whereas an unduly large

defectives, the chronically unemployed and proportion (60 per cent.) of the S.S. families

various other groups of social failures. Much were of the unskilled labouring class.

of the data relating to these subnormal types

are obtained from the statutory or voluntary FERTILITY OF DEFECTIVE FAMILIES

bodies dealing with them; but the Director The following table* gives the comparative

and his staff have supplemented these by a fertility of the parents of defective children

series of special investigations which have andofthe parents belonging to a control group

yielded results of the greatest interest.

The data relating to the deaf and the blind

* Volume III, p. 40.

THE MERSEYSIDE SURVEY

203

consisting of normal working-class families. of a family who are mentally defective or

The defective families were those containing insane knows how difficult it is to get a com-

one or more mentally defective persons (aged plete and reliable record. We can be sure that

five to twenty-two) who were either in the the data presented in this chapter are an

special class or under guardianship or super- underestimate of the amount of coexistence

vision.

that prevails especially in regard to abnormal

mental conditions. Moreover, in order to

Mean Number of Children

Group of Number Families Sampled

per Family

interpret such data we need some standard or norm of the incidence of the condition in a random sample of the population.

Alive Dead Born

DISTRIBUTION OF DEFECTIVENESS

Defective ... r,rI5 Normal ... 4,379

4 .69 2 *97

2.47 0°95

7.I6 3 .92

In his researches on the " Localization of Defect" Mr. Caradog Jones set out to test

the validity of one of the conclusions of the

The figures in this table show clearly how Wood Committee on Mental Deficiency. This

much more fertile are the parents of the committee, it will be recalled, stated that

defective persons than those of the normal there were special areas or " pockets " where

group. The text does not state whether the the incidence of mental defect was decidedly

control group contained any families with no greater than in the community generally. In

children. If so these figures exaggerate the the Merseyside Survey, however, the data

disparity somewhat but would by no means related not only to mental deficiency but to

account completely for the difference. The other defects such as blindness, deafness,

high proportion of dead children in the tuberculosis, and physical deformities. The

defective families is also worth noting.

results give much support to the contention

One of the specific problems calling for of the Wood Committee. They also show

intensive study in the near future is that that what is true of feeble-mindedness is also

presented by families with two or more true of other defects. None of these defects

mentally defective sibs, especially if these are is uniformly spread over the City of Liver-

low-grade. Such a study will doubtless throw pool, but there is a decided concentration of

much light upon the relative importance cases in all the congested inner areas, and the

of heredity and environment in producing concentration is still further limited to cer-

certain types of mental defect. The Director tain streets in these areas. Whether we

in this Report has given some illuminating believe that these defects are mainly in-

preliminary data in regard to such families herited or mainly due to environmental

and these will serve as a good starting-point conditions, the fact that they are concentrated

for some intensive studies in the future.

in a comparatively small section of the com-

COEXISTENCE OF DEFECTS

munity should improve considerably the prospect of practical preventive and ameliora-

The chapter on the " Coexistence of tive measures being supplied.

Different Defects and Disabilities" is much The next step should be the intensive study

too brief to do justice to this important but of these foci of social diseases. From the

difficult subject, and the data are more standpoint of economy alone, it would well

suggestive than conclusive. The value of repay local authorities to employ students of

such data depends to a great extent upon the social science to investigate these foci which

degree of their completeness. Presumably absorb so much of the money and energy

when clearly defined conditions such as deaf- spent upon our social services. The " black "

ness and blindness exist it is relatively easy streets in our large cities may be regarded as

to ascertain all the members of the family laboratories already well equipped with all

afflicted with these conditions. But everyone the necessary human material for the inves-

who has experience of ascertaining members tigation and solution of the problem of the

204 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

relative importance of heredity and environ- cent. of the total births. The death-rate is

ment in the production of social failure. still higher in this class, being 74 per cent. of

the total, with the result that the net contri-

DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY

bution in living children is reduced to 6i per

The Report comes to a climax with its cent. of the total of the sample. Most

chapter on differential fertility and the future of these families, it should be remembered,

trend of population. Comparison of the are existing on unemployment benefit or

birth-rates and death-rates for quinquennial public assistance.

periods from i88i to I930 suggests that the population of the Merseyside, like that of the SUMMARY

whole country, is fast approaching a stage In this review of the Report we have

when it will become stationary, and if drawn attention to a few of its most striking

the present trend continues much longer the features, and in doing so have run some risk

population will progressively decline. The of giving the reader an unbalanced concep-

fall in the birth-rate is most conspicuous in tion of the results of the survey which it

the residential areas of Liverpool, whereas records. Conclusions have been quoted out

the improvement in the death-rate has been of their context; and whenever this has been

most marked in its industrial areas, where done the reader should be cautious in his

naturally there was most room for improve- interpretation of them. It is hoped that this

ment. The only districts where a natural review will not be regarded as a summary,

increase in the population has been main- because in the limited space available it

tained are those in which the Roman Catho- would have been absurd to attempt to give

lics form a good proportion of the residents. a comprehensive idea of the contents of three

The differential fertility of various occupa- large volumes. If the reader is not led to

tional classes was ascertained by a special study the Report for himself these observa-

infant welfare inquiry. The data thus tions will have failed in their chief purpose.

obtained are compared with those of the The Merseyside Survey will undoubtedly

main survey of a random sample of 7,000 occupy an honourable place amongst the

ordinary working-class families.

most important surveys made during the last

There is a decided increase in the size of half-century. Mr. Caradog Jones and his

family as we pass down the occupational colleagues are to be heartily congratulated

scale. Nearly two more children are born in upon the completion of their formidable task,

the family of the unskilled working class as and upon the presentation of the data in a

compared with that of the " black-coated " manner that will appeal to a wide circle of

class. The balance is retrieved to some extent scientific readers. The data have been inter-

by the higher proportion of deaths in the preted cautiously but also clearly: the

lower occupational classes. Again, the size of reader is left in no doubt about how the

family definitely increases as the chances of investigators think the data should be inter-

employment become more precarious. An preted. Students seeking problems for future

analysis of the houses in which births research will find innumerable suggestions in

occurred during a selected fortnight shows these volumes, and they will do well to emu-

that, while families of poorer social classes late the methods adopted in the Merseyside

represent just over half of the total sample, Survey in securing the data and in presenting

the children born in them make up 63 per the results.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 8.

