6fr97

I

t 1 I*zI
_>sn X.ILS'C3

I

ter >

X

1

288

THE TREASURER'S PAGE

T HE Hon. Treasurer of a society such the Society had been transformed by the

as the Eugenics Society can interpret money left to it under his will. As soon as

his functions on narrow or broad lines. I had grasped work to be done, I realized

My inclination is to interpret them in terms that instead of the £70,000 (approximately)

which will enable me to serve in my small we had anticipated receiving from the

way the cause of eugenics to the utmost limit estate, it looked as if, owing to the slump,

of my capacities and experience. It is for this we would hardly receive £45,000. These

reason that I have suggested to the Editorial figures were so startling that it seemed to me

Committee that, at least for the next year or essential to concentrate on recovering so far

so, there should be included in every issue of as possible the loss which the Society looked

the EUGENICS REVIEW a Treasurer's Page, like suffering. With the help of my colleagues

through which I propose to make contact with on the Finance Committee, this has proved

my fellow-members and with all subscribers possible to the extent of something between

and donors towards the funds of the Society. £20,000 and £30,000 in the years which have

In the coming months I shall call attention to intervened. It has proved possible because

certain aspects of our financial position, in this Committee and the Council of the Society

a way which I hope will strike your imagina- have been willing to undertake greater re-

tion and arouse your determination to add sponsibility in relation to the funds of the

largely to the financial support of the work Society than is usual in such circumstances.

which the Society is doing.

It is also due to the wisdom of Mr. Twitchin

In this number I shall ask you to consider and the drafters of the Constitution of the

the facts illustrated in the chart on page 288. Society that no obstacles were placed in the

That chart shows the growth in our income way of our investing those funds over wider

and expenditure from I924 to I935. Its out- fields than is usual in the case of such gifts

standing feature is, of course, an enormous and such societies.

growth in both income and expenditure, but With the gradual achievement of our

it also shows the large fluctuations in the purpose there took place a very great ex-

annual figures. These latter are to some pansion in the Society's activities-so great

extent fictitious, for inevita1le delays in the that the opportunities which were presented

transfer of funds from the late Mr. Twitchin's to us outran even the largely increased in-

estate to the Society give an appearance of come which we received from the benefaction

variation in income which in fact hardly of Mr. Twitchin. In view of all the circum-

existed. There is the further fact that stances, however, the Society decided to go

income was not completely separated from boldly forward with the policy of spending

capital, so that some of the over-expenditure out of capital the necessary additional funds

shown in the years I930-2 is undoubtedly required during the years I934, I935 and

more apparent than real.

I936.

I joined the Council of the Society at What, then, is the present position?

the request of the late Sir Bernard Mallet In the past year we have been gradually

on May I3th, I93I; Mr. B. S. Bramwell was arriving at a time when the possibility of

then Hon. Treasurer. On May 3rd, I933, Mr. increasing the value of our capital has grown

Bramwell was appointed Chairman of the less, and the danger of its falling has grown

Council and I was asked to take over the more. It has therefore become obvious that

Hon. Treasurership in his place.

we must make strenuous efforts to increase

To explain the problem with which I found our income from other sources. It is to the

myself confronted, it is necessary to recall continuation of this story that I will return

that Mr. Twitchin had died on March igth, next quarter.

I930, and that the whole financial outlook of

C. F. CHANCE.

289

