SPEECHES AT THE GALTON DINNER

LARGE gathering of Fellows, Mem- have an interesting evening and expecting

bers and guests was present at the some advice to poor industrialists who will

Galton Dinner which was held at the have to provide the money to enable the

doff Hotel on Thursday, February i6th, aims of eugenics to be carried out in this

Lord Horder, President of the Eugenics country if your speaker this evening is

peIy, in the Chair. Among the guests of correct. I have learned a lot. I am a little

Society were Professor Aveling, Mrs. hazy as to what the attitude of the indus-

.Q. Darwin, Dr. and Mrs. T. Joekes, Dr. trialists is to be towards such questions as

F. McCleary, Mr. Terence Maxwell, Mr. family allowances. We have always thought

Mrs. Ogilvie, Miss A. Hylton Stewart, that it was a good thing to encourage people

and Mrs. F. Tietze and Sir Sylvanus to have children, especially if they are good

workmen. If two workmen are doing a job

Introducing the Galton Lecturer, Dr. C. G. equally well one should not be penalized for

,Lord Horder said: You may have having a family as against one that has no

iced that while I have been in the very children.

ourable position of being your President When Dr. Darwin was talking about

bave not made speeches at the Galton further allowances for people of income tax

ebration Dinner, and as I have heard no level, I was asking myself who was to provide

erse comments I propose to follow my a more satisfactory family and from what

example to-night. I have been provided family were there likely to spring the best

Dr. Blacker, with his usual thoroughness, people: the person who paid income tax last

a list of the positions held by our year-possibly a Football Pools promoter-

* guished lecturer and the degrees earned or a poor Highland crofter ? The crofter is

him. I propose to spare both you and well educated, hardworking and poor-

from a repetition of these. I have also many of our leaders have come from that

provided with a resume of what he will level-but he is not likely ever to be in a

to you; it would be more than redun- position to receive income tax allowances

t if I said anything about that. I would for his family. I am not asking for a definite

ever like to say this-though it is answer, but it is a point that might be

bably apparent to us all-that three considered.

ago the great-grandson of Thomas It did strike me what a very true remark

Huxley gave us the Galton Lecture, it was that our civilization is based on

his distinguished brother sitting at his publicity; if civilization is to go marching

To-day the grandson of Charles on it seems to me that a great deal more

is our Galton lecturer, and more publicity must be given to eugenics. There

that-and this is my last remark-our must be much wider knowledge among all

er is a god-child of Francis Galton. classes of people of the benefits that are

you see what a truly genetic and eugenic likely to accrue to the nation if this question

osphere we once more have here. Dr. is studied seriously and translated into

les Galton Darwin, Master of Christ's practical policy; and though we cannot

ege, Cambridge.

expect the man in the street to go into the

Dr. Darwin's lecture on " Positive Eugenic technical details of eugenics, wider eugenic

licy" is published on p. I3.

knowledge would be an asset to the nation.

Lord Trent, proposing the vote of thanks I am not going to take up your time by

the lecturer, said: It is my pleasant duty dealing with the various points in the

propose a very hearty vote of thanks to address, but I will say that I think that in

. Darwin for his address to us this evening. politics-a side not touched on this evening

came here knowing that I was going to -it is often the bold course that gets one

57

58 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

there soonest, and I would be for making I have the honour to be Chairman

much more drastic restrictions on the nega- small Committee which owes its existend

tive side of eugenics and giving much more the generosity of the Eugenics Society, NM
support to the positive side. I would broad- is discussing practical measures that m

cast the proposals on both the negative and taken to maintain the quantity and imp

the positive side of eugenics; I think you the quality of the population of this cOUI

would get much more response from the We shall pay a great deal of attention t(

voter, and it is the voter who sways wise, though perhaps to some, provocl

politicians. Those of you who know poli- address to which we have listened to-nh

ticians know what a reverent fear they have But perhaps after all, Dr. Darwin's p

of the voter.

that those with large salaries are those '

I have to move to the Master of Christ's a should be encouraged to have large fam

very hearty vote of thanks for the extremely is not so provocative as it appears at i

thought-provoking lecture we have had this sight. He admitted that in the case of po

evening.

if you want them to have families you Hr

Professor N. F. Hall, in seconding the vote see that they have adequate salaries.

of thanks, said: I have very great pleasure making this concession, he has invited u

for a number of reasons in thanking your review the distribution of income as we

Speaker this evening for his address. In the to encourage the successful to be par

first place, it was a very pleasant experience One of the advantages of a positive eug

for an economist to hear a distinguished policy may be that it will compel us amo

physicist stressing not the certainties of other things to reconsider what shoul

science, but its uncertainties; and in the the relative remuneration of poets as w

second place, it was refreshing to hear the that of members of other professions

emphasis which he placed upon the diffi- beginning with P.

culties of dealing with problems that are largely subjective, for this, after all, is a general difficulty which has to be faced in applying knowledge to social problems. The importance of this was brought home to me at the very outset of my work in Econo-
mics. I well remember sitting one day in my tutor's room at Oxford when into it there burst an excited post-graduate student who announced that he had discovered the perfect

In particular, I am grateful for Darwin's concluding point. He has urg not to wait for further advances in scien knowledge, but to take action now. He in fact, reminded us that we must not o stress the scientific aspects of the prob] but must recognize also that public ad tration is the art of reaching approxima right decisions upon insufficient evide

way to forecast the price of copper. " Have Dr. Darwin has given us what Galton w

you allowed, sir, for the effects of your dis- have wished-a great stimulus to euge

covery upon the future price of copper ?" by trying to translate scientific knowl

said my tutor.

into practical social policy.

