OBSTACLES TO MARRIAGE*
By R. H. PEAR, B.Sc. (Econ.)

IN this country we have no population policy. But it is at least possible that at some future date the Government will
take notice of the fact of a dwindling population. Whether we anticipate official action or not, it is of the utmost importance that we should know what the population problem is, and how it is likely to affect the economic life of the country.
The population problem attains prominence to-day because of two particular phenomena of the modern world. On the one hand, we have the question of unemployment. This immediately starts a discussion on the extent to which we are unable to use our idle resources, and has encouraged many in the belief that we are " over-populated." On the other hand we have the question of manpower in times of national emergency. The salient facts of the problem are three in
number.
i. Excluding immigration, our population will, in a few years, begin to decline in numbers.
2. This will be due to the number of deaths exceeding the number of births.
3. The most important reason for this state of affairs is the modern habit for small families; this habit has spread in the past, is spreading, and does not seem likely to lose popularity in the
future.
The most obvious result of this change in population is that there will be a diminution in the size of the population, with a redistribution of the proportions belonging to each age group. The numbers of old people will increase relatively to the numbers of young people. There will be more nonproducers relative to producers, and, in terms of piublic finance, this means that relatively more persons will have to be supplied with pensions and social services by the labours of relatively less active producers.

It would not be true to say that there is complete agreement amongst the economists about the exact economic repercussions of this change, but on one point there does seem to be agreement, namely that any diminution in the size of our population, far from curing unemployment, is likely to leave it as chronic as before. We may like to remember that the grim prophecies of Malthus were not borne out by facts, mainly owing to the growth of international trade in foodstuffs which he did not foresee, but on the other hand, we do feel ourselves better able than Malthus to speculate on these problems of future social development. At best we can look forward to a decrease in the numbers of active producers, at worst we may foresee the gradual disappearance of our race in this part of the globe.
Marriage and the barriers to marriage are of interest to the population investigator for two main reasons. First, the amount of marriage in any community is related to the number of children produced, and secondly, the age at which marriage takes place has a definite bearing upon the ease with which the mother produces children. On the second point it is sufficient to quote from a survey carried out by the Department of Health for Scotland.
" Irrespective of cause it was found that the liability of death in general increases with the age of the mother, except that those under 20 have a slightly greater risk than those of 20-25. In other words, with the above exception, the maternal death rate follows closely the trend with age of mortality from causes other than those associated with reproduction." *
The report goes on to show that the optimum period for reproduction is between. 20 and 25 years of age. Before the report was produced it was shown " that age does

* A paper read at a meeting of the Eugenics Society * Report on Maternal Mortality, Department of

on Tuesday, June 27th, 1939.

Health for Scotland, 1935.

I6I

162 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

appreciably affect the maternal death rate from all causes." *
Barriers to Marriage
If there are barriers to marriage which either prohibit marriage or necessitate its postponement, it is undoubtedly true that they must have some effect on the size of the population.
For both men and women there are certain professions and occupations employment in which, or training for which, necessitates some interference with the desire to marry. We can say that there are legal, institutional, conventional and economic barriers to marriage, but such a classification of barriers is not easy to make, for in many cases the barrier is not so well defined that we can say, for instance, that it is a legal and not a conventional barrier. Moreover, we are not interested so much in clearly defining such barriers as in investigating how they operate in practice, and in estimating how many people are affected by them. Again an economic barrier may be so related to an accepted standard required by a certain class of employment as to become in practice a social rather than a purely economic barrier. A bank clerk for instance may be just able to marry on £250 per annum, whereas a worker in another field would find it a princely salary. There is undoubtedly much hardship amongst unemployed persons who wish to marry, or having married find life very difficult, but in general this is a problem of creating employment for such persons, rather than in the first instance of creating facilities for marriage.
Let us consider first of all the question of barriers to marriage affecting the men in our population. It is important for our purpose to realize that the later a man marries, the greater is the possibility that his wife will be passing out of that optimum period for reproduction. Marriages which take place relatively late (due to social or economic causes) often involve the possibility of long engagements.
In general we can in our approach to this
* McKinley, P. L., J. Hyg., 1929.

question separate the male population into four occupation groups. While a strict classification is unnecessary here, we can make a real distinction between each of these four occupational groups, for the work (and training for work) in each group shows great difference in each case. First we have the unskilled worker. Second the skilled worker, third the white-collar worker and lastly the professional man. This is roughly in an ascending order of incomes, but it must be remembered that many skilled workers (for instance printers on newspaper work) earn considerably more than many white-collar workers. Again there are certain chances of promotion for white-collar workers which would raise their incomes above that of many professional men. And lastly if we include teachers in the professional class (and it would be difficult to exclude them) there are many classes of teacher who receive salaries considerably below those of some office workers.
The Unskilled Worker
The essence of unskilled work is that the work demands little or no previous training on the part of the worker. Also, as the work is of this type there are few opportunities of passing from one scale of wages to another. An unskilled man of i8 is just as competent at his job as one of 38, as the additional twenty years of experience does not materially affect the capacity for work or the method of work involved. For this reason it is true to say that the unskilled man will earn the same wage at i8 as at 28 or 38. His " peak" earnings depend not on his skill but upon the number of hours he works. Consequently if this man is contemplating marriage he has no reason for postponing it until a later age. His wage will never be large, and he can settle down into the social life that his fellows enjoy and will not feel that in his own particular sphere he is either superior or inferior in social standing. If he earns 50s. a week he can marry on this, as his wife is not expected to dress, to entertain, or amuse herself in any other way than that
which is dictated by the term 50s. a week.

OBSTACLES TO MARRIAGE

I63

In general therefore unskilled men marry early, for there is no point in postponement.
Apprenticeship and the Skilled Worker
In the next rank we have the phenomenon of apprenticeship. Apprenticeship to a skilled job, such as engineering or printing, implies that the apprentice works for five years or so at a wage that is not expected to be a living wage. He is considered to be forgoing part of such a living wage for the privilege of learning the trade. He may well qualify at 2I and if employment is available will then jump sharply in the economic scale to earn the wage of a skilled man.
How long does apprenticeship last ? In those trades where apprenticeship is still of significance-mainly in printing and bookbinding, apprenticeship lasts seven years, apprenticeship on newspaper printing lasting five years. This means that a man apprenticed in these trades is qualified to draw a skilled craftsman's wage at the age of 22 or 23. It is probably no great hardship to postpone marriage until this age, and in many cases in printing it is not possible for a man to continue to be an apprentice i.e. to draw an apprentice's wage, if he has reached the age of 25 and is still not qualified. While it is of interest to note that apprenticeship lasts as long as seven years it is probably not of great importance to us as its significance in industry is rapidly declining, except that there is a large likelihood that marriage will be postponed, as the wage in the seventh year is usually £2 4s. per week and the wage of a fully skilled man rises sharply when apprenticeship is over to double that of the seventh year of apprenticeship.* In printing there is relatively little difficulty in getting a job when apprenticeship has been completed, for as printing is one of the most highly organized jobs the printers themselves make sure that a number of apprentices appropriate to the possibilities of future employment are taken on.
In other spheres, e.g. engineering and building, old-style apprenticeship is dying out. As apprenticeship is dying out in the
* New Survey of London Life and Labour, vol. 5, p. 85.

old form, and is not likely to be revived, we must not give too much attention to the question of its ability to postpone marriage. In printing, the only great field where it still continues with strength, it is possible that the relatively good earnings of skilled men determine to some extent the outlook of the men, and have the effect of postponing the age of marriage until the time when some capital has been accumulated for the establishment of a home. Printers are notoriously sane men and desire in most cases the same (or better) opportunities for their children as they themselves had. Owing to a peculiar set of economic factors (one of the most important being the difficulties of foreign competition) printers have by strenuous union efforts been able to raise their earnings well out of the economic sphere usually associated with working men. A printer on newspaper (night) work can, according to the London Life and Labour survey, earn round about £I3* per week.
We have suggested that apart from printing, apprenticeship is not of great importance in industry nowadays, and for this reason the barrier to marriage raised by apprenticeship does not itself affect to any great degree the ability to marry at a relatively early age.
Clerical Workers
In the huge field of clerical labour we have a real problem to deal with. In general, clerical labour offers little return in the earlier years of employment, but it offers, in theory, respectability and the possibilities of a steady income in later life. Clerical work, especially in banking and insurance, attracts a certain type of young man coming from a certain social background. It is not possible to state what percentage of clerical workers are of middle-class origin and what percentage are of working-class origin, for such a survey has not been made. As far as London is concerned some estimation has been made. Dr. Klingender in his work on Clerical Labour in London, says: "the boys are derived in almost equal proportions from working-class and middle-class households
* Ibid., vol. 5, p. 284.

i64 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

while in the case of girls, the middle class predominates." (New London Survey Categories.)
Whether the clerk's household is working-
class or not, he is generally expected to exhibit externally a middle-class appearance
as far as clothes are concerned. It is extremely difficult to speak of the earnings and
standards of living of the clerical class, for the class includes persons in banks, insurance companies, warehouses, distributive and general trading, and apart from banks and insurance (relatively homogeneous industries) the type of work and salary varies greatly. However we do know something about the earning possibilities in these two industries. The Ministry of Labour pamphlet on
Insurance says*
" for the male workers of average capacity there will accrue a salary, built up by annual increments, of £I50 to £200 p.a. at about the age of 25, and of £250 to £300 p.a. at about the age of 30 if no special promotion is obtained"
and on page ii the pamphlet tells us " after a figure of about £300 has been reached advancement depends increasingly upon personality, opportunity, ability and any special qualifications required." £200 p.a. at 25 is not a very large salary, and the employees' organization (the Guild of Insurance Officials) maintain that the lowness of salary has a decidedly deterrent effect on the employee's ability to marry. The Guild itself has a slogan, " a married wage at a married age," and interprets this as meaning a salary of £250 per annum at 26 years of age. Although there are very few firms where the management's advice must be sought before marriage, and only one instance known to the Guild where a threat of dismissal upon marriage was made to an employee, those employees organized in the Guild of Insurance Officials consider that their salaries are low from the point of view of the age at which they would wish to get married. No inquiry has yet been made into the question of the age of marriage amongst these men, but the opinion of the Guild is that it is difficult for
* Choice of a Career, Ministry of Labour Pamphlet
No. I3, p. 9, 1939.

a male insurance employee to marry until he has reached the early thirties. When speaking of male insurance employees in this respect we mean those employees employed on office work and not the numer-
ous collectors on outside work whose remuneration depends on a number of different factors, and who for the purpose of representation and bargaining are organized in a separate union.
It has been estimated that there are some 70,000 to 8o,ooo men employed in insurance offices, approximately 40,000 of whom receive less than the £250 per annum considered by the Guild as adequate for marriage. Salary payments, conditions and types of work vary very greatly from office to office, and there are probably more opportunities in insurance than in banking for young men to show initiative (and to gain material recognition for this) by specializing in some particular branch of the work.
In banking we have a fairly similar position as regards the type of recruit and salaries paid, but we have here another factor of great interest to us, namely the rule in some banks on the age at which (or salary at which) marriage may take place. Four of the ten clearing banks have such regulations, which result in the age at which marriage is permissible being fixed at 25 or 26. In one of the Big Five banks (where no written regulation is in force) the management informed the writer that the average age of marriage for male clerks was 27, also that of a staff of some 9,500, 5,500 were married and 4,000 unmarried. The salary paid at 27 was between £200 and £250 p.a.
The salaries paid to bank clerks in other banks (in London) vary from £205 to £230 at 25.* The country scales are £io for large towns and £20 for small towns less than the London scales. So that it is possible for a man working as a bank clerk in a country town to obtain less than £200 p.a. at 25. The Bank Officers' Guild in their Report on
Bankingt suggest a salary rising by annual
* Income tax on bank clerks' salaries is paid by the
banks.
t Report on Service in Banking, Bank Officers' Guild, I936.

OBSTACLES TO MARRIAGE

i65

increments to £26o p.a. at 26 to be the desirable minimum (i.e. £253 approximately when taxed under I93I Budget scales), this salary to be paid to both men and women employees.
The Scottish banks, which have recently
been in the news over two cases of dismissal for marriage, have similar problems to the English banks. The Notman case* brought to the public notice the existence of marriage
regulations in banks. Of the nine clearing
banks in Scotland, five have written regulations or undertakings that a clerk will not marry until his age and salary have reached a certain level. In practice it is difficult to determine exactly the age at which marriage will be allowed, but from various information in the writer's possession it appears to be between 26 and 30 according to the bank employing. The average wage for a clerk of 26 is about £200 p.a., the averagewage at 30 about
£280 p.a. In some cases where there is a
marriage regulation for male clerks which is dependent on the salary scale, the banks will make allowances for those clerks who can make up their salary to the required mini,mum froin outside funds or private incomes.
But the existence of marriage regulations in banks is probably not the most important deterrent to early marriage. Those in a position to know the facts are confident that if these rules were swept away there would be little increase in the number of marriages amongst young clerks. They believe that by far the most important barrier is the economic one. The bank clerk must maintain a certain standard of living, and if employed outside the centre of London must mix with
those people and adopt those habits which will bring repute to the bank. In a small town a bank employee has many local duties to perform for which he is not paid. Subscriptions to local charities and local clubs are expected from him, and his salary is not calculated to include these. The young man marrying, again outside London, may be expected to live in a house appropriate to his position, and not in furnished rooms. The maintenance of this standard of life is of
* See The Scottish Banker, Special No., November
1938, for a full account of this case.

great importance to the young clerk desiring
promotion, and undoubtedly contributes to his unwillingness or inability to marry while
his wage is not such as would provide for
these activities.
The view of the Guild is that such regula-
tions about marriage as there are in banks
are an unnecessary and unwarranted inter-
ference with the personal life of the clerk, but hold, in the writer's opinion quite correctly,
that the basic fact which prevents early
marriage is not the regulations but the scale
of salaries, together with the standard of
expected by the employers. The employers' case is that from long
experience they are convinced of the undesirability of early marriage made by clerks whose salaries are not adequate for this
adventure. They maintain that they have ample evidence of the financial difficulties into which such young men get themselves, and maintain that very many cases of misappropriation of the banks' funds arise because of the financial difficulties due to supporting a wife and family. In having such regulations and understandings they claim to be acting in the best interests of the clerks and of the public.
One former bank employee, who acted as inspector for one of the Big Five for a number of years, informed the writer that in this bank men " went wrong " at the rate of about one a week throughout the year, and that in nine out of ten cases the cause was due to the demands of a wife or family on the insufficient means of the clerk.
The employers' point of view on the question of wages is probably fairly stated by an extract from the Ministry of Labour pamphlet ;* the writers, in explaining the salary scales of banks, say that " it will be obvious that for the first four or five years a junior in a bank will be just as dependent on a certain amount of help from his parents as in preparation for other careers." This view of banking as a career for which training is necessary is, in part, a remnant of the days when young men of some means went into banks, intending at a later date either to
* Choice of a Career, Ministry of Labour Pamphlet
No. 12, p. 9, I936.

i66 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

buy themselves a share in the bank, or in idea of the age at which marriage takes place

some other business enterprise.

by looking up the Occupational Census.

We should not imagine from the above This cannot tell us anything definite about

description of banking that the bank clerks such an age but gives us an idea of the

are seething with discontent at their in- number at any age who have managed to

ability to marry. We must realize as a fact marry. Out of a total of I8,90I married

that many of them have been brought up in medical practitioners, twenty-eight only were

surroundings where, rightly or wrongly, they married in the age group of 2I-24, and I,067

do not see anything peculiar in waiting until in the age group of 25-29.* This tells its own

they are 27 before marrying. For many in story, namely that long training and the

this type of employment, marriage is worth necessity for working up a practice makes

waiting and saving for, as it takes them out marriage a financial responsibility which the

of an old milieu into new surroundings, with young doctor is unable to face. Similarly in

great possibilities of new interests and dentistry, the 8,797 male married dentists

enjoyments.

include only 334 whose ages are between 2I

We have dealt with banking at some and 29.t

length, firstly because it is possible to get a Under the heading Judges, Stipendiaries

good deal of information on this subject, and Barristers of the Census table we find

secondly because it is a relatively homo- that of i,887 married men in the professions

geneous industry, and thirdly because it only 288 are between the ages of 2I and 34,

represents an interesting type of employ- and those married men under the age of 30

ment, a type of employment which is number only I20.+ Training for the position

relatively safe from violent economic varia- of solicitor also demands a certain raising

tions, gives no quick returns but solid of the age for marriage. While the age group

rewards to the industrious, and in which the 2I-29 showed 2,379 qualified solicitors, only

ideas of loyalty to one's firm and one's social 568 of these were married, and of these 568

class are very strong.

only 39 were between the ages of 2I and 24.§

The banking industry in England and It is not necessary to say much more on

Wales employs approximately 50,000 men the professions, as numerically they are of

clerks and I5,000 women clerks. Nearly all less importance than those occupations

the women employees are receiving less than employing tens of thousands of persons.

£250 p.a., while some 20,000 male employees Training for the professions-cannot be easily

are receiving less than £250 p.a.*

obtained except by being willing and financially able to look ahead to four or five

The Professional Classes

years of study during which time no earnings

When we come on to the question of the are expected.

professional classes, we have at once to face

different problems. In the main, persons The Fighting Services

entering the professions of medicine, den- The men in the fighting services also have

tistry or law do not expect to be qualified their marriage problems. Marriage allow-

until they are well over 20 years of age, and ances to men in the Services are not paid

for this reason know well that their earning immediately a man is married. In the Army,

days will begin many years after those of in a man's sixth year of service a marriage

other young men. To such persons marriage and family allowance is paid.II In the Royal

is only to be considered when they are well * Census (Occupations), I93I. Physicians, Surgeons,

established in their practice.

Registered Medical Practitioners.

In the case of medicine we can get some

t Ibid. Dental Practitioners.
I Ibid. Judges, Stipendiaries and Baristers.

§ Ibid. Solicitors.

* Figures obtained from Annual Report of the Bank- II For wife, I7S. a week; for wife and one child, ing Unemployment Insurance Board, 1938. Figures 22S. 6d. a week; for wife and two children, 26s. 6d. a

given in this report concern a certain number of bank week; for wife and three children, 28s., a week. (War

messengers and cleaners.

Office Press Circular, May 3rd, I938.)

OBSTACLES TO MARRIAGE

I67

Air Force family allowances are paid for a his money. For both types of employment

wife and any children under I4 to married marriage is likely to be postponed for socio-

men of 26 years of age at the following rates: economic reasons, rather than for reasons of

Warrant officers 23s. 6d. per week, flight real poverty.

sergeants I9s. 6d., and ranks below sergeants

I7s. a week. Allowances for children are at Legal Barriers to Marriage

the rate of 5s. 6d. for the first child, gs. for
two children, IIs. for three children and I2s. 6d. for four children. Where the family has Government quarters including fuel and light only the children's addition is given. The Navy allows marriage allowances to men over 25, conditional upon the man being willing to have deductions made from
his own pay.
The fact that much of the soldier's, sailor's or airman's pay is in kind makes it difficult for a man in the Services to keep a wife and family until he has qualified for this privilege by reaching a certain age.

The number of instances where legal
barriers or quasi-legal barriers to marriage are encountered are small and confined
almost entirely to some banks and to some overseas employing bodies. It is extremely difficult to get an idea of the age at which employees of overseas employing bodies marry, as the rules are very different from company to company, and there are great differences between the ages at which men are recruited for jobs overseas. If we wish to show the significance of this question from the point of view of the population situation we should consider if possible those cases

involving relatively large numbers of persons.

Financial Barriers to Marriage

The two main spheres of male employment where marriage cannot be said to follow automatically upon the desire for it are, it seems from our survey, the spheres of white-
collar employment and the sphere of professional work. In the first the desire to
marry is hindered by the necessity of keeping up a certain standard of appearances on a
salary which is calculated upon the basis of the needs of a single man; the aspect of regarding banking and insurance work as a profession for which " training " is necessary also enters here. In the second, the professions, training finishes with the passing of qualifying examinations, but earning does not, as in apprenticed occupations, begin immediately.

Women
The question of women's employment has been debated at length ever since women claimed, and later showed, that they could be usefully employed in many spheres of clerical and manufacturing work. In industry the fact that a woman is married or unmarried is of no particular interest to the employer. In the cotton industry for instance it has long been the tradition that both man and wife work in the mill. The wife has of course to take periods off work when she is expecting a child, but once the child is old enough to look after itself, or if it can be looked after by somebody else, the woman returns to the mill as soon as she is fit. There may be a preference for unmarried

After training there is usually a period of years during which capital must be accumulated and debts paid before the young

women in some industries, but it is not as
strong as the prohibition of married women in clerical employment.

practitioner is really independent. A further point about the position in medicine is the Clerical Work

necessity for the young doctor (if he has There are very few spheres of clerical

bought himself a practice or a share in a employment in which a woman is not

practice) to attain as soon as possible that expected to retire on marriage.

standard of life regarded as appropriate to Employment in banking, insurance and

a doctor of the district in which the previous some general commercial work carry this

incumbent has for many years been making requirement. Women employed in the Civil

i68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Service are expected to retire on marriage. as yet has made no move about the female

The Civil Service position has been reported clerical staff.

on by various Royal Commissions and Com- In local government it is the general rule

mittees, ever since it was first raised in I875 that women resign on marriage.

by the ruling of the Post Office regarding its Some of the distributive trades, some

women employees. This operated a marriage education authorities and certain commercial

bar against women staff. In I9I9 the Sex firms allow women to continue in employ-

Disqualification (Removal) Act laid down ment after marriage, but in the main clerical

the principle that no person should be barred work and teaching are closed to married

from civil or judicial office by reason of their women.

sex, but added the proviso which gave the

King in Council power to determine the condition on which women should be appointed to the Civil Service.
In I934 a Committee on Women's Ques-
tions laid it down that " The object to be aimed at should be the retention in or appointment to the Service of a married woman in those cases where, in the opinion

Opposition to the Employment of Married Women
The arguments put forward by those opposed to the employment of married women fall under four main headings.
i. That the employment of married women would intensify the unemployment problem.

of the appropriate authority, any dis- 2. That it is wrong in principle for two

advantage which may arise out of the incomes to go into one home.

employment of a married woman is likely to 3. That the children's interests suffer

be outweighed by her special qualification when the mother takes paid employment

or special experience." This is the position outside the home.

at present and it means that in nearly all 4. Married women would be less efficient.

cases marriage entails resignation from the It is worth studying these arguments, for

post. although they are seemingly sound there are

fair answers to each one.

Teaching
In teaching some of the fiercest battles have been fought on the question of married women and many victories have been won. Of the 35I education authorities of England and Wales, twenty-seven now employ married women teachers. In answer to a question in the House, Mr. Ramsbotham, Parliamentary Secretary to the Board of Education, said that on March 3Ist, I933, II,9I3 married women were employed in public elementary schools and practical instruction centres in England and Wales.* The I93I Census shows
I6,742 marred women teachers out of a total of i8i,8o6 or approximately 9 per cent.t
The London County Council, which allows married women teachers to retain their jobs, has recently extended this concession to certain other classes of female employees but

As to the first, it is a matter of opinion
whether the employment of married women
would increase unemployment. Many would
say that our unemployment is now so grave that the employment of married women can have little effect upon it. Remedies more
fundamental are necessary. But it is true that many men object to being undercut in the labour market by female labour which is paid at lower rates. But any labour, female, male or juvenile, which undercuts has the
same effect. If it is wrong in principle for two incomes
to go into one home we should have to reconsider our whole view of society. If it is wrong for two earned incomes to go into one home why is it right for one earned and one unearned income to go into one home, or for that matter two unearned incomes ?
If two incomes go into one home, more

* Hansard, Feb. 15th, I934, p. 2083.

money is likely to be spent on relative

t Census (Occupations), 1931. Women Teachers.
(The higher figures in the I93I Census includes all
women teachers, except music teachers.)

luxuries, whether domestic service or any-
thing else, and this in itself can have a

OBSTACLES TO MARRIAGE

I69

favourable effect on the circulation of money.

c i. That in some cases the bringing up

That the children's interest may suffer if of a family is possible only on the basis of

the mother takes employment away from two incomes.

home is true, but we are speaking at the " 2. That many intelligent and capable

moment of marriage and not of children. women who are good office workers are

If children arrive we have a new problem temperamentally unsuited for the duties

and may well decide that the mother should involved in the care of small children.

be persuaded to remain at home.

" 3. That in such cases the work in

The efficiency argument is very interesting. question is better and more efficiently done

It cannot be proved that a married woman from the children's point of view by some-

is always less efficient at her job than a one other than their mother, and

single one. In many cases marriage may be " 4. That it is reasonable to leave the

helpful in . increasing her efficiency, and, decision as to who shall look after the

especially in teaching, it can be argued children to the parents, who, after all, know

forcibly that a married woman is likely to the full circumstances of the case." *

have at least as much, and probably more,
human understanding than a single woman.
In general clerical work a married woman
may not be more efficient because of the fact of her marriage, but it is difficult to
prove that she must be less efficient. If we
acknowledge that the Americans know some-
thing of business efficiency we must also
recognize that the extent to which married
women carry on clerical employment is infinitely greater in the U.S.A. than in this
country.
The one argument which is probably worthy of attention is not often admitted by those antagonists of married women in employment. Most secretarial and clerical work to-day consists in the repetition of easily acquired skills. These can soon be
learnt, and years of experience do not produce much added skill. If you can dismiss a woman on marriage and hire a young girl to take her place, why should you increase your wage bill unnecessarily by keeping on those who will demand the natural wage increases that are their legitimate expectations? Little is apparently lost in efficiency by taking on new girls to fill the place of those who leave for marriage. This has been the experience of the Post Office, where it has been calculated that of IO,OOO women in the service at the age of 2o, 2,207 leave for marriage before 25 and a further 2,777 before the age of 30. This has no effect on efficiency.

The extent to which the employment of
married women in clerical jobs obtains in
the country can be shown by the Census
figures for I93I.t Married women formed
some 21 per cent. of the total employed (i.e.
II,500 out of 429,700). In distribution, more married women are
employed, especially in some London stores. In some stores (mostly the fairly expensive
ones) married women who have a special circle of customers are retained, probably
because of their usefulness to the store, while in one large store young married women are preferred in many departments, especially if their husbands are also employed by the
same firm. The most striking fact about the position
of women in clerical jobs is that they seem to be quite uninterested in the question of a marriage bar. In most large places of employment where such a bar is in force there is a socially-minded minority in favour of its abolition, but in nearly all cases this minority is very small. In the Civil Service Clerical Association, in many ways the most advanced of all clerical unions, a ballot of women members has not yet shown a majority in favour of the principle of the retention of a post on marriage. The last ballot of women members (I929) did not show a majority in favour of its abolition and a new ballot was requested by the annual conference of the

The Civil Service Clerical Association offers * Report on the Marriage Bar, Civil Service Clerical

the following arguments in favour of the retention of married women in the Service.

Association, 1938. t Census (Occupations), I931. Women Clerks and
Typists.

170 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

C.S.C.A. this year. From those interested in organizing employees m banking, insurance and local government we receive the same reply-namely apathy of women members
on this topic. It seems quite true to say that the vast majority of women who enter this

type of employment regard it as a means of
filling up the time between leaving school and getting married. By taking up such employment they earn some money, make
many friends, but hope for and expect not a career but marriage.

M ETROo1x1
is the only International Review of Statistics
M E TR O 1I
accepts original articles on statistical methods and on the applications of statistics to the different spheres of
activity, and reviews or discussions of results obtained by statistical method in various fields of science.
CONTENTS of Vol. XIII, No. 3
RENZO CISBANI. Contributi alla teoria delle medie-Parte II. C. GINI e G. ZAPPA. Sulle proprieta delle medie potenziate e combinatorie. DANSIE T. SAWKINS. The use of cumulative graphs for estimation of means, higher moments, etc. G. A. BAKER. The probability that the standard deviation of a second sample will differ from the standard
deviation of a first sample by a certain multiple of the standard deviation of the first sample. HELMUT MUHSAM. Bevdlkerungsprobleme Palastinas.
G. PIETRA. Gli esodi in Italia durante la guerra mondiale (I9I5-19I8).
METRO1I
is published in numbers. Four successive numbers make a volume of 700 to 800 pages in all. Subscription price: Ioo It. lire for complete volume, 30 It. lire for single numbers. The whole set of METRON,
consisting of Vol. I to Vol. XII, can be obtained exceptionally at I.200 It. lire. Business Correspondence, including subscriptions, should be addressed to!:
AMMINISTRAZIONE DI " METRON "-Istituto di Statistica della
R. Universita-ROME-Via delle Terme di Diocleziano, lo.
Eugenics Review, Vol. X33, No. .

