ENERGY IN THE FUTURE

By SIR CHARLES DARWIN, K.B.E., F.R.S.

R. P. C. PUTNAM, a consulting M engineer, was charged by the American
Atomic Energy Commission to make a study of- the prospective demands there would be for energy during the next fifty or a hundred years. He was to consider this primarily for the United States, but also for the wvhole world. His findings have recently been published in an important book.* Although such a study necessarily involves making estimates of future probabilities, Mr. Putnam does all he can to avoid setting himself up as a prophet. Instead he takes what seems a quite admirably appropriate line for his purpose, for he imagines himself in the position of the trustee of some very large trust. Such a trustee must take all necessary precautions against unsuitable investments, but in planning his investments he is entitled to disregard remote possibilities such, for example, as the simultaneous failure of all the great banks. Acting on this principle the present trustee takes it for granted that the world will go on in the same general manner that it has been doing in the recent past, and his forecasts for the future are thus mainly extrapolations from the present conditions of the world.
In the light of this policy the trustee has to decide what is the probable trend of development for the world, and in deciding this he, as an American, is very naturally influenced by the view that the only world really worth having is one running broadly on the lines at present established in the United States. He therefore assumes that America and Western Europe will want to go on and extend their present " literate industrial-urban-farm" pattern of life, while the under-developed countries, whose life is based
* Putnam, P. C. Energy in the Future. London, I954. Macmillan. (Published by Contract with United States Atomic Commission, I953.) Pp. x + 556. Price gos.

for the most part on " illiterate subsistence-
farming," will continue, as they are doing now, to aspire towards turning over to the industrial-urban-farm pattern. This seems a not unreasonable line to take about the
present wishes of most of mankind, and the
supply of sufficient energy is an essential thing to make it possible, but it must be
recognized that many other things besides energy would be needed. However, these other things fall outside the scope of the
present book, and certainly the provision
of energy is one of the most important needs that must be satisfied if the whole world is to turn over to the industrial way of life.
The book falls into five main parts. First there is consideration of the population numbers to be expected during the next century. Then there is consideration of the demands for energy to be expected from them. There follows an examination of the quantities of " fossil fuels," coal, oil, etc., available. Then there is consideration of " income ' energy, from water-power, wind,
forests, etc., and finally there is atomic energy. These matters are all discussed in great detail, making use of all the knowledge at present available, and they are explained with much use of charts and diagrams and tables. Moreover, more than half the book is given up to long explanatory notes. With this vast amount of information the book could claim almost to rank as an
encyclopaedia of the subject of energy.
Anyone wanting information on some detail
can find it somewhere in the book, and can get references to the documents on which the information is based. It does not make the book easy reading, but nevertheless it is quite possible to get the gist of it by running more lightly through the text, and the reader will be much helped in this by summaries and conclusions that are given at the end of each chapter.
For the subject of population Putnam

237-

238 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

begins by reviewing the numbers of mankind for forecasting future populations, but finds

in the past. In I0000 B.C. the population that none of them can be accepted with

may have been about one million, though this any confidence. So in his role of trustee he

is very uncertain and may be wrong by a assumes the world will go on in the way it has

factor of ten either way. Civilization was been going in the recent past; that is to say,

invented some six or seven thousand years he does not consider the possibility of major

later, and it is estimated that by the begin- catastrophes, or of wholly unexpected strokes

ning of the Christian era the population of of exceptional good fortune. The habits of

the world had grown to something like 300 2,000 million people cannot be changed in

million. With fluctuations up and down it a day, or even in a generation, so it is fairly

stayed roughly constant for i,6oo years, and safe to extrapolate from present trends for at

then there began what can only be called least fifty years, and rather less certainly

an explosion of population. In the three for a hundred. The results are quite

hundred years from I650 till now it has formidable.

jumped from less than 500 million to 2,400 By A.D. 2000 the population will be a

million, and the increase is going on at an little short of 4,000 million, and by A.D. 2050

ever faster pace-at present every day year something above 6,ooo million. There is one

in and year out there are about 70,000 more thing which makes these estimates even more

births than deaths, and soon it will be Ioo,ooo. formidable than the mere numbers suggest.

It is easy to explain why these increases' An important characteristic of our present

have suddenly occurred among the Western way of life is that every year the amount

nations, for they can be attributed to the of energy used per head of population

rapid filling up, of the nearly vacant New steadily increases, and so the trustee will
World, and to the enormous improvements have to satisfy much more exorbitant

in medical science and in transportation, demands for energy than are suggested

both of them consequences of the Scientific by the mere population numbers. Of course,

Revolution, which have lengthened the the question also arises of the prospects of

individual life and removed the danger of being able to feed these expanded popula-

local famines. But Putnam makes an tions, and this is examined in one of the

interesting point in this connection. At the longer notes later in the book. The trustee

same time that the Europeans started arrives at the conclusion that it should be

increasing there was a similar increase in perfectly possible to do so, because the

China, and this began long before there was peasantry of most of the world at present

any serious contact between the two civili- have many very inferior agricultural prac-

zations. This certainly calls for study, for tices, and these could easily be improved.

no one seems to know why it happened, The reforms would not even call for any

though it is hardly reasonable to suppose that elaborate modern agricultural machinery;

a population can explode in this way without only comparatively simple and obvious

some good objective cause. Was it perhaps changes would be needed, but there does

because of the extension in the use of some remain in the mind of the reader the question

new crop in the same way that the introduc- whether it is possible to reform all the con-

tion of the potato explosively increased the servative habits of 2,000 million peasants in

numbers of the Irish in the early nineteenth a couple of generations.

century? This unexplained Chinese increase In the next chapters he comes to his

began in the early part of the present phase principal subject, the energy that must be

of increases; of course the lat'r world-wide supplied for these people. To handle the

increases are directly due to the Scientific large figures that arise he adopts a special

Revolution invented by the West.

very large unit of energy, the Q. This is

From reviewing the past Putnam passes defined as a million million million British

to the prospects for the future. He examines thermal units (Io18 B.T.U.), and is the

the various methods that have been proposed energy contained in not quite 40,000 million

ENERGY IN THE FUTURE

239

tons of coal. He estimates that in the first The next subject is "income" energy,

eighteen and a half centuries after Christ and the results are also very discouraging.

the whole of mankind used up about 6 Q. Timber and peat do not look profitable.

This was chiefly from trees and farm-waste Thus if forestry were systematically devel-

such as straw and dung, and its chief use oped in all suitable parts of the earth, the

was for cooking and house warming. Since trustee reckons that by A.D. 2050 the total

I850 the leading place has been taken by trees of the world might have energy I 4 Q.

coal, and in this century alone some 4 Q This is the accumulation of a century and it

of coal has been burnt, and it is now being is really quite a lot, but it is not important

consumed at a rate of I0 Q a century. One if measured on the scale at which coal is

of the most startling figures he gives is that, being used even now. Peat and farm-wastes

of the total amount of coal burnt since the give little help. Water-power is much the

beginning of the world up till now, about half most important source of income energy,

has been burnt in the United States in the but even that is disappointing. At present

period since I920!

the energy derived each year from water-

He goes in detail into the expected reserves power is less than i per cent of the total

of coal, and in particular of coal in seams energy developed from all sources, and in

convenient enough to be mined, and he comes fact its use is increasing at a slower rate than

to the conclusion that there will be little the use of coal. If all imaginable sources of

such coal left in fifty years. In making his water were suitably harnessed, there would

estimate of what coal is worth winning he still only come from them about half a Q a

takes as standard that the energy it produces century. And there is one trouble even so

should not cost more than twice as much as which has hardly yet had to be faced, for the

it does now. This is an arbitrary figure, great reservoirs that store the water are all

and perhaps it would have been better to silting up, so that many of them will be use-

take a bigger factor, because there must be a less for storage before the end of a century.

lot of coal at present produced in various Perhaps the silt might at intervals be dug

parts of the world which is in fact already out, but the need of the energy to do the

costing more than twice as much as the coal digging again lowers the total value of the

obtained from the best American mines. Still, water-power. The general conclusion is that

it is reasonable to take some fairly small water-power should be developed wherever

factor like this, because if the cost of energy possible, but that it can never be expected

were many times more than it is now, it would to carry more than a small fraction of the

certainly have a profound effect on the energy load demanded by our present

shape of our civilization.

civilization.

There is a great deal of information in the Of other sources of energy neither wind

book about reserves of coal and oil, and the nor tides can ever give a really important

subject is judged conservatively, but without contribution, though they will no doubt be

too excessive caution. As a final summ'ary developed in the appropriate places. The

of the situation the trustee estimates that only serious contributor from income is

the amount of fossil fuel still available has the direct use of sunlight. Experiments have

energy 27 Q. There is thus no room for the been going on with this for some time, and

cheery optimism which claims that new oil minor things such as cooking and the heat-

wells are being discovered every year and ing of water are easily accomplished. The

that there need be no end to this. The heating of houses is also feasible on a

reader is left with the conviction that, no limited scale, and the trustee estimates

matter how economically coal and oil are that in the parts of the United States with the

used, there simply has got to be some new appropriate climate something like 6 per cent

source of energy within the next fifty years of the house heating could be done in this

or so if our way of life is to continue on manner at a cost not more than twice the

the present lines.

present cost. For the direct production of

240 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mechanical power the difficulties are much greater, but so of course are the rewards,
because the energy of sunlight is so enormous.
Roughly speaking a square yard facing the
sun receives energy at the rate of a horse-
power, so that if even a fraction of this
energy could be won nothing else would be needed. Thus Putnam calculates that a plot of land seventy miles square in the
deserts of New Mexico would provide
enough energy to meet all the present energy requirements of the whole United States. The problem of turning this light-energy into power-energy has not been solved, and though it seems likely that some solution will be found, it looks likely that a sunengine would always involve great capital outlay, and so would not satisfy the trustee's demand for cheap energy.
There is also the possibility of using
nature's own method, the vegetable, for getting energy out of sunlight. This is not thermo-dynamically a very efficient process, but there is so much solar energy that efficiency hardly matters. At present probably the cheapest way of getting such energy is simply to plant a row of trees, let them grow and then cut them down, but a more effective industrial process than this is being tried. The green alga, chlorella, can grow at a prodigious rate in water containing nutrient salts with carbon dioxide, and of course sunlight. The daily yield is many times that of any of the higher plants, but the cost is estimated at more than a hundred times the present cost of energy. When an experimental process is at last developed into full production the cost is often very greatly reduced, but it is too much to hope that it could be cut by a hundred. Furthermore, one of the characters of the algae is that they are very largely proteins, and so they might contribute directly to human diet, and it §eems hardly likely that a world perpetually asking for more food would allow such a source of it to be used for the less essential purpose of providing mechanical energy.
Since the central purpose of the book is to consider energy, the author hardly touches on the other difficulties the world will have to face in the near future. One of

these is the approaching exhaustion of the supplies of many of the metals, such as zinc, lead and copper, which play such an impor-
tant part in our present life. It is sometimes
possible to use other metals instead, and some, such as iron and aluminium, are never likely to go short, but even so there would
be energy troubles. Thus there is nothing impossible about making an electric genera-
tor with aluminium wires instead of copper, but the efficiency would go down on account
of the inferior electric conductivity, so that once again the energy would cost more.
There is another matter on which the author
only touches lightly, though it is really a very important matter for the trustee, and this is the storage of energy. Most income energy
can only be won during part of the time, and to be really useful to us we need a more or
less continuous supply. Thus sunlight will only yield energy during the day, so that it would not light our houses at night. Similar troubles would occur for the tides or wind. So the use of income energy on any reasonable scale demands the necessity of storing it. This may be done mechanically as in a water reservoir, but that calls for
building the reservoir; or electrically as in a storage battery, but present storage batteries require lead, and that is nearly exhausted; or chemically as in a vegetable, and the difficulties of that have been already described. So it would seem that an important part of the problem of developing income energy is to find a really cheap way of storing it, but the book hardly touches on the subject.
The remaining source of energy is of course the nucleus of the atom. This looks a most promising source, and it may well replace the fossil fuels for quite a long time. When atomic energy was first considered it was thought that only uranium 235 could be used, and this would have meant that the total amount of energy in the world to be derived from the nucleus would have been roughly equal to the amount from coal; that is to say, it would have been very useful, but no final solution of the energy problem. But it now looks extremely probable that an efficient method of " breeding " will be

ENERGY IN THE FUTURE

24I

found, which will make the much more abundant uranium 238 also fissile, and also the element thorium; in this way a supply of energy many times greater will be won. Uranium is not a very rare element-it is, for example, commoner than silver-but for the most part it is very widely distributed in very small quantities. Nevertheless the energy of the individual atoms is so great that even these very small quantities could give a lot of energy; there is, for example, more atomic energy in a ton of granite than chemical energy in a ton of coal. At present only the richest concentrations of uranium are being worked, but soon poorer ones will have to be used, with all the attendant difficulties. With the possibility of " breeding" it seems not unreasonable to expect that energy could be supplied to the world on the present scale for a couple of thousand years at least.
There is no reference in the book to the
thermonuclear reactions of hydrogen as a source of power, presumably because nothing had been published on this subject at the time the book was written. No one yet has much idea how to make hydrogen-or more probably it would be deuterium-give up its energy slowly instead of in a violent explosion, but it may be that in due course this problem will be solved. If that is achieved, a practically infinite amount of energy could be obtained, perhaps by some rather elaborate processing of sea water. It must be remembered, however, that any invention takes a

long time to move from first discovery to final production, and it is not over-cautious to say that even if the key discovery were made today it might well be fifty to eighty years before it bore full fruit.
In dealing with atomic energy Putnam discusses how it would have to be used. It would be produced in great power-
stations, and so it would not be convenient for all the purposes for which the present small power-units are so suitable. The railways could be electrified, and some house heating could be done with it, but he estimates that this would only satisfy about IO per cent of the power demanded in America. It is hardly too much to say that the central feature of the American way of life is the automobile, and however unlimited the supply of nuclear power may be made, it cannot help in the retention of this characteristic when once the fossil fuels are exhausted. Perhaps it may one day be possible to turn the energy liberated from the nucleus into chemical energy in the form of some liquid fuel, but here again the time for the development of the process might well be so long that the fossil fuels would be exhausted before the substitute was created.
These are the chief subjects treated in this important work. There are quite a number of others which have not been touched on here, but anyone who wishes to be fully informed must have recourse to the book itself, and he will find it a rewarding study.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 4

