JUVENILE DELINQUENCY

A N informal luncheon was held at the wrong one. Deficiencies could be, to some

Eccleston Hotel, S.W.i, on Thursday, extent, made up, so child delinquents should

April 23rd, I942, when an address was not be thought of as helpless victims of inborn

given by Mrs. Rackham, J.P., on Juvenile characteristics.

Delinquency, in place of Miss Margery Fry, Putting these considerations aside there

who had had to leave for America. The Hon. were about 65 per cent of children of whom

Mrs. Grant Duff was in the chair.

it might be said that their delinquency was

Mrs. Rackham said she would not speak on caused either by bad environment or by

the subject of heredity because that was the unhappy events in their lives. The speaker

Society's subject and not her own. She had confessed that it was with this 65 per cent

been a magistrate for twenty-two years and that she found herself most familiar.

had learned that heredity played a very important part in the work of the Courts. The Child Delinquency To-day

controversy as to whether the larger part Much was heard about the heavy increase was played by heredity or by environment in.the numbers of the children coming before was an age-long one, and in the Juvenile the Court and it was inevitable in war-time

Courts there were some people who thought that there should be an increase. Two things that the evils caused by a bad environment had to be remembered: first, that although

were so obvious, and at the same time so the figures might be large, some of the remediable, that they could not be expected offences which brought children into court
to do more than deal with that aspect. were trifling and in more happily placed They were inclined to occupy themselves homes they would not come into court at all;

with environment about which they knew and secondly, that the number of children

something rather than with the subject of who came into court was very small compared

heredity which was obscure, particularly as with those who did not. In a place where

it was difficult to know how bad heredity juvenile delinquency was high, possibly

could be remedied.

one child in 8o or go might come before the

She thought they must have regard to court; in a place where it was low, it might

both, although the idea of the born criminal be one in I20.

was now exploded. Cyril Burt said that the This did not mean that the work of the

number of criminal children who might be Juvenile Courts was not important-it was';

said to have "criminal blood in their veins " the coming into court might be the first step

was trifling. He added, however, that as a in the child's downward course. Thirteen

result of his investigations into large numbers was the peak age for male delinquents.

of criminal children he came to the conclusion More came into court at that age than at any that in more than a third of the cases there other, which showed how important it was was some deep constitutional failing which to check delinquency at that time. Although was really the prime cause of their miscon- the court was a very good instrument for duct. finding out whether the child had or had not
That constitutional failing presented the committed the offence with which it was most obdurate type of delinquenIt with which charged, she did not think it was very good Juvenile Courts had to deal; it was the type for finding out very much about the child in which punishment was not of any use; himself; the court could see the symptom the only hope lay in some kind of palliative but often could not discover the cause. It treatment. Although such tendencies might was fairly simple to decide, for instance, that be irre'mediable, they could be recognized, a child had taken something from a shop, and when recognized, forestalled, and but the causes might be very varied: the directed into a right channel instead of a child might be hungry or greedy, the motive

6S

66 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

might be jealousy or spite; it might be a the average age of the magistrates in some

desire to please, or a sort of bravado, other of the courts was over 70, which gave an

children " dared " it to do something stupid; idea of how very old some of them must be.

obviously all these causes needed different It would also be better to have more women

methods of treatment.

magistrates.

Causes of Delinquency

One of the signs that the magistrates were not keeping up to date was that there had

Children became delinquent for most been a tendency to return to the discredited

diverse reasons. Sometimes it was because punishment of birching. This method was

of coming from a very poor home; but quick, cheap, and ineffective; it had been

sometimes because of coming from a very dwindling to very small figures until the last

indulgent home where the children had never year before the war, but one was sorry to see

been taught to check their desires. It might that it was rising again. It had been found

be a home which was too strict, or one where by experienced magistrates that boys who

no one took any trouble to control the child. had been punished in this way were nearly

The child might be so dull or stupid that it always back again in a short time. If there

had no idea of the consequences of its actions; was one thing which a boy valued it was a

on the other hand, it might be quick-witted reputation for pluck amongst his mates, and

and have a desire to show how clever it was. he would show he did not care about pain of

A child in poor health might go wrong that kind. Cyril Burt said that in 99 cases

because of some physical cause, and so might out of IOO birching made the offender more

a child overflowing with health and spirits furtive and defiant-the speaker was quite

which did not find within the narrow limits sure the magistrates would never find the

of its home sufficient outlet for its energies. hundredth case. Another authority, Mr.

One of'the main causes was the broken Justice Du Parcq, had said that he had seen

home; one or both parents dead, or the many long criminal records which began

parents separated, or on such bad terms that with the birching of a small boy. The pun-

the home was a continual battleground. The ishment was made illegal in the Children's

latest figures from an approved school for Bill when it was passing through the House

boys showed that 40 per cent of the boys of Commons in I934, but it was put back by
came from homes of that kind and it was to the House of Lords. The Bill was returned

be feared that much of that kind of trouble, to the House of Commons and the provision

which led to delinquency, was bound to was again taken out, but the Lords put it

increase during and after the war. The back once more. It was thought better to

fathers were away (and children were suffer- pass the Bill with the penalty of birching

ing from that now) and a number of marriages included rather than that it should not be

would be unable to stand the strain of separa- passed at all.

tion, with the result that unhappy homes or Magistrates had other methods of dealing

broken marriages would present a crop of with children; they could be sent to one of

juvenile delinquents in years to come.

the approved schools-of the Home Office, and

Juvenile Courts

very useful indeed that method was in some cases. Foster homes where children could be

The speaker now turned to a consideration boarded out were badly needed, especially

of the courts themselves. Naturally, the for the younger children. There were children

great need was for better and younger as young as eight years old in approved

magistrates who understood and were inter- schools for whom a home life would be far

ested in the work they had to do. Efforts better. Where children were before the

had been made for some time to get younger court because they were in need of care and

magistrates, but these had not been as suc- protection one felt that at least the first

cessful as they should. A report issued by choice should be to see if they would do well

the Probation Officers' Association said that in a foster home before going to a school.

JUVENILE DELINQUENCY

67

The one thing which the children had to Social Factors

learn was to live as members of society, and Mrs. Rackham finally urged that this

they could do best by living in an ordinary question of juvenile delinquency must not

home. The probation system was valuable be separated from the whole subject of child

precisely because it left a child " in the open," welfare. The number of children before the

with the chance of leading an ordinary life courts depended on the social system under

but under guidance. It was very important which the population lived and the back-

that the scope and quality of the probation ground of the children's lives. The " bad "

service should be maintained. It had been or " broken " home was spoken of as the

very much weakened by the absence of men main cause of children going astray, but that

officers on service and those left must not be did not take the matter very far. Why was a

overburdenedwith more cases than they were home " bad "-or " broken "? It might very

able to supervise.

often be due to poverty, overcrowding, bad

Juvenile Court magistrates felt very much housing, over-work, or the drunkenness of

the need of provision for border-line children. one of the parents leading to impossible and

There were institutions for those certified as unbearable conditions of life. All these

mental defectives, but there were a great questions affected the number of children

number of children who, though not certi- before the juvenile courts more than any-

fiable, were unstable or neurotic or extremely thing else. Although better magistrates and

dull and backward. Such children were not a larger probation service were needed, yet

suited to large approved schools;, and there more than anything else we needed better

was a great need for special homes to which homes, better schools, better working condi-

they could be sent. To plunge them into tions and better play places where the

normal schools might not be fair, and it was children could occupy themselves and work

difficult to leave them to the probation officer off their high spirits in a healthy normal way.

because they might not be fit for the battle

of life and the probation officer could not Discuission

always be at their side. Although such Thanking Mrs. Rackham for her talk, Mrs. weak, border-line children might do well in Grant Duff said she was very glad of the a foster home, it was not easy to find foster emphasis on the fact that all these questions

parents who would undertake their charge. formed part of a great whole, and until

A home on the lines of the hostels for evacua- proper living conditions in a sane world were ted children unsuitable for billeting would be attained they would be continually present.

a useful model for the kind of home needed.

In answer to a question on the categories

Another great need was more knowledge into which children's offences fell, Mrs.

of the children. Years ago a Departmental Rackham said that the great majority were

Committee urged that there should be obser- thefts of some kind or other-sometimes in

vation centres such as exist in some other the home, more often from shops or stalls,

countries where children could stay for three from automatic machines, from bicycles

or four months to be observed under as (pumps, lamps, things left in the baskets

normal conditions as possible and as a result attached to bicycles), and then the bicycles

could be sent back home or boarded out or themselves or the motor cycles. There were

sent to a school or a smaller home. There very few cases of any other description.

had never been observation centres in this There were some of disorder in the streets,

country. Many authorities were setting up pulling down fences, injuring trees, and so

child guidance clinics which were a great on. There were very few sex offences or of

help to the magistrates, who could refer cruelty to younger children or animals.

cases to them for diagnosis; but even then Miss Stevens, of the Institute for the

it was often difficult to know what to do. Scientific Treatment of Delinquency, sug-

with the children, because of the lack of gested that teachers in special schools would

special schools or special foster parents. need psychological training apart from

68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

teaching abilities to understand the delin- Mr. Gun thought that heredity played a

quent nature. Mrs. Rackham replied that small part in the question of morals as

many teachers were trained; the head compared with ability. Whether people

master might have been a teacher or a were to be stable or not depended on

worker in boys' clubs, and his wife would heredity, but it was also a question of en-

often be the matron. Many of the schools vironment. He did not think that heredity

were denominational, which limited the played a very great part. There were cases

choice of teacher. Sometimes the masters where there seemed to be something wrong

had to live in and had, therefore, to be single and with which nothing could be done. He

men, which created another limitation. thought these were comparatively few in

Miss Stott, in answer to a question from number and bad environment was certainly

the Chairman, said that parents were apt to the reason for the vast majority of juvenile

find some difficulty with problem children. delinquency.

Of 54 consecutive cases she had tested for Mr. Marindin asked whether evacuation

the Institute for the Scientific Treatment of of either parents or children had contributed

Delinquency i8 were definitely above average to the increase in broken homes. Also

intelligence and 24 below; only I2 were whether for the smaller offences the appoint-

of average intelligence, which showed a ment of people who would deal with the

distribution of intelligence exactly the re- offences on the spot would not be more

verse of that in the population as a whole. effective? During the very short time that

In a normal institution one would find a child was at a remand home, was it possible

approximately 25 of average intelligence to give sufficient psychological treatment ?

and iA or I3 below.

How far was legal knowledge a necessary

The Chairman asked if the children were qualification of magistrates, or psychological

brought back into social life by treatment, knowledge, or experience in social questions ?

and Miss Stevens replied that a great many Mrs. Rackham replied that magistrates

became perfectly normal. Mrs. Rackham were appointed by the Lord Chancellor. No

said that the great majority of children did legal qualifications were necessary. The

not return to court. The juvenile court could Lord Chancellor had been making efforts to

not be blamed for the first appearance, but get younger magistrates; but it was often

it might be for the second. There were not until men and women had retired from

baffling cases which appeared again and work that they could attend courts which

again, where a child seemed to have every sat in the morning hours. There was a

advantage and yet continued to commit separate panel for the juvenile courts, and

offences. These were a minority, however. benches were urged to put their younger

Eight out of ten cases were not seen again, members, and certainly women, on that

but the two out of the ten were a great panel. The Howard League had always urged

problem.

that there should be some kind of training

Miss Stott said that even children who for magistrates, but nothing had been

appeared to have satisfactory homes might done.

be emotionally starved and psychologically With regard to evacuation, she lived in a

unstable.

reception area which had had its full share

Mrs. Rackham said that magistrates were of evacuated children. Some authorities had

observers of external conditions; they might made careful investigations into the effects

be told that the father was in work and there of evacuation and had come to the con-

was a good home and a good mother, and the clusion that the separation of children from

magistrates could only think it must be their parents was bad mentally; physically

inborn sin causing the child to steal. But the change might be good. There was often

one had to try to penetrate further and find great anxiety as to whether the parents were

out what was wrong, and that was often in danger, and whether they had forgotten

difficult to do.

their children. Parents very often suffered

JUVENILE DELINQUENCY

69

from jealousy. How far the figures in the machinery of the juvenile court was too

evacuation areas were affected she did not elaborate for these very small offences.

know. They had had some problems with Mr. Marindin said that one of the main

evacuated children in her area; they were objections to birching was that it took place

serious, but the numbers had not been long after the offence; if it took place

great.

immediately the effects were likely to be

With regard to the time in the remand less harmful, and might even be beneficial.

home, that ought not to be for long.. Remand He also suggested that some of the more

homes were not suitable places for a long trifling offences could be handed to the local

stay; the children were there because the headmaster to deal with on the spot, without

court was not ready to deal with the case or the intervention of the juvenile court. Mrs.

because the court had not decided what to Rackham agreed that it might be less harm-

do, or because the child was waiting for a ful. The time lag was absurd; the child was

vacancy in an approved school. To keep supposed to be medically examined to see if

children at a remand home for months when it was fit to be birched and the punishment

they had been committed to a school and was inflicted by a police officer who was

knew that the school period would not begin wholly unconnected with the boy or the

until they actually arrived there was an offence. Corporal punishment at school or

unhappy position. Something could be done at home was another question from punish-

psychologically at the remand home, but ment at the hands of the court. She thought

the conditions were not suitable. The remand what Mr. Marindin suggested often hap-

home was a place where the child could be pened, but she would not mix it up with the

cared for until arrangements were made for law. The case had to be properly proved

it. An observation centre was a place where before any legal action could be taken.

it could stay for a few months and be The Chairman expressed the gratitude of

watched by skilled people. The two could the meeting to Mrs. Rackham for her talk.

not be combined.

She also thanked those who had contributed

On the question of smaller offences, much to the discussion and she hoped they could

depended on the attitude of the parents. combine in their different branches of life to

Some such offences might be dealt with by make a better world for their children and

the education authorities. She agreed that grandchildren.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Artikles appearing in forthcoming issues:

REACTIVITIES OF COLPODA DUODENARIA TO ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS. II. FACTORS INFLUENCING THE FORMATION OF RESTING CYSTS. By C. V. TAYLOR and A. G. R. STRCKLAND, Stanford University.
RETARDATION OF EARLY CLEAVAGE OF URECHIS BY ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT. By AstTsR C. GESE, Stanford University.
ON THE KILLING ACTION OF OPTICALLY ISOMERIC NICOTINES IN RELATION TO PROBLEMS OF EVOLUTION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN ANIMALS. By G. F. GAUSE and N. P. SMARAGDOVA, Institute of Zoology, University of Moscow.
THE PRODUCTION OF DUPLICITAS CRUCIATA AND MULTIPLE HEADS BY REGENERATION IN EUPLANARIA TIGRINA; By ROBERT H. SILBER and VMTOR HAMBURGER, Washington University.

Edited by W. C. AuL, Professor of Zoology, The University of Chicago. Published

Qjarterly by the University of Chicago Press.

Subscription: 35S. 2d. per year.

E.4gl4 dgeus: CAMBRIDGE UNJVERSITY PRESS

