EDUCATION FOR FAMILY LIFE*
By CYRIL BIBBY, M.A., M.Sc., F.L.S.

IT is now generally accepted that sex it provides a socially recognized channel for

education should be a part of the whole the perpetuation of our species. Thirdly, it

educational process and that it should be is the prime agent for the socializing of

considered not as a new " subject " but as a
new orientation of teaching. This desire not

children, thus freeing them from the domination of their own physiological processes and

to deal with sex in isolation has led to the re-creating our cultural pattern anew in each

view that " sex education is merely a part generation. Fourthly, it fosters the personalof health education." This is true enough if ity of the child, thus providing an integrated

the phrase " health education " is interpreted personality as the parent of the next genera-

sufficiently widely, but it is helpful sometimes tion. In drawing up any plans for family life

to think of sex education rather as part of education all these functions must, therefore,

education for family life.

be considered.

Charles Eliot has stated that " the security and elevation of the family and of family life are the prime objects of civilization," and, even if rather sweeping, this statement has a good deal of truth in it. There are, however, those who object (as is always the case when

While family life education of some sort
may always have been desirable, there are circumstances peculiar to our own times
which render it essential. Because of modern mobility, children may continually have to readjust themselves to new neighbours, new

a new aspect of education is suggested) that schools and so on, and, therefore, need more

there is no need to pay any special attention than ever the stabilizing influence of the

to this matter, since " we have managed all home. But because of irregularity of occupa-

right up till now without it." The validity tion (such as shift working, transport work-.

of this objection depends on two assumptions ing, etc.) it is often very difficult to establish

-first, that in the past we have in fact a family routine; while the father may work

managed " all right" (which most social at a distance from home and barely see his

workers would deny); and secondly, that children except at week-ends, and the

changing social circumstances do not require mother, in an effort to reconcile her claims for

changing educational aims and techniques self-fulfilment with the claims of her family,

(which most educationists would deny). may also not provide the stable family

While it is probably true that the institu- nucleus which she has provided in the past.

tion of the human family grew out of man- Moreover, now that the conception of chil-

kind's biological peculiarities of all-the-year- dren has become not an accident but an

round mating and reproduction and very active affirmation of faith, most families are

extended period of infancy, it is also true smaller, removing that valuable " buffer "

that there have been many different forms of between personalities which used to be

family in the past and are many different provided by the many members of a large

forms in the world to-day.

family. It is also perhaps the case that the

In the modem world it seems that the weakening of religious belief has diminished

family has four main functions. First, it the authority of the father, who no longer

satisfies the physical and mental needs and basks iu glory reflected from the Supreme

aspirations of husband and wife (this is put Father in Heaven. Finally, whereas social

first because it is probably the main reason life used to be very largely family social life why most people do in fact marry). Secondly, (e.g., family groups at harvest festivals, " at

* The substance of an address given on behalf of the Eugenics Society at the Conference of Educational Associations, January 1946.

homes," family parties, etc.), nowadays the family in its leisure activities is fragmented, with mother at the whist drive, father at the

87

88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

club or pub, the older children at cinemas, ships which brings out the responsibilities of

dance halls or youth organizations, and the each individual and an understanding of the

young children at play-centres-with perhaps social factors acting on the home; some

occasional and often rather artificial family training in the skills of what the Americans

parties on feast days and birthdays. In the call " home economics "; sex education in

light of all these outside attractions the home the widest sense; education for the fruitful

appears comparatively unattractive and use of leisure in a way which will expose the

tends to become merely a place to eat and mammon of false commercial values; and,

sleep in. The difficulty is accentuated by the perhaps most imnportant, education of those

fact that whereas the small all-age school, emotions (loyalty, co-operativeness, love,

despite many disadvantages, had many of affection, respect and responsibility) which

the characteristics of family life, the modern will provide the voluntary ties holding the

large school with its limited age-range is family together when the shackles of eco-

quite unlike the home and is, therefore, less nomic necessity have been sundered.

able to replace it.

In working out a plan for such education,

Apart from these more obvious factors, prime attention must be given to the

those modern " gadgets " which are so often parents' part, because, as Dickens wrote,

taken as the index of a degree of civilization " We thought that, perhaps, it is right to

tend to weaken family life in all sorts of begin with the obligations of home, Sir; and

subtle ways. What, for example, has been that, perhaps, while those are overlooked and

the effect of replacing oil by electric lighting ? neglected, no other duties can possibly be

There have, no doubt, been many gains-but substituted for them." The family has

when one considers how the single oil lamp handed over much responsibility to other

provided a focus for the activities of the social agencies, but, in the moulding of the

whole family of an evening, whereas cheap child's character, it has as great a part to

and convenient electricity encourages mother play as ever. The general home atmosphere

to sew in one room, father to read in another and routine will, from the earliest years,

and children to do their homework in yet a largely determine the child's attitude to

third, one wonders whether we may not have family life, and this general influence can

purchased better eyesight at the cost of be reinforced by the conscious fostering of

family solidarity. There is, however, another co-operative family activities and projects

side to the picture. Many of the old house- both in housework and in leisure.

hold " virtues" depended on the necessity The primary school should be able to

for almost continual housework, and modern develop many similar activities in games,

labour-saving devices make nonsense of plays, etc.; while elementary nature study,

them. Thus, whereas family living has in the if it dealt, not with dreary details of leaf

past been largely a by-product of house- form and flower structure, but with the more

keeping and has received only marginal interesting animals, the education of their

energy, it should be possible in the future, as young and their family life, could do much

more mechanical domestic aids become avail- to encourage an appreciation of family

able, for full living to become the main values. In the secondary schools, biology

function of family life. This is the more teaching with a human and social bias could

important in that, since our modern complex do much to encourage an understanding of

society requires increasing standardization those peculiarly human characteristics which

and regimentation of many activities, the at once render parental care and family

family will increasingly provide the main solidarity valuable and render their achieve-

surviving area for the development of ment possible. Other sciences could similarly

individuality.

deal with household affairs; while there is

Education for family life, therefore, should much to be said for developing (for boys

include an explanation of these family equally with girls) a course in " homecraft "

values; an interpretation of family relation- which would include not merely cookery and

EDUCATION FOR FAMILY LIFE

89

needlework, but also minor home decorating
and repairs and maintenance, family budgeting, child care, guidance in sex relationships
and, at an appropriate age, advice on choos-
ing a spouse. Similarly the social studies (such as history, geography and citizenship)
provide innumerable opportunities for de-
veloping an appreciation of family structure and functions and of how changing economic
and social circumstances render necessary changing duties on the part of the members of the family. Physical education can be
used to encourage co-operativeness in various activities and, if linked up with physiological
instruction, medical examination and care,
can provide a medium for encouraging not merely lusty health but also those qualities
of vivacity, vigour and poise which are so
important to personal attractiveness. It would, indeed, be very difficult to find any subject of the curriculum which could not play a part in this education, while many out-of-school activities (e.g., visits to nursery schools, clinics, etc.) would also be of value.
In further education, the County Colleges could do much to help in education of this type, which is equally necessary for both sexes. There should also be marriage guidance of the widest kind, consisting not merely of pre-marital advice on sexual technique but of continuing help in all aspects of

married life. Much also remains to be done
in the further education of present parents
and teachers, so that they may have an understanding of the normal development of
children and their needs, an appreciation of
the respective r6les of home and school and,
perhaps most important, an understanding
of each other. If this leads to close co-operation between
home and school, parents will perhaps realize
that they do not " send their children to
school to be educated," but rather that the school exists to supplement the basic education given in the home. Similarly, teachers might perhaps make " homework "
real homework, consisting of tasks which can
be done at home, but cannot well be done at school; while, instead of there being an explicit instruction or a tacit understanding that parents should not help their children with homework, tasks might be set which actually require the help of parents, and parents encouraged to give as much time as they can to aiding their children.
Clearly, co-operation should be much wider than merely between home and school. Youth leaders, social workers, medical practitioners, health visitors and nurses all have a part to play, and only when they all play it will education for family life be of the
highest quality.

Eugnic Review, Vol. Vmu, No. 2

