RACE AND CANCER
An Investigation of Its Incidence Among Jews
Carried out under the auspices of the Jewish Health Organization of Great Britain
By MAURICE SORSBY, M.D., F.R.C.S.

IT is said that cancer of the stomach is THE TOTAL INCIDENCE AMONG JEWS

very common amongst Japanese, and that Different countries report different rates

it is infrequent amongst Scandinavians. of cancer. Have the Jews in the different

Cancer of the breast is stated to be almost countries where they reside the same inci-

absent in Japanese women, and it would dence of cancer as their neighbours, or is

appear to be rather high amongst English there a uniform rate of incidence for the Jews

women. UIterine cancer is certainly more the world over, no matter whether they live

frequent amongst the women of this country in a country with a high rate of cancer, or than amongst those of Holland. The total in one with a low rate?

incidence of cancer computed per ioo,ooo of The summary table below is elaborated

populhtion likewise shows remarkable varia- from the returns of some representative

tions when different countries are compared. cities and gives the answer.

Thus in I920 it was 87 in France, ii6.i in It is clear from this that there is no speci-

England and Wales, 72.4 in Belgium, and fic Jewish rate. On the whole there is a

Ii2.6 in Holland.

remarkable approach of the Jewish rate to

A study of the incidence of cancer among the non-Jewish rate. Cancer among Jews

Jews is of interest from more than one seems to turn not around a racial centre, but aspect. It has been known for many years to vary with the geographical background,

that two forms of cancer are particularly though there are differences in the various

uncommon among Jews; cancer of the cervix cities; sometimes the Jewish rate is lower,

of the uterus is generally regarded as being and at other times higher than the non-

met with only rarely among Jewish women, Jewish rate.

whilst penile cancer is stated to be totally The fact that the incidence of uterine and

absent in Jewish men. These marked varia- of penile cancer is lower amongst Jews, tions lead to the question whether other whilst the total incidence of cancer is

forms of cancer also show distinct differ- approximately the same among them as

ences of incidence upon the Jewish popula- among non-Jews, suggests that the incidence

tion, and this in turn leads to the question of cancer of other organs must be higher

whether Jews have an incidence of cancer among Jews. An analysis of cancer accord-

different from that of theii neighbours. ing to organ should therefore be of interest.

What is the significance of such variations? Such analyses vary to some extent with the

Is the explanation to be sought in environ- different cities in which the investigations

mental factors or in an inherent racial were conducted, but the Warsaw figures may

basis ?

be taken as fairly typical.

London* Vienna Amsterdam Warsaw Budapest Lodz Leningrad
19I0-25 1921-27 1922-26 I92I-26 I92I-27 I92I-27 I925-27
Jews ... .. I,490.2 174.6 I20.4 72.5 I33-5 65.5 131.0
Non-Jews ... ... I,4I.5 I58.3 I28.5 85.o ii6.6 76.8 II5-9 * For London the calculation is per io,ooo deaths in the cancer-age (40 and over)-for Jews and the total population. In the other cities the computation is per ioo,000 people alive in each groQ1p: Jews and non-Jews.
99

ioo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

WARSAW, 1921-26.

Rate per zoo,ooo population.

Non-Jews

Buccal Cavity ... ...

I.3

Pharynx, Oesophagus, Stomach,

Liver, and Adnexa

4I.7....

..

Peritoneum, Intestines, and

FeRmeaclteumGenit..a. l

...
Organs

...
...

... 5.8 25.5

Breast.

... ...

7-3

Other organs ... ... ... I7.9

Jews 0.38
40.2
8.7
7.0 4.8 17.0

These results, fortified by data from other places and analyzed in greater detail, show that apart from the low incidence of uterine cancer, and the apparent immunity to penile cancer there is a higher incidence of cancer
of the alimentary canal, a rather lower incidence for cancer of the tongue, and a breast-
cancer incidence which is variable, being
sometimes higher and at other times lower
for Jewish women compared to non-Jewish. Thus, in spite of an approximately equal
incidence of cancer for Jews and non-Jews there is a considerable difference in the distribution of these cancers according to the site affected. If, therefore, the total incidence of cancer in the two groups is against any suggestion of a racial factor in cancer, the markedly different distribution according to organ strongly suggests such a factor, unless these variations can be explained on
the basis of a different environment and mode of life of the two groups.

RACIAL FACTOR OR ENVIRONMENT?
The cause of cancer is unknown, and it
would therefore appear a hopeless task to
try to disentangle the possible racial and environmental factors from the problem pre-
sented by the different incidence of cancer by organ met with among Jews. But though the cause of cancer is still a mystery, a good deal of knowledge is available as to preexisting conditions and contributory factors in the causation of this disease; and a review of the findings as to the distribution of cancer among Jews, in the light of this knowledge, leads to the strong probability that environmental factors rather than a racial predisposition or immunity underlie the variations under discussion. A consideration of the different organs separately is useful:

(a) TONGUE.-The lower incidence of can-
cer of the tongue among Jews is readily explained by the fact that syphilis is relatively
less common among Jews than among nonJews, and that syphilis is the " cradle in which cancer of the tongue is born." A very, frequent pre-existing condition of cancer of the tongue is chronic superficial glossitis, almost always a syphilitic condition.
(b) PENIS.-The apparent immunity of Jews to this form of cancer is not altogether confined to them alone. Mohammedans also appear to be but little prone to this affection, and in India penile cancer is very rare amongst Mohammedans, but quite frequent amongst Hindoos. There is considerable evidence that amongst Europeans develop-
ment of penile cancer is dependent on a preexisting condition of phimosis. The great rarity of penile cancer amongst Jews and Mohammedans would therefore appear to be
due not to a racial factor, but to circumcision which acts as a preventative means against
phimosis and its complications. (c) BREAST.-Cancer of the breast shows
considerable variations in different communities. In Warsaw it is less frequent among the Jews, in Vienna it is more frequent among them than amongst the non-Jews. Thus there is no unifying principle in the different Jewish rates, the variations being most extreme. That in itself is an argument against a common racial incidence, but
the discrepancies observed are to be explained by the different social groups seen in the different towns. Warsaw Jewry is a
poverty-stricken community, labourers or small merchants by occupation; Vienna Jewry is almost entirely an intellectual and professional aristocracy. In a social group
like the Jews of Vienna the women marry late and many do not marry at all; in a social group like Warsaw Jewry the unmarried are few and late marriages are un-
common. These are factors of profound significance on the incidence of cancer of the breast, for it has been found that cancer is much more prone to develop in the breast that has not functioned physiologicallv than in one that has, breast cancer being relatively more common in the unmarried

RACE AND CANCER

IOI

woman of the cancer age than in her married direction. Of late years these regulations

sister. The discrepancies observed in the are being disregarded to an ever-larger

incidence of breast cancer in the Jewish extent, and in Budapest there is some evi-

communities find a ready explanation in the dence that cancer of the cervix is on the

consideration of the social strata of which increase among Jewish women. Compara-

these communities are composed.

tive statistics in this sense for other cities

(d) CERVIX OF UTERUS.-The incidence are not available.

of this form of cancer in Jewish women is (e) ALIMENTARY CANAL.-Thehigher inci-

remarkably low, being one-half to one-third dence of this type of cancer among Jews can-

of the incidence among the surrounding not be explained in the light of any known

population. This is certainly not due, as facts. But to invoke a hypothetical racial

has been suggested, to the avoidance of con- factor as an explanation is only to give a

traceptive agencies by Jewish women, for verbal solution to a genuine difficulty. It is

Roman Catholic women are just as prone to much more likely that some factor in Jewish

this form of cancer as the women who do mode of life or diet is the underlying cause

avail themselves of these means. Moreover, for this discrepancy: but this suggestion

uterine cancer is low in Holland, where con- takes us from facts into the arid fields of

traception has a considerable history. Nor hypothesis.

can the immunity of Jewish women be

ascribed to numerically excessive or to in- CONCLUSION

sufficient child-bearing, for the number of The total incidence of cancer among Jews

children borne is a factor of no significance lends no support to the view of a racial basis

in the causation of cancer, though the fact for this disease, though an analysis of the

of giving birth to a child is of paramount cancers according to organ brings out some

importance.

remarkable features which strongly suggest

Cancer of the cervix is a pathological a racial immunity or predisposition. How-

curiosity in the unmarried, so that sexual ever, a review of these detailed features in

life in one or more of its phases must be the the light of the known facts as to the causa-

exciting cause of this form of the disease. tion of cancer lead to the suggestion that the

It is not at all unlikely that the great free- discrepancies are best explained not on a

dom from this form of cancer among Jewish racial basis, but as the result of environ-

women is to be explained by the observance mental factors.

of the Mosaic code, which regulates sexual A detailed study of the incidence of cancer

life in such a way that periods of rest to the among Jews is all against the view that race

local parts are ensured at times when rest is is a factor of significance in the ravages of

probably beneficial. This complicated code this disease. Cancer is a universal foe who

may not have been devised as a measure of breaks into the camp by crashing through

hygiene, but it is certainly effective in that the outer defences.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 2.

