INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS
THE First International Congress on Eugenics will be held in London in July (24th to 3oth), I9I2. It is being organised by the Eugenics Education Society, the Council and Vice-Presidents of which have formed themselves into the General Committee. The following Vice-Presidents have been elected: Lord Alverstone, Lord Chief Justice; Lord Avebury; Sir Thomas Barlow, President of the College of Physicians; Sir Henry Butlin, President of the College of Surgeons; the Rt. Rev. the Bishop of Birmingham; the Rt. Rev. the Bishop of Ripon; Sir William Church, lately President of the College of Physicians; Sir William Collins, Vice-Chancellor of the University of London; Principal Miers, Principal of the University of London. Dr. Ploetz, President of the German Gessellschaft fur Rassen Hygiene, who will be the head of the German Consultative Committee. Dr. Starr Jordon, Chairman of the Eugenic Section of the American Breeders' Association.
Mons. Hubert and March, together with Docteur J. Dejerine, Professeur de Cliniques des Maladies Nerveuses; Docteur Magnan; Docteur Manouvrier, Professeur d'anthropologie, Paris; Docteur A. Marie, Medecin des Asiles de la Seine, Directeur du Laboratoire de Psycho-Pathologie a l'Ecole des Hautes Etudes; M. Edmond Perrier, Directeur of the Musee D'Histoire Naturelle, have undertaken to assist in the arrangement as regards French contributions. Permission has been obtained to hold the Congress in the buildings of the London University.
In the preliminary notice concerning the Congress it is urged that at present the most urgent need is more knowledge, both of the facts of heredity and of the action of social institutions in causing racial change and the ways of modifying and controlling them: as knowledge accrues, it must be disseminated and translated into action. The imparting of such knowledge constitutes a great problem in education: for both private individuals and public bodies have to be impressed with the gravity of the situation and taught how to act eugenically. Ultimately it may be possible to induce societies to adopt a well-considered eugenic policy and to reform themselves on eugenic lines, but the immediate need is to check biological degeneration.
To attain all these ends, however, it is necessary that those who are alive to the dangers of the present social situation should combine together for the purpose of exchange of views and mutual instruction and should agree upon a concerted scheme of action. For this reason the International Eugenic Congress has been arranged. The attendance and co-operation of all interested in the application of scientific knowledge to the betterment of life on the lines above indicated are earnestly solicited.
In the Autumn it is hoped that the Committee will be in a position to issue a detailed programme. In the meantime, suggestions would be gladly received.
As the Congress is International, it is proper that the subjects submitted for consideration should be of wide importance and permanent interest. It is proposed to group the papers into sections, but papers dealing directly with Eugenics, and not finding a place in any of the sections, will not be rejected on that account.

