OBITUARY.

353

that which was organised by Mr. and Mrs. Crackanthorpe at their house, 65, Rutland Gate, on June 25th, I908. Mr. Crackanthorpe was in the chair, and Sir Francis Galton's address on the occasion was subsequently published, with the result that the membership of the society was largely increased. In fact the recognition of the society by responsible scientists and medical men may almost be said to date
from that meeting. At the termination of Sir James Crichton Browne's
presidency, Mr. Crackanthorp,e was nominated by the Council as
President in accordance with the expressed wish of Mr. Galton, the
election taking place at the annual meeting in I909. Owing to the close friendship which existed between the acting and the Honorary
Presidents, the society then received the full benefit of Sir Francis Galton's advice; and it was this combination between the founder of the science and his acute and courageous friend which led the society through those most critical periods of its early youth. During his presidency Mr. Crackanthorpe represented the society on several important deputations, including those to the Local Government Board in connection with mental defect and the Poor Law, and to the Home
Office concerning legislation for the feeble in mind. He also gave evidence before the Royal Commission on Divorce, presenting a memorandum prepared by the Council.
Mr. Crackanthorpe married a daughter of the Rev. Eardley C. Holt in I869. Mrs. Crackanthorpe is known to so many members of the society, both as a member of Council and as a hostess, that a widespread sympathy has been felt for her in her sad bereavement.

MR. EDWARD NETTLESHIP, F.R.S. BORN, I845; DIED, I 913-
In Edward Nettleship eugenics has lost a firm friend. He represented the Haslemere branch on the Council of the society, and was a most valuable and valued member of it. Many members of the society will recall with gratitude the care and thoroughness with which he helped them in their investigations, and the Research Committee, in particular, owed much to his advice.
Nettleship belonged to an able family, two of his brothers attained academic distinction at Oxford, and a third was a well-known animal painter.
He himself, after studying veterinary surgery, qualified as a surgeon and specialised in diseases of the eye. As an oculist, he was in turn appointed consulting surgeon to the Royal London Ophthalmic Hospital and consulting ophthalmic surgeon to St. Thomas's Hospital, and attained to a leading position in this branch of his profession.
From a very busy practice he retired somewhat early in life, in I902, and at once devoted a large part of his time to the study of heredity, as illustrated by various eye diseases and defects. In this work he was associated with opposing schools, for he was in close correspondence both with Professor Pearson and Professor Bateson.
The diseases and defects which he investigated-highly localised and definite in character-afford most interesting and clear evidence of heredity. He brought to the study of these, special knowledge and skill of the highest order, and, above all, a most uncompromising

354 EUGENICS REVIEW.

standard of the exactness required in scientific observation. Nothing

was too much trouble for him, everything that could be done should

be done. Where it was possible he examined each case in his pedigree

himself, or got them examined by a friend in whose diagnosis he oould

trust. All this meant a great deal of labour and a great deal of travelling

but the result is work that will stand as of permanent value.

It was sonetimes remarked that he was extraordinarily diffident for

a man of his parts. This was inr part due to a manner which was a

family trait, also, I think, to a dread of dogmatising on any subject on

which he had not accurate first-hand knowledge, certainly not to any

hesitation as to the opinions he had formed for himself.

Nettleship was of a reserved and retiring disposition, but those who

got to know him soon realized that they were in touch with an excep-

tionally fine character, and his generosity, his fair-mindedness, and

his constancy to his friends and his opinions, won the deepest affection

from all those whom he honoured with his friendship.

He married in I869 Elizabeth Endacott Whiteway, but leaves no

children.

WM. C. MARSHALL.

CORRESPONDENCE.

RECENT EUGENIC LEGISLATION IN THE UNITED STATES.

In case it has not already come to your attention I thought you

might be interested in the reoent eugenic legislation which has been

passed in this State. I am acoordingly sending enclosed herewith copies

of the so-called " Sterilization Bill " and " Eugenic Marriage Bill,"

which have been passed this summer by the State Legislature and were

made law by the signature of the Governor a short time ago. The

sterilization law, as you will note, follows very closely along the lines

of similar laws which have been passed by a number of other States.

While we in this State, who are interested in eugenics, are not over

sanguine as to what will be acoomplished directly under this law, we

believe that it will at any rate prove to be a strong factor in eugenic

education, and in fact the discussion which has been aroused in the

newspapers of the State and country must have had much influence along

this line.

The eugenic marriage law is so far as I am aware, the first of its

kind to be passed by any of the States. This subject, as you know,

has been agitated in this country 'for some time and has been brought to

the attention of the public especially by the action of certain clergymen

in announcing that they wrould marry only people who could show

satisfactory medical certificates of good health. The Bill, as originally

drafted, would have required these certificates for the woman as well as

for the man, but this feature was changed in the Assembly so that the

law applies to the man only. It remains to be seen how this law will

be administered, but we feel that it will do much good. Certainly it is

a step in the right direction, and its educational value will, undoubtedly,

be very great.

LEON J. COLE.

University of Wisconsin.

