THE IDEAL OF AN ELITE

By PAUL BLOOMFIELD

T HE former Master of Balliol, Lord fundamental principle. I should say that if

Lindsay, once told me this story. He we feel concern foi the future of mankind, we

was listening to a discussion about Elites when it occurred to him to get up and ask: " What is the difference between the
elite and the elect ? " And somebody at once
answered: " You choose the elite-God chooses the elect."

have to think in terms of men, women and
children even before institutions. And since exceptionaUy gifted individuals exist, and
often transmit their abilities, then there already is a case for making the most of them rather than letting their seed run to waste.

This wise sentence sounds a little rebuffing.
It needn't be taken to be so. Anyhow, we can't usurp God's prerogatives; and the idea of an 6lite still calls for description,
provided we go on thinking it really stands

This, of course, is part of the positive policy of eugenists. An ideal elite in being tends to be able to look after itself. But what if
social policy is dysgenic-bad for the survival
of an elite ? The danger of that is a danger to

for something. The idea, we should notice, the whole community: it is the danger I was

came before the ideal, if only because the referring to.

idea must originally have been evoked by what appeared to be the thing itself. I mean

So now to go back to the beginning, to the
idea of an elite. But let us break our journey

that from very early times it must have in the sixteenth century. Here is the great

seemed obviouis to people all over the world Montaigne writing about " the Inequality

of primitive civilization that there was such amongst us." After quoting Plutarch, he

a thing-that there were individuals and says: " In truth I find so vast a distance

families, say Pharalohs, wlho were an elite- betwixt Epaminondas, according to my

however one was goinlg to account for the judgment of him, and some that I know, that

fact, an(l whether onic approved of there are yet men of good sense, that I would-wil-

beting picke(d persons (or of those particular lingly enhance upon Plutarch, and say that

persons being picked) or wlhether one (lid not. there is more difference betwixt such and

Before sugiesting how it was that people such a man than there is betwixt such a man

had such perceptionfi at all, I ouight to and such a beast:

exp)lain why I hazve invxited the attention of

an audience (almost certainly an elite) to this
fresh discussion of the stubject. Mv reasoin is

Hem ! vir viro quid praestat!

that there has bten, aswe k now, an immense and that there are as many and innumerable

revulsion (against social inequalities-so im- degrees of minds as there are cubits betwixt

mensie thatt the notion of nzaititral inequality this and heaven."

has come in for some of the reprobation (a

go(od (leal of it fromi p)eople who might be
thouIght tlhenz*'lve('s to hiav\e miore tlhaln an av( rage share otf hreditIary en(lownents).

Anl,1, of course, froml the point of view that I, anlit others lhre with me, take of thiis reactionl,

it is not wiollygood ;it is eVen1 in soiIIme ways wery ba(l and dan;grmoi.ms, anid imiist he nmet

witl all t rc truithfully use.

argumnciits we can

Dange rous ' needs> exf)l2nul. I)angerotis
to wvhorn or haII.tL Il answer involv(s a

What a brilliant essay it is. It also takes
us back, with those Latin wor(ds of Terence, two hunt-dred years further than Plutarch. Later on in the same essaV Montaigne rather drifts tovar(ls a more conventional themethe i!lusionis of greatness, the nee(l to remember that " lhl(lsomle is ats handsome (loes " that kin(d of tling; but the earlier pages penewtrate excitingly to the heart of the matter. T1e (listinction is (Irawii bctween a mnan's ouitwar(d circurnstances and his real
p)ersonality. " Mleasure him witliout hlis

'3

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stilts," says Montaigne; " let him lay aside ing on the Mount he turns to his disciples and

his revenues and his titles, let him present says to them, "Ye are the salt of the earth."

himself in his shirt." Then he refines the dis- Chatham believed in 1757 that he was the

tinction still more. After telling an excellent only man who could save England, and a

rude story about Antigonus, he says: modern organizer of victory of not less capa-

" He.. . "[that is a man] " . . . is but a man city must have felt that kind of confidence

at best, and if he be deformed or ill-qualified when he cried, in a tight corner-" Courage,

*at birth, the empire of the universe cannot boys: Comrade Trotsky is leading you ! "
set him to rights." Now this, which is a Well, posterity judges by results-without

little over-pessimistic, being written in the there always being a consensus of opinion,

infancy of modem medical science, does seem because, as I need hardly say, people's views

to show that Montaigne understood very well of success differ. There has even been a

that the inequalities which he notices among tendency to challenge the opinion that either

us have a great deal to do with our congenital individual great men or elites have played

equipment-I must not here say " heredi- such an important part in history after all. I

tary." But as a matter of fact the element of shall come to that. Mileanwhile I have been

heredity, of like begetting like, was intelli- trying to make the point that there is a sub-

gently commented upon a couple of thousand jective sense of election, and that it is often

years before Montaigne. I am thinking of the confirmed, as you nmight say, by general

Greek poet Theognis, who contrasted the way agreement. llites objectitvely regarded can be

men were sticklers about mating their beasts traced from early beginnings by the usual

eugenically with their fecklessness in marry- methods, and I should now like to glance for

ing any sort of girl so long as she had plenty a moment at origins.

of money.

" I doubt," wrote Breasted, whetlher aniy

Now the idea of an elite did not spring, as of those travellers who ride on their donkeys

I may have been taken to mean, entirely through the palm groves that IIow cover the

from its being observed that there was such a streets and houses of ancient Memphis . . . I

thing as an elite, an aristocracy, a selective doubt very much whether any oi them

breed of human beings comparable with the realizes that what they are about to see is the

selectively bred flocks of rams an(d asses. earliest known revelation of family life." Thiie

The king's subjects felt " there's a divinity family life, of course, of an Elite : the inobles

doth hedge a king." But the king felt it about of the Pyramlid Age. It is unflikely that they

himself, too. Our unsympathetic James I, as owed their originial noble status to any mlove

we all know, believed in his own election-bv or less respectal)le sanction than capitalists

divine lhereditary right. However, this sub- have done-an(d if it ha(l to be brains or

jective aspect of the matfer is important. brawn, not both, theni probably brains. Any-

Whatever we may think of James, we hiow, those Mlemphite nobles gave a imienv)or-

probably shouldn't put down as wrong- able accoulnit of themselves on their toinmbs.

headed a poet, say, who felt he had a mission Can their evi(lence be acc(pttu(l in their owni

-felt he had been born, chosen, elected by favouir, as proving tlhey had Lamrncd to deser-ve

destiny to write what he and nobody else their social eminience ? Breasted tlinks so.

possibly could write. That sonme people Combined with certain other indications the

should feel themselves elected is a fact about tomb reliefs, he sayxs, " fturnish us witlh conI-

human nature. When Hesiod met the Nine clusiv'e historiclI evni(lence that mnoral discern-

Muses they revealed to him wlhat he was inent had its roots ii tle life (f the fainill.''

good for. Joan of Arc learne(l about her mis- So vou see, far fi-n m hIainllg Moved .away

sion from St. Catherine. The New Tlestament from thle lositionl of the LLnmilv ais the bre(e-

begins with a geneatlogy-the line of the ing ground (iIn tw(o sclnses) of the moral

family who were an elite aimong a people whlo chlaracter, we are mnore thiia ever to-day pcr-

regar(led themselves as Chosen. ILater in tfle sua(led that a certail kind(i 4)f family life is

Gospel story, when Jesus has finished preach- thie best nuirserv ot the soci;i 1 virt ties. Whecn

THE IDEAL OF AN ELITE

25

all families come up to the quite unsnobbish tions: emphasis on the Inward and Spiritual.

five standards of eugenics, there should be a And in between nothing, according to Koest-

sort of universal elite. My ideal of an elite, ler, except " the muddled intermediary

then, has something to do with family and bands of the spectrum."

family traditions: it is a hereditary elite. But doesn't the world somehow live ? Is

Now you know that those men whom Jesus nothing going on without the leave of Com-

called the salt of the earth were to turn their missars or Yogis? Of course there is. What

backs on their homes and families. But then is " the real issue " ? Our issue is something

they were a body of the elect; and observe to do with those compromises by which

how the Roman Church has taken pains to people really do live, unless they are under a

prevent their example in that respect from despotism: live sometimes successfully and

influencing the great body of non-elect-how creatively-and compromise is just what

by its encouragement of devotion to the Koestler says that Commissars and Yogis are

Madonna it has affirmed the dignity of no good for. The " real issue " is realizing

women as mothers, the duty of filial piety, our intimations of our humanity, inspired by

in short the value of the institution of the love and guided by reason (as you have heard

human family. On the other hand, unfor- said before); and just as the Commissar at

tunately, as you will most fully realize if you breaking point must find he has to acknow-

have read Pope Pius XI's Encyclical, Casti ledge the irrational (not anti-rational) in

Connubii, the Roman Church opposes human nature, so the Yogi sometimes surely

measures of birth control without which, in asks himself why the Creation exists at all

the view of eugenists, the most formidable except to be loved. Of the reasons why the

of the world's population problems can Commissars fall short of my ideal of an 6lite

hardly be solved. That is rather beside my it is only necessary to name one-that they

present point....

believe their Change-from-Without (housing

You had probably been expecting my ideal schemes, social services etc.) can do the work

of an elite to have something to do with of heredity. This is a tragic error. As for the

family and hereditary ability and so on- Yogis, I should have thought that long ago

but, after all, that band of the elect who were Mahayana Buddhism would have cut across

the salt of the earth were not the only their ingrowing philosophy with its idea of

unhereditary corps d'elite we can think of. the Bodhisattvas; and Bodhisattvas them-

Corps d'ilite is properly used of crack regi- selves may be, can only be, elect (and very

ments; however, I suppose that in times of wonderful too); they cannot possibly be

stability under a monarch, or I dare say a thought of as an 6lite. We can agree that

republic too, the officers of such regiments do outward conditions are most important and

tend to come from a few privileged families. that the inner life is an immaterial something

No: the rivals of my elite are not Guardsmen of the highest value, but the improvement of

but Commissars and Yogis-and Managers. human society depends also on breeding.

Koestler described Yogis and Commissars as That is, it depends on the kind of people who

" at the two ends of the sociological spec- both are exemplars of, and are capable of

trum." He said that " the real issue " was transmitting (and not only genetically but

between them, that is, between the funda- also morally and intellectually), the qualities

mental conceptions of Change-from-Within we should like to see distinguishing the whole

and Change-from-Without. I don't want to human family, a universal 6lite-making

seem to be pinning him down to what he the use of this descriptive noun finally un-

wrote some years ago, as if it was his last necessary.

word, but the fact is that in his well-known It has seemed to me, while I have been

essay he admirably expressed a situation thinking about these things, and on reading

that has to be reconsidered perennially. the bitter and sometimes, I imagine, insincere

Wholesale Change-from-Without-Detailed criticisms which are made of eugenic policy,

Change-from-Within. Emphasis on Condi- that not quite enough distinction is

D

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

commonly drawn between parents as nature andparents as nurture. What I mean is-they are both. Plato in the Republic eliminated
them from their children's environments, a measure I don't believe he would have recommended if he had been writing to-day after studying modern psychology. Even
to-day two and two are not always put
together. The lady who recently wrote to one
of our week-end reviews saying it was tyran-
nical and a shame to discourage the feeble-
minded from having children, because, she
said, most of such children were likely to be normal . . . that lady ought to have been asked whether (apart from the eugenic aspect of all this) she would think the best
atmosphere for her grandchildren to grow up in would be a home made for them by a feeble-minded father. I believe one reason why the ideal of an elite needs to be taken seriously is precisely because parents have this double role-of representing both nature and nurture. And I should have thought it was sufficiently obvious that no culture could regenerate itself all the time: if you want a civilization of any value it has to have continuity and stability. It must be a kind of second nature in the people who are animated by it. There is a lot of sense in the
well-known saying that it takes three generations to make a gentleman. Rome was not built in a day, and a favourable atmosphere for what is best and steadiest in human personality does not come into existence over night. For such an atmosphere an elite appears to me indispensable. They are the
atmosphere. The other day a friend, who has reasons to
feel some complacency with his own ancestors, asked me whether, in fact, the Victorian upper classes had not been very backward as patrons of the arts. I ought to have had the presence of mind to answer him with the words put by Bernard Shaw into the mouth of his Cesar answering a remark by Apollodorus. " Is peace not an art ? Is war not an art ? " But I should not have cared to round
off with: " All these we give you in exchange for a few ornaments "-because, of course, I think the ornaments almost as important as Apollodorus the Sicilian did.

Now one of the less amusing paradoxes of
modern history is that the kind of things I
am saying and am going to say would have
been anathema to Karl Marx. It is a paradox
because Marx's disbelief in the importance of the impact of individuals on the course of
events has by nothing been more significantly
belied than by his own enormous influence in our time. I have got to introduce this ques-
tion of the importance of eminent individuals
because an elite, in my sense, though it may
be known by its standing or privileges, is
NOT in my sense ideal unless its fame and
position are justified by the proved worth of
a sufficient number of the individuals com-
posing it. They must be a constellation of
valuable men and women-real stars-not
just a nebulous confratemity of entrenched conservatives. And not ALL of them stars.
Among a real elite, sensitive and unworldly people are not allowed to go to the wall.
Their more imponderable qualities are treated
with consideration and love-they are not derided. A totalitarian elite has other views; a sensitive plant among them could consider
itself happy to be merely sterilized. Something, then, ought to be said about
this question of the effectiveness of indivi-
duals as compared with Movements, and after that something to explain how the
organization of an elite encourages able families to pull their weight.
Well, Bryce seems to me to have been talking good sense when he said: " Think . . . what it would have meant in the American Revolutionary War if Clive, who died in I774, had lived to lead the troops of George III and had there been no Washington to oppose him . . . or how different the course of events in the Civil War if Seward instead of Lincoln had been nominated at Chicago for the Presidency." In an essay he once wrote called " Is History a Fraud ? " Professor J. B. S. Haldane rejected the claims to importance of Heroes-and of Movements too-and of Thinkers into the bargain: rejected, I mean, their claims to have done much to change the course of history. Yes . . . but a sentence creeps in, in which he says the very opposite. I quote. " If Galileo and a few more like-minded men had been burned

THE IDEAL OF AN ELITE

27

alive at an early age, we might very possibly still be living under a civilization not greatly different from that of the middle ages."
I don't think I need go on about this. I do indeed believe with Kropotkin that common
humanity wonderfully survives the disasters brought upon it by those men, " great " in Fielding's ironic sense, whose works have constantly to be undone by the good men. But this implies that the good men are

way children are brought up-and in a gifted family more conspicuously than in anotherhow they turn out after that, what notions they have of their obligations to the community, and so forth.
So now I come to what I believe is a fair illustration of how it all works. It would be enough to say "that it all works." This should show that the " ideal " part of it isn't an airy-or reactionary-notion. In English

effective. They count-and that is what I history since the beginning of the seventeenth

believe elites do.

century four family connections strike me as

So let me pass to the elites: the families having played a quite extraordinary part.

gifted by nature, nurtured by the oppor- I won't take the Villiers line, the des-

tunities they had the wit and courage to cendants of Sir George Villiers-eight prime

seize, and to use for founding and perpetua- ministers and so on. By the fact that they

ting a certain kind of family tradition. I hope include the cream of our titled aristocracy

I shall not get into trouble for quoting a we might be involved in too much argument

passage from one of Machiavelli's Discourses. about the advantage it must have been to

He may be your bete noire, but you cannot them to live close to the Throne. Nor will I

deny that he was a shrewd observer and bril- take the brainy, brawny, philanthropic pro-

liant historian. There are two points here, geny of the herculean Colonel Barclay, First

both relevant to my theme. Having remarked of Ury-though not because he and that

on the contrasting attitudes adopted by a other, remoter, sire of the Quaker clan, de

number of ancient Roman families of equal Goumay, were less blue-blooded than those

distinction, he says: " This can scarcely be others (they were not: a fact a little obscured

wholly due to heredity-(" nasceredelsangue " by their phase of legal subordination). And

are his words)-for intermarriage would thirdly, I shall not speak of that series of

bring about variation: so it must be set Fellows of the Royal Society and other

down to the different way in which this remarkable people tracing descent from the

family and that educates its children. For Staffordshire potter Thomas Wedgwood-

when a child of tender years begins to under- with whom, by the way, as with the

stand, it makes a great difference that he Barclays, Francis Galton himself was

should hear some things spoken of with connected.

approval and some things with disapproval, I think the fourth of our elites should suit

since this must needs make an impression on us best. So let me quote a few lines from a

him, by which, later on, his own conduct will book, a novel, written by a highly talented

be regulated in all walks of life. If it were not member of this ideal and at the same time

so it would have been impossible for the very substantial elite . . . a book published

Appii to have had the same desires, and to in I9I9:

have been moved by the same passions, as Titus Livy says many of them were...
W)hat he is saying is, first, that within the bounds of any particular class there are likely

Denham had accused Katharine Hilbery of
belonging to one of the most distinguished families in England, and if anyone will take the trouble to consult Mr. Galton's Hereditary Genius

to be striking differences of social precept and he will find that this assertion is not far from the

practice-and this being so I should never truth. The Allardyces, the Hilberys, the Milling-

expect any class to be altogether conterminous with a true elite. Secondly, Machiavelli's intelligent speculation is that, granting there are hereditary influences at work, it is,

tons and the Otways seem to prove that intellect is a possession which can be tossed from one
member of a certain group to another almost indefinitely, and with apparent certainty that the brilliant gift will be caught and held by nine

over and above them, something to do with the out of ten of the privileged race. . ..

3E

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Then a little further, the writer, with the fair-mindedness that goes with just this " gift " that she speaks of, admits the possibility of a controversial element. She says:
It may be said, indeed, that English society being what it is, no very great merit is required, once you bear a well-known name, to put you into a position where it is easier on the whole to be eminent than obscure. And if this is true of the sons, even the daughters, even in the nineteenth century, are apt to become people of importance-philanthropists, and educationalists if they are spinsters, and the wives of distinguished men if they marry.
I shall have a word to say about some of those women. In general, it is one thing to step easily into a position of eminence, and another to distinguish oneself in it. Our
writer really took this for granted, and readily admitted-with that same fair-mindednessthat the kind of families she had in mind produced their exceptional number of black sheep.
Then notice carefully this sentence:
. . . The Allardyces had married and intermarried, and their offspring were generally profuse, and had a way of meeting regularly in each other's houses for meals and family celebrations which had acquired a semi-sacred character, and were as regularly observed as days of feasting and fasting in the Church.
My quotations are from Night and Day... by Virginia Woolf, daughter of Sir Leslie Stephen.
The historic elite, then, to which I should like to direct your attention-or that fraction of it that is all we have time to consider -need be traced back no further than the mid-eighteenth century, to two Scotsmen, neither of them grandees. It would be incautious to put that more strongly, for, as Shelley's friend Hogg said of the Scots and Swiss: " I should much like to see a person from either nation of a bad family or of a new family." Anyhow, from Aberdeen came a James Stephen and from the Highlands a John Macaulay; and another James Stephen and a Zachary Macaulay found their way to a village south of London: Clapham. Perhaps a third ancestor might be introducedJames Pattle, of the Bengal Civil Service, reputed the biggest liar in India, who died of

drink, but not before becoming the father of
six beautiful daughters and one plain one. Now ideally all this should be presented
under some title such as " From Clapham to Bloomsbury," and we should trace the progeny of twelve sires (twelve isn't many)
instead of being limited to a glance at only
three lines. Twelve or three-it isn't a story
of Courtiers or Commissars or Yogis. Clapham in parts was certainly very rich, but the
Stephens and the Macaulays had to earn their way up. At all events, the descendants
of my three non-aristocratic sires were very able in each generation; they had family
solidarity; they gathered round them other people with their kind of outlook. How much power to make themselves useful as well as happy that sort of cliquiness means to the
elbow of people like that ! . . . And between them and their friends they liberalized-I am not speaking of economics-as much of the
world as could be liberalized by them. (I
don't say that nothing that any one of these did was ever open to criticism.) Without bothering about chronological order, let me take some of their women, referred to too modestly by Mrs. Woolf. When it came to
the revolution in the status of women, and
the period following it also, where should Oxford and Cambridge have looked for heads of their women's colleges except to the women
who had grown up as hitherto unmobilized units of this elite and the other elites ? On a genealogical table you will find Virginia Woolf between two cousins, Katharine
Stephen (head of Newnham) and Dr. Janet Vaughan (head of Somerville). Move beyond Dr. Vaughan and you come to Miss Strachey (another head of Newnham). The Macaulays link through the Trevelyans with the descendants of John Penrose; and there you have a Dame Emily Penrose (another head
of Somerville). And so on. Of course, if I had been sticking to chrono-
logy I should have begun with the antislavery work done by Zachary Macaulay and Sir James Stephen. Macaulay made such a good job of running the settlement for poor negroes in Sierra Leone that when he retired the British Government took it over as a
Crown Colony. Stephen, whose step-mother

THE IDEAL OF AN ELITE

29

was Wilberforce's sister, drafted Buxton's the flatness of the surrounding country.

Emancipation Bill-he did it in two and a Indeed it would I think be very difficult for

half days, one of which was a Sunday, and any man to have had a more desirable human

one of the only two Sundays in his life on setting than Leslie Stephen. He married a

which his evangelical conscience allowed him lady who must have been the most exquisite

to work. The plot thickens. Intermarriages of James Pattle's grandchildren: you can

multiply. These were the days when the pen read about her in the memoir of Stephen by

was mightier than the sword. I suppose the F. W. Maitland, who himself owed inspira-

books on Constitutional Law by A. V. Dicey, tion for his work to Dicey and his own wife

Stephen's sister's son, are classics. One of to the Pattle connection. And his brother-

his own sons, Leslie Stephen, was a very in-law, Lady Stephen's nephew, was H. A. L.

notable, very pivotal, figure indeed in English Fisher, yet another liberal historian in our

nineteenth-century history. As a dignified elite and, of course, a great name in

renegade from the Church he gave social education.*

standing to agnosticism. As editor of the We cannot now go on with the list.

Dictionary of National Biography he helped Remember again the words of Virginia

to set on foot a great propaganda for the Woolf-how the offspring of the people in

serious, truthful appreciation of the national her novel " had a way of meeting regularly

genius-with a certain bias for the liberal in each other's houses, etc." Well, if you

openness that is still incomplete in his read the family memoirs of any of our four

brother FitzJames's biographical notice of elites, say, for instance, Percy Lubbock's

their father (not in the D.N.B.).

delightful book about the Gurneys of Earl-

Meanwhile Zachary Macaulay's famous ham, you soon get an idea, if you aren't

son had written his report on India-a docu- lucky enough to have it already, of why this

ment of which we can really say without family spirit, overlapping into coteries, is the

fatuity that it was fraught with historic con- best humanizing influence in the world. For

sequences. The energies of all these people such coterie-making people like the Stephens;

were stupendous. I wish there was time for have-as someone said to me last week-ar

more than a snap of Mrs. Cameron, the plain instinct.

Pattle sister, turning at fifty into a pioneer This instinct helped to create Bloomsbury,

of art in photography. . . Lord Macaulay the group who were the secular liberal succes-

did not marry, but his sister was the ances- sors to the evangelical Clapham sect of a hun-

tress of eminent Trevelyans, including the dred years before. In the interval they had

great scholar and liberal the Master of guided British society into some of its better

Trinity. The Macaulays themselves have courses. I'm afraid Bloomsbury has been

been a wonderful academic and literary popularly disparaged, associated with so-

galaxy, and Miss Rose Macaulay the novelist called highbrowism. Well, the members of

is one of them....

that set were not only eminent writers and

I don't think we have to go even as far as critics; also philosophers, economists, pain-

this before beginning to feel that to doubt ters, prison reformers, orientalists. Theirs

the ideality of a true elite is pure oafishness. was not a narrow and precious culture. And,

The special opportunities of birth, the com- by the way, among people like that you can

forts of mutual admiration-when there is do your best work and not be afraid of get-

much to admire-and solid support which ting the sack. . . . In our not-very-well-

membership of clans of this rare kind offers patched-up materialistic society, victim of

the well-endowed individual are everybody's two wars and over-population, in which most

good fortune. The lives of the ones I am

talking about were worth living. Of the * Let me put in here that it seems to me that children

greater ones among them it could not be of a father and mother who don't get on, or who separ-

said, as I think Marx said of the Mills, James and J. S., that they only stood out because of

ate, are comparatively safe from psychological troubles if their parents belong to a large and humane family
group.

30 f;

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of our fellow citizens are much too busy pro-
ducing goods for export, we still hear a lot
about culture. Myimpression is that as arbiters
of taste the people who used to live in Gordon
Square exercised a better influence than any
public corporation-in which the closest
bonds are likely to be between the managers,
interested chiefly in management.
This brings me to the moral of it all, as I see it.
A differential birth-rate and heavy taxation militate against the survival of an elite as
such. These are in a way greater dangers, to
my mind, than technological and managerial revolutions per se, for, just as you find able
descendants of sires of our aristocratic elite on the Labour benches, so you might expect to find members of any of the true elites
among the managers. I qualified with " in a
way" because a managerial elite, even if partly drawn from an ideal one, is itself no
true elite: the social function has changedand ability does not of itself, or when successfully applied to management, confer the title of 6lite.
In the last month two interesting articles have appeared in the papers, relevant to my theme. In the one, Professor Butterfield, reviewing the Pembroke papers, describes English liberty as a. process of privileges filtering down to an ever broader section of the population. He writes with satisfaction. He is thinking more of the past than the future. In the other article, G. M. Young writes-with dissatisfaction-of the obstacles there are nowadays to the continued emergence of what he calls the New Patriciate. It is a too-theoretical State Socialism that raises the obstacles. Now we know from recent history that of all people nowadays the totalitarians most self-consciously believe in having an elite or vanguard. As James Burnham emphasizes, they insist that their various elites represent or stand for " the people as a whole." This is not what an elite in my sense quite does. My elite is something, and it realizes something. When in a position to maintain itself, such an elite is ideal for guaranteeing that the filtering-down process should not be checked; and at the same time it is ready to assimilate and make

common cause with the New Patriciate. And this is how it truly serves " the people as a whole."
Discussion
Dr. C. P. Blacker and Mr. Cecil Binney took part in the discussion which followed at the Members' meeting to which this lecture was addressed.
Dr. Blacker said that, if he understood Mr. Bloomfield correctly, he (Mr. Bloomfield) recognised that there were several possible meanings of the word elite. Yogis, Commissars and Bodhisattvas were members of elites of certain kinds-rivals of Mr. Bloomfield's elite; so were Mr. Burnham's Managers. Mr. Bloomfield had used the term to denote members of certain broad family connections, some doubtless containing their quota of black sheep, which tended to form coteries centred on certain places such as Clapham or Bloomsbury; these produced men and women eminent in diverse fields who came to be recognized by posterity as constituting galaxies or constellations of talented, energetic and successful people. Within these kinships were transmitted not only inborn qualities of value but also family traditions wherein these qualities flourished to best advantage. This genealogical ideal of an elite, advanced by Mr. Bloomfield, implied that man was not only the architect of his environment but also its beneficiary.
How are these elite families chosen? They are not self-nominated, as were Joan of Arc, Chatham or Trotsky; nor are they chosen by God, whose ultimate separation of an elect of sheep from a large but rejected body of goats hardly affects us in this life; not by Pontiffs sanctifying or beatifying posthumously certain favoured mortals who come to constitute a sort of celestial elite. Nor are they elected by electorates such as choose the House of Commons; nor are they appointed by kings or prime ministers who keep the House of Lords abreast of the times; nor are they picked by people like Lord Lindsay, albeit that his predecessors as Masters of Balliol sometimes picked well.
By a process of assortative mating which

THE IDEAL OF AN EPLITE

3I

is perhaps not entirely fortuitous, the mem- political developments in this country gave

bers of Mr. Bloomfield's elite somehow more prominence to the ideal of an eclectic

choose themselves. When they make these than of a genealogical elite. A socialist

choices, they are largely unaware of the ideal society like ours, though striving to realize

they are unconsciously fulfilling. How are the ideal of equality, must yet appoint its

these creative choices and their vitalizing tiers of bureaucrats who constitute a mana-

sequences influenced ? Dr. Blacker suggested gerial elite after the pattern of Burnham.

two ways. The first was by means of the Every organised community has its own

process of assortative mating; not only was particular system of authority and delegated

geographical mobility here important-the responsibility. Authority and responsibility,

sort of mobility which made it possible for a wielded by or resting upon a minority which

James Stephen from Aberdeen and a John is in fact an eclectic elite, must permeate a

Macaulay from the Highlands to come ministry, an industry, a political party or a

together-but also a social mobility by which profession no less than a battalion or a ship.

individuals who are appropriately endowed The problem which increasingly confronts us

will be translated into a stratum in which to-day, when widened educational oppor-

they can meet people like themselves. Such tunities have facilitated social mobility, is to

geographical and social movements perhaps select the right people for our managerial

occur more readily to-day than formerly. elite. In Napoleon's army every private

The second process consisted in what Mr. soldier was encouraged to think that he held

Bloomfield had called proliferation (proles a field-marshal's baton in his knapsack; in

and fero): nurnerous offspring should be the secondary schools of to-day every boy

born. Here we are less well placed to-day has at least as much reason to believe that he

than were our forebears. James Pattle, if he holds a bureaucrat's fountain pen in his

had lived to-day, might have had but two waistcoat pocket. Dr. Blacker quoted the

daughters instead of seven, six beautiful and findings of Proctor, an American psycholo-

one plain.

gist, who in 1923 studied the aspirations of

There might be reasons, suggested Dr. American high-school boys. Proctor found

Blacker, other than the movement towards that sixty-one per cent of his boys aspired to

egalitarianism why the ideal of an elite was occupations for which there were social

unpopular to-day. By his race theories and vacancies for under five per cent. If the

persecutions, Hitler, a follower of Nietzsche, fashions of thought, the tone and the moral

had so poisoned the word that on some lips code which prevail in a community are in

it was tainted. The Americans, for whom the fact set by a small but influential minority,

word " democratic " connotes something then it is essential that this minority should

approaching an absolute good, abjure the be properly picked. But how are we to find

antithetical conception of aristocracy. And the men and women with the requisite

Mr. Bloomfield had reminded us of the ability, integrity, energy and imaginative-

influence of Marx. But the countries and the ness ? How is the raw material of our eclectic

systems which most passionately reject the elite to be identified ? That is perhaps the

notion of a genealogical elite nevertheless central problem which to-day confronts the

take pains to foster what might be called an social administrator and the political theorist.

eclectic 6lite. The Kremlin vests power and prestige in the members of the Communist

***

Party, led by Commissars, who are a political Mr. Cecil Binney, while expressing his

elite. And most American universities have appreciation of the paper, questioned whether

followed the prototype of the German the reader was correct in regarding an elite

students corps in developing their system of as essentially hereditary, and said that he

fraternities of which the members may enjoy agreed with the Russians and Americans as

the prestige of an elite.

depicted by Mr. Bloomfield though he was

Dr. Blacker went on to say that recent not himself either, but a Manchester liberal

32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and an opponent of the hereditary system. obvious modem example, none of us knew

This might sound heretical, but it was note- who invented the atomic bomb; if fifty of

worthy that as belief in hereditary qualities those engaged on it had been put to death, it

had increased, largely as a result of Galton's would only have been invented some years

work, so belief in hereditary institutions had later. It was otherwise with political events;

declined. The House of Commons, which was some events of far-reaching consequence

elective, was exalted above the House of were due to a particular personality, and it

Lords, which was hereditary. There was was a melancholy reflection that the decisive

really no inconsistency, for there was a limit fact was often not the appearance of a man

to the extent to which qualities were of genius but the existence in a position of

inherited, and the best government would be importance of a person of unusual incom-

made by selection, but paying special atten- petence. He suggested that the most interest-

tion to those who might be expected to have ing of the " ifs " of history was what would

inherited ability. The Russian Commissars, have happened if Charles I's elder brother

who doubtless regarded themselves as an had survived and come to the throne. Even

elite, were the successors of the Turkish if he had not been the very remarkable man

Empire, where there was no hereditary aris- he was believed to be, he could scarcely

tocracy, partly because the absence of sur- have been like Charles I, who threw away a

names made it difficult to identify relation- position of immense strength. On the other

ship; but the most remarkable example of hand, Cromwell, though a man of great

an elite class which was not hereditary was ability, could never have established any-

supplied by the bishops of the medieval thing permanent in view of the enormous

Church, who were a small class selected from feeling in favour of the monarchy. The same

the select class of clergy.

might be said of the Russian revolution;

Turning to the question how far progress only a small number of people could ever

was due to individual men, Mr. Binney sug- have desired the present regime; the

gested that scientists were a bad example. Czarist regime was in urgent need of reform,

Science progressed gradually, and some but there was no reason why the Czar, had

inventions had been made simultaneously by he been a man of ability, might not have

more than one person. To take the most preserved the monarchy in an altered form.

Eugmiu Rview, Vol.

No. 1

