REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

I65

instances, mostly well known, of this kind of relation, the book seems to shed little fresh light on the problem of evolution.
L. DONCASTER.

Haldane, J. S., sonality:

M.D., LL.D., An Examination

F.R.S. of the

Mechanism, Life, and Per-
Mechanistic Theory of Life and

Mind. London. John Murray; 1913; price 2S. 6d.; pp. 139.

IN this book of four lectures delivered last May at Guy's Hospital, Dr.

Haldane has his views on

developed, a subject

in of

a remarkably attractive and assimilable unfailing interest. Commencing with

form,
a fair

and lucid exposition of the mechanistic hypothesis of living organisms

and the physiological observations upon which this hypothesis is founded,

he discusses more superficially the objections raised in favour of vitalism,

only to reject this alternative hypothesis as "unproved, unintelligible,

and practically useless as a scientific working hypothesis."

find

On such that the

a clear and mechanistic

tangible foundation it hypothesis is rejected

is a on

little disappointing to
no better ground than

that of the extreme complexity of the intracellular mechanisms required

for the ordinary functions of cell life, and for heredity; in view of our

ignorance of the possibilities of molecular structure, such a conclusion

would seem to be somewhat presumptuous. Moreover, when we look

further for an alternative hypothesis, we are merely frustrated by a

philosophical discussion on the reality of the a not very relevant presentation of idealism.

phenomenal

universe,

and

That there is nothing in the mechanistic hypothesis which is incon-

sistent with the purest idealism must be familiar to all students of

Huxley; and we imagine that Hume would have particularly resented the

assertion (p. 74) that he had proved the world of matter to be non-

existent. Nor does it help matters to place organic beings in a special

category; if the physicist is right in attempting to express the relations

between physical quantities in terms of mathematical symbols, although

the symbols are avowedly not physical quantities, the physiologist is

equally right in explaining physiological mechanisms, even the most

obscure and intricate, in terms of physics and chemistry.

It is, indeed, to be regretted that Dr. Haldane, in developing specu-

lations of great philosophical interest, should have founded them, in appearance, upon the supposed inadequacy of the mechanistic theory; for

not only does he fail to establish this inadequacy, but there remains

between the physiological and the philosophical portions of his reasoning

an unbridged gap in an argument, which in other respects he has taken

pains to make complete.

Unquestionably the best lecture of the four, both from the literary

and from the scientific point of view, is the last, entitled "Personality."

Here, in a purely philosophical region, the author develops the conse-

quences of the thesis that the phenomenal world is a product of per-

sonality; and in particular of the personality of an organism, itself

adapted to its environment. The conception bristles with paradoxes,

and it is only by appealing to an ultimate unity in the universe of per-

sonality that solempsism ";

it is possible to nevertheless, it is

escape from by powerful

the sophistry reasoning as

of " racial well as by

brilliant creative thought that world and all that lies within it

we is

are led to the conclusion, that " This a spiritual world." R. A. FISHER.

Dealey, JAMES QUAYLE. The Family in Its Sociological Aspects. London.

G. G. Harrap and Co.; 1913; price is. 6d. net; pp. 137.

ccThuHalIpmStienlraistttilcneogmbpoirnoikstehdeoaemsossdoimenergwnuhlaafrtalmyiplolyoitrtolfeanjAdumsetuirncicecoatnonviintdsceimtnoigtclre.ahicsytT.ohreicaflirsotutsleivneen,

" It family,

is in

possible, therefore, its later aspects at

to get a much clearer idea of the least, from a study of the American

modern family

