ANIMAL AND HUMAN BREEDING
An Attempt to Study their Common Principles

By Professor F. A. E. CREW, M.D., D.Sc., F.R.S.E.

T HERE are two entirely distinct underlying law of evolution by natural

forms of science, though they are not selection.

often recognized by the public when I have always wondered whether that

it comes running to " the scientists " to same deep insight, that quest after a unify-

lay down the law or prophesy on some one ing principle of life, was present in Mendel's

or other subject of importance.

mind. I suspect that it was not, or he

The first of these forms consists merely would never have allowed his theological

of the application of scientific knowledge and duties to distract him from a work so essen-

methods to various practical problems, such tially religious. But certainly Bateson and

as the cause of ' knocking ' in a motor his followers, when they continued Mendel's

engine or the standardizing of the breed of work, were fired by the quest; and

pigs which make the most economical live- between them and in conjunction with Dar-

weight gains. This form has a sub-section winism we have hammered out to-day a

which, for want of a better name, I have growing philosophy, which is based not on

christened the stamp-collectors' section. It theory but on fact, of the living thing.

consists in the amassing of a vast amount of Now, Mendel's peas, like Newton's apple,

information about a subject of no importance would have been just curiosities of no greater

whatever-some such byway of knowledge interest than the knick-knacks on the side-

as the habits of the meadow-pipit-and only table of a Victorian maiden lady, if similar

differs from the main section of this form in phenomena had not been noticed in other

being unprompted by practical motives. organisms: they were one instance of the

The men who pursue it are indeed actuated laws of heredity, of genuine scientific value

by that same curious motive which makes only when they were synthesized with other

others collect postage stamps or hit a little instances. One of the most curious things

white ball with a long wooden stick.

about modern biology is that little or no

The second main form of science differs effort has been made, big branch of know-

from these two sections as the art of a ledge as it is, to provide an organization

Romney differs from the craft of the for similar syntheses-perhaps it has been

domestic decorator. It is the pursuit not of due to the influence of the practical

mere knowledge, but of wisdom, understand- ' scientists ' ! Such synthetic work as has

ing, and, as wisdom must be, it is synthetic. been done has been sporadic, the occasional,

It seeks to grasp, not the facts of life and uncorrelated sparks from single men.

matter, but the laws which govern them. C. J. Bond's extremely significant and

The fact that apples fall from trees was suggestive work on hemilateral asymmetry

probably too well known before Newton's strikes me as one of these sparks, for it

day for his discovery to be of much assist- links up reproduction with growth and

ance in furthering the craft of pomiculture. suggests that the process of becoming an

The value of his contribution was the dis- individual is kin to the apparently separate

covery of a unifying principle which linked process of creating new individuals. Gold-

apples with the solar system. Similarly, the schmidt with Lymantria dispar, Huxley

vast amount of heterogeneous information and Ford with Gammarus chevreuxi, pos-

about the lives and habits of animals in The sibly Mumford with the growth of school-

Origin of Species would be of little interest boys, are doing most suggestive work on

or value were they all not linked up by the the physiology of inheritance and hetero-

95

96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

gonic growth. There are philosophical im- not merely under Milk and Cattle, but

plications in their studies of the rate and would also be classified in the Physiological

rhythm of life and growth. Rhythm is file, the Endocrinological, the Genetical, and

everywhere, in living as well as in not-living so on.

matter; and this work indicates that the Thus the truly scientific files, which tell

differences between two organisms, two of the phenomena common to different forms

human beings, are largely due to their in- of life, will automatically keep pace with the

herent rhythms. The fertilized egg is not files which tell the farmer the practical facts

a mere collection of chemicals: it is an about his stock. The thickness of the layer

orchestral conductor, a maker of rhythms; of fat along the back of the bacon pig may

and the individual into which it grows is be made to illuminate the darker ways of

their product. There is a rhythm of flesh- life as efficiently as it replenishes or depletes

making, a rhythm of bone-making, the the trouser-pockets of the farmer. I look

rhythm of the sexual cycle; and as they forward in a year or so to glancing down, for

weave and interweave, so is the final pattern example, the sex-linkage file and finding

of the individual formed.

there, causally related to one another, odd

Allied to this, and perhaps also synthetic, suggestive facts about ' criss-cross ' inherit-

is some of the work now going on in my own ance in poultry, endocrine factors in sheep,

Department at Edinburgh, where we are hemophilia and colour-blindness in man.

investigating the basic causes and differ- I have been a long time coming to the

ences of sex. Metabolism, rate of growth, point; but it seems to us that our Bureau

appears at the moment to be the significant will not truly cover its subject unless human

clue. breeding is included as part and parcel of

But, though there are these occasional in- our subject of animal genetics. So we are

dividual attempts, there has so far been no making the same contact with eugenic re-

organization to synthesize the findings of all search bodies as with biological institutes

the different branches of biology and to and agricultural stations; and I do believe

discover their common principles. I am, that both human and animal breeding will

therefore, rather proud of the Imperial be enriched by the association and synthesis.

Bureau of Animal Genetics which has just Regarded narrowly, eugenics ranks with

been attached to my Department, and which the practical ' sciences '-though much the

will, I hope, prove to be such an organiza- most important of them all-since its imme-

tion. It is one of eight bureaux which are diate aim is simply to apply the well-

being set up to co-ordinate the various agri- founded methods of science to the practical

cultural research stations throughout the task of preventing racial decay. But in the

Empire; and it is, therefore, strictly speak- wider view it is much, much more. It is an

ing, a tool for the use of the practical attempt to synthesize the most marvellous

' scientists.' But it has another function- and complex of life's manifestations with

when you start to classify anything, you the rest of the organic world, to discover

must do so under several heads. A paper, man's place in nature, whence and how he

for instance, on milk-yield in cows would go has come, and whither he may go.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 2.

