POPULATION CHANGES AND ECONOMICS

By L. J. CADBURY

IN the first -number of the EUGENICS to encourage parenthood are desirable."

REVIEW for I941* Mr. Lafitte made an But is he not open to misinterpretation when

interesting commentary on Mr. Redda- he says, " that no substantial and sustained

way's book The Economics of a Declining rise in the birth rate is likely to be achieved

Population. A more recent issue has con- in the absence of far-reaching economic

tained his paper on certain aspects of family reforms " ? Is it not desirable to be more

allowances.t Both contributions raise such specific ?

important points that some further discussion The word " reforms " is generally used in

of them may perhaps be permitted.

connection with acts leading to all types of

I am sure all eugenists will take to heart social betterment. We want social better-

Mr. Lafitte's parting advice to study the ment for itself, but it would be untrue to

book under review before attempting to assume that all acts leading to it simul-

strengthen their case for a population policy taneously stimulate the birth rate. In many

by the use of non-eugenic arguments. Also directions they have no effect on demographic

they will be glad to know that he disagrees trends, in some they may even aggravate

with Professor Jewkes who sees no reason their decline unless this tendency is realized

why anything at the moment needs doing and corrective measures taken simultane-

about demographic problems. He makes it ously.

clear that action is needed now, not forty Mr. B. S. Rowntree's recent book, Poverty

years hence, but it is not so apparent why he and Progress,* records the results of legisla-

regards a trend of slow population decline as tion which has had as its objective raising the

" desirable " until a total of 33-36 millions is general standard of living; improving indus-

reached, which he suggests is " adequate." trial conditions; insurance against unem-

It is true that if nothing is done a decline ployment and sickness; legal holidays and

is inevitable, but why should we assume that pensions; subsidized housing; etc. Apart

if active measures are adopted we cannot from certain aspects, it is a report of achieve-

achieve stability at our present numbers ? ments of which we may well be proud. But

To do this the present N.R.R. of .75 has to it is clear that among these achievements the

rise over the next two decades to unity. encouragement of parenthood is conspicu-

Why should we not adopt this as our aim and ously absent.

devise a policy to make it practicable ? To As a matter of fact, if we select certain

sup.port a policy that looks to stability only sections of beneficial legislation, particularly

at the end of the century and a population those dealing with the school-leaving age

of 33-36 millions seems unduly acquiescent. and the control of juvenile employment, we

To reverse a population trend is admittedly find progressive Acts have definitely been a

an extremely difficult thing to do, but if we deterrent to parenthood. Such legislation

think it can be done to the extent of arriving lengthens the period that elapses before a

at an N.R.R. of unity in 6o years' time, why child can begin to earn, and thus, unless

should we assume it is impossible to do it in counteracting measures are taken, increases

twenty ?

the cost of rearing a family.

* **

*

Another group of economic reforms which

Mr. Lafitte rightly warns optimists that "reform of the economic system in itself will not solve everything and that measures
* EUGENICS REVIEW 82; 4. P. I21ff.
t Ibid. 88, 3. P. 67 ff.

are frequently assumed to have a beneficial bearing on the birth rate are those whose aim is to provide security. It is difficult to dogmatize about this relationship. The
* London, 1941. Longmans. Pp. XX + 540. T5S.

'3

14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

teaching profession, for instance, have a very to what H. G. Wells has called the " Social

high degree of economic security but they appetites and opportunities " that have been

are one of the least fertile groups in the so immeasurably enlarged since Victorian

community. A feeling of insecurity may be a times, but the fulfilment of which can only

deterrent in certain circumstances, but con- so often be achieved by abstention from

versely security per se does not appear to parenthood ?

stimulate the birth rate.

Many of the " good things of life " have

The fact is that parenthood inevitably been commercialized as well as having

involves taking risks, economic and other- become the alternative to parenthood.

wise. We can endeavour to minimize the Having become commercialized they have

risks and we can try to create a courageous been pushed by all the arts known to those

outlook and disposition to face them. Can who specialize in " breaking down consumer

we combine both ? It is not easy as the very resistance." Parenthood as merely one

act of investigating and legislating against among many desirable ways of spending

risks so often engenders an excessive spirit of money and unsupported by propaganda has

safety first. " Security " legislation and thus suffered.

measures for economic insurance by them- Is the withdrawal of its competitors from

selves are just as likely to discourage as to the field of commercial enterprise the best

encourage parenthood. It is important this course to take ? In some respects it may be.

should be recognized and countered.

But it is doubtful if this is a practical way

** *

of dealing with other competitors, motor

Thus for our purpose we may divide re- cars, travel, radio, gramophones,- a more

forms into three groups:

luxurious standard of living, etc. Here the

i. Those which promote the general spread solution seems to be educating and in-

of the amenities of life but have little effect one way or another on the birth rate.

fluencing public opinion aided by deliberate control of-these alternatives chiefly through

2. Those of which I have given examples, which excellent in themselves are a deterrent

taxation, assisted perhaps by some scheme of rationing or controlled allocation.

to parenthood. The important point with

***

this group here is to recognize this deterrent When we get to the question of taxation,

influence and to take counter measures. it is important to distinguish between

3. Those which stimulate the birth rate measures designed to achieve vertical and

and which for the most part add to human horizontal redistribution. Vertical redistribu-

comfort and enjoy ment as well. These tion aims at reducing the disparity in spend-

include all the efforts to remove the penalties ing powers between the richer classes and the

of rearing a family; relief from the drudgery poorer classes. Such redistribution is desir-

of housework and maternity; the provision. able on grounds of equity, but it cannot be

of free or special food for children; family said to have any direct effect on the birth

allowances in cash and kind; public recogni- rate, though it has an important indirect

tion of the social importance of parenthood; effect in so far as the funds it provides are

etc. subject to horizontal adjustments in their

We are indebted to Mr. Lafitte for enu- spending. Horizontal redistribution in the

merating some of these ideas in his article same economic groups between those with

on "Family Allowances and Eugenics." family responsibilities and those without

He also makes other suggestions, including them on the other hand, should have a direct

the important one, " that many things which effect in reducing the financial deterrent to

to-day are financial alternatives to parent- fertility.

hood should be withdrawn from commercial This is equally applicable to all sections of

enterprise and provided communally- society and calls for immediate attention.

especially in the field of cultural and leisure Such documents as Mr. B. S. Rowntree's

pursuits." Is this the answer we should make book or the Bristol Survey show that large

POPULATION CHANGES AND ECONOMICS

failies are the outstanding cause of poverty " strive for a social order in whi7ch social

among the low income groups; Family promotion depends on ability and social

Allowances both in cash and kind, whether prestige attaches to social service." But for

" earmarked " or not, are increasingly recog- this we want to look surely to a quickening

nized as the answer here.

of intellectual and spiritual forces rather

At the other end of the scale the incidence than putting our trust in mere mechanical

of taxation on a single man. a married man changes in our economic structure.

without children, and a married man with The other premise is based on " striving"

three children, all in receipt of £io,ooo a year, and " competition." But can a democratic

is discussed by Mr. J. E. Allen in the Decem- economic order remove such elementary

ber number of the Economic Journal. The human instincts? They can be to some

first pays £6,862 in taxation; the second extent eliminated in static caste or feudal

£6,832; and the third £6,757. That is to say order, but surely we do not want to move in
the last with three children to educate is left such directions. Our object should be not

with £75 more than the second and £IO5 more to destroy " striving" and " competition"

than the bachelor. To mitigate the economic but to see that it drives human endeavour in

disadvantages of raising a family, Income the right direction and that it does not

Tax allowances on this scale are useless; encourage people to remain among the

they should be drastically revised, not unencumbered."

between the bachelor and the childless

***

married man, but as between these two and Turning to the other side of the picture

the man with a family.

and considering the influence of demo-

***

graphic trends on the economic situation,

Before leaving this aspect of the subject, which is the main theme of the first article,

may I refer once again to another section of there is much truth in the statement that

Mr. Lafitte's article on " Family Allowances " the cessation of economic growth is bring-

and Eugenics " ? In particular to the section ing to a head all those economic problems

where he states, " In our civilization prestige the solution of which was easier, but less

goes primarily with the ownership of property urgent and evident, in the period when

and conspicuous spending-preferably with- population was still steadily expanding."

out conspicuous working to justify it." -And Structural unemployment has always been

" Social prombtion depends on striving, in a problem and a declining population em-

competition with others and often to others' phasizes it. " A shift in demand, when popu-

detriment, for a higher income or greater lation is declining, may involve actual con-

possessions." From these two premises he traction of the total output of the industry

proceeds to the conclusion. " At whatever concerned, which would involve physical

rung one starts . . . it is a ladder best transfer of capital and labour to new em-

climbed by those unencumbered by too many ployments, with unemployment in the in-

children."

terim; whereas in a period of population

But are these two premises and their expansion a fall in demand for capital and

conclusion true ? I do not deny that there labour of a specific type (e.g. horse transport)

is some flaunting of conspicuous spending: might more commonly be met simply by

it is certainly one of the causes of anti- ceasing to expand production of that type."

Semitism. I suggest, however, that it is not It would be foolish to ignore the defects

in evidence among large and important and frictions inherent in the present eco-

sections of our civilization, those, for nomic system and to pretend that a cessa-

instance, who seek their vocation in the tion of population growth was their cause.

Services, in our Universities and educational But surely one can disagree with this view

system, in the Arts, as members of Municipal and at the same time recognize that cessa-

and National legislative bodies, and so forth. tion of population growth removes a useful

I agree with Mr. Lafitte that we should economic lubricant, and that a period of

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

decline goes further, actually introducing " Recent technical trends have been mainly

new economic difficulties. Mr. Lafitte seems in the direction of reducing the amount of

to suggest there is something perverse in capital per unit of output." It would be

associating a falling birth rate with future interesting to have a list of industries where

industrial and other problems; this attitude this is the case and to know whether cog-

is really unjustified however if we keep all nizance had been taken of two very relevant

the factors in their proper perspective.

factors; shortening of working hours, and

In the section " Capital Outlay and Econo- the increasing use of ancillary services such

mic Progress," the finance of our economic as power, heating, refrigeration, lighting,

system is surveyed. It is laid down that " The ventilation, water supplies, effluent disposal,

accumulation of capital itself tends ultimately etc. The shorter hours you work your

to diminish the ' marginal efficiency ' of plant the larger it has to be for the same

capital." This has hitherto, however, been output and thus more capital is required.

held in check by counteracting forces, which The more use that is made of ancillary

by expanding the demand for it have main- services the greater the capital that has to

tained its marginal efficiency. These forces be invested in them either by the industrial-

were:

ist himself, by public utility concerns, or

(a) technical advance, (b) increase in the home population, (c) expansion of foreign trade, (d) the rise in the standard of living.
It is suggested that " prolonged stagnation in any one of these forces of expansion would, if the other factors continue to expand demand for net additions to capital no faster than before, have a depressing effect on capital outlay."
Each force is then reviewed in turn and each it is suggested is becoming progressively less effective.
The moral presumably is that enthusiastic

by the community.
On (c) it is said, " It is impossible henceforth to count on overseas investment to stimulate the demand for new capital in the absence of deliberate measures to promote it." But why should it be assumed we are not prepared to take " deliberate measures " ?
This country has been badly treated in many of its foreign investments, e.g. South American Railways, but the calculations Lord Kindersley produced from time to time before the war showed that things in the
aggregate were not quite as bad as one was
sometimes inclined to think. Though new directions and methods for overseas invest-

supporters of a population policy must not ments need to be worked out, it would be overlook these other factors which in the unduly pessimistic to assume they will not be

past have done so much to absorb capital, resumed after the war. In some directions,

and which in the future may be less effective. such as our Colonial Empire, they are likely

This is eminently reasonable, but is there not only to be resumed but amplified; the

not a further moral that if (a), (c) and (d) are Colonial Office with the assistance of the

declining factors, (b), that of population, London School of Economics is examining

tends to become all the more important, and the position actually at this moment.

that from this financial angle the reactions There is also the startling statement

of a declining and ageing population are attributed to Colin Clark that " of the

profound ?

remarkable gains in productivity which have

This is a powerful argument in favour of been made since I9I3, nearly the whole has

those who advocate every effort being made been lost" (in the form of increased un-

to stabilize our numbers.

employment).

Though they are rather minor points and

***

do not affect the real, issue, is the outlook Those who urge a stabilized population and

for (a) and (c) quite so gloomy as Mr. point out the burdens of an ageing popula-

Lafitte suggests ?

tion are taken to task in a section headed

Discussing (a), the statement is made that, "Public Finance." Harrod is quoted as

POPULATION CHANGES AND ECONOMICS

17

follows: " In the coming decade we shall While population is increasing the burden of

have a rapidly ageing population and the the aged is automatically lower than that

maintenance of the older members will be carried by a stationary or falling population.

an increasing burden on those actively Conversely, the children are a heavier charge

employed." For this view it is suggested he on a rising than on a falling or stationary

is an unjustified pessimist by two arguments population.

that are not convincing.

If we allow an N.R.R. of under unity to

The first is a table showing the probable continue for some time and then try to bring

cost of Old Age Pensions, Widows and it up to unity, we are going to carry a heavier

Orphans, and War Pensions up to I965-66. burden of dependency at both ends of the

The aggregate shows a very moderate in- scale. Until a stable age structure9 is achieved

crease, but this is entirely owing to War the generation which tries to arrest a declin-

Pension costs dropping from £40 million per ing population will have to carry the double

annum to £io million. Bringing War Pen- charge.

sions into the calculation is to introduce a Once more an argument for striving at

completely irrelevant factor into a discussion once for an N.R.R. of unity and a stabilized

on whether an N.R.R. under tinity is going population'as soon as we can manage it.

to increase the cost of dependency, or not.

***

Further, the present war may completely Mr. Lafitte summarizes his main thesis by

alter the War Pensions calculation.

saying, " I have endeavoured to show that

The second argument suggests that in- many of the economic arguments currently

creasing dependency costs can be ignored as put forward as grounds for stimulating the

the rising number of elderly people who will birth rate are ill-conceived, and that others

die will increase and thus Death Duties will are really arguments for dealing with our

rise from £80 million I935-9 to £105 million economic lack-of-system."

I960-64. This surely is to confuse two quite Printing " economic " in italics is presum-

different considerations. The Old Age Pen- ably to emphasize the fact that there are

sion figures reflect an increase in the number other arguments for stimulating the birth

of non-producing dependents. The Death rate as, for instance, political and psycho-

Duty figures are merely the trend of one logical ones. But should these be excluded

method out of many by which the Inland from the discussion and it be assumed that

Revenue decide how the community shall they have no economic significance ?

be assessed. They do not reflect any increase The high standard of living in this country

in the country's earning power, wealth or is dependent on our position as a great centre

taxable capacity. It is no good, for example, of international trade and finance, and the

congratulating ourselves that the Death focal point of the British Commonwealth. As-

Duty returns are rising if the Income Tax a first-class political power in the world we

returns are falling. Death Duties are merely can retain that position. If we were ever to

a convenient device for taxing capital; in decline from being a first-class power, as

fact a convenient form of capital levy. seems to be the destiny of France, then an

The trend of existing taxes as a whole may. adverse reaction on our standard of living

be a method of calculating the future appears inevitable.

national income, one single tax device Whatever the direct economic effects of a

certainly is not.

declining population may be, they are not in

***

fact so fundamentally important as the in-

The statement, " there is little justification direct effects brought about by such a

for gloomy talk about the increasing financial political change as this.

burden of old people," is hardly supported

***

by the figures.

The psychological aspect is difficult to

The position is, in fact, worse than that analyze; it has its industrial and social

presented even by the quotation from Harrod. reactions.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Most thriving British enterprises look to of diminishing trade. No one, provided the

an expanding market, to higher sales, larger war effort is accelerated, complains of these

premises, and development generally. Such things, but the psychological effect of being

expectations are mainly based on creating " concentrated," or in other words, of work-

new " lines " and securing a fair share of an ing for a diminishing market, is hardly

increasing number of potential customers. exhilarating.

It is a platitude in business that " You A falling population would presumably

can't stand still." What is going to be the have similar if less pronounced results. Is

effect of having to look to a declining number this a case of showing up inherent but un-

of customers on the home market ? Before necessary defects in our economic structure ?

the war we had the spectacle of some of our Rather it is introducing a depressing element

export industries steadily losing ground. It into any form of industrial and commercial

is readily understandable that these were or financial system, which we should strive

hardly happy hunting grounds for our men our utmost to avoid.

of enterprise or those who were seeking to In conclusion, therefore, provided we do

develop new markets.

not ignore the other factors involved, there

Since we became involved in war we have seems to be every justification in using eco-

had the experiences of curtailed supplies, re- nomic arguments in support of a policy of

duced civil production, the inevitable prospect population stability.

in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.
FOREIGN BOOKS not in stock obtained under Licence.
A wisit to this Department is respectfully suggested.
I l Please write for LISTS, mentionin. interests

H. K. LEWVVIS Co. Ltd. Phone: EUSton 4282 (5 lines)

136 GOWER STREET

LONDON

W.C.1

Eaugeis Review, VoL , No. 1.

