THE
EUGENICS_REVIEW
CRIMINALITY FROM THE EUGENIC
STAN DPOINT.
By W. A. POTTS, M.A., M.D., Psychological Expert to the Birmingham lustices.
A Lecture given at the Rooms of the Royal Society on March i6th, 1920.
CHAIRMAN (MAJOR DARWIN): Ladies and gentlemen, as probably you will all remember, it was our custom before the war to have regular lectures of this kind in the afternoon. We ha;d to dTop it through the war, but I
am very glad to say that we are now reviving the custom. and hoppe that it will never be stopped again. We as a Council have felt that we have not given members of this Society much value for their money in the way
of lectures and hope to do better in this way and have regular afteroon lectures in the future, and I think it is a happy augury that our first lecture should be given in the Royal Society's Room. I feel that it is a compliment to our Society, and 'that we are honoured by being permitted to have a lecture here. In the name of our Society I wish to tender thanks to' the Royatl Society for this honour. I do not wish to intervene between the lecturer and the,audience; I only wish to say that the subject of our lecture to-day is the most important one I can imagine. Our lecturer, Dr. Potts, has had very varied experience. He is the Psychological Expert to the Birmingham authorities an.d in that capacity has had good experience in dealing with the examination of young people and adolescents, which will make everything he says of great importance, and I am sure we shall listen attentively to all he has to say. I will now ask Dr. Potts to address you.
DR. POTTS: Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, I should like first of all to thank you, sir, for the kind words you have used. I should like to tell the audience straight away that the reason for the quickened interest in crime now is not any actual increase in crime; as a matter of fact crime is diminishing at the present time. The last reports of the Metropoliftan Police for the years I9I8 and I919, published together in one volume, show that crime is on the whole slightly less than it was. The-re is a very slight increase in burglary and a greater one in shop-breaking, but contrary to what many people think, crimes of violence, murder, wounding and manslaughter are distinctly less at the present time thaan before the war. When we look at the last report of the Prison Commis-
sioners we find that even more gratifying, because it shows a large decrease in crime. The la.st report of the Prison Commissioners, which goes down to March last year, states that in some departments the redu-ction in crime is enormous. Before the war over 8o,ooo persons were con-

82 EUGENICS REVIEW.

victed annually either for drunkennessor vagrancy-over 8o,ooo. At
.forpresent the number convicted those crimes isonly 3,ooo. The report
points out that that dimination cannot be attributed to dealing with crime,
but is due to two very important social factors, first the greatly increased
facility foir obtaining employment, and secondly the greatly increased
difficulty in obtaining liquor, and the Chairman of the Prison Commis-

sioners, in an address published in the report, says that i-t would be
deplorable if the country ever wen,t back to pre-war conditions as regards

the sale of alcohol.

The greater interest in crime now is due neither to increase in crime, nor misdirecteld sentimentality. It is due to the fact that the public are
at last realising that thep,re.sent method of dealing with crime has been

a failure, and in consequence there is serious danger to the community

as well as expense. Perhaps the expense does not seem so very big,

because I find from the report of the Prison Commissioners that the total
cost of p,rison and Government institutions for criminals was in last year

less than Z7o,00oo. That does not seem such an enormous sum com-
pared with some items in public expenditure we are obliged to face; I want you, however, to irealise that that does not anything like represent
the full expense ofc.rime to the com,munity, because we must add on the

future expense of the descendants of those habitual criminals who ought
not to be at large, but whom we allow to- be at large, and who will have

to be supported by the community, not necessarily as criminals, but as

prostitutes, pau-pers and so on. Numbers of these will have to be sup-

ported by the country unless we deal with crime in an efficient manner.
Further dealing with crime in an unisatisfactory way means also the loss

of much useful human material.

So recent

completely does statistics show

tthheatpretsaeknitngsysctoenmvicotfiond.esalianllg

with crime over the

fail that
country

62 per cent. of those convicted had at least one previous conviction and

7 per cent. had been convicted 20 times previou-sly, while of the convic-
p.reviouslytions at Assizes and Quarter Sessions 70 per cent. had been
convicted. That is the state of affairs in England' and also in Canada

and America. An enquiry last year in Ontario revealed that preventive
measures would have saved the large bulk of habitual criminals from a

life of crime, and also showed that the gaols annually returned to the

community persons well known as a menace to society, and absolutely

certain to have to be sent to prison again.

The reason why the present system of dealing with crime fails is,

firstly, because in dealing with crime at the present time we only consider

the question of guilt. This is the only question investigated as a rule,
and when the question of guilt is diecided the punishment depends only

on the crime and not on the individual. Little good can be done until
hel.pthe treatment is what is required for the individual case. One cannot

feeling that failure is partly due to the fact that punitive criminology is
in the han.d.s of lawyers, without the assistance of doctors, especially

dbctors who are psychopathologists and social workers. Crime is dealt

with by people some of whom never heard of considering conduct from

a mental point of view. These people in dealing with crime never

hesitate to spend hundreds of pounds on the question of guilt if necessary,

CRIMINALITY FROM THE EUGENIC STANDPOINT.

83

but if you suggest spending a five-pound note to see how to deal with a prisonner to prevent his sinning again, that would be considered an
extravagance which cou,ld not be contemplated. At the present ti.me we are urgently in need of improved methods of dealing with crime to help on social reconstruction. Although we can derive some comfort from the pdli.ce reports and those of the Prison Commissioners, yet there is an increase of crime between I6 and 2I years of age, and the number of
cases in the Children's Courts has greatly increased. These are disquieting facts. I do not want you to think for a moment that I do not reali.se
that those who are dealing with crime have effected great improvements in recent years. We have had some improvements, such as the Borstal System, the Prob,ation Acts and the Crimina.l Justice Administration. Act
of 19I4. In consequence of th.at Act we find that while before the war more than. half the persons imprisoned, were in prison simply because they were unable to pay their fine.s, at the moment that is the case with
about one-fifth only. Before the war of all convicted persons one out of every four went to prison; at present one in twelve goes to prison, which
is much more satisfactory; but although these measures are valuable and
capable of doing much good, they must fail in achieving all they might
if we d{o not study the in,dividual an,d employ medical help. The Courts should call in medic-al practitioners wrho have made a study of mental defect and mental di-sease.
An important question is, where shall we study the prisoner, before his conviction, or in prison? Some influential people are in favour of studying cases in prison; I am sure this is wrong and will not dk a.s much good as examining them before the Court passes sentence. There are many objections to studying a case after the person goes to prison. One argum,ent for examination in prison is that the person is a degenerate and must therefore be taken care of. He may as well be put in prison and kept there, while you settle what should be done; but the disadvantage is that in prison there will be more difficulty in dealing with
the case. To start with, if a person goes to prison and it is unnecessary, then he has a stigma all his life from which he ought to be free. Then
the sentence may be very short. When anyone is in prison fo,r a mnatter of days only, it may be impossible to properly study or examine him because you must give him time to settle. down after the ordeal in Co-urt; befoTe he is fit to be examined his s-entence may be over; also when you send anyone to prison you may develop anti-social instincts an,d an. antisocial grudge. Besides, in examining these cases we want al.l possible help froim the prisoner; after he is sent to prison we shall not obtain that help, but if he thinks an effort is being made to save him he will help. Of course we must realise, as is done in America, where more of these cases are studied than in this country, that in examining you must pay careful attention to the attitude of the prisoner. Perhaps he is so anxious to appear irresponsible that he may simulate irresponsibility when. it is not there. In some cases this has led to erro,r. I have seen such a man in prison, who said he could not read. He was mentally defective, but
it was found later he could read. Soon after, however, he became insane, and had to be removed to an asylum.
There is another danger in sending these peopl.e to prison, and that
is, as happe.ned in this case, that some persons after being sent to prison

84 EUGENICS REVIEW.
become insane. Kraepelin, a great German psychologist, found out years ago t.hat there is io per cent. more insanity among prisoners than
ordinary individuals. As long ago as 1871, Reich stated that some
prisoners committed to prison shortly after became insane and, remained
soo for several months. Another German investigator, Moeli, in i888 drew attention to the same fact. Recently Dr. Healy, Medical Officer at the Courts in Chicago, observed this too. In Birmingham we have had more than one criminal defective who, after being placed in an institution within a week or so, developed ins.anity in consequence of the strain of
the trial and the sentence. Then the question may be asked, did the insanilty develop after going to prison, or wvas he insane all the time? This is sometimes a complicated and difficult question. At any rate the
prisoner goes through an attack of insanity for which he is no better. Again. in prison there is no opportunity of judging how a man conducts himself in ordinary life, because he may behave perfectly vell in prison and yet n,ot be able to adapt himself to his environment in the ordinary world.
If we do study the individual how can we treat him? All I can say is that we must study the individual and give him the treatment best suited to his case, always bearing in mind th.at wve must at the same time protect society, so, that we must segregate -all the prisoners whom we find to be mentally defective; many prisoners are in prison for that reason. The Royal Commission on the Feeble-minded found that the percentage
varied from io per cent. to 20 per cent.; in America it has been fou.nd to
be higher, from 25 per cent. to 30 per cent.; I think we shall find as we go on that we must enlarge our ideas as to what mental defect is, because although an ordinary defective may not have to be segregated, yet once a defective ha.s become criminal he must be segregated, however slight his degree of mental defect, because you cannot reform a prisoner who is much below the average in intelligence. One recent American investig.ator in the Municipal Court of Boston, Dr. Anderson, says that the number of mentally defective prisoners is io per cent. and maintains that these io per cent. are responsible for 50 per cent. of all crime.
In order to deal with critme properly we must first segregate all prisoners who are mentally defective. Mental defect is bound up. with the question of criminology. We must not only segregate those wfho are prisoners but all mentally defective women, however high grade they may be, who breed illegitimate children, because their children cannot be of any use, a's they have no father, no home, and a bad heredity. We must segregate these mental defectives, because mental defect is a hereditary character. Inheritance does not expl.ain eve-ry case of mental defect, yet it does expl.ain a large number. If we segregate all cases we shall m-uch reduce the number of mental defectives in th.e country.
What we want to know is-ca.n the prisoner behave like an average person of his. social class and up-bringing ? Is he able to earn his living and keep out of the hands of the police? If he can do this it does not matter much how far he may fail in tests of intelligence. In the American Army some interesting tests were carried out. It was found that a large number of the men examined were carrying on quite well in ordinary
life, but were really mentally defective. The only real test is that of

CRIMINALITY FROM THE EUGENIC STANDPOINT.

85

oonduct. In speaking of mental defectives we must include the moral imbecile. Recently I saw a moral imbecile boy in an institution u,nder a
Justices' order. He had been in Standard VII. at school and was bright
and intelligent in many ways; there must have bee.n great difficulty in
certifying him, but I was convinced he wa.s in the right place for this
reason. The institution had a large number of low-grade cases, almost idiots, and a boy who h.ad been in Stand.ard VII. at scho-ol seemed out of
place. But when I asked him if he was happy, he s,aid " Yes." When I asked him what he did he told me that he played football with the other
boys, and was quite contented. That was a p,roof of mental defect. No ordinary healthy bo-y could have been haippy under such conditions.
I should divide p,risoners into three groups: i. Those who are noirmal, both physically and mentally. (A small group.)
2. At the other end of the s-cale, the mentally defective.
3. Persons who are physically or mentally defective inferior (the largest group).
An individual exam,ination will help us to deal with normal cases, and with a large number olf the intermediate group.
Tot show how an individual examination may help I will refer to two
cases in Birmingham. One was a man discharged from the Army and suffering from shell-shock. Instead of being sent to prison he was placed by the military autho,rities in a suitable hospita.l. The other man was
suffering from consumptio0n, and placed in a sanatorium. The disease
was cured and his mentality so much improved that he ha,s behaved ever
since in a normal manner. He had been previously engaged in work which was too heavy for him; afterwards he secured lighter work and
was able to earn good wages.
Those cases wvould probably never have been discovered except by speciial medical examination, which saved them from the stigma of prison, and the community from. much expense.
Are we ready at the present time for this individual examination ? Yes, the time is undoubtedly ripe for two reasons: First, be-cause by modern methods we can cure incipient mental disease; mental disease and crimi.na-lity are closely related; if we can cure mental disease by modern methods, we may hope to treat many cases of criminality as suc-
cessfully. Arnother reason why we are now ready for such treatment is in consequence of the work of the late Dr. Charles Goring, who was unfortunately cut off in his prime, but who has done the most valuable work ever done in connection with prisoners. In his book he p,roves, first, that there is no special criminal type as many people think. The criminal possesses no special chaTacteristics, but is merely physically and mentally inferior to ordin,ary people; if you take a large number of people and s,elect those who, are mentally and physically inferior the.n you have a group closely resembling criminals. In every class it is the inferior, mentally and physic-ally, who get into prison.
Dr. Goring showed, by his valuable statistics, that the question of heredity doles come in. Criminality is a characteristic which can be inherited in the same way as the predisposition to tubercular disease or insanity. The table of parental inheritance shows t,hat the criminal

86 EUGENICS REVIEW.
diathesis is innherited at much the same rate as tuberculosis, eye-colour,
height, and other inherited qualities.
Therefore criminality is a heritable condition. Dr. Go:ring showed
tihat the criminal is never, as has been alleged, the victim of circum-
stances. He may be. the victim of heredity or of environment, but never
really the victim of circumstance. His fate is not due to not having had
a chance. Goring showed that the environment hasreally a very small
influence. It must have some influence because criminality, tubercular
disease, venereal disease and alcoholism, etc., are all intimately asso-
ciated. Bad environment leads to people being mentally and physically
inferior and so predisposed to cri-minality. I have described Dr. Goring's
book as epoch-making, but I am sure he would be the last to wish us to accept his work as final. He meant it as an iintroduction and a stimulus
and incentive for other wo,rkers, and no one would have regretted more
than he would if we took his conclusions as final. I say this because I want torefer to one conclusion of his with which I do not agree, namely that i6 to, 21 iS the proper age at which to attend to crime. It seems to
i.sme that that is at least seven years too0 late. Surely a child's fate
settled before he is I4 years ofa,ge. He will not come into the Courts
before that, but it is decid:ed much earlier whether he is going to be a
criminal or not. I once had to examine in prison a boy of 14 years of age who had been stealing; I asked him when he began stealing, and what he
stole at school? He said "Oh, half-c.rowns and shillings," so I asked
whether he had begun with that. He said he had begun by taking
pennies, and then when I enquired whether they were the first things
he took he said " Oh, I took hanklies at first." When I asked him how
ni.neold he was then, he told me th,at he used to take hankies when he was
years of age to make footballs of, -to play with the other boys. I think
at I6 we are seven years too late. One important matter in dealing with
crime is to, have proiper views regarding what we mean by education.
In this c.ase what had the education authorities been doing? They take
a boy away from 'the protection, of his home at seven years of age and
at niine years of age they let him begin criminal courses and go on without
w.asfinding it out. I think they ought to, have known the boy launching
on a career of crime and have stopped him. One of the most important methods of preventing cri,me is to have proper methods of education. We musit recognise what is the first step in going wrong. That boy should have been dfealt with xvhen he was only stealing handkerchiefs.
Again the prisoner is often really guilty of something which has led to the offence; if you punish him merely foir the offence with which he is
charged then vou do, no good. M\Iany women, for instance, who are
charged with petty theft .are not really thieves, but steal that they may
get money for drink; therefore you should deal with them as inebriates, or -as, mentally unsltable, because inebriety is a form of mental disease. The thing to deal with is the wrong habit; it is little use punishing any-
puni.shed.one for theft if it is really lying for which they ought to be
The prisoner should be examin'ed to see if there is any disease. A crimin.al is often lazy, and that may be due to constitutional disease. It
may be tuberculosis. If it is not that, but -a low moral tone then you
should put him into, a Labour Colony and develop higher ideals. Th'e

CRIMINALITY FROM THE EUGENIC STANDPOINT.

87

gxeat thing is to dea.l with the initial cause which will often be found to start very early in life.
In conclusion I should like to refer to the anxiety states and to mental conflicts which -lead to crime iln some cases just as they ane thie caus-e of mental disease. Mental disease is largely due to something dis-
tressing which has be-en, done or which has happened, and which was thought of with too much emotion. This subsequently causes such dis-
tress thait the individual itries to, repress the memory of it. One sdhool of authorities on mental disease describes these cases as being sexuaI in origin, but verry often that does noit come in. A common cause of crime is an uncongenial occupation. When I spoke on this subject to the Chief Constables' Association last summer o,ne Chief Constable gave two excellent instances. He said' in h.is district there were two boys, sons of miners, whose fathers were earning su,ch good wages th.at they insi.sted
upon their sons becoming miners; but the boys soon got into trouble and
were convicted; then it was suggested that the proper person to give advice as 'to what should be done w.ith them was the schoolmaster; he said that neither of them should be miners. One should be a farmer and the other a soldier. When {hey weie engaged in these occupations respectively they turned out well.1
I have indicated the first step in treatment to show the modern way of dealing with these -conditions. Among criminals we may sometimes fin.d 'such condition's and be a,ble to save them by dealing with them in
the same way.
Reoently at a public conference Dr. Addison said the t,ime would come when we. should look upon the present provision of lunatic asylums as memnorials of a not very glorious past. So I think when we deal propeTrly with criminals we shall look upon the large number at the
present time as records of a not very glorious past.
THE CHAIRMAN: Ladies and gentlemen, I am quite sure that you will a.ll agree that we have listened to' a most interesting lecture. It has interested me especially because at one of my Presidential addresses some years ago I dealt wi,th this question o.f criminality with the same intimate kn-owledge as your lecturer, a-nd I think what he has said has confirmed my impressions. Of course, you may ,think a criminal should be punished. Sometimes you .are told yoiu ought to do it for revenge, but I do not think this is a deterrent.
I think the time has come when we may put revenge on one side. As regards reformation it seemis that the lighter the punishment given the betteLr because the punishment leaves the stigma. on a man for ever, and I think that is one of the conclusions you have a,rrived at to-day. Then as to deterrents. I judge fro,m statistics that it is better that the punishment s1hould be -short and severe, because it s,eems that after four or five convictions a man is moire and not less likely to commit crime. It seems to me that the most important reform d,ealing with habitual criminals is to. make the length of each imprisonment depend far mo're upon the probability of another being added in the future and less upon the crime for Which it has been given. Then, another conclusion, I thiink is that you should always study the individual. I think the habitual criminal
1 Two other cases of mental conflict were described, one of which nearly
resulted in a serious crime, but the speaker stated that they could not be published.

88 EUGENICS REVIEW.
who commits a number of petty crim-es time after time is the worst kind. He h.as nothing whatever to do and by putting him in prison. for some time you diminish that. The longer they are detained the fewer will be
th-eir offspring, who will not on-ly h-ave an inferior education but have inferior natura.l qualities. It is to my mind always inferior surroundings going hand in, hand with inferior natural qualities which lead to crime. There is very little use in long sentences making a man callous and hardened. Still you wan,t to prevent a man of this kind becoming a parent and passing on these inferior qualities. I should have liked to have heard more from Dr. Potts. I understood him to speak of the large central group, a group which are s-tupid but which m.ay be able to carry
on their lives, and you must make the test of their lives the only one to consider but I d{o not think from a eugenic point of view that we ought to put aside this stupid group. I am afraid I look upon the future of eugenics as very much depending upon this class which are inferior in mental, qualities to the whole community. I think in future that is the class to deal with and I think we should concent.rate our emotions on the feeble-minded, and ours will be the problem of this stupid intermediate group. Our lecturer said that it is. all right if you cann.make this group
mate with the sound stock. I think we always ought to acknowledge that -that would be merely hiding the harm and not getting rid of it. I hope some of those who were present, and who have taken an interest in this subject will enter into the discussion as I am sure it is a very interesting lecture and a good subject for discussion.
A QUESTIONER asked whether if the unfit were allowed to bear children by mating with sound stock the mental defect might not come out in the third or fourth generation?
DR. POTTS: I thoroughly agree with you, but in the case I was speaking of there was not really unsound stock, although not the best possible stock. If it had been a case of real mental disease she ought not to mate with anyone but she is now apparently a normal individual whose relations are healthy. Her nervous system is rather sensitive but not sufficiently tainted to come out in future generations. I believe if she mates with a man who is reasonably sound no harm could result. I am very keen about sound heredity but we cannot go quite as far as we might
wish. A QUESTIONER asked whether it would be the same in regard to mental
defectives as in the case of insane persons? DR. POTTS: Neither mental defectives nor insane people should have
offspring. THE CHAIRMAN: Mental defectives usually have larger families than
fit persons. A QUESTIONER: I would like to make a remark, although I am almost
diffident in speaking on so vast a subject. I have given some considerable attention to the subject of insanity. First I would like to just say how very much I have enjoyed the lecture which is full of most valuable sug*gestions and shall ponder the matter carefully. The subject is so vast that one hesitates to speak at all dogmatically. As regards one's views and experience I would like to mention a reference to Dr. Goring. The lecturer referred to a conclusion of Dr. Goring's which distinctly opposed
the view set forth by Lomrbroso, one of the greatest psychopathologists of

CRIMINALITY FROM THE EUGENIC STANDPOINT.

89

his day. Dr. Goring obtained a very great reputation and after writing his book naturally led a very large portion to his way of t.hinking. It is a question whether the followers of Dr. Goring investigated the matter
as much as they could. I do not profess to be a great student of Lom-
broso but I believe there are criminal types which could be eliminated to
a great extent, but as an old friend of mine-a schoolmaster-once said
" There are two kinds of people in the world, those who are in jail and those who have been clever enough to keep out." There is a great deal
of truth in this. The lecturer referred to three types, the women of a
certain type being difficult to deal with, and if this type is so difficult to deal with we have to ascertain the predisposition of heredity and mental
constitution of the individual and then we should inquire into the environment in which he lives and the conditions which cause him to yield to the crime. Then the lecturer seemed to have some little difficulty in
accepting the view of Dr. Goring that there was no, criminal type, and yet
he told us that these mental defectives could be classified, and I want to
know if you have a- large number of mental defectives classified and
measures taken, whether you could not show a distinct type so that if you had the type photographed and then took a photograph of the Oxford
and Cambridge crew and some other section of healthy boys and girls, you might decide that there was a type.
A QUESTIONER: Dr. Potts said there weTe some mental defectives
who would call for segregation but he said that they were sometimes
of good behaviour and he did not seem to think it so serious in those
cases, but I would ask whether mental defectives should not be either sterilised or segregated. The lecturer spoke of mating as if that meant
having children, but surely if such a tainted stock as the girl he spoke
of were to, marry she should not bear a child. To mate wirth. a mian does
not necessarily mean bearing children, although the two might live together in companionship. As the author of a book on parenthood I take the subject very seriously. I think unsound stock would be better
mated to unsound stock and the sound with the sound.
A QUESTIONER: I happened to have some little talk with the head of a great public institution and the opinion there is that epileptics usually
have very fine children. I do not know whether that applies to the physical
or mental constitution.
A QUESTIONER: I should like to ask one question and it is simply
this-Whether the cases to which the lecturer alluided to did not belong
to entirely different classes from those which were tainted by mental disease, and whether it is not possible through shock to produce temporary insanity which is curable and which would not need to be transmitted to offspring, and whether these did not belong to a different class to those who were tainted by birth ?
A QUESTIONER: Would the lecturer kindly tell us if it is any use
teaching morals and ethics to a criminal class of women? I have been asked to give moral and ethical lectures to criminal classes between I6
and 21. Would the lecturer tell me whether such teaching is useless? DR. POTTS: Such teaching will certainly not be useless, although it
will not be so effective as if it had been given earlier.
A QUESTIONER: I think the lecturer said something to the effect that
the criminal is a criminal before I4. I think that is really too sweeping.

go EUGENICS REVIEW.
Perhaps the lecturer may give reasons for criminal acts. I should also like lo ask what his views are with regard to crimes of say a fraudulent solicitor, who say after middle life found himself committing great frauds. I should like his opinion on the crimes of the directors in the
City of Glasgow Bank. He is undoubtedly familiar with the facts of those frauds. I think it was in I879 or i88o that those directors were
convicted. Then again with regard to postmen. The postman is very often a man who is entrusted with a large amount of money in paper and other valuable things in specie. It seems as a rule that they are honest men but they have very great temptations. Now it is not so many years ago that theft by a Post Office servant was punished by penal servitude. Three years penal servitude was a minimum punishment. That punishment has been reduced but I should like to have the lecturer's views in regard to the mental state of a postman say at the age of 50 who commits a theft. I should like to have his view considering his statements as to criminalities before the age of 14. If I might venture to comment on what he has said with regard to the case of mental conflict it struck me as being very far-fetched. I think it is an unfair way of
dealing with the matter. THE CHAIRMAN: I must now bring this meeting to a close, but before
asking our lecturer to reply may I move a most hearty vote of thanks for his admirable lecture?
DR. POTTS: Mr. Chairman, ladies aind gentlemen, I thank you very much indeed for the extremely kind way in which you have received me. In regard to the fraudulent solicitor Dr. Goring of course says that cases of that kind show no sign of mental defect. Of course they are very special cases but I tlhink the fundamental cause even in those cases is the upbringing b-efore seven years of age. I do think the early years of life are the most important to everyone. In regard to the case of the mental conflict, it is difficult to explain the whole rationale briefly, but the views I indicated a,re accepted by the majority of those engaged in mental work, namely, that some unfortunate coincidence, such as happened in this case, is the fundamental cause. Many cases seem at first more peculiar
than that one. As regairdi the anatomical peculiarities xve hoped at one time we
should find an anatomical distinction by which we could recognise the mental defective. We now know that io per cent. of defectives can be recognised in this way and a very small percentage of criminals can be recognised by theiir anatomical peculiarities but 99 per cent. do not conform to such a test. Then I should say that epileptics do not have fine children. With regard to what has been said about sterilisation I absolutely disagree with that. If a person has a right to life he has a right to live as an ordinary person and not as a mutilated one. I would either segregate him, or have a lethal chamber, I would also like to protest very strongly as a medical man against a wilfully childless marriage. I believe a deliberately childless marriage is always unhappy and I believe if we have an increase in deliberately childless marriages we shall have an increase in disease. I have seen several pathetic cases of women who have had to go to an asylum partly because, during their married life, they have deliberately prevented conception.
(The Meeting then closed.)

