THE COST OF A CHILD

By W. S. BROMHEAD

The writer of this article is the author of a scheme for ' capitalizing ' citizens, and has
been naturally led to investigate the financial cost of rearing a child. Since this cost bears directly upon family endowment, income-tax rebates, and other eugenic pro-
posals, we are very glad to print his interesting estimnates, and hope that they will elicit
similar work.-Ed.

THE cost of raising a child is of utmost interest to those who believe that
there can be no wholesale improvement in human evolution or intelligent eugenics until the parent receives practical acknowledgment for the citizen he supplies to the future ranks of the nation. The work
of family-rearing is a business of the first importance to the State, taking preference, indeed, over agriculture itself, which it is customary to name as the primary basic industry of every people. It is a business demanding the highest and finest qualities of mankind and yielding compensating rewards. But the latter are immaterial blessings which cannot sustain an enterprise that
calls incessantly for financial support.

and finish being equal-is regulated by the cost of output from the most successful and
efficient manufacturers, the latter being in a position to fix market prices. Applying this law to family affairs, the first requirement is to discover where the young of our race can best be maintained at the lowest
cost, in conditions of maximum health and
progress, during their period of growth into useful economic units. Clearly this is in rural surroundings, where fresh air, low rents, and cheap natural foods are to be found. Hence the fact that our cities, which
grow more and more unsuitable for the rear-
ing of children, have always existed largely by virtue of the constant drift from country to town. To support this view we have
knowledge from earliest antiquity of the

Parenthood is the only occupation to successes achieved both in national mass

which it appears to be nobody's business to race-production and in the supply of remark-

fix a reasonable reward in terms of cash. able personalities by parents who have had

Yet it is the one supreme form of production the assistance of natural surroundings.

upon which every other lesser form of liveli-
hood depends. In the ideal State the leading " key " Trade Union would be the Parents'
Union; and every other economic combination would be subservient to the demands and criticisms of the race-builders. To-day this natural order of things is reversed. The community allows a man to breed a horse, a cow, or a Pekinese pedigree dog and gives him full rights to recompense himself
for his trouble by sale or otherwise; and yet cuts up the value of all human offspring
among its members, or uses them up prodigally in its wars. There is never a thought for those who through the best years of their lives strained and struggled to rear them.
Not the finest domestic traditions can survive the burden of such handicaps.

The remarkable efficiency, racial, physical, and industrial, of our British peasantry during the last hundred years or so in rearing big families on incredibly low incomes
is too well known to be disputed. The men and women who bore the brunt of the great
industrial revolution of the nineteenth century, as well as the soldiers who won Waterloo and the sailors of Trafalgar, probably did not cost their parents, on an average, more than one shilling per week in
actual cost; and after the age of twelve they were self-supporting. This cost-£3I in all -cannot, of course, include the infinite labours of the parents. These, probably, can never be capitalized. The secret of the
big family lay naturally in organization. A clever mother, who had learned the business

It is a hackneyed axiom of economics that from older women, knew that once the first

the intrinsic value of an article-quality two or three children were on their feet the

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

worst of her troubles were over. The elder fully. During the War I was intimately

children helped the younger; and further acquainted with the circumstances of a

family increases only strengthened her family belonging to an educated man who

position.

was called away on service to a distant part

Not only in the rank and file has sterling of the Empire. Being- on the wrong side of

work in citizen production at minimum cost forty, he never rose above the rank of ser-

been done. Many of our finest men in the geant, and his wife had to manage a family

realms of commercial, political, and.military of four children on an average income under

achievement have come from homes where £2 per week. She took a cottage in the

the family budget, and especially that por- heart of the country; the children assisted

tion spent in their upbringing, was amaz- her in the intervals of local schooling; and

ingly little. What, for example, is a fair at the end of the War she was strong and

estimate of the expenses incurred in raising healthy herself with an able, level-headed,

Kitchener, who never went to a public happy adolescent family of boys and girls.

school, in his rural Irish home? How much They are to-day far above the average in

was the outlay on Lloyd George until such worldly success and in mental, physical,

time as he joined a lawyer's office in a very and moral qualities.

subordinate capacity? It is probable that The latest figures of the Barnardo Homes

£I5 per annum would more than cover the give the inclusive costs per child in' their big

costs of both these boys to their natural family. They amount to £35 per annum

guardians.

for a normal healthy child; and presumably

Before the War there were several country cover the paid service of foster mothers,

schools (by no means necessarily of the overhead charges, etc. These children are

Dotheboy's Hall type) advertising for perfectly nourished, well looked after, and

boarders at an inclusive charge of £30 per given an excellent start in life. The only

annum; and I have been at pains to seek out other necessary costly items needed by a

one or two who are known to have been child thus reared are facilities for securing

trained at such institutions in order to sum- further technical and general knowledge.

marize their present condition, in compari- In a recently published book The Builders

son with men educated at far more expensive of America, figures are given (p. 304) of the

establishments. In no case do they show costs of child-rearing from birth (confine-

either physically or mentally any in- ment charges are estimated at £,50 mini-

feriority; and there has been at least one mum) until the age of i8 years is reached.

ex-pupil who, by sheer innate ability and The total figure amounts to $7,328 (say

initiative, has risen to be nationally promi- £I,470) for that period. This works out at

nent and personally wealthy. The fact about £I,300 for the limit of i6 years which

is that common knowledge may be dis- the writer suggests as the natural age for

seminated and a knack for inculcating livelihood-earning to begin.

independence of character exercised at very little cost provided the ruling personality is of the right stuff. To my own personal
knowledge there were before the War many married women in modest country homes willing to take charge of a child for £i per month. Since then it is improbable that such folk are to be found. The inference remains, however, that if strangers could
do this at a profit, the cost to parents living in their own home was not more.

It must, of course, be realized that the
American quotation, while doubtless low for middle or well-to-do classes there, does not
pretend to represent the national minimum expenditure for parents in the U.S.A. Doubtless the costs of rearing the individuals of a respectable, potentially useful country family in the villages of Ohio, Virginia, or a thousand other districts are far
less than this, probably approximating to
the figure of £6oo which I believe to be the

The actual costs even now of child-rearing total minimum cost of rearing a British

are not high if gone about sensibly and care- child. It is certain that the costs incurred

THE COST OF A CHILD

3I

in raising Abraham Lincoln, Jack London community of course-not those who bred

or Edison were well below this figure.

and raised him. No serious attempt has

In auditing family budgets it is not just ever been made under modern civilized

to charge to child-rearing costs the heavy methods to assist parents to draw in their

expenses, rents, etc., which really originate old age, if only by way of an advance, any

from the preference or necessity of the cash interest or share in the returns from

parents for living in areas where these are these productive human wealth-makers with

artificially enhanced.

which they have endowed their nation. Un-

In conclusion it is interesting to note that til such an attempt is made, the present

the earning powers of the ordinary man in wide diffusion of contraceptive knowledge

the U.S.A. (see p. 327, Builders of America) will operate increasingly in the direction of

from the age of 2I onward, whose maximum sterilizing all that is best and most vital

income between the age of 40 and 5o rises in our race. Not till a standard minimum

only to $2,500 (65oo), produce an average capital cost for child raising has been agreed

amount of wealth during his life calculated upon can the task of just and adequate

at about $3I,000 (I-6,200) over and above his reward for parenthood be usefully con-

own living expenses. Who gets this sur- sidered.

plus of the ordinary man's industry? The

