'ANTICIPATION' IN MENTAL DISEASE
By ARTHUR S. PATERSON, M.A.(Oxon), M.B., M.R.C.P.E.
(A Report of an address given to the Eugenics Society, June 14th, 1932.)
A ' LAW ' which had been supposed onset, and type of psychosis of both relaby many writers to govern the here- tives. Mott then compiled statistics which dity of mental disease was, said the appeared to show that not only was the age
speaker, the subject of his address. In at which the psychosis started much earlier virtue of this law there was said to be a ten- in the children than in the parents, but also dency for an inherited disease to occur in earlier in nephews and nieces than in uncles the child at an earlier age than that at which and aunts. it occurred in the parent. This phenomenon From the results of this inquiry Mott conhad been called anticipation, ante-dating, cluded that "-this signal tendency of insane ante-position, and, in France, pre'cession. offspring to suffer with a more intense form
Tracing the development of the theory, of the disease, and at an earlier age, is of Darwin, it seemed, said that there was a great importance for the following reasons: strong tendency for a disease to occur in first, it is one of Nature's methods for endthe offspring at the same period of life as ing or mending a degenerate stock; in the parent, but where this rule failed, secondly, it is of importance to the physician, the disease more often occurred at an earlier for he can say that there is a diminishing than at a later age. The French psychia- risk of the child becoming insane after he trist, Morel, in I859, discussing heredity has passed 25, a matter of great importance in relation to mental disease, said that in in the question of marriage; thirdly, it is of some stocks the type of insanity appeared importance in connection with the subject in a more intense form and at an earlier of social surgery of the insane, for when the age in each succeeding generation, until the first attack of insanity occurs in the parent, family, being unable to propagate further, the children, for the most part, have all been died out. Dr. Henry Maudsley wrote that born." there was a silent tendency in Nature to The speaker said that he would direct his restore an insane stock to a sound type, if arguments against this work of Mott' s regeneration was possible, or to end it, if the because Mott was the most distinguished degeneration was too bad to mend. It would writer who had upheld the so-called law of be noticed, however, that he did not say that anticipation. This law had been repeatedly anticipation was the rule, merely that it quoted as an argument against the utility of could occur. Later, E. Nettleship collected eugenic measures, since it was argued that pedigrees in which other diseases occurred, Nature caused insane stocks to die out, or notably cataract and diabetes, and believed else, less frequently, allowed a spontaneous anticipation in these cases to be the rule. recovery.
At Nettleship's instigation the late Sir Mott had to a large extent taken as his Frederick Mott initiated an inquiry in material the patients in Colney Hatch I909, to find out whether anticipation was Mental Hospital, and the speaker (through the rule in mental disease. With this end in the courtesy of Dr. Brander, the Superintenview he instituted a card-index system, in dent,) had had access to that material. He which the name of each patient in the Lon- had examined over 4,000 cases in that instidon County Council mental hospitals, who tution, and was thus able to compare the had either a parent, child, or other relative material which Mott used in i9ii with that in one of these hospitals, was recorded, which obtained to-day. As a result of his together with the date of admission, age of investigation the speaker concluded that
I9I

I92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Mott's results, the chief of which were that were admitted more than thirty years after

insane offspring of insane parents became their parents, their age on admission would

insane on an average at an age some 24 have been higher-there would have been a

years younger than their parents, depended negative anticipation, or post-dating.

on certain statistical fallacies, and did not In limiting his material to children who

require that we should postulate any " Law were admitted, on an average, fourteen

of Anticipation."

years after the parents, Mott was counting

There were several considerations which as sane those children who were later to

made against the value of Mott's findings. become insane. 'The speaker found that in

i.-Mott compared the age of onset of in- families where more than one child became

sanity in three classes of patients:

insane, the average anticipation in I9II was

(a) Insane parents of insane offspring. (b) All patients. (c) Insane offspring of insane parents.

25 years, and of those who have since become insane thirteen years. If Mott had waited till all the children were past the vulnerable age for insanity he would have

The reason why the age of onset was later found much less apparent anticipation than

in (a) than in (b) depended on the fact that he did.

(a) did not constitute a fair sample of the Two of Mott's pupils had collected

general admissions. In order to be a parent numerous pedigrees which appeared to show

at all, a patient must in all probability have anticipation, but the apparent anticipation

passed the age of 25 before being admitted depended on this fallacy, that they did not

to a mental hospital. The age of onset was wait till the children's generation had died

therefore bound to be higher in class (a) out. Thus they took as their starting-point

than in class (b) which included those a patient, the average age of -whose genera-

admitted at the adolescent period.

tion was about 25, and in the previous

The fact that the parent group were older generations of whose family was a fair

on admission depended on the very fact of sprinkling of insanity. If acquired forms of

their parenthood and not on an obscure insanity were included, as was done by

" law." This could be shown by a simple Mott, then about four times as many mem-

comparison. If one collected all cases in the bers of a family became insane after 25 as

community where parent and child had died before it. In the older and completed

from accidental causes, one would find that generations there was therefore about four

the average age of the parent was much times as much insanity as in the youngest,

higher than that of the child. This would, whose average age was 25.

however, depend on the fact that to be a If insanity occurred in the youngest

parent one must have reached adulthood; generation, it was said to be a case of antici-

and the higher age of the parent at death pation; if not, the stock was said to be

would have nothing to do with a law of mending. The real truth, however, was

heredity.

that if Mott had waited till the propositus'

2.-Class (c) also did not constitute a fair generation was extinct, he would have found

sample of the population. The speaker the amount of insanity the same. The

found that the average time which elapsed speaker, in fact, showed that if one con-

between the admission of parent and child sidered as the youngest generation the

was fourteen years. The children class was second youngest generation in the pedigree

therefore composed of those whose parents -that is, the youngest completed genera-

had been admitted only fourteen years tion-there was no anticipation compared

before them. Such a group were bound to with the older generations.

be younger than the general run of admis- Turning to the question of anticipation as

sions. If Mott could have extended his between uncles or aunts and nephews or

researches over a greater number of years nieces, the speaker found in his material an

he would have found that where children anticipation of I3 *4, as opposed to i6 *O

'ANTICIPATION' IN MENTAL DISEASE

years between parents. Mott had attributed Nature ended a stock by the gruesome

such a difference to the fact that the relation- method of causing insanity to appear at a

ship was less close. The real truth was that progressively earlier age in each succeed-

the spurious anticipation which resulted ing generation. The question whether the

from the fact of parenthood only held par- child of an insane parent should be allowed

tially for uncles and aunts, many of whom to marry after 25, could be answered by

were unmarried. That there was some reference to what was called hereditary

anticipation depended on the other fallacies prognosis-that is, how much more likely

described above.

the child of a parent suffering from a par-

3.-Another fact which accounted for the ticular form of insanity was to become

spurious anticipation was that between I890 insane than the child of healthy parents.

and I9I0 the accommodation for mental Figures dealing with this subject had been

patients in London was almost doubled. In worked out in Germany, and were still

the parent generation, a patient was, being borne out bv investigation in other

generally speaking, only admitted when he countries. The child of tainted parentage

was dangerous to the community or quite might be from 3 times to 83 times more

helpless. In I910, in the children's genera- likely to suffer from a given type of insanity

tion, when asylums were more like hos- than the child of healthy parents. The

pitals, patients were admitted at a much degree of probability depended on the type

earlier date. The speaker repeatedly found of psychosis.

that members of the parent generation had Lastly, with regard to Mott's contention

been previously insane, but since they had that when the first attack of insanity

not been admitted to a London County occurred in the parent, the children had for

Council asylum, their second or later attacks the most part all been born, and therefore

were counted as their first.

eugenic measures would be useless, the

4.-Further, as already shown, Mott speaker pointed out that the type of in-

believed that insanity as a rule occurred in sanity which was most strongly inherited

the children at an age some 24 years earlier was recurrent, and therefore parents would

than in the parents, no matter what the have the opportunity of propagating in their

parents' age. An analysis of Mott's lucid intervals after they had already

material, however, showed that the amount become insane.

of apparent anticipation depended on the The speaker ended by saying that no law

parent's age. Thus, where parents became of anticipation having a general validity in

insane over 70, there was 34 years' anticipa- mental disease had ever been proved

tion, but where between 30 and 40, only 5 statistically. The so-called law which had

years'. Where the parents were under 30 been given great prominence in psychiatric

at the time of onset, post-dating, not text-books was from the eugenic point of

anticipation, was the rule. These facts view of much less importance than the

taken from Mott's own material showed that ascertaining of the hereditary prognosis in

the apparent anticipation merely resulted different forms of mental disease. Mott

from the way in which the material was himself recognized the importance of this

collected.

last, but by the time of his death had not

The fact that similar results were forth- investigated the problem. It was on figures

coming from the cases of uncles or aunts based on the study of hereditary prognosis

and nephews or nieces, especially where that the eugenist would be justified in dis-

these had no blood relationship, showed that couraging certain individuals from becom-

the apparent anticipation was spurious. ing parents.

The speaker then dealt with Mott's con- The address was illustrated by thirteen

clusions. There was no evidence that figures and diagrams.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 3.

