INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDERS

An Address to the Society at the Annual General Meeting By AUBREY LEWIS, M.D., M.R.C.P.

T HE inheritance of mental disorder What then are these difficulties, and what

can be regarded as a body of is the actual substance of the achievement?

knowledge and a subject of inquiry. The difficulties are, in part, those of

The knowledge, in short, is still incom- psychiatry, which has no certainty that in

plete; the method of inquiry neither fully its clinical varieties of mental disorder it is

worked out nor fully applied. But, dealing with biological entities, if I may be

although the knowledge is incomplete, it is permitted the term. Indeed, it is certain

trustworthy as far as it goes. If, therefore, that the current groups or types of reaction

one is concerned, as members of this -the best one can work with-are not satis-

Society are, to improve the human stock, factorily defined as yet, even for clinical

one can feel that one's zeal in this regard purposes, how much less for biological?

need not be intemperate or blind. Such The difficulties are also, in part, those of

zeal, exercised upon the elimination of biology, which is, in some respects, inade-

mental disorder, will be zeal informed by quate in the apparatus of methods and data

the assured knowledge that permits of pre- to be applied to the problem. But most of

diction, and tempered by the limitations all the difficulties are those of the animal

that are the sober outcome of critical exami- investigated, the human being, a wilful,

nation; such critical examination is con- perverse creature who persists in going on

tinually being applied.

living a colossal length of time-as long as

As in all fields of busy scientific inquiry, the investigator indeed-that does not

there is here much conflict and questioning always welcome inquiry into its habits,

and examination of evidence. Although refuses, not unnaturally, to submit to

two or three may be found to sing together planned genetic experiments, and is likely

in tuneful choir, there is nearly always to go on being as recalcitrant to research of

another singer over against them, or many this kind as it has been to systems of

such, who are sometimes strident and government or plans of regeneration. Such

adverse. So the inheritance of mental dis- is the nature of the creature, man, con-

order is being inquired into very actively, sidered as an object of genetic research-

but not without much controversy. Those amiable in his tendencies, but inherently

who explore the territory differ somewhat unamenable, and with a mind of his own.

about the value of each other's ways of Perhaps it would be best for me to illus-

exploration; they do not accept each other's trate these difficulties by some examples. I

charts and maps out of hand, but when all have said that the types of reaction which

agree about a discovery-and such agree- psychiatry uses as categories of mental dis-

ment is surprisingly frequent in so new a order are not satisfactorily defined. If, for

subject-it is pretty certain that the thing example, an inquiry is being made into the

is as they say. That, no doubt, sounds a inheritance of hysteria, one will be un-

limited, feeble thing to say about the science certain whether the biological attribute of

on which one wishes to base action of the which one must investigate the transmis-

first importance for future generations. sion is the limited hysterical type of

But, in fact, the difficulties of research in reaction, or a larger grouping which will

this subject are so great that the concor- include other psychopathic forms. One will

dance of critical and experienced opinion is not know whether some kinds of, say,

a very remarkable achievement.

schizoid personality, are not to be regarded

79

8o

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

as hysterical, or the reverse; and whether herited predisposition (genotype) and en-

hysterical personality must be regarded as vironmental means of manifestation or

distinct from hysterical reaction. That is modification, is not certain, nor the possi-

different from, let us say, some forms of bilities of summation, multiple gene deter-

muscular hypertrophy-I am taking an mination, blastophthoria, etc. These diffi-

instance from neurology-where there are culties are among the least troublesome.

universally accepted means of distinguish- The biological weakness in much work in

ing the anomaly in question-bodily this field has not been due to the inadequacy

changes recognizable beyond all doubt, of the methods and knowledge available, but

either during life, or on special examina- to the failure of the investigators to acquaint

tion of the affected parts of the body after themselves with it and to use it.

death.

The difficulties of the animal investi-

Mental disorders are not so clear-cut. I gated: he has small families; he cannot be

do not wish to suggest that psychiatry is a observed for long enough; he drifts out of

grandiose synonym for specialized muddle, one's reach-he goes from London to Val-

or that psychiatrists are babes in the wood, paraiso or Leeds, and is lost. Perhaps I

not even sure which trees are which. Most can illustrate this by some work being done

of the trees can be identified, and they do at the Maudsley Hospital on the melan-

not prevent the wood being seen as a whole; cholia that occurs in people who have passed

but in some cases indubitable criteria of the the prime of life-climacteric depression.

separate groups, the species and genera, as These patients have reached the age of

it were, are lacking. One does not know fifty or thereabouts before they come under

for sure what is the true relation of a par- one's notice. Full information about their

ticular kind of constitution to a particular parents, uncles and aunts and grand-

kind of mental disorder. Things essentially parents will, by this time, be very difficult

different may conceivably be lumped to get. Their children will still be twenty

together in schizophrenia, for example, and years or so short of the age at which the

partial deviations from the norm may be illness often makes its first appearance, and

equated with whole deviations, as in cyclo- the investigator must, therefore, wait until

thymia. The difficulties, in short, are he is himself past the prime of life before

greater than in other medical fields; the he can draw his conclusions, or must leave

closer one gets to them the more alarming his data for posterity to complete.

they become-these " sturdy doubts and You might object that as regards the

boisterous objections wherewith the un- children one could overcome the obstacle by

happiness of our knowledge too nearly selecting for investigation cases of this dis-

acquainteth us." But they are steadily and order which were diagnosed say twenty or

ingeniously being surmounted; many of thirty years ago; their children will now

them have already been put out of the way be old enough to justify you in drawing con-

for good.

clusions. But it will be difficult to trace the

Then there are the difficulties more children of people who were in a mental

strictly biological. The appropriate statis- hospital twenty years ago, and if you did

tical methods are not agreed upon; Wein- trace them, they might not be willing to be

berg and Bernstein have been at each other's investigated. Also, you are not always able

throats for the last three years or more as to use diagnoses made twenty or thirty

to the merits of their respective sibship and years ago; the fashions of psychiatry -have

a priori methods, and other people say that changed a good deal-especially the fashions

the methods are complementary and both in terminology and grouping, and still more

useful. The relation of physical to mental important, the fashion of writing a full

constitution, or the larger issue of what is account of the patient's life and symptoms.

constitution, is unsettled. The way of Had full records been kept, one could now

assessing the relative importance of in- make one's own diagnosis, but in the old

INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDERS

8i

days records were very meagre; moreover, patient, 8-io per cent. will probably them-

one often wishes to correlate clinical find- selves show this directly; 40 per cent. will

ings with genetic findings, and for this the show schizoid disorders of personality; only

record must be full and preferably collected about half will be mentally normal. This

by only one or by very few observers. represents ten times as great an incidence

Ana, of course, human beings sometimes of schizophrenia and twenty-five times as

conceal and vary the truth when an inquiry great an incidence of schizoid psychopathy

is made into such painful matters as those as may be expected in the offspring of

relating to mental disorder in their family healthy parents taken at random. If both

or themselves. But even these great diffi- parents are schizophrenic, half the children

culties-the worst dragons in the path-can will be so, and only a fifth of the children

be disposed of in one way or another: the normal. Of the siblings of a schizophrenic

chief weapon against them is the patience 5 per cent., of the grandchildren 2 per cent.,

and tact of the inquirer.

of the nephews and nieces and the cousins

I.5 per cent., will probably have the same

WHAT IS NOW KNOWN

disorder. The probability for all these

So much for difficulties. Perhaps I have relatives is higher where one or, worse,

put too much weight on them: as though both of their parents show schizophrenic

I wished to glorify the workers who have or schizoid features. Furthermore the mor-

tilled such stubborn soil; or perhaps as tality curve for tuberculosis rises and falls

though I wished to extenuate the meagre- in the different generations parallel to the

ness of the fruits. And certainly the latter morbiditv curve for schizophrenia among

is not my intention. The fruits are con- them.

siderable. Much is now known.

I shall not go on to discuss the findings

Huntington's chorea, a rare but strik- in paranoia, paranoid states, cerebral

ing mental affection of middle life, is in- arteriosclerosis, hysteria, etc., because of

herited as a simple dominant: myoclonus the difficulty of explaining their signifi-

epilepsy as a simple recessive. Manic- cance briefly. Perhaps it would be of more

depressive psychosis is, in its most typical interest to mention the particular investi-

recurrent form, a highly transmissible dis- gations that are being carried on at the

order: the probability is that of the chil- Maudsley Hospital. I cannot tell you the

dren of a parent with it, a third will also results because these investigations take a

suffer from the disorder. Another sixth long time, and no conclusions have been

will show milder mood-disorders. If both arrived at yet. Several of them deal with

parents have manic-depressive illness, two- special types of reaction: the family his-

thirds of the children will show it, and the tory of obsessional patients is one study;

remaining third will show milder affective that of schizophrenic children is another;

swings of mood, not reaching definite mental a third is concerned with the inheritance of

illness. Of the brothers and sisters of such involutional melancholia in men; another

a person, a tenth show the disorder: if both covers the psycho-neuroses associated with

the parents have been free, the probable accident claims and prolonged unemploy-

incidence is 7 per cent. : if one parent shows ment.

it, 23 per cent.

These are the special investigations.

In schizophrenia there are some forms in Others deal with more general problems:

which the causative influence of the en- twin studies, concerning which I have

vironment has been great: in these the spoken here before; studies on the children

hereditary factor, thotigh considerable, is of of couples both of whom have been insane;

less importance than in the much more and inquiries into the frequency of mental

numerous cases which constitute the bulk disorder in the average population.

of the conditions widely known by the term A word may be said about how the last

Dementia' Proecox. Of the children of a two investigations are being conducted. A

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

card-index system permits one to discover what away from the search after mendelian

the instances where both husband and wife relations and towards the empirical assess-

have been inmates of one of the L.C.C. ment of probability. How many of the chil-

mental hospitals during the last fifty years. dren of a parent with a particular disorder do

The records of these patients are gone as a rule, inherit the disorder? But perhaps

through to discover the features of their this incidence is no higher than one would

illness and the number of their children. find if one were to take any chance group of

An attempt is then made to get in touch people. Is there, for example, any more

with as many of these children as possible. cyclothymia among the children of manic

Information is collected about their history or melancholic parents than among the

generally, their personality, and any people of the same age taken at random

mental illness they may have had; the from the average population? One must,

information is then examined in the light therefore, discover the incidence in the

of necessary qualifications as to age, acces- average population and compare it. I

sibility, etc. In this study, as in almost all would say, parenthetically, that for this

such investigations, the services of a study, as for many others, research in a

specially trained psychiatric social worker small rural community with fixity of resi-

are invaluable. My own experience makes dence over many generations, is a desi-

me say with the strongest conviction that deratum.

without one or more such helpers, trained, This matter of empirical assessment of

intelligent, tactful, and keen, research of probability is of the utmost importance in

this kind is practically impossible.

genetic prognosis. In the absence of a well-

Then there is the last investigation I defined theoretical knowledge of the mode

referred to-the assessment of psychic mor- of transmission and the intensity of trans-

bidity in the average population. The mission, if I may use the term, of the par-

method being employed in the Maudsley ticular syndrome, one must rely on these

investigation is to collect from patients in empirical estimates and upon clinical

a surgical ward of a general hospital infor- experience if one is to give sound advice to

mation about their parents, brothers and those who ask whether they should have

sisters, and children. These may be children.

regarded as a fair sample of the average These are the equipment with which the

population of a given district of London. psychiatrist deals with the individual prob-

This method has the advantage of calling lem: but such an equipment is of little use

for relatively little time, money, or trouble. unless one has full access to the factual

But it is by no means a satisfactory material in each case. This can only be

method; the surgical illness brings in a gained by a careful study of the members

possibly detrimental element of selection: of both families concerned in the proposed

one is dependent on the possibly untruth- union.

ful, prejudiced, or ill-informed statements Here arises a larger issue: that of the

of one member of the family. It is there- stock as a whole, the constituents of the

fore necessary to supplement the informa- nation. The individual is traditionally the

tion by further inquiries outside hospital. chief object of the doctor's concern, but for

The need for such a study as this may eugenists and even for doctors in the

not be obvious. Mental hospital statistics modern view, it is the stock, the nation,

already give the incidence of gross mental society at large that must finally be the

disorder. To what use can one put a more body treated. Would the thorough applica-

detailed assessment? To explain this one tion of our present knowledge appreciably

must consider that the mode of transmis- diminish the amount of mental disorder

sion of the various mental disorders is not and the consequent human misery?

simple and is not yet certain. Investigators Whatever one's values, whether one put

have therefore turned their attention some- emphasis on ethics or economics, health or

INHERITANCE OF MENTAL DISORDERS

83

social stability, one must hope for the a failure of the human individual to be in

lessening and even disappearance of mental a harmonious relation to his environment:

disorder in most of its forms. Would this disharmony is occasionally associated

voluntary sterilization, for example, do with other qualities socially most valuable.

this? I am afraid we must answer that it Apart from the striking examples which

would not: it is very doubtful whether genius offers, there is the hypomanic person

even compulsory sterilization would do so. who may be an admirably energetic member

We know too little: we have no means of of society; the hysteric and the schizoid may

recognizing those who transmit the morbid be an original leaven, an enlivening or a

quality though they do not exhibit it, nor creative force, and the obsessional a strong-

can we detect with any certainty those who hold of order and painstaking work.

have so far been healthy but will later It is possible to imagine a society hum-

become ill. And even if we could, it would drum for lack of such people: but it is still,

be a Draconian and possibly disastrous I think, rather fanciful to picture a day

measure that rooted out all morbidity at when society will have become so purged,

the cost of much excellence that went with or could be so purged if eugenists wished

it. it. Should such a day come, eugenists

This is a large issue, concerned as much would have to be unanimous about the social

with the positive as with negative eugenics; and ethical values which must stand, along-

the consideration of what is desirable in side those medical ones which to-day we

mental quality is as important as the get- have chiefly considered. If I seem unduly

ting rid of what is unhealthy. When we cautious about the large possibilities for

know more, extremism in this matter may betterment of the nation, it is only that I

be justified, but I do not think it is now. may stress the necessity for further research

Certainly in individual cases one must into this subject, and for a clear under-

decide whether propagation would be standing of the not purely medical or

unwise, and one would in most instances genetic issues in it. Human personality is

be able to give good advice. But any root- the basis of all national betterment; person-

and-branch methods for the elimination of ality is closely related to mental disorder.

mental disorder as a whole are as yet The study of the inheritance of normal per-

illusory. All the more reason for further sonality, of varieties of human personality

research: all the more reason why steri- sometimes the precursor of mental disorder

lization and similar measures should be but still more often not so, and finally of

available for the individual.

mental disorder itself-these studies are

As for research, no doubt there will essential towards the ends that eugenists

always be workers who pursue research, have in mind.

genetic or other, for the sole end of in- To under-rate the knowledge gained by

creased knowledge and the pleasures of the the very fruitful work already done is an

chase, but the ends of research as a whole amusement only for the ignorant, an outlet

must be its application in life. Thought for the captious and the prejudiced: but it

must issue in action which in the long run is an unwise optimism that would over-rate

becomes the test of its worth. So genetic this knowledge or assume that the problem

studies on mental disorder have as their has been solved in theory and now only

object and perhaps as their ultimate justifi- awaits enlightened social action. Propa-

cation the discovery of means by which ganda to be effective must be honest as well

these forms of illness and misery can be as zealous; and to this audience, already

eliminated not only in single cases, but convinced about the structure to be built,

altogether.

the end to be aimed at, I may safely point

Let us, however, be clear about what this out the incompleteness of the foundations as

implies. Mental disorder, as nowadays yet laid. It is not a question of pessimism.

conceived, is a failure of social adaptation, Over-bold and premature claims lead to

84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW refutation and over-refutation: and what is calamity. Much is now known, and the true is then ignored or denied, and even work is hopeful; the present task is to derided. To get for this branch of eugenics " endeavour at more knowledge by labour the false name of a chimera would be a and inquisition."
EUGENICS SOCIETY
MEMBERS' MEETING
At the Rooms of the Royal Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly, W.1 TUESDAY, JULY 18th, at 5.30 p.m.
Eugenics and Consanguineous Marriages
Speaker: A. M. Ludovici, Esq. Chairman: Sir Humphry Rolleston, Bt., K.C.V.O., K.C.B.,
M.D., D.Sc., LL.D. Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 2.

