250 EUGENICS REVIEW.

to the volume, was in any degree the result of Irish immigration. Some such origin seems indicated in his treatment of race mixture, when he recommends that marriages like those between whites and negroes should be prohibited until we know more definitely what sort of results they give.

E1FGAR SCHUTTSTER.

Garofalo, BARON R. Criminology (translated by R. W. Millar).
London. Heinemann; IQI4; price i6s. net; pp. 478.

THIS well-known work was first published at Naples in i885. A French

version which was prepared under the auspices of the author went through

five editions. Of these, the most recent, which appeared in 1905, was

completely recast Baron Garofalo is

by him and primarily a

lfaowrymesr,thaendortigEienallegoafl

the present version. aspects of the treat-

ment of criminals rightly receives a full share of attention, but it is

owing to the fact that he realizes the necessity for basing the reform of

the criminal and the protection of society on a thorough knowledge of

the natural history of the crime, that his great work has been written.

The translator has done his work adequately, and the get up of the book

is a credit to the publishers.

Creighton. LOUISE. The Social Disease and How to Fight It. A

Rejoinder. London. Longmans, Green and Co.; 1914; price is.;

pp. 87.

AFTER the recently published literature dealing with the problems of

prostitution and venereal disease from the pens of various writers both

at home and abroad. it is indeed a relief to have this calm and reasoned

statement of the case by one who has had far-reaching experience of

the special problems under discussion. After the recommendations

of extremists-ranging from the segregation under conditions approxi-

mating to slavery of a group of women who, it is argued, must be so

maintained owing to the inherent polygamous character of the race, to an

extension of the franchise to women as a means of abolishing prostitution

-it is a relief to turn to the dignified recognition of mutual responsibility

of both men and women for the existing state of affairs, and the possi-

bility that their joint efforts to solve the problem may lead to a measure

of success in the near future.

Mrs. Creighton fully realises the racial effect of the diseases, and

advocates as the immediate policy careful education of the public, and the

provision of free treatment, as being the only sure method of reducing the

disease and the direct road to the formation of a standard of public

opinion which will recognise both the ethically and socially injurious

nature of prostitution. The origin of the problem lies in the social

custom of prostitution and a uniform standard of morality for both sexes

is recognised as its only true and final solution.

The recent tendency to use the social evil as a ground for sex

antagonism has been deeply deplored by many men and women

concerned in the attempt to improve conditions. It is only by

co-operation between the sexes that any real progress can be made.

It is the recognition of this principle that is so warmly welcomed. The

race is composed of men and women, and neither part can make real

progress without the other. Mrs. Creighton urges care in the dissemina-

tion of knowledge, but emphasises the need of right instruction, educa-

tion during childhood in the simple physiological laws of life, clear

warnings as to the prevalence and danger of disease for those going into

the world, the need of medical co-operation in supporting the principle of

chastity before marriage as a hygienic as well as a moral duty, the

provision of free and adequate treatment of disease, public recognition of

the danger of marriage until treatment is completed, an extension of the

feeling of parental responsibility, and above all the cultivation by women

and men together of a healthy public opinion.

S. G.

