REVIEWS OF BOOKS

to consider it. This and other moral questions over half imagined themselves well. The experi-

raised by prostitution should have been treated ment also demonstrated how much could be

with the seriousness that they deserve, and done to correct and prevent these common but

curtailment of other material would have en- little appreciated deviations from optimum

sured that this was done without enlarging the health and fitness, by skilled medical supervision

book. and the inculcation of better hygiene and living

SHERWIN BAILEY habits. When one regards the thousands of

millions squandered on drink, tobacco, gambling,

dissipation and frivolity, with misery, frustration

Williamson, G. Scott, and Pearse, Innes H. and impaired well-being as the outcome, it is

Science, Synthesis and Sanity. London, 1965. clear that the diversion of a few hundred millions

Collins. Pp. 352. Price 45s.

from those channels into health conservation

and promotion on the lines foreshadowed by

THIS BOOK IS the work of two doctors who the Peckham Experiment might represent an

inspired the Peckham Experiment which first excellent bargain, from both the social and the

took off as a pilot project in 1926-29. This later individual point of view.

developed into the Pioneer Health Centre, a This book presents the basic philosophy which

scheme which combined the recreational ameni- underlay the Peckham Experiment. Accepting

ties of a family club with facilities for education fully the contribution science has made to an

in healthy living, regular medical overhaul and understanding oforganic mechanisms, its authors

supervision with an integrated approach to question the adequacy of the quantitative

positive health based on the study of the indi- approach to healthy living. Many qualitative

vidual in relation to the ecological background factors, including feelings, relationships and

of the family. When the centre closed in 1951 activating motives remain poorly defined and

from want of funds, Dr. Williamson began the outside the scope of the essentially quantitative

preparation of this book, but died before its methodology of science to-day. They claim that

completion, since undertaken by the co-author, qualitative as well as quantitative aspects must

his wife.

be taken into account in relation to the whole-

The Peckham Experiment was an immensely ness that is health.

important pioneering venture, which has paved In synthesis alone lies the sanity which

the way for far-reaching future developments maximizes the well-being of the individual in

involving not only the National Health Service integrating it with the interests of society. An

but the whole matter of healthy living in the hypothesis combining these conditions is pre-

widest sense.

sented which is open to verification by experi-

When the scope, purpose and validity of the ment. In this there is offered a definition of the

National Health Service is being subjected to dimensions of quality and of the conditions in

scrutiny and reassessment, the light shed by the which it becomes manifest, and the possible

Peckham Experiment is highly relevant and correlation of these dimensions with those of

significant. Despite some successes, the NHS the Space Time Realm is explored.

remains less a programme of promoting health The potentiality and promise of the Peckham

than of palliating disease, though the existence Experiment sprang from the background of

of the large "submerged iceberg of disease" hypothesis presented in this book, which deserves

shows how far it is from doing even that. It was consideration of all who are concerned to ad-

in fact the Peckham Experiment which was vance the ideals of positive health and creative,

largely responsible for first drawing attention integrated living. One may note with satisfaction

to the problem of unrecognized and untreated the promise of a further book which will review

disease. Thus figures drawn from overhaul of in additional detail from the qualitative angle

the first and second 500 families examined, the material which has been observed in terms

revealed that only about one person in ten was of that hypothesis.

free from some disorder or other, although well

HERBERT BREWER

ER-C

33

