'Eugenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities ofa race; also
with those that develop them to the utmost advantage.' -SIR FRANCIS GALTON (1904)
The Eugenics Review
EDITORIAL OFFICES: THE EUGENICS SOCIETY 69 ECCLESTON SQUARE * LONDON * SWI * VICTORIA 2091
Editorfor the Society: Mrs. K. Hodson

NOTES OF THE
QUARTER
THE MAKING AND THE TAKING OF LIFE
THE ESSENCE OF "life" is the everlasting multiplication of its own specific kind within the confines of an alien environment. The growth of knowledge now transmutes the very success of this multiplication into a new hazard to the wellbeing of our own species. Two tremendous world wars killed between them perhaps as many as 50 million people, the equivalent of the total population of the British Isles. Yet that number is now replaced in less than 400 days by natural increase of world population.
Experience suggests that, as numbers in any community or population increase, the seeming importance of the individual diminishes. As reproduction becomes more deliberate, and as the necessity for global "limitation" becomes more widely understood, the need emerges for progressive appreciation of quality in the making of new lives. This is the essential prerequisite for eugenic advance, and entails further biological evolution in the sense of advantageous differentials in actual reproduction. The growing understanding of the importance and excitement of psycho-social evolution is additional to, and not a substitution for, deliberate eugenic bio-
* Nature, January 5th, 1963. 197, 4862.

logical advance. Sir Julian Huxley's recent Fawley lecture* should stand as a landmark in this subject.
The human dilemma is greater than this, however, since qualitative improvement must be sought without detriment to the conscious appreciation of the importance and worth of every individual. The population surge and excess is a recent addition to an age-old problem. We live in days of rapid transition, both biologically and in the evolution of propriety and ethics. We must cherish the individual whatever his quality, and yet what is an individual? On reductio ad absurdum a living tissue culture of human cells is not an individual which anyone would hesitate to destroy. Is the foetus, the product of rape of a still terrified girl, an individual who should appropriately be destroyed by therapeutic abortion? Opinions vary. The adult in misery may now voluntarily end his existence without commission of crime. But what of infants born grossly defective?
THALIDOMIDE
IN THESE NOTES two years ago (April 1961) appeared these words:
Fourthly ... is the problem, set primarily to the medical profession, of the appropriate treatment of those infants born hopelessly deformed. At present this problem is quiescent in comparison with others in our series.
Contraception, sterilization, abortion, suicide and voluntary euthanasia were the other members ofthe series.
Since then enough thalidomide-damaged children have been born in Europe to be recognized

I

ER-A

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and to cause a furore in both the lay and the This is a courageous age, but it has a different

technical press. First, the lay papers foJlowed the difficulties of the American mother who had
taken thalidomide in the early days of pregnancy whilst in Europe, and later wished for a "thera-
peutic" abortion. This she finally obtained in Sweden, with the finding that the baby, if born, would have been deformed. And then came, in November 1962, the acquittals in Liege of parents, relatives and a doctor, charged with murdering a limbless child which had resulted from thalidomide ingestion.
For several years the knowledge that the mild virus infection of german measles, occurring in the early days after conception, can produce infantile deformity has occasionally raised the question of therapeutic abortion. More recently, it has also been realized that virus pneumonia may result in similar deformity, and it is probable, too, that an incorrect diet can, on occasion, affect the developing embryo. Thalidomide is the first widely used drug recognized to have direct deleterious effects on the embryo: undoubtedly there will be others. "Drug"

sense of values from the ages which have gone before. It looks upon life more from the point of view of quality than of quantity.
This was said in a discussion on euthanasia; since then public, as well as medical, opinion has considerably progressed. The Suicide Act of 1961 now allows an individual to choose a contrived death to end personal suffering, though the unfortunate is often unable to put the choice into practice. A medical practitioner cannot help without committing a criminal offence and jeopardizing his career.
The acquittals at Liege resulted in a remarkable correspondence in The Times, including one leader and forty-two letters. Some of the writers openly welcomed euthanasia for deformed infants, as well as, voluntarily, for older people in distress and suffering. One of the correspondents mentioned the Society's name on November 14th, 1962:
Let up hope, rather, that the time is not far distant when, on petition of a parent or a body like the Eugenic [sic] Society, a small panel of medical men will sign an order for its destruction.

deformity has now come to be a problem alike for the community, the medical profession, and the pharmaceutical industry.
The problem of the severely deformed infant, whether mentally or physically deficient, has facets which are emotional and ethical, rational
and traditional. The suffering of a child with
gross physical deformity, even after surgery or partial alleviation with gadgets, can be immense. Additionally there is the mental suffering of the parents, and often of the siblings, too, if the mother tries to compensate for the disability by so much devotion that the other children are
given insufficient love and care. Dogmatic, but varied, assertions based on clear consciences have been many, but few seem to have recognized, at least in letters to the press, two fundamentals. The one is that this problem has both physical and temporal degrees, and the other is that there

In fact, its Statement of Aims does not specifically include any consideration of the problem set by the birth of severely deformed infants; nor would the Eugenics Society in any way accept the role of arbiter. Yet the problem must be of interest to the Society. At present the
appropriate treatment of deformed infants is a
matter for the consciences of individuals, though it may well happen that members of the Eugenics Society would tend to be in one camp rather
than another. The Society, as such, would only be directly concerned if deformed infants, for any one of a variety of possible reasons, were so nurtured that the possibility of reproduction were to arise and with it the possibility of transmission of heritable abnormalities or inadequacies. There is no evidence that a thalidomide deformity is likely to be transmissible.
In a conservatively-minded country like

is an evolution of conscience with the passage Great Britain the activities of a pressure group,

of time, and from one generation to another, zealous for reform, may do more harm than good

among even the most devout of people. The his- to its cause if the group is brought into being

tory of the introduction of anaesthetics provides prematurely. The growth of the Abortion Law

an admirable example.

Reform Association and the Voluntary Euthan-

In the House of Lords, in 1936, Lord Dawson asia Legislation Society are examples of pres-

of Penn said:

sure groups arising when the time is ripe. It is

2

NOTES OF THE OUARTER

difficult to see, however, how the problem of the population prospects, which remain unchanged.

deformed infant (including mental or physical Let us, therefore, leave this particular confusion

deformity) can be dealt with except by special on one side and deal with three other popular

legislation, since "sound" and fashionable errors nearer home that are so often repeated

medical practice will never be able (except in and so rarely corrected. Let us state firmly that

the case of the occasional perceptive midwife it is wrong to suppose:

or obstetrician) to deal with it without legislation. As with voluntary euthanasia and the now public condonation of suicide, a doctor cannot,

1. that those who make population projections are forecasting what will happen in the future;
2. that a growing population must be a very good

yet, openly help without committing an offence. The effect of thalidomide is now limited by its
recognition and the withdrawal of the drug by the manufacturers. But this withdrawal only

thing; 3. that Great Britain's population is (or was until
recently) going to become materially older in its age-distribution.

occurred after the additional births of a number Let us hope that it will be generally realized

estimated, in the United Kingdom alone, as one day, not too far ahead, that the truth is quite

between five and six hundred grossly deformed different, namely that:

infants who are likely to require care over many 1. population projections are, somewhat reluc-

years of impaired and often painful existence.

tantly, made annually in response to popular

Thalidomide is a complex product of a complex

demand for illustrations of the effects that must

society, and it has added to the difficulties of
mankind. Its effect has, however, probably accelerated the advance ofpublic opinion on subjects allied to the interests of members of the

follow if present trends in fertility, mortality and migration continue; when the trends vary between projections, then the projections themselves will follow suit; 2. a moderate rate of growth can be economically

Society.

stimulating in the short run, but its long-term effects may be harmful; a rapid growth is a

POPULATION PERSIFLAGE IN THE

disaster for all countries and most of all for under-developed areas;

PRESS
THE ANNOUNCEMENT BY the Minister of Health of new official projections of British

3. Great Britain's population has " aged" enormously already over the last thirty or forty years and is unlikely now to age much further; (what has happened is largely a reflection of

population showing prospects of a larger

the fertility trends in the early part of the

growth and a younger age-distribution than

twentieth century).

hitherto expected has given rise to comments of The Minister may well not be sorry to observe very varying quality in the newspapers. At best, that there will be more young people to stimulate the Minister's carefully chosen (if a little slanted) economic demand in the near future and rewords have been repeated or suitably para- plenish the labour force later on. But the consephrased. At worst, the leader-writers have used quence of a continuation of the higher fertility the change, to what they regard as a more cheer- level of to-day, as compared with that of seven ful prospect, as an excuse to shuffle off the world years ago, is a total population for Great Britain population problem in cheap and easy terms. As of nearly 65 million in the year 2000 instead of readers of the REVIEwwill know, from facts given one of about 50 million (the present level). in the January, 1962 and January, 1963 issues, Which total is going to be the easier to live with Britain has not hitherto partaken in the world in these islands-even if the larger one is someproblem of excessive fertility in the present what the younger of the two? century but may now be showing some signs of a

mild movement in this direction. It does not seem to be a cause for much rejoicing.

TOO MANY PEOPLE?

Needless to say, what has happened in Great THE FABIAN SOCIETY has recently published Britain has virtually no effect on the world a broadsheet by Mr. A. Carter in which the

truths mentioned above are much better recog-

* Fabian Research Series 232. 1962. Pp. 31. Price 3s. nized.* The author argues that we should prefer

3

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a stable to a rising population on both social and TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE; A BANNED

economic grounds. Socially, he is concerned

EXPRESSION

chiefly with the use of land and with traffic A BATTLE HAS been going on at the United

congestion on the roads, and makes arguments Nations over the phrase "technical assistance."

generally similar to those used in a debate held It began in 1961, when thirteen countries-

by the Eugenics Society some years ago. From including Ceylon, Ghana, Greece, Nepal,

the economic point of view, his line of approach Sweden, Thailand and the United Arab Re-

is perhaps unorthodox, but he is able to make public-put forward a long draft resolution in

some interesting points concerning the relation- which, inter alia, the view of the Population

ship between population size and productivity Commission was endorsed that the United

and between population growth and the increase Nations should "give technical assistance, as

of wealth. He is also able to refer for support to requested by Governments, for national pro-

the Report of the Economics Committee of the jects and programmes dealing with the problems

Royal Commission on Population, if not to the of population." This was not discussed until

Report of the Commission itself. In a final September 1962, when amendments were pro-

chapter, Mr. Carter maintains that control of posed by France, Liberia and Spain, one of

numbers is both practicable and a permanent which was the deletion of this passage. The

necessity. He supports the idea of a greater sponsoring countries carried their resolution,

amount of emigration from Britain and points to amended but still including the foregoing pas-

the disadvantages of large-scale immigration into sage, in committee, against the opposition

this country of mainly unskilled labour. Encouraging emigration and restricting immigration are aims that might well be capable of achievement in some degree in the long run, but it is a pity that he gives no figures to illustrate the demographic consequences that could reasonably be expected; if he had, it might have appeared that no practicable development of

mainly of Roman Catholic countries; but they failed to obtain a majority for it in the General Assembly; the voting on the passage was thirtyfour for, thirty-four against and thirty-two abstentions. This rejected, the remainder of the
resolution was then passed. Why this argument over an apparently harm-
less phrase? It would appear, as some ofthe other amendments also seem to indicate, that it is

migration policies is likely by itself to be capable held to imply, or include, the dissemination of

of solving the problem of eliminating Britain's contraceptive appliances and knowledge of

population growth.

methods of birth control that are in disfavour in

The author does recognize, however, that "the some countries. It was in this sense that the

fundamental problem is the excess of births debates in New York were reported in the

above replacement level," "which is likely to persist unless steps are taken to counteract it." In this connection the only measures he suggests are smaller Family Allowances for larger families, and a higher minimum age for marriage -say seventeen or eighteen. Here his case is not strong, for such measures would appear able to command little political support at the present

Guardian, which recorded the French delegate as saying that the General Assembly had no right to impose a collective view on the question of birth control, "which risked violating certain consciences and disregarding certain laws."
Fortunately, help for the areas needing technical assistance can still be provided, even if it cannot be given by the United Nations.

time, and even if they were applied their direct

SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

effect (as he himself recognizes) would necessarily THE CURRENT CALENDAR of meetings of

be small. The fact is that a larger vision and a Biological Societies, 1963, compiled by the Bio-

much longer-term policy (such as family plan- logical Council, lists the names of sixty-six

ning and eugenics provide) are needed in order to societies in the United Kingdom. It is both infor-

tackle effectively the problem of major demo- mative and salutary to scan the list and mentally

graphic trends in any country.

to place the Eugenics Society among the hetero-

4

NOTES OF THE OUARTER

geneous company. Almost all the societies listed publish their own journals and the few which do not are offset by those which publish more than one. Membership varies from the highest honour of election to the limited Fellowship of the Royal Society to the thousands who join the Royal Horticultural Society.
Most of the listed biological societies are composed of learned enthusiasts within a fairly clearly defined scientific discipline. Their objectives are the increase of knowledge in a limited field by means of publication and mutual stimulation. As examples of the purest of such societies may be instanced the British Bryological Society and the Malacological Society of London. Others such as the Mammal Society, the Nutrition Society and the Marine Biological Association advance knowledge and may provide the platform from which individuals may seek to modify or channel public policy in the realms of conservation or rational fishery. Other societies seek deliberately to educate the public in addition to furthering a particular discipline: the Zoological Society of London is the primary example, and it is notable, too, for the possession of its own laboratories.
Many of the listed societies contain individuals who possess a sharp social conscience. But few of the societies themselves deliberately seek to modify public opinion and action on account of strength of conviction in matters of social responsibility. The Eugenics Society is among the few. The admirable Universities Federation for Animal Welfare goes further and is in fact a learned pressure group within a particular field. It flourishes for three reasons: the enthusiasm of its directorate, the convenient alliance of things of the head and of the heart, and the relative simplicity of its appeal to individuals.
By contrast the Eugenics Society stands alone among all the listed societies. Its aim is the appreciation of social responsibility in matters connected with human biological inheritance; that is to say, human genetics ennobled by responsibility. The Eugenics Society must build on a foundation of increasing detailed genetic
knowledge. It must disseminate information
and spread the appreciation of responsibility:
that is to say, it is inevitably concerned with
education. Its role is too difficult and its material

too intractable for advancement other than by the use of the intellect. Additionally, the complexity of the Society's field of interest and its very long-term nature make advance by pressure group tactics inappropriate, not to say inexpedient. The Eugenics Society can, however and does, advance by the subsidization of pressure groups which have aims sufficiently simplified to move the hearts of the many as well as the heads of the more discerning. The long-term subsidization of the Family Planning Association and the I.P.P.F. fall into this pattern.
In one further and important particular is the Eugenics Society in isolation. It alone is subject to active antagonism based on emotion and ignorance of reality. No one will condemn the British Lichen Society or the British Society of Protozoologists for their enthusiasm and increasing knowledge. But, just because the Eugenics Society has consciousness of responsibility for the good or ill of our own species, emotional reactions and antagonisms are all too prone to flourish. These are regrettable facts of life with which we must contend. Yet, looking back, the advance in understanding over the decades has in fact been remarkable, more especially, of course, in the provision and the acceptability of the contraceptive means for attaining those favourable differential fertilities which are the core ofeugenics.
The Eugenics Society is up against the fact that the mere increase of knowledge is a simple matter in comparison with the deliberate improvement of the condition of men by the sensible use of new knowledge. Valid comparisons may be made with the increase of knowledge in the nuclear field.
A NEW PUBLICATION PROJECT
AN EARLIER DEFINITION of almost any con-
cept is likely to seem archaic with the passage of the years. Thus with eugenics-Galton's "study of the agencies under social control that may improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations" now seems oddly outmoded despite its truth. A more sophisticated modern definition might read "eugenics is the ennoblement of human genetics by an assumption of social responsibility." Yet the complexity of the eugenic concept remains an impediment to its

THE EUGENCIS REVIEW

much wider appreciation by those many who Families Sub-Committee, whose surveys were

already have an inkling of reality in this difficult an important part of the Eugenics Society's

field. To help such people the Society is planning activities at that time.

a volume under a title which shall encompass Formal obituary notices and appreciations

much of our range of responsibility towards appeared in the national press following his

future generations.

death on the last day of 1962. We print below

The scheme is to produce a volume bringing two personal tributes.

together between a dozen and a score ofpersonal

contributions from authorities on their own topics. The contributions will, so far as possible,
be set in a logical order, but editorial work will be used extensively to unify the whole. Thus, it is hoped, it will be possible both to display the wide area, and to clarify the inevitable complexity, of eugenic interest, where so many factors are interrelated.
Such a volume should present eugenic thought not only in relation to genuine realism but also in relation to proper concepts of personal freedom and responsibility. This last is an area of concern in which the ignorant too freely tend to criticize those who possess ideals which extend beyond mere environmental factors.

Dr. G. C. L. Bertram writes: Sir Charles Darwin was the Eugenics Society's eighth
President, serving in that capacity from 1953 to 1959. Obituary notices elsewhere have told of his
many distinctions and achievements: here is the place for a more personal tribute.
The personality of a President is large in the mind of a new General Secretary taking office during the great man's tenure. Sir Charles could scarcely be excelled in this regard: his good sense and kindness were available at all times. The mutual dwelling in Cambridge added immensely to the convenience and the happiness of the relationship. To use the modern idiom, a eugenic "working tea" at Newnham Grange was

always a pleasure and most instructive too.

OBITUARY

Sir Charles's The Next Million Years appeared

SIR CHARLES DARWIN,

in 1952, and its essence later formed his Rede

K.B.E., M.C., F.R.S.

lecture. Both received wide attention, though it

SIR CHARLES DARWIN had a long association was characteristic of him to remark-with a

with the Eugenics Society: he became a Life happy sense of family pride-that really it was

Fellow in 1930 and in 1939 he delivered the his sister's, Gwen Raverat's, Period Piece which

Galton Lecture on Positive Eugenic Policy.* In caught the public fancy. That of course was true

the same year he was elected a Vice-President, in the sense that there are always more who read

which office he held until 1946. He was a member for pleasure than for enlightenment.

of the Council from 1951 until 1961 during which During the earlier part of his presidency Sir

period he served as the President of the Society Charles had taken a leading part in helping for-

from 1953 to 1959.

ward the Society's Survey of Promising Families

Sir Charles was unfailingly helpful in contri- organized by Dr. C. 0. Carter, and in furthering

buting Notes of the Quarter and book reviews the concept of "promising" as opposed to

to the REvEw, besides the original papers which "problem" families. The reality of the new con-

we were fortunate in being allowed to print from cept was well vindicated in that research, which

time to time. These included Eugenics: Galton has perhaps not yet received the fuller recogni-

and After (1952); Energy in the Future (1955) tion which it most certainly deserves.

and The Ascertainment of Promising Families, Even after the six years as President were over

also in 1955. The last named was the text of a -that being the maximum allowable under the

lecture given on behalf of the Eugenics Society Eugenics Society's Articles-the Darwin pre-

at the Thirty-eighth Conference of Educational sence was frequent and so very welcome at

Associations. This was during the period when Council meetings. It is a happy custom of the

he was Chairman of the Society's Promising Society that past presidents are always invited to

all subsequent Council meetings. In that way

* 1i EUGENICS REVIEW, 1939. 31, 13.

the Society has, so very fortunately in recent

6

NOTES OF THE OUARTER

years, continued to profit from the wisdom of and uranium would be exhausted. There would

Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders, Sir Charles Dar- be a world-wide shortage of power. Attempts

win and Sir Julian Huxley. Long may this to get energy economically from heavy hydrogen

custom survive.

and hydrogen fusion would, he thought, fail.

It was during Sir Charles's tenure of office that Full exploitation of natural sources, water,

the Society celebrated its jubilee, the fiftieth wind and sunshine would allow a population

anniversary of its founding in 1907. The dinner and civilization rather less complex than existed

on December 4th, 1957, to mark the occasion was at present.

presided over by Sir Charles. The occasion was Further he thought that any attempt to limit

notable both for the presentation to Dr. Blacker population on a world-wide scale would fail.

of the Society's second Galton medal and, sadly, Man was a wild animal and any race which

for the thickest fog for many years which caused successfully practised family limitation would

both the Lewisham train disaster and the be replaced by more prolific groups. Population

absence of many who desired to be present. would always press hard on food supplies with

Sir Charles was the Society's first President to many people undernourished and under the

spring from the physical sciences. As a physicist threat of periodic famine:

he was especially well qualified to recognize the

There is no need for the procreative instinct

numerical aspects of biological problems, more to become even as remotely as strong as the

especially of course the fundamental world demographic problem. On this matter he took what some may have regarded as too gloomy a
view, doubting whether any sufficiently impor-
tant substitute for under-nourishment would
arise in time to afford a significant brake upon excessive population increase.
As President, and perhaps because he was a physicist and viewing from that perspective, he
had a clear perception. He perceived, perhaps more than some to-day, that eugenics does truly go beyond human genetics by the addition, to that pure study, of personal and group responsibility and therefore need for action. Sir Charles was also remarkably perceptive in his recognition -and he published on this subject-that the modern increased expectation of life postponed the average age of leadership. Thereby, people

sexual for it to defeat any opposing creed that favours limitation of population, and so to perpetuate the over-population of the world.
Nevertheless, Sir Charles thought that civilization based on the scientific revolution would probably be retained, with golden ages alternating with times of hardship and a return in many areas to barbarism. All civilizations tend to be dysgenic, but the first civilized race which could keep its civilization and, as a result of the practice of family planning with the selfelimination of the psychologically sterile, develop a strong procreative instinct would have an advantage over all others-an advantage both over civilized races without such an instinct, and
barbarian races who have not needed it for
their survival. This process would be helped, and might be much accelerated, if creeds should

being what they are, the introduction of novel arise working in the same direction:

ideas and ideals is regrettably postponed and Is it possible that there should arise a eugenic

delayed beyond what is truly desirable. Sir Charles Darwin was a great man, a kindly
man and a wise one. The Society was fortunate indeed to have his leadership, and many of us to be blessed with his friendship.

creed, which-perhaps working through what I have called the method of unconscious selection -should concern itself with the improvement of the inherited nature of man, instead of resting content with merely giving him good but impermanent acquired characters? Without such a creed

man's nature will only be changed through the

Dr. C. 0. Carter writes: Sir Charles Darwin's

blind operation of natural selection; with it he might aspire to do something towards really

ideas on eugenics were embodied in The Next changing his destiny.... Attempts at improving

Million Years published in 1952. He was not wholly optimistic. He foresaw that a fifth revolution would follow the fourth or scientific
revolution, when the stored energy in coal, oil,

the lot of mankind have all hitherto been directed towards improving his conditions, but not his nature, and as soon as the conditions lapse all is lost. The only hope is to use our knowledge of biology in such a way that all would not be lost

7

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with the lapse of the conditions. The principles Published and current work includes the

of heredity offer an anchor which will permanently fix any gains that there may be in the quality of mankind.

results of the child morbidity study already mentioned, a series of studies on rhesus haemo-

Many eugenists will not agree with Sir Charles on all points. In the ten years since he wrote there are clearer indications that an ample and permanent supply of nuclear energy will be available before stored fuels are exhaused. The
dysgenic influence of civilization may well be arrested sooner than he thought probable. There are perhaps already signs in Western civilization of an increase in procreative instinct

lytic disease of the newborn and ABO incom-
patibilities, work on congenital malformations, studies of twinning and birth weights in Nigeria, post-neonatal infant mortality in Birmingham, inguinal hernia in Newcastle, a series of studies on the aetiology of intussusception, and investigations of the epidemiology of congenital oesophageal atresia, clefts of lip and palate, leukaemia, and malignant tumours of children.

in the more gifted groups, who were the first to practise family limitation. The discovery of a simple artificial method of photosynthesis giving sugar from carbon dioxide and water may give a sudden rise in food supply, which together with the discovery of a simple reliable method of oral contraceptive, may for a substantial time
lift the pressure of populations on food supply. In this time a more intelligent future population
with a developed eugenic creed might well take steps to limit the expression of their procreative instinct.
But those who, perhaps mainly for reasons of temperament, take a more optimistic view of the future are in debt to Sir Charles for his thoroughgoing evolutionary approach to man's future, and

E. V. Kuenssberg, M.B., Ch.B. Edinburgh
DR. E. V. KUENSSBERG iS one of a group
practice in Edinburgh whose members have been carrying out research into familial morbidity among their patients. The initial stages of this study were financed by the Eugenics Society and in January 1961 an interim progress report was published in this REVIEW (52, 225-8). Dr. Kuenssberg has been awarded a B.M.A. Scholar-
ship 1962-63; he is a member of the Research Committee of the College of General Practitioners, and Chairman of the Scottish Council's Research Committee. He is also Honorary Secretary of the Research Foundation Board, College of General Practitioners.

the stress he laid on the instability of advances due purely to cultural inheritance.
He was a courageous as well as a kindly man and was glad that his own descendants would be taking part in the vicissitudes of the future, hard though these might often be.

S. A. Sklaroff, B.Sc. London MR. S. A. SKLAROFF has been associated with
Dr. Kuenssberg in the mechanics of the ingenious filing system used in recording this research. He has worked at M.R.C. Social Medicine Research Units in London and Aberdeen, with

special interest in epidemiology and recording in

OUR CONTRIBUTORS

general practice; he is a member of the M.R.C.

E. G. Knox, M.D., M.R.C.P.

Committee on General Practice Research and is

DR. E. G. KNOX graduated at Newcastle in at present Lecturer in Demography and Vital

1949 and worked in paediatrics there, at first in Statistics in the Department of Public Health

the health service but later with the University. and Social Medicine in the University of

He spent six years as a whole-time member of a Edinburgh.

team studying illness in relation to its environ-

ment in a representative sample of children in Professor A. S. Parkes, C.B.E., M.A., D.Sc.,

Newcastle upon Tyne (the Thousand Families F.R.S.

Survey). Later he worked in the Department of PROFESSOR A. S. PARKES, who was for many

Social Medicine at Birmingham and at present years on the Staff of the National Institute for

is back at Newcastle as a Lecturer in Paediatrics. Medical Research, has been Mary Marshall

He has also spent some time in Nigeria and in the Professor of the Physiology of Reproduction,

Gambia.

Cambridge, since 1961. He is a Fellow of

8

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

Christ's College, Cambridge, and of University College, London, and is President of the Association of Scientific Workers.
Professor Parkes has long been associated with the Eugenics Society as a member of its

Council and as a Vice-President; in 1945 he read a paper at a Members' Meeting on Some Problems of Reproductive Physiology, and in 1957 he took part in the Society's Symposium
on Artificial Insemination (Donor).

9
ER-B

