AN INVESTIGATION INTO ASSORTATIVE. MATING*

By ELIOT SLATER, M.D.

B Y assortative mating we mean the shown that for one mental hospital in

tendency of one sort of person to Canada the frequency of both husband and

mate with another specific sort of
person, and not entirely at random. One might think perhaps that the dark-skinned and dark-haired might be especially attracted to the blue-eyed and fair-haired, and vice versa. In fact, wherever the matter has
been gone into, it is the opposite that holds, and it is always a matter of like attracting

wife being admitted with a psychotic illness
was much greater than chance probability
would suggest, and he concludes that assortative mating does exist " with respect to
traits which form part of the background of mental disease." On the other hand Leistenschneider (I938) found that the incidence of schizophrenia in the families of

like and never unlike. This is true of such the consorts of schizophrenics was not things as hair and eye colour and other significantly greater than in the general

anthropometric characters, and perhaps most population. This finding, of limited interest

importantly of intelligence. Husbands and though it is, is of great significance when

wives have been found to resemble each the highly debated mode of inheritance of

other as closely in intelligence as brothers schizophrenia is considered.

and sisters (Jones, I929).
The importance of this from the evolu-

Everyone who has been concerned with the problem during the past war has been

tionary point of view cannot be overemphasized. A general tendency of like to

greatly impressed with the great frequency
and importance of neurotic illnesses in the

mate with like, what is often called homo- population. It is generally agreed that,

gamy, if it extended over a wide range of however reactive these illnesses .may be to

hereditarily determined biological qualities, various forms of environmental stress, they

would amount very nearly to intensive in- have also a genetical basis Which can show breeding. It would have the same effect itself in emotional instability and various.
as inbreeding in increasing the variability deviations of personality. I was therefore of the population, and so increase its gene- very glad to take an opportunity, which was tical instability and vulnerability to se- made possible by the munificence of the lective forces. If, as seems - certain, the Rockefeller Foundation, to institute an intelligent have At the present time fewer enquiry into the intensity of assortative children than the unintelligent, then the mating as far as traits of personality were marriage of two intelligent people to each concerned. The investigation was planned other means that both of them are part in the following way. A psychiatric social sterilized; whereas if they both married unin- worker, Mrs. Moya Woodside, our second telligent partners, whether the marriage were speaker to-night,* interviewed a number of fecund or not, both intelligence and the lack soldiers from the neurotic wards of my of it would be equally penalized or favoured. hospital. From each of them she obtained
Nearly all the work on assortative mating a social and psychiatric history, including has been done in the U.S.A. by sociologists, family history, number and ages of sibs, and relates to modes of social behaviour, early life and upbringing, school and occuattitudes and interests. There is also a pational career, and the history of the certain amount of work on physical charac- marriage. A specially devised test of temters, but extremely little in the realm of peramental traits, which has been stanpsychiatry. Professor Penrose (I944) has dardized on nonnal and neurotic soldiers,
* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on was also given. She also obtained from the

January 15th, I946.

* See this issue, p. 29.

27

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

men permission to visit their wives, from infections I4, respiratory diseases 5, hernia

whom an exactly equivalent history was and piles 3; and only 6 merL fell into the

taken. This group of families were con- suspect groups of " gastritis," " rheumatism,"

trolled by exactly the same procedure being "vvertigo " and " painful toes." Of the total

followed with soldier patients from the of 7 neurotic men found in this group, 2 had

general wards of the same hospital and one of these suspect diagnoses. Accordingly

Horton Emergency Hospital, by the kind I think it fair to say that we can interpret

permission of Dr. Nicol. When the in- the main differences found between the

vestigation is complete, as it is likely to be neurotic and control groups as due to the

in a few weeks, IOO soldiers of each kind special nature of the former.

will have been investigated, making with

Corre-

their wives 400 persons in all. Some of the selective factors in the investi- Neurotic

Men Wives lation r

I. Age

32.5 29-8 +-88

2. Stature 67.7 63.9 + 52

gation must be briefly mentioned. Every man had to be married, and his wife had to

Group (50 families)

3. Sibs

4.4

4. Children 58

5. Neurotic 50

5.4 +*2I 6r 14

be living in an accessible district; this

meant that only those living in London and its outskirts came in question. All subjects

Control Group

i. Age

32-2

2. Stature 67.9

3. Sibs

5-2

30.3 +174 63.7 .+.38 4-8 +.03

were of the less prosperous socio-economic (50 families) 4. Children 67 70

classes. As no civilians were included, such groups as highly skilled technicians and

5. Neurotic 7

7

I. Mean age in years. 2. Mean stature in inches.

3. Mean number of sibs. 4. Total number of children.

those unfit for military service were not 5. Number of propositi who were adjudged neurotic.

represented. As only those wives could be I have now to show you the results of

visited who would agree to it, pairs in open some of the findings in the first 50 families

conflict with one another had to be left in each group. As you can see, differences

out. Nevertheless I believe the sample in age and height are negligibly small * they

collected to be roughly representative of an do not approach statistical signidcance.

urban working class, and I think that some None of the other differences are significant

of the findings that Mrs. Woodside will be either; but it is interesting that the neurotic

discussing will be found interesting on that soldiers are themselves less fertile and come

account. In what she will report it will be from less fertile families than the others.

noted that she has not distinguished between This fits in -with a finding I have reported

the neurotic and the non-neurotic groups. elsewhere (Slater, I945), that the neurotic

For the purpose of a provisional communi- constitution is associated with an impoverish-

cation such as this, such a procedure is ment of sex life. The finding that is of vital

justified by the fact that no obvious and significance, if confirmed on the total

large differences in behaviour in the two material, is that the incidence of neurosis is

groups have impressed themselves on us, twice as high among the wives of the

and the groups are very similar in other neurotics as among the wives of the non-

qualities (see table below).

neurotic soldiers. Furthermore, it is to me

It might well be questioned whether the very interesting and quite unexpected to

physically sick give an adequate control for obtain from the correlation coefficients an

our neurotic material. I believe that in the indication that assortative mating may prove

present instance they do. Although in to be more intense among the neurotic than

general the physically sick are a special the normal population.

selection, in the present case the illnesses

REFERENCES

were of a kind to which all soldiers are almost JONES, H. E. (I929) Am. J. Sociol., 35, 369.

equally liable. Among the first 50 cases, LEISTENSCHNEIDER, P. (Ig93) Ztschr. f. d. ges.

which are all I have had time to analyze for this paper, the diagnoses of the physically ill
men were: Wounds and injuries 22, common

Neurol. u. Psychiat., 162, 289.
PENROSE, L. S. (I944) Psychiat. Quart. Supp. SLATER, E. (I945) J. Neurot., Neurosurg. and
Psychiat., 8, 12.

