MENDELISM AND FARM LIVESTOCK

How Improvement Has and Can Be Achieved

By A. D. BUCHANAN SMITH, M.A., M.Sc., B.Sc., F.R.S.E.
(Fromn tihe A nimal Breeding Research Department, University of Edinburgh.)

IT is no exaggeration to say that Mende- is not like that of wireless. For the farmer

lism-using the term in a wide sense to to get results from the latter an understand-

include ' Morganism ' but not ' Mul- ing of the use of certain levers, buttons,

lerism '*-has revolutionized methods of aerial and earth is sufficient without any

plant improvement and in this way has had probing into the whys and wherefores. In

a tremendous effect on agriculture. As Mr. animal breeding it is necessary that the

Roberts in a recent issue of the EUGENICS farmer should understand certain basic laws

REVIEW has pointed out, Mendelism has been in order that he may adjust them to particu-

accepted somewhat uncritically in regard to lar circumstances. This requires a new

eugenics, where it certainly has not affected generation of farmers.

the improvement of human stocks to any- Before proceeding further there is one

thing like the same extent. Midway between point which stands greatly to the credit of

its effect on the improvement of plants and the science of genetics in respect of stock

of humans, stands Mendelism in regard to improvement; indeed it cannot be over-

farm livestock. Herein, that the problem of emphasized. Granted that methods of stock

the improvement of animals is more nearly improvement have not greatly altered in the

akin to that of eugenics, lies the reason and past thirty years, nevertheless genetics has

apology for what follows.

provided an understanding of the methods

Compared to plant improvement, Men- adopted by the great breeders and has justi-

delism has not greatly affected the methods fied the majority of their practices. By pro-

of stock improvement. These are much the viding a logical basis in place of empiricism,

same as they were at the beginning of the a distinct advance has been made, and all

present century. For this there are two the more so in the case of the rising gene-

principal reasons. Firstly, there is the slow ration of stockbreeders on whom depends

rate of reproduction in farm livestock, com- future improvement, for they can now start

bined with the high monetary value of wvhere their fathers left off.

existing good stocks. And secondly we must

face the fact that any mass improvement of POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE BREEDING

stock has as a prerequisite the improvement As in eugenics, there are two principal

of the minds of the breeders of those stocks. modes of stock improvement, the positive

Whereas plant improvement can be effected and the negative: the conscious selection for

by a few men, animal improvement requires many; few farmers are plant breeders, while at least 50 per cent. are animal breeders. Thus it is not reasonable to expect rapid

the best and the elimination of the unfit. Legislative and private methods cut across both of these. For instance, in Great Britain subsidies are given, largely to small-

progress in the application of Mendelism to holders, enabling the use of a sire of a

stock improvement. The science of genetics higher standard than would otherwise have

been possible. As an example of the nega-

*Morganism implies the mechanism of heredity, tive method we may cite the law requiring

while Mullerism means ' monkeving ' with that
mechanism by X-ravs, etc., thereby ' short-circuit-
ing ' the normal processes which govern the transmission of heritable characters.

stallions to be licensed for public service. Ireland has gone further: no bull is allowed to exist that is not likely to leave good stock.

25

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The success which has attended such legisla- possessing first quality material and a long

tion, both in Northern and Southern Ire- purse. The progeny test is the more impor-

land, has convinced many that if the rest of tant weapon, for, if experience goes for any-

Great Britain were to adopt such ' scrub thing, nothing is more misleading than to

bull ' legislation, this would be followed by base breeding operations on phenotype alone.

an immense improvement in the quality of

our cattle.

THE NEED FOR MEASUREMENT

The improvement of farm livestock differs from eugenics principally in the emphasis that is placed on the sire. " The sire is half
the herd," is a true statement and is in accord with the science of genetics for two reasons. Firstly, the sire contributes to the
hereditary complex of every animal born in that herd; the remaining part of that con-
tribution is made up by the female stock.
Secondly, as the sire is frequently from a
pedigreed breed, he is presumably more homozygous than the female stock and
therefore more prepotent and likely to impress his qualities on his offspring more markedly. The position is thus rather understated when to the sire is attributed an importance equal to the sum of the females.
Before going into detail it may be interesting to eugenists to know how improvement has hitherto taken place. The earliest improved breed of modern times is the thoroughbred horse. Prior to the publication of the first stud book in I793 the wiser breeders had already adopted, probably unconsciously, two methods as a basis of their operations. (The same methods were employed bv Bakewell of Dishley in the formation of the breeds of Leicester sheep and
Longhorn cattle, and were also followed by those breeders who built the surer founda-
tions of the three great beef breeds of cattle,
Shorthorns, HIerefords, and more recently
the Aberdeen-Angus.) They practised inbreeding to achieve homozygosity and pre-
potency and to measure these they applied the progeny test. To these must be added a
definite conception of the qualities, in relation to the environment, that they desired in

The majority of the pedigree breeds of Great Britain date from the seventies of last century. In theory, at any rate, the commercial stock of this country is improved by the use of pedigree sires. At the present time pedigreed animals do not constitute as much as 5 per cent. of the total of farm animals. In its earlier years pedigree had a
great influence on the commercial stock, blit
there is reason to believe that this is on the wane. Certainly the commercial beef cattle of to-day are not any better than they were twenty or thirty years ago.
Nor is the reason for this hidden from the scientist. The majority of our farm livestock -except dairy cattle, horses, and laying hens-are raised for meat production. This is a quality which is not amenable to
measurement, and hence one which cannot as yet be analyzed by science. The effects of environment and nutrition cannot be clearly separated from those of heredity. That heredity plays a part there is no doubt. Is that sufficient? It is. The first thing that the scientific animal breeder has to determine is whether or not the character with which he is dealing is fundamentally a hereditary one.
All else is secondary. Even if it were
possible for science to locate these genes concerned with meat production, the knowledge, under the circumstances which at
present constitute the industry, would not advantage the breeder greatly.
If the character is hereditary and if it is a productive quality-meat, milk, eggs, wool, etc.-we mav be certain that it will not be inherited as a Mendelian recessive. There remain the following main possibilities.

their animals. Genetics has justified their i. Single factor-simple dominance.

practice, and the mission of the scientist who 2. Single factor-blending inheritance

deals with animal breeding is to emphasize

(i.e. no dominance).

these points, with the caveat on inbreeding 3. Multiple factor- showing some domi-

that it should only be employed by a breeder

nance in cumulo.

MENDELISM AND FARM LIVESTOCK

27

4. Multiple factor-blending. 5. Multiple factor--showing some reces-
sivity in cumulo. 6. Sex-linked inheritance.
7. Sex-linked combined with either 3,
4, or 5.
From evidence available the first two can be ruled out. The third is probably the manner in which meat qualities are inherited, since the best animals are frequently crosses between breeds, and heterosis is dependent upon a number of genes acting in at least a partially dominant manner. In milk production (total yield) dominance can play only a very small part, while for butter fat the evidence of Gowen and others seems to indicate slight recessivity: there is also some reason to believe that, in addition to multiple factors of a blending nature being concerned with milk production, some of the genes are inherited in a sex-linked manner. If multiple factors are established for any character, then it is hardly worth while to determine their precise effect. What is important is to discover whether sex-linked factors play any appreciable part, since if they do, it modifies the type of inbreeding which the constructive breeder should employ. Incidentally it might be stated that this may furnish the reason why so little inbreeding has occurred in the creation of our dairy, as compared with our beef, breeds.
SEX-LINKED CHARACTERS
The method adopted by the present writer and his colleagues of ascertaining the existence and importance of sex-linked genes is based on the fact that the paternal grandsire cannot contribute a sex chromosome to his granddaughter. This may be explained diagrammatically. (See top of next column.)
Correlations of the relative exhibition of a certain characteristic between an individual and each of its four grandparents should disclose the existence of sex-linkage. If sexlinked genes for the particular character are of importance, then the correlation with the paternal grandsire will be lower than that

SEX CHROMOSOME DISTRIBUTION IN A PEDIGREE. Paternal Paternal Maternal Maternal
P2 Grandsire. Grandam. Grandsire. Grandam.
ox xx ox xx

Pi Sire ox

xx Dami

Fi xx cow
For a human pedigree substitute a Y for the 0.
with the three other grandparents. This was found to be the case as regards the total yield of milk in pedigreed Ayrshire cows (and also in American Holsteins).
Three principal objections to this method
exist
i.-The bull does not yield milk, hence
a method of indirect correlation has to be
adopted, which means that the correlations with the grandams cannot be compared with those with the grandsires.
2.-There is a statistical difficulty, " nonlinear regression. "
3.-If breeders in their selection have been laying greater stress on one sex, or if they have changed their standards, th'en the cor-
relations will be affected.
To overcome these obj'ections, particularly the first and second, Dr. R. A. Fisher of Rothamsted suggested a method which we have been using for two years. The principle is the same-i.e. the determination of the influence of each of the four grandparents upon their grandchildren. This depends upon the amount of variability expressed between pairs of animals of the same generation and related to each other by the same ancestors in the same position in their pedigrees. If the var-i
abitlity is as great amongst full brothers and sisters as amongst unrelated animals, then
it is doubtful whether the character con-
sidered is due to genetic causes, though the poingtrequires further investigation before
it can be resolved. If the variation is less and at the same time the variation found
amongst the various degrees of relationship

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

increases as the relationship widens, then hundred eggs, or a sheep with a wool clip

it is almost certain that heredity plays no of forty-five pounds would have been dis-

unimportant part. The test for sex-linkage missed as absurd. Yet such things have

lies primarily in the variation found happened. And these achievements are due,

amongst animals related by a common not to the application of genetics, but to the

grandparent. If the variability is greater appreciation of the existence of methods

amongst those connected by a common whereby production may be measured, and

paternal grandsire than amongst those con- to the application of these methods to the

nected by a common maternal grandsire, selection of breeding stock. Here the writer

then there are grounds for suspecting sex- is at one with Mr. Roberts when he says,

linked factors.

" It may well be that the task of the human

The results obtained by this method con- biologist is far more to measure, to distin-

firm us in the opinion previously obtained guish, and to relate." But the animal

by the correlation method, that sex-linked breeder's task is more to discover the

factors do govern the inheritance of milk method of producing the homozygous sire.

yield. Owing to the absence of large enough An example of positive livestock improve-

numbers for certain relationship groups, the ment without Mendelism may be found in

matter cannot yet be taken as proven. Inci- the pig-testing station which has been long

dentally it must be pointed out that this established in Denmark, and of which there

method of Dr. Fisher is an excellent one for is an example at Edinburgh. A breeder

obtaining information as to whether or not wishes information about a certain boar and

a particular character is of genetic or other sow. Accordingly four piglings nearest to

origin. In addition, this method is to be the average in one litter are sent to the

commended for its fundamental simplicity, station. They are called a " litter group."

which outwTeighs the disadvantage of the Other litter groups come from other litters

considerable labour involved.

and breeders. Each group is kept by itself.

WHERE SUCCESS HAS BEEN GREATEST

Nutrition and environment are kept as constant as possible throughout the test. Food

Thus far can we get and thus far will consumed is measured, and the time taken to

it be profitable for us to get. Finer deter- reach bacon weight is also noted. All groups

minations are of no immediate value since are marketed through the same factory,

they cannot be applied. TPhey may be of where measurements of percentage live to

value when the industry is reorganized- dead weight and dead to curable bacon are

probably by the State, for the matter is taken, as well as many other points. From

too big for any private breeder to risk such work two points of value emerge.

entering upon-and when some sure means Firstly, to the owner of the pigs who receives

have been discovered of economic artificial a report and is able by this progeny test to

insemination. At present we are only enter- judge the genotype (though he doesn't call

ing this stage.

it that!) of his breeding stock; and secondly

In many aspects both the scientific and to ourselves who, since environment, etc.,

the practical animal breeder await the inven- are held practically constant, can determine

tion of methods whereby the economic pro- which characters are hereditary and which

duct of the animal with which they are con- are not.

cerned can be measured. It is not coincidence

that within recent years greater improve- ELIMINATING THE UNDESIRABLE

ment has occurred in dairy cattle, wool Breeding for production is only half the

sheep, and laving hens than in any other story of animal improvement, the positive

class of stock, for the product of these can half. There remains the negative, the elimi-

be measured and weighed. Thirty years ago nation of defects. A priori most defects

the idea of a cow giving in a year three thou- must be inherited in a recessive or partially

sand gallons of milk, or a hen laying three recessive manner dependent on one or more

MENDELISM AND FARM LIVESTOCK

29

genes. The number is not important, but adopted by eugenists, by a study of pedi-

the fact of inheritance is.

gree. Here the scientific animal breeder is

How is the fact to be established ? It enormously helped by the existing records.

may be proved by planned experimentation, But unless pedigrees are handled intelli-

as Warwick has done in the case of scrotal gently, they can be most misleading. The

hernia in pigs. By selecting for this proper method is to combine a study of

blemish he increased the percentage of defects with a complete analysis of the

defect. The abnormality is dependent on breed.

more than one recessive gene: it matters This is done by analyzing the amount of

little on how manv. Following on the pub- inbreeding: Sewall Wright's coefficient is

lication of 'Warwick's work, it was found the best to use. This analysis must be from

that the pigs in our herd in Edinburgh car- the earliest records and is best done by tak-

ried the recessive factors for hernia. As it ing a random sample for each year and then

was not our intention to trace the inherit- calculating in five-year periods. This must

ance of this defect, we decided to breed it be followed by an analysis of the percentage

out. At the same time, we could not afford influence of the various notable animals in

to scrap the female stock. By making sure the breed. Then the pedigrees of the defec-

that the boars we purchased came of stocks tive animals are tabulated and compared

which did not exhibit this defect we have with the average of the breed. Unless a

not had another case, though, if we were to standard for comparison can be established,

inbreed, the defect would almost certainly the mere study of the pedigree of defective

crop up again.

animals is liable to prove misleading.

Another example is that of sterility in Using the official returns of stallions which

stallions, wvhich also lies in our files at Edin- owing to some defect have been refused

burgh. A stallion himself prolific left many licences, we are able to state quite definitely

relatively unprolific sons. Some of these, in that roaring is hereditary and almost cer-

their turn, left yet more unprolific sons. tainlv inherited as a simple recessive; but

One of these left a few sons of almost nor- this cannot be proved till the mating of roar-

mal prolificacy, though the greater number ing by roaring can be made. Sidebone is

were relatively unprolific, while he also also inherited, or at least the diathesis to it.

left some colts who were absolutely sterile, Of others we are not quite so certain, ring-

in that neither testicle descended. A condi- bone, shivering, and stringhalt fairly cer-

tion associated with this sterility was that tainly, but in whistling the evidence is not

the testicles were small. The advice we give so definite.

to breeders on this point is that they should assume the offensive-i.e. breed for fer-

SUCCESS BY CASTRATION

tility, not necessarily multiple births but Having determined that a defect is in-

regular production.

herited, what is the next action? It is the

It is not always that there are facilities elimination of the unfit by castration. The

to conduct such an experiment as War- effect of the Stallion Licensing Act of I9I9

wick's, which in cattle or horses would have is now being felt. No person qualified to

been costly and lengthy, or that opportunity give an opinion can be found to condemn

provides such an observation as that concern- that Act. The percentage of defective horses

ing the stallions cited above. Nor are the has fallen greatly. By merely eliminating

numbers of the defective animals sufficient the defective sires the average quality of the

to enable a statistical study, as that outlined stock can be improved. Hence the writer

for the productive qualities, to be carried cannot find himself in agreement with Mr.

out. Roberts' argument in the October issue of

An answer as to whether or not a certain the EUGENICS REVIEW, though he is con-

defect is inherited may be obtained-par- scious that the importance of the sire makes

tiallv at least-by the same method as that a big difference when comparing problems

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of stock improvement with those of eugenics. Finally, stock improvement has this in

Take Mr. Roberts' conundrum as to common with eugenics, that it depends on

whether the sister of a haemophilic should much more than its basic science, genetics,

marry. (Hemophilia is recessive and sex- for its success. Thus the lessons from stock

linked in its inheritance.) This question improvement, while they cannot be quoted

can be put in simpler form, for the sister of chapter and verse for the problems of the

a haemophilic may or may not be a ' car- eugenists, do give him some help. It was

rier,' whereas his daughter must be. recognition of this that led Mr. Henry

Accordingly, in reply to this query I would Twitchin to help our Society in so many

like to ask Mr. Roberts another:

ways, and finally to bequeath to us the

" Would you approve of a marriage be- residue of his estate. Mr. Twitchin was a

tween the Prince of Wales and the daughter practical stockman and his interest in the

of a hlemophilic?" The chances are equal improvement of the human race dated from

that the first son of such a marriage would his attendance in i888 at the Downton

show the defect-in other words it would be Farming School, where he was livestock

a toss up whether or not the future King- prizeman. Modern experience in the im-

Emperor would be a 'bleeder.'

provement of livestock endorses his state-

Under exceptional circumstances, with ment:

adequate facilities for testing genotype, such

a mating may be justified in livestock breeding, but hardly in eugenics. The haemophilic should not have been allowed to breed.
It is not the purpose of the writer to tres-
pass on the field of the eugenists, but to point out the general lines along which livestock improvement is at present heading, since they more nearly approximate those lying ahead of eugenics than does the work of plant improvement.
Mr. Roberts has done a service in drawing attention away from simple Mendelism-a word the present writer uses most reluc-

" I should not, if I were you, condemn ' stockyard methods,' so-called, so severely. What are they but the practice of the very essence of eugenic principlesthe prevention of the breeding of the unfit and making it possible for only the best types to do so. It may be good policy for the present not to go too far, but if eugenic teaching is ever to do any practical good for the human family, stronger measures will have to be taken than any so far advocated."

tantly-to the importance of multiple factors

and in particular to the test by results. He Nor is it coincidence that the only other

is right when he states that it is more large gift made for the permanent improve-

important to know the progeny than the ment of the human race also came from a

ancestry. The value of the progeny test is stockman. Like Mr. Twitchin, Mr. Met-

becoming more and more clearly realized as calf, who left a large sum of money to the

the basic method of stock improvement. At American Genetic Association, was also a

the same time, this must not be taken as man well versed in the improvement of farm

decrying the value of pedigree. The progeny animals. As was pointed out in a recent

test is expensive and takes a long time to issue of the Journal of Heredity, both give the result. Tt is the final criterion. men started as immigrants to a new country But pedigree is a useful indication. On and both made their fortunes in livestock.

this point the lesson from stock improve- Equally for the improvement of livestock

ment is decisive. The very least that pedigree can do is to make a useful short leet (as we call it in Scotland) for the progenv test. In the absence of the progeny test it is invaluable.

as for that of the human race, more is required for success than the science of genetics. To achieve the object other things must be taken into consideration, and of these for both problems the most important

is the individual himself.

