L. S. PENROSE, F.R.S.
The Galton Laboratory
Congenital Malformations in Man and Natural Selection*

IN SPITE OF the obvious variations in size, universally but these are not scored as abnormal

shape and colour which differentiate one person unless they are very noticeable. The same

from another, the idea is still prevalent that applies to minor defects of hands and feet, eyes,

the human species is at the top of an evolutionary ears, etc. Gross malformations occur in about

ladder and thus represents an almost perfect 2 per cent of all infants born at term and careful

animal. Even though few women are expected observation tends to raise the proportion to

to have the proportions of Milo's Venus and about 5 per cent if less serious defects are

few men resemble the Apollo Belvedere or include&. If spontaneous abortions are taken

Hermes of Praxiteles, the species as a whole into consideration, the proportion of all zygotes

is felt to be a biological masterpiece. Man's affected would be found to be much higher

domination of terrestrial life is the result of still.

his very large and efficient central nervous The spectrum of anomalies is extensive. It

system. In respect of other traits, however, there ranges from hidden defects of internal organs,

is always some animal which can be found to heart, kidney or intestines, to visible malforma-

do better. The egocentric view that man is the tions, like harelip, or dramatic deformities of

highest form of life is comparable to the limbs and even of the cerebrum. In the pioneer

Ptolemeic system of astronomy and, in modern investigation by Malpas, gross defects of the

times, to the assumption that, if life should brain had an incidence of 1 per cent.

develop in distant parts of the Universe, it must Traditionally there has been a strong tendency

follow the terrestrial pattern culminating in to ascribe these disasters to the influence of an

human forms..

unfavourable environment and, particularly, to

Belief in the perfection of the human species illness of the mother. Darwin took a guarded

is completely shattered by considering the very view. In Variation of Animals and Plants under

high rate of malformation among the offspring Domestication, he stated that, although many

in every generation. In earlier times a freakish congenital monstrosities were inherited (e.g.

event like the birth of a child with severe mal- polydactyly, albinism, harelip and cleft palate),

formation was believed to be a divine portent other malformations were probably due to

-even a warning of disaster. Hence the name non-inherited injuries in the womb or egg.

"monster" from the Latin "monstrum", a sign. There are several well-established examples in

Accordingly such births were viewed as being which external factors can be blamed.

extremely exceptional.

As long ago as 1702 the observation was

Accurate observation, however, leads to a made by Duttel that, if a pregnant woman had

different evaluation. Darwin, in the Origin of smallpox, this disease could be transmitted to

Species, differentiated between "monstrosities" the foetus and the child would be born with

which suddenly appeared in a population and severely pock-marked skin. The proof that

variations of possible usefulness. It is difficult another virus infection, rubella, in the mother

sometimes to know where to draw this line of could cause deafness and cardiac malformation

demarcation. Imperfections of the skin, such in the child came comparatively recently through

as pigmented patches, are present almost the work of Gregg in Australia. There are other,

* The fifth Darwin Lecture, arranged by the Institute
of Biology, delivered in London on 20th May 1965.

less well-defined, similar effects and some diseases, like tuberculosis, formerly credited

126

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1965, 57, 3.

CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS IN MAN AND NATURAL SELECTION

with the power of producing malformed off- genetical constitution of future generations.

spring, are now exonerated.

Genetical diversity, which Fisher called the

Physical trauma is a rare cause even if, in "energy" of a species and which enables selec-

this group, we include damage by exposure to tion to act, arises in two ways. First by single-

radiation. For radiation to produce a direct gene mutation and secondly by chromosomal

disturbance on foetal growth the dose must be aberration. The important point is that the

large and such exposures are not likely to pass self-reproducing properties of the nuclear

unnoticed in a civilized community. For example material, which carries the hereditary instruc-

in Russell's experiments on pregnant mice, 200 tions, ensure that any alteration tends to be

Rontgen units were required. With poisons, the permanent; the changed form is replicated.

chain of cause and effect may be much more Conditions which can be attributed to fresh

difficult to establish. The dangers of thalidomide single-gene mutations are rare. Typical instances

were, for a surprisingly long period, unsuspected. are the detrimental dominant traits, like ectro-

Observations on pregnant animals have disclosed dactyly and epiloia (Bourneville's syndrome).

that a great number of chemical poisons can, The milder condition, arising by mutation in

in sufficient quantity, induce gross developmental an ancestor, though disfiguring, lasts for many

anomalies in the offspring; but the effects in generations. The more severe rarely continues

man need not be precisely parallel. Experi- for more than two. The force of selection is so

mentally, vitamin deficiency and sometimes strong in epiloia that the incidence of this

vitamin excess can also cause damage. The disease in the population is controlled almost

significant point is that, in classifying origins entirely by the rate of recurrent mutation, that

of malformation, allowance has to be made is, about one in 60,000 per individual per

for possible environmental causes not yet generation. Epiloia is not strictly a congenital

identified. We may, however, with confidence, malformation because it is not visibly present

exclude the traditional superstition that maternal at birth. More exact examples in this respect

psychological impressions are significant. Micro- are achondroplasic dwarfism and acrocephalo-

phthalmia cannot result, as Sedgwick reported syndactyly (the syndrome of Apert).

in 1863, from the mother's being frightened Next to dominant malformations, selection

by a ferret. Living close to a Chinese laundry pressure is greatest in sex-linked morphological

does not cause mongolism. In ancient times, as defects. Again, only a few are known, e.g. one

far back as those of Hippocrates (460 B.c.), it type of hydrocephaly and one kind of eye

was thought that, if any part of a parent was defect, microphthalmia. In such instances, as

mutilated, it would be so likewise in the foetus. shown by Haldane in 1932, one-third of the

Darwin reviewed the evidence for this and found cases arise by fresh mutation in each generation.

it inconclusive. We now reject it without The disease is perpetuated only when the results

hesitation.

of mutation appear first in the child of a female

carrier.

Hereditary Deformities caused by Gene Differ-

If a malformation is recessively inherited, the force of selection is much weaker. Several kinds

ences of anencephaly and other central nervous system

In so far as a defect is environmentally deter- defects fall into this category. These persist in the

mined it takes no part in the process of natural population because the genes responsible for

selection; that is to say, provided that genes them are carried on from generation to genera-

do not predispose to a particular malformation, tion by perfectly normal people. Defects caused

the case can be excluded from the present dis- in this way persist in populations all over the

cussion. In a population of organisms which is world. The local incidence can vary according

entirely homogeneous genetically, there can be to selective action for or against slight con-

no selection in the Darwinian sense. In such stitutional peculiarities in the heterozygous

circumstances, chances which favour survival carriers. There might also be frequency differ-

or extinction would have no effect upon the ences caused by inbreeding. Anencephaly, which

127

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

seems to be recessive in about half the cases, has another way, the high prevalence of malforma-

a remarkably uneven distribution throughout tions of the nervous system in man may be to

the world and sometimes the origin is non- some extent inevitable payment, at the lower end

genetic: all kinds of influences have been of the scale, for the maintenance of his high

blamed, including too pure a water supply in average level of cerebral development with its

which minerals are absent.

wide range of variation. The extreme upper

Even though selection against recessive mal- limit of intelligence is also believed to be

formations is weak they would eventually associated with some degree of infertility.

vanish, albeit exceedingly slowly, from the

population unless there were mechanisms which neutralized the selective process. One of these

Malformations

associated with Chromosomal

which has already been mentioned, is recurrent Aberration

mutation. The other is stable equilibrium of In recent years, that is since 1958, it has

genes, first studied by Fisher, in which homo- become clear that a frequent source of mal-

zygotes are less fit than heterozygotes. A very formation is chromosomal aberration. This fact

slight advantage in the heterozygous carrier could only be surmised before techniques of

can compensate the loss of genes which occurs cell culture and chromosomal spreading were

when the malformed recessive homozygote fails to developed. Indeed, classical work on the mathe-

survive. In the extreme theoretical case, although matical theory of evolution, by Fisher, Haldane

all homozygotes are deformed and lethal, the and Wright in the decade from 1922 to 1932,

population can be in equilibrium because neglected almost entirely the kinds of mutation

all heterozygotes are healthy. This phenom- concerned with gross chromosomal changes. It

enon of completely balanced lethals is not known was thought that these would rarely make

to exist in man but might be a possible explanation significant contributions because they would

for a high prevalence of recessive malformations. lead to completely inviable states in all higher

If there were many alleles at a given locus, e.g. animals. Most authorities believed that embryos

A, B, C, D, etc., and all homozygotes, AA, BB, with aberrant chromosomal patterns could not

CC, DD, etc., were lethal, the population could develop beyond the very earliest stages, say,

still survive on the large excess of normal hetero- that of 8-cells. It was another blow to human

zygotes, AB, BC, AC, AD, etc. For n alleles of self-esteem to find that, as with plants and insects,

equal frequency, l/n would be the incidence of survival was possible with an imperfect set of

lethals; but, for a 1 per cent incidence of lethal chromosomes.

deformities genetically balanced in this way, a set Some chromosomal mutations cause little or

of 100 alleles would be required so this explana- no disability. Females with three sex chromo-

tion seems rather improbable.

somes, instead of the normal two, can be

There are other ways in which this type of perfectly normal; so also perhaps are some

compensated selection may be effective and males with two Y chromosomes instead of one.

one of them is exemplified by weight at birth. Otherwise any marked irregularity or deviation

Thus, both very light and very heavy infants from the normal pattern is very liable to cause

experience risks much greater than the normal. physical defect, often identifiable at birth.

Extreme types, moreover, are likely to represent Mental defect is a very consistent accompani-

homozygous states, less fit than the intermediate ment of these developmental disturbances.

average types, which represent heterozygotes.

Certain relatively common malformations of

This kind of genetical equilibrium, in which chromosomal origin are now well known. In

the optimal population type is maintained by most of these there is one extra chromosome,

the sacrifice of unfavourable, that is to say, which has arisen in consequence of an error

less fertile, extreme types, is called by Muller in meiosis at germ cell maturation as described

and by Crow and Kimura, "segregational" load by Ford; a homologous trio is produced instead

as opposed to the "mutational" load of defects of a pair in the cells of the zygote. In the plant,

caused by spontaneous mutation. Expressed in Datura stramonium, Blakeslee had found, many

128

CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS IN MAN AND NATURAL SELECTION

years ago, a different morphology for each of have been obtained from numerous aborted

the possible trisomics for its twelve chromosomal embryos and from one live birth which survived

pairs. In man, only four out of a possible only a few hours. Clearly there is strong natural

twenty-three kinds have been clearly recognized selection tending to eliminate such individuals

so far, those associated with X, a chromosome and, by implication, to a slight extent people

in the 13 to 15 group, one in the 17, 18 group like their parents also, if they should carry any

and one in the 21, 22 group. In the case of genetical predisposition.

Down's syndrome, mongolism, believed to be The incidence of triploidy, again, is rather

caused by trisomy-21, the standard condition high judging by its occurrence in aborted

can actually be transmitted to the next genera- foetuses, perhaps about one in 500 of all

tion in a manner rather like that of a single-gene zygotes formed. The problem of its origin is

dominant trait; but this is exceedingly unusual somewhat similar to that explaining chimaeras,

for such patients hardly ever become parents. hermaphrodites and conjoined twins. Such

Individually, each of these standard trisomic freaks can arise through accidents at fertilization

types occurs in about one per 500 to one per or shortly after. In so far as there are genetical

1,500 fertilized ova (zygotes) when allowance is factors which determine these events, selection

made for the fact that they often cause foetal will tend to make them rarer. However, it is

death and abortion. This rate is about 100 times usually believed that they occur in response

as frequent as that of single-gene mutation. to influences of a purely accidental nature

Selection against these trisomic types is, thus, perhaps demonstrating physical limitations of

very strong. Like single-gene dominant lethals, the reproductive mechanisms and, if this is

they are perpetuated only because the chromo- true, it is understandable that they have not

somal non-disjunctional errors recur. The causes been eliminated from the species.

of Down's syndrome are connected with the There is another, quite different, kind of

ageing of the mother, that is to say, with the chromosomal mutation or aberration found in

age of the maturing ovum which begins its association with varying degrees of malforma-

cycle at the mother's own birth. Precisely the tion. This always involves breakage and reunion

same effect is found in the other kinds of trisomy. of fragments so as to produce morphological

During thousands of past generations there changes in the chromosomes. Individually their

must have been selection against genes carried frequency of occurrence is rare, resembling that

by mothers who, when they were young, gave of mutation rates of single genes. Chromosomal

birth to malformed offspring. Gradually the deletion is one variety. Some developmental

age ofthe parent at which non-disjunction would defects, so caused, are incompatible with survival,

occur became further and further advanced. others, if the deletion is small, are only incom-

At late ages, where the generation time is nearly patible with reproduction. Microcephaly and

double the average, selection would necessarily heart defects are characteristic signs in such

be weaker and evolutionary improvements in cases. Natural selection acts at once against

the maturation mechanism would be made these detrimental variations and they are

more slowly. Apart from this indirect selective eliminated from the population as they arise.

action, standard trisomics have no effect on the Two special types of chromosomal mutation,

genetical future of the population.

called inversion and balanced translocation,

Besides alterations of number affecting one require special consideration. They do not

particular chromosomal pair, it is possible for directly harm the individual who carries them.

all the pairs to be transformed into triplets. However, they are likely to lead to malformation

This results in cells with sixty-nine instead of in the offspring of a carrier. Both types are

forty-six chromosomes. Ifthe peculiarity affects acused by incorrect rejoining after two chromo-

only a proportion of the cells of the body, say up somal fractures. Inversion can follow two

to 50 per cent, it is compatible with survival breaks on the same chromosome and trans-

though accompanied by mental and physical location, breaks on two different chromosomes.

weakness. Pure cultures of triploid human cells It has been known for a long time that peculiar

12I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

pedigrees shown by some kinds of familial
malformations could be interpreted as the
results of translocations or inversions rather
than of irregularly dominant inheritance which they would otherwise suggest. Examples were
shown by central nervous system malformations
and by mongolism. Cytological researches now have made it clear that this kind of inheritance
has an explicable and recognizable pattern.
Natural selection acts directly against the
malformed offspring in such families and in-
directly against the carriers of the inversions
and translocations by diminishing effective
fertility. The result is that such variations would,
in general, be fairly rapidly eliminated from our species. However, there are two ways in which they might tend to persist after their
entry into the population by mutation. First,
there may be, as Dobzhansky has demonstrated in wild species of Drosophila, some special virility conferred on the heterozygous carrier of a chromosomal inversion which may be sufficient to neutralize deleterious effects on fertility.
Secondly, in a small very closely inbred population, homozygotes for inversions or translocations may be produced and these could continue interbreeding without harm.
A considerable number of minor chromo-
somal differences are found among members of the human general population. In this way, as in the blood groups, man shows again an internal example of the polymorphism which is so characteristic of his external appearance. The study of chromosomal polymorphism, indeed, gives a hint as to how some evolutionary processes may have taken place. The translocation fusion of acrocentric chromosomes, illustrated in the carriers of Down's syndrome, is of a kind which has been observed in varieties within the same species of animals and plants. A normal human with forty-five instead offorty-six chromosomes is now almost a commonplace observation. In the fairly near future examples of normal people with only forty-four chromosomes will be found. If this same process happened twice over, that is to say, to two sets of chromosomes, a person could be born with only fortytwo chromosomes and have a pattern not unlike that found in the Rhesus monkey. He would probably still look like a man and could be quite

normal himself though a very high proportion of his grandchildren would be liable to suffer from developmental defects.
I think I have said enough to indicate the significance of studying human malformations in relation to natural selection. In many instances particularly in those cases caused by chromosomal aberration, the selection is of a type which closely follows Darwin's ideas. To some extent the study of these phenomena helps us to understand how man has evolved and may be continuing to change very slowly. They also indicate the price which has to be paid, in terms of genetical defect, for the comparatively stable and successful state of development which the human race has now reached.
REFERENCES
Blank, C. E. 1960. Apert's syndrome (a type of acrocephalosyndactyly): observations on a British series of 39 cases. Ann. hum. Genet. Lond. 24, 151.
Carr, D. H. 1963. Chromosome studies in abortuses and stillborn infants. Lancet, ii, 603.
Chu, E. H. Y., and Bender, S. 1961. Chromosome cytology and evolution in primates. Science, 133, 1399.
Crow, J. F., and Kimura, M. 1965. The theory of genetic loads. Genetics Today, 3, 495.
Darwin, C. 1859. The Origin of Species. London, G. Murray.
Darwin, C. 1868. Variations ofAnimals under Domestication. London, G. Murray.
Dobzhansky, Th. 1946. Genetic structure of natural populations. Yrbk Carneg. Inst., Wash. 43, 120.
Duittel, P. J. 1702. De Morbis Foetum in Utero Materno. Magdeburg, C. Henckelii.
Fisher, R. A. 1930. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Ford, C. E. 1961. Human cytogenetics. Brit. med. Bull. 17, 179.
Gunther, M., and Penrose, L. S. 1935. The genetics of epiloia. J. Genet. 31, 413.
Haldane, J. B. S. 1932. The Causes of Evolution. London, Longmans Green.
Kam, M. N., and Penrose, L. S. 1951. Birth weight and gestation time in relation to maternal age, parity and infant survival. Ann. Eugen. Lond. 16, 147.
MacKenzie, H., and Penrose, L. S. 1951. Two pedigrees of ectrodactyly. Ann. Eugen., Lond. 16, 88.
Malpas, P. 1937. The incidence of human malformations. J. Obstet. Gynaec. Brit. Emp. 44, 434.
M0rch, E. T. 1941. Chondrodystrophic dwarfs in Denmark. Op. Dom. Biol. Hum. Hered. 3.
Penrose, L. S. 1957. Genetics of anencephaly. J. ment. Defic. Res. 1, 4.
Penrose, L. S. 1961. Mongolism. Brit. med. Bull. 17, 184. Russell, L. B., and Russell, W. L. 1954. An analysis of
the changing radiation response of the developing mouse embryo. J. Cell. Comp. Physiol. 43, Supp. 1, 103. Sedgwick, W. 1863. On the influence of sex in hereditary disease. Brit. Foreign Med.-Chir. Rev. 21, 448. Wright, S. 1931. Evolution in Mendelian populations. Genetics, 16, 97.

130

