C. P. BLACKER BARBARA BOSANQUET
The Family in Contemporary Society

The Family in Contemporary Society. The questions as pre-marital education, conditions

Report of a Group convened by the Church of of marriage, divorce and re-marriage, working

England Moral Welfare Council, at the behest of mothers and delinquency, though some of these

the Archbishop of Canterbury with Appended Reportsfrom the U.S.A., Canada and India. The material in the Report and its four Appendices is for the use of the Lambeth Conference, July, 1958. London, 1958. S.P.C.K. Pp. viii + 229.
Price lOs. 6d.

questions are raised in the Appendices which deal with the family in the United States and Canada. (These last give fresh information on such topics as urbanisation, shift work, mobility, immigration and housing.)

The three factors in the population problem

MRS. BARBARA BOSANQUET

with which the Report does deal are: increase of

THIS IS an exceedingly interesting work, and resources, reduction of mortality and family

may prove to have great influence. It is by a planning. As regards the first two, the Church is

group of eighteen people-seven clergymen, seven urged to increase its understanding of industrial

sociologists, two educators and two demo- and scientific advance:

graphers. The Chairman was Canon Max Warren, To-day, asasecondindustrialrevolutiongathers

the Secretary the Rev. G. R. Dunstan, and speed, the Church ... if it will but run in har-

Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders and Dr. Sherwin ness with those whose profession is to observe

Bailey were members of the group. The Report objectively what is happening in society ...

itself takes up only some thirty pages, and is need not be left behind.

signed unanimously. The remaining two hundred Fiscal and trade policies must be liberalized, so

pages consist of four Appendices, containing a that the underdeveloped countries can begin to

miscellaneous assortment of facts and considera- pay their way; new resources must be developed,

tions, focused on family planning, particularly in and help from the "have" countries in the form

India, and on problems in Africa, the West Indies of expert assistance and gifts, must be stepped

and the Middle East. Dr. Gertrude Willoughby up. With a wholly praiseworthy juxtaposition of

who, as Research Assistant drafted seven chap- ecclesiastical and scientific language-refreshingly

ters of the chief Appendix, is to be congratulated visible throughout the report-citizens of richer

on an able compilation of statistics bearing on countries are urged to "interpret the divine

family problems in these areas-problems such precept to give to those in need" and Professor

as urbanisation, racial confficts, "bride price" Blackett is quoted (in his Presidential address to

and polygamy. It is safe to say that if the facts in the British Association): ". . . the sending of

this volume are digested, and its recommenda- experts to poor countries without the capital to

tions acted upon by the assembled Bishops, it will carry out their plans could be as irritating as to

mark a great forward stride in religious thinking. send a trained cook to a family unable to pay

The Report proper limits itself to discussion the baker." Modern medicine and hygiene have

of three demographic factors which impinge on removed the natural checks to population, and

our western concept of "the family", and on the this process cannot but be praised and helped by

interplay between rapid social change, the family the Church; but the stark fact is faced that in

and the Church - meaning in this context, many parts of the world numbers are increasing

presumably, the Anglican Communion. Being to a point where they will soon press dangerously

limited by time and space, and showing evidences against resources. Perhaps not enough weight is

of haste, it does not try to deal with such vital given to exponents of views such as Colin

I 25 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1958, 50, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Clark's*, nor is mention made of the work of
F.A.O.t However, the dilemma is there, and in
this slender paper-bound volume it is honestly faced. The third factor-family planning suitably used-is, by implication in the Report and by
direct advocacy in the Appendixt-approved as
compatible with Christianity. The operative words are "suitably used", and
at this point we cannot do better than quote from the leading article in the Manchester Guardian of April 15th, 1958:
The classical Christian attitude [disapproval]§
was formulated at a time when natural checks like war and disease seemed to guarantee the world against over-population. The advance of medical science has transformed the moral problem. As the report says:
'If our conscience will not tolerate, when we know how to prevent it, a torrent of infant deaths, no more should we, with the knowledge we have, encourage an ungoverned spate of unwanted births. If fatalism has given place to upholding the sanctity of life for the living, should it not also yield to a responsibility for those whom we cause to be born?' and again,
'"'Family Planning" represents an extension of the responsible use of science into the realm of procreation, in the immediate interest of the family and the more remote but no less real interest of society . . .' If the Lambeth Conference of 1958 accepts this point of view, one may expect it to lead to a resolution more positive and less cautious than that of 1930 [grudging approval].§ Less
cautious, but not thereby less moral.lI
But one's attitude towards family planning and contraceptive practices must be drawn also, and perhaps more fundamentally, from one's attitude towards marriage itself and the
* Director of Institute for Research in Agricultural Economics, Oxford, who points to the acceleration of invention and new resources, and thinks the main problem is distribution.
t Food and Agriculture Organisation of the U.N. which is doing much to increase food production.
t A prudent prefatory note states that individual signers
are not committed to all details in the Appendix. § Brackets mine. B.B. 11 Italics mine. B.B.

place of sexual intercourse in it. This is the
ground on which the Lambeth theologians
may be expected to join battle. The 1930 con-
ference went so far as to declare that intercourse between husband and wife has a value of its own, in that "married love is enhanced
and its character strengthened"; but it con-
firmed the traditional view that procreation
is the primary purpose. The present report
seeks to reconcile instead of distinguishing these purposes. The end of Christian marriage (or most such marriages, for a possible vocation for childless marriage is not excluded) is to bring children into the world-but not that
only; it is no less to bring them up to maturity
as good and healthy citizens. This purpose will
not be fulfilled if the children are more numerous than the parents can sustain, or if the parents themselves are out of harmony with each other, as long-continued abstinence may make them. ("The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge.") The best family (from a Christian and not merely a humanist point of view) is not that in which there are most children but that in which children grow up in an atmosphere of confidence and affection, fed by the "mutual endearment" of parents who engage in regular intercourse without thereby producing more children than they can manage to rear. This is a powerful case to meet, unless, as the report
puts it 'the nature of coition is "given" in every particular and for ever, in all its physical and metaphysical aspects, and so placed outside the realm of human decision.'
Many Christians would still say that it was so "given". But an increasing number, both in this country and in the churches overseas within the Anglican communion, would reject so absolute a doctrine. The term"given" presupposes belief in, and belief that we can understand the will of God. Whether we feel, with the agnostics, that the will of God is unknowable, or whether we believe these words have a real meaning (though not universally expressed by Church formulations), we should follow the Lambeth deliberations on this Report most carefully. It is a realistic effort to break new ground (the "prophetic role"), com-

126

THE FAMILY IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY

bined with a respect for but not an undue In recognizing that there are times when the

leaning on authority.

relational purpose of coitus has a value apart

There is an understanding of marriage and from the conceptional purpose, it follows that

sex in the Guardian's leading article which reflects a limited use of contraceptives is permissible.

the admirably frank insights of the Report. The The Committee is however in complete agree-

concept of the family as a whole-parents, ment that there is no justification for the use of

children, perhaps even grandparents !-benefiting contraceptives:

from the atmosphere of "endearment" engen-

(1) for purely selfish motives, or in the

dered by what we must suppose Dr. Kinsey

attempts to avoid the proper and neces-

would call "a healthy sex life" has seldom been

sary self-control; or

put more plainly.*

(2) to avoid parenthood altogether.

But surely, if we are discussing morality, the

. . . We would request that authoritative

concept of family welfare must be based on an guidance be given by the 1958 Lambeth Confer-

even deeper level, namely on love and loyalty. ence on whether the relational act of coitus

To a simple mind, unversed in philosophy, the is morally justifiable where there are sound

morality of sexual intercourse depends not on moral reasons for limiting parenthood.

whether contraceptives are used, but on whether The second request which would break new

there is a true relation between husband and wife. ground if acted upon is that the Bishops should

That is primary, and, combined with sexual provide "opportunities for . . . discussion [of

harmony, is what theologians say the Bible theological and practical problems] in which

means by "one flesh". Given that, the decision churchmen would join others, not all of whom

to use contraceptives is secondary. If the use of would necessarily profess the Christian faith"

contraceptives prevents abortion, adultery, or unwanted children, that is a good thing, but

(Appendix 1, Chapter 8). This request is linked with a plea for an "entirely fresh approach to

secondary. The primary good which must be guarded, or where it is weak, built up, is the true

women's work in the church". It is a little surprising that not more is said, in this study of the

relationship between persons. In theological family in contemporary society, about the

terms this could be called a reflection of the love changing status of women. Apart from calling

of God. Where it is present the decision to use or the education of women and girls the "most

not to use contraception can be left to the couple. disruptive force of all in matters of family life", This decision will be a moral act, and should be little more is said, though there is so much dis-

recognized as such. Perhaps eventually the cussion of family planning. This is no doubt due

Church will provide a form for such recognition. to the short time in which the report had to be

One of the two most penetrating requests to drawn up. But the call for a new approach by the

the Bishops which the Appendix to the Report makes bears directly on this:

Church, in which the clergy and laity and professional workers not necessarily of the same

Where there is the clearly felt moral obligation faith would discuss the problems of family life

to limit or avoid parenthood, that relational here and abroad is a real challenge. It should

intercourse, which cements and deepens their lead to fresh thinking about the whole work of

mutual love and contributes to [the couple's] the Church.

well-being and that of the family, must take place with the use of some method of contra-
ception. Complete abstinence from intercourse might well cause strains and repressions that

To sum up in a sentence: this Report is proof that the Anglican Church is concerned with family and population problems on a realistic basis. Also, it narrows the gulf between reverent

would be harmful.

agnostics and believers.

* The leader must refer to the words of Dr. Sherwin Bailey, quoted in Appendix 4: " It cannot too strongly be stressed that the well-being of the family depends to a greater extent than has perhaps been recognised hitherto, on the well-being of the one flesh - and to that well-being regular coitus makes a profound contribution."

DR. C. P. BLACKER
THE IMMEDIATE IMPORTANCE of this noteworthy statement will be decided in July. There will then take place at Lambeth the conference of

I 27

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bishops for which it has been prepared. But its power of manouvre in this matter as the English

long-term importance is assured whatever Archbishop.

happens at Lambeth.

The responsible group consists of 19 persons of

Credit is due to the Archbishop of Canterbury whom seven (perhaps eight) are theologians. Of

for having provided the initial stimulus: we are the booklet's 229 pages, 31 only contain the

told that the group which produced the booklet report proper, signed by the 19 members of the

was convened at his "behest". The Church of group (including Canon Max Warren, the Chair-

England (and a fortiori the Church of Rome) is man, the Rev. G. R. Dunstan, secretary, and Dr.

rather like an enormous raft lying in a harbour: Gertrude Willoughby, research assistant); the

its bulk and inertia make it difficult to move. remaining 198 pages consist of four rather

Momentum is generated by a complex inter- curiously assorted appendices. The second deals

action of tugs, pulleys, levers and winches - with the family in the United States, the third

forces operated from both land and water. The with the family and modern society in Canada,

initial problem is to decide how best to start the and the fourth with family planning in India. The

movement. The method here adopted is to pro- first and longest Appendix is entitled An Assess-

duce an authoritative report, containing an ment and Theological Consideration of the Facts

appropriate amount of factual material and upon which the Report is based. It thus contains

advancing recommendations which are by design two quite different parts, namely an assessment

vague and general, and then to blanket the of the facts and a theological consideration of the

startling character of the recommendations by facts. The facts assessed include those presented

the dullest possible prose. The report acknow- by certain countries such as India, the West

ledges that its theme may be repellent to some; Indies and Mauritius, Africa, Egypt and the

but the authors say that responsibilities imposed Middle East, Europe and Great Britain. (Com-

on them by Christianity

prised in a review of conditions in the West

oblige us to offer some things which the Bis- Indies is an appreciative notice of Lord Simon's

hops might understandably not have chosen Population andResources in Barbados, 1954). This

for themselves, some from which their first "assessment" takes up 84 pages, and we are told

inclination might have been to turn away; but that Dr. Gertrude Willoughby (well known to

things which, in our judgment their Lordships members of the Eugenics Society) worked hard

may properly be asked to receive and inwardly to write them in a short time. A most creditable

to digest.

performance.

The report in fact flies a kite: it presents facts The theological consideration of the facts

which it declares should no longer be neglected occupies 40 pages and is partly (or perhaps

and poses questions which should claim the wholly: the matter is not made clear) written by

Church's attention. Episcopal inertia displayed the theologians in the group. Here is included a

during half a century in the matter of the ethics 23-page discussion (illustrated by three different

of family planning is acknowledged in the hypothethical "examples" of possible attitudes)

following words:

of the significance in marriage of coitus and of

The resolutions of the Lambeth Conference of the consequent permissibility of contraception.

1908 and 1920 denounced contraception out- The conclusion is reached that coitus has, in

right; that of 1930, carried by a three to one addition to its procreative purpose, a further

majority, was grudgingly permissive.

(relational) significance in consolidating the bond

If the Conference in 1958 is cautiously but be- between two married people; and that hence con-

nignly permissive, the Church of England will traception is permissible provided that it is used

have shown a commendable receptivity and with a due awareness and sense of responsibility.

realism. Indeed the English bishops will have dis- The arguments and language employed by the

played an agility which a few Roman cardinals theologians responsible for this part of Appendix

could almost bring themselves to envy. Would I could strike the laymen as about as obscure as

that the Roman Pope could, by the indirect the language of lawyers: stress is laid on the

method of a behest to a group, exercise the same Incarnation by which the world and the flesh

I28

THE FAMILY IN CONTEMPORARY SOCIETY

(belittled in Gnostic and Manichean heresies) But universality, unless imposed by force, calls

were sanctified; and St. Paul's views (that for tolerance:

"marriage is undoubtedly second best with Distinctive and unique though Christianity be,

celibacy and virginity as ideal courses") are we need not deny all significance to other

treated with respect (despite the fact that when religions nor need we condemn in toto the

he wrote the epistle to the Corinthians Paul institutional, doctrinal, cultural pattern to

"considered that the end of the world was at which they have given rise.

hand and a time of great tribulation . . . The argument in favour of tolerance is applied

imminent").

(in a manner which the sympathetic but unsophis-

But the theologians in the group certainly ticated layman hopes will not put too heavy a know their business; there can be no doubt that strain on the bishops) in favour of African poly-

their contentions are skilfully developed for the purpose in view, namely presentation to the bishops attending the Lambeth conference in July.
A leavening feature ofthe report - which adds to the heterogeneity ofAppendix I - is An Essay in Crusoe Economics. Here are allegorically described the vicissitudes which befall two families
occupying neighbouring islands, both of which subsist on coconuts: one family discovers that it can improve its harvest of coconuts by using
coconut fibre to make ladders. The possible sequels provide the text of the essay in Crusoe
economics.
We are told that the group was asked to report on two things, namely problems ofpopulation and the effects of rapid social change on family life. In effect, the group finds that many ofthe changes now taking place are for the worse: what the
Church needs is both knowledge and goodwill. It needs a better intelligence service before it can act for the best. No action without information:
the two should go hand-in-hand. If full knowledge of the range of man's psychological and cultural diversity were to be coupled with good-

gamy. In many parts of Africa the disruption of ordered polygamy, which has strict sanctions of its own, has resulted in a "sordid pursuit of promiscuous relationships, with a mounting toll of illegitimacy and social delinquency". The theologians in the group appear to declare that the Christian Church betrays Christ if, in certain
cultural conditions, it insists too legalistically on
monogamy: A Church which is not a fellowship so strong that it can hold men and women, and their new family life, in its continually strengthening and forgiving embrace, and serve as a mutual benefit society in times of stress -such a Church is a very sad betrayal of its Lord. In the context of that betrayal, wherever it occurs, a legalistic insistence on monogamy and the penalty of excommunication for any lapse, come very near to the repudiation of a trust.
The following passage forcibly conveys the group's position on family planning:
To produce children without regard to consequences is to use procreative power irresponsibly, the more so when there is involved the imposition of one partner's will upon the other. If our conscience will not tolerate, when

will two needed things would emerge: universality we know how to prevent it, a torrent of infant and tolerance. The report speaks of a universal deaths, no more should we, with the knowledge

church:

we have, encourage an ungoverned spate of

When the most staggering differences of wealth unwanted births. If fatalism has given place to

are no longer between persons and persons but upholding the sanctity of life for the living,

between nations and nations, problems raised should it not yield also to a responsibility for

by material development are problems for those whom we cause to be born?

which a Christian solution will need a far This passage, which might almost have been

greater emphasis on the concept of the Church written by Galton, could well be used as a text by

Universal.

eugenists.

129

