THE UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATIONS AND THE WORLD POPULATION PROBLEM*

By KARL EVANG, M.D., F.R.S.M. Hon., F.A.P.H.A., F.R.S.I. Hon.
Director-General, Norwegian Public Health Service

P RACTICALLY all problems of broad international importance are at present, in one way or another, dealt with
by the countries of the world in the United Nations and its specialized agencies. The discussions and comments, the recommendations, resolutions and regulations adopted by these official, governmental bodies, and the reports of expert committees composed of members with outstanding knowledge and experience in the fields concerned -are already indispensable to any government which wishes to keep up with developments in the various fields, and reap the benefit of modern knowledge and administrative practice for its own country.
It is therefore of interest to survey the situation regarding the extent to which the U.N. and its specialized agencies have, so far, tackled the population problem. Although there is still a pronounced tendency to dodge at least certain aspects of this problem, the years which have passed since the United Nations was created have brought more and more responsible governments and scientists to realize that the population problem has at least five important aspects of world-wide importance, demanding international discussion and action:
i. Political.
2. Economic.
3. Social.
4. Health.
5. Cultural.
I will try very briefly to survey the position of the United Nations and its specialized agencies as regards population problems.
* A Paper read at the Fourth International Conference on Planned Parenthood, Stockholm, August, I tb, I953.

F.A.O. and World Food Resources
F.A.O. (The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations) has among its objectives the assessment of the amount of food needed for the growing population of the world, and the promotion of production, conservation and distribution of this food. Both at Hot Springs in I943 and during the first years of the existence of F.A.O. an optimistic note was sounded, although the picture which presented itself both in I943 and after the war was very dark indeed, showing that food production was far short of even the minimum require-
ment for the population existing at that time. It was generally felt by agriculturists and technologists that, by co-ordinated efforts by the member States of F.A.O., a rapid increase of food production would be
possible. F.A.O. was at that time under no illusion as regards the requirements. The
prognosis showed that by the year I960, as
compared with pre-war supplies, the world
would need about 6o million more tons of
cereals, 30 million more tons of meat, 250 million more tons of vegetables and fruit, and
35 million more gallons of milk. There wvs no flinching from this gigantic task. F.A.O.
was confident that untilled land could be
brought under cultivation, production intensified, soil erosion stopped and the output of fisheries increased. During these first years of the life of F.A.O. there was on the whole
little talk of growth of populations. One might say that the population question was
only looming in the background, throwing perhaps a shadow of doubt over the enthu-
siasm' and optimism.
Time will not permit me to follow the
gradual change, but some quotations from

247

248 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the report of the Sixth session of the Conference* of F.A.O. (November I9thDecember 6th, I951) will show how the outlook had been changed during these few
years.
" The Conference was gravely concerned by the fact that food production over large areas of the world was not keeping pace with the growth of population; that progress generally remained slowest in the major food-deficient and seriously underfed nations of the world and that the expansion planned over the next two years, even if fully achieved, would be insufficient to remedy this situation.
"1 The most important area presenting the most urgent problem is the Far East where the population of nearly I,250 million is increasing at the rate of I 2 million people a year. Here the agricultural pattern 'concentrates on quantity rather than quality, yet production constantly hovers between levels of basic subsistence and famine."
The Conference goes on to express its especial concern over the production of cereals. It points to the fact that in Latin America increasing food production can barely keep pace with the rapidly growing population, and that in the Far East, even if the I952-53 objectives could be reached, cereal production per person would still be 8 per cent below pre-war. In the Second World Food Survey, produced by the Secretariat of F.A.O., published in November I952, the Director-General of F.A.O., MR. NORRIS E. DODD, states:
" The new information gives no ground for complacency. The average food supply per person over large areas of the world, five years after the war was over, was still lower than -before the war. The proportion of the world's population with inadequate food supplies has grown appreciably larger...
"... The whole demographical picture, though still imperfectly understood and interpreted, adds a note of urgency to the task of expanding
world food production'."
Even more outspoken was the deputydirector-general of F.A.O., SIR HERBERT BROADLY, in his opening address to the Fifth World Health Assembly in May I952. He said:
... We are both technical bodies and we are both concerned with human needs. Your busi-
* The " Conference " of F.A.O. is the meeting of the
representatives of all member States.

ness is to see that the people of the world are healthy; ours is the task of seeing that they are
adequately fed, clothed and housed. But the more successful you are in reaching your goal, the more difficult F.A.O.'s task becomes. We
do want to pay tribute to the great achievements that have marked the first few years of W;H.O.'s existence. The span of human life is being extended, infant mortality has immensely fallen and thousands upon thousands of human beings are coming out of the shadow of disease, misery and incapacity into the sunshine of healthy
energetic lives. But more mouths demand more food....
"'We must recognize that at the moment the world is just not responding to F.A.O.'s challenge. It is not producing sufficient food even to
maintain for its increasing population the
amount which the fewer, shorter-lived, lesshealthy millions had for each individual before the
war ... So the time has really cpme for this drive to increase food production to become a reality,
and if it does not, then we are faced with fearful consequences. At the moment there are two schools of thought busily preaching their doc-
trines on this problem. There are those who see
no hope of ever adequately feeding the world's
increasing millions, and their solution is a reduction in the millions, substituting education and a limitation of families for those desperate remedies that operated in the past, of war an-d the great killing diseases; and the other schoolthe enthusiasts and the optimists-who see no
limit to the quantity of food that the world can
produce. Well, it is quite true that technical knowledge exists today which, if it were applied, could result in an immense increase in world food production; but the political, social, and economic difficulties are also immense. In many countries antiquated systems of land tenure are an enormous handicap to the application of the' new agricultural technology, and ignorance too, on the part of so many millions, is a giant in the path, and disease has sapped human effort and initiative in this field. But all our agencies together are beginning work on these problems. 'The United Nations and F.A.O. are at work on
the field of land reform. UNESCO is beginning,
to lighten the darkness of human ignorance, and W.H.O., we are happy to record, is eliminating the killing diseases. So we can hope in the successful outcome of our joint efforts, but we cannot yet have confidence that success will be achieved in time. We are marching rapidlv into a future full of promise but equally lively with menace, and that is why there is no simple or quick solution to the problems which W.H.O.'s' successes and the efforts of the health organizations of our national countries are posing to the world.
Where birth-rates continue to advance, as is the case in many countries-and not only in the under-developed countries-where death-rates

UNITED NATIONS AND WORLD POPULATION

249

and human mortality are being halved, where
the expectation of life is gaining another five, ten, fifteen years, we cannot just sit back and let Nature take its course. If we do, Nature's

aspects. In I948 the First World Health Assembly agreed that the collaboration with the United Nations on population

course will be a very desperate one. It is only questions, which had been started by the

through international action, which this assembly Interim Commission in I946, should be

represents and which our agencies are endeavouring to carry out, that wise solutions can be achieved. Otherwise, the growing populations of those countries which are at present exporting

continued and developed. This was again emphasized by the Executive Board and by the Third World Health Assembly in I950.

food will consume their own existing output, and The Regional Committee of W.H.O. for

the food-importing countries of Western Europe will in turn be faced with the dangers of shortage and famine."

South-East Asia in September I950 passed a resolution recommending the Regional Director, in co-operation with the other

It must be made perfectly clear, however, international agencies dealing with this

that the two last statements partly quoted problem, to obtain from member States in

above are given by staff members of F.A.0. the region all possible demographic data

No such statement by a member of the which would thereafter be circulated to

F.A.O. staff, however prominent, can of member governments for any action which

course be attributed to F.A.O. as an organ- they may deem necessary. The Executive

ization. The parts I quote from the Report Board of the World Health Organization at

of the Sixth Conference, on the other hand, its Eighth session again emphasized the

can be taken as an expression of the attitude importance of co-ordinated efforts between

of F.A.O. towards the problem at that time. the World Health Organization and the

To sum up, therefore, it may be said that Population Commission of the United

F.A.O. as an organization has gradually Nations and added a very important point

changed its attitude from a most optimistic requesting the Director-General ". .within

one as regards the possibility of increasing the limit of budgetary resourees to carry

food production more rapidly than popula- out studies of the health aspect of the

tion growth, to a much more reserved atti- problem." This is the first time that

tude coloured by stronger and stronger W.H.O., as an organization, publicly recog-

realization of the fact that populations in nized its task to study the health aspect of

the world are growing much faster than the the population problem. Further, it was

increase in the production of food.

decided that W.H.O. should participate in

In spite of this, F.A.O. as an international the World Population Conference.

organization has made no resolution or As part of this slow but encouraging

observation regarding the problem of over- development, the Government of India-

population in the world, but has limited made a constructive move in 195I, asking

itself to drawing the attention to the dis- W.H.O.-with the aid of W.H.O. Technical

crepancy between the world's population Assistance-for a one-year study in family

and its available food. The attitude of planning as a means of population control.

-F.A.O. towards the United Nations World The request for aid, however, was condi-

Population Conference will be mentioned tional upon the experiment being restricted

later. to a method of family planning based on the

" safe period " of infertility in a woman, the

W.H.O. and Demography

so-called " rhythm method." W.H.CO., in

As far as the World Health Organization meeting the request of the Indian Govern-

is concerned it has, so far, mainly taken an ment for aid and accepting the condition

interest in the demographic aspects of laid down, engaged as an expert consultant

population problems and especially in vital Dr. Abraham Stone, of New York.

statistics. Excellent results have been Regardless of what view one takes on the

achieved, in improving mortality statistics applicability of the " rhythm method," the

in many countries, and also in several other Indian Government is, to my mind, to be

250 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

congratulated upon its initiative. These production and not to limit births, that

study projects should be completed so that family planning would result in an ageing

once and for all the discussion as to whether population and a decrease of productivity,

or not the " rhythm method " is applicable that the duty of physicians was to preserve

in a so-called under-developed country may life and not to stand in its way, and finally

be brought to a definite conclusion.

that if W. H.O. were to deal with these

'At the Fifth World Health Assembly in problems it would tacitly recognize the

I952, when the preparations for the World principle according to which the State is

Population Conference were well under way, authorized to intervene to facilitate family

it was felt by myself and others that the planning,* a principle which is not univer-

contribution of W.H.O. would be more sally recognized. The delegates of Panama

valuable if the organization collected some and the United States of America also

material and studied the problem from that expressed the fear that W.H.O. might meet

aspect for which the World Health Organiz- with criticism if it took up this problem.

ation had itself declared its responsibility- What happened at the Fifth World

the health aspect. The Norwegian dele- Health Assembly demonstrated the sur-

gation at the Fifth Health Assembly, there- prising fact that, even in a technical body

fore, put forward a resolution inviting the like W.H.O., it is impossible at the present

Director-General to " establish an expert time to discuss the health aspects of the

committee to examine and report on the population problem on a purely technical

health aspect of this problem." This basis. A number of the delegates showed

proposal was supported by the delegates great emotion, and certain delegates even

from Ceylon, India, Mexico, the Philippines, threatened the withdrawal of their countries

Sweden and Yugoslavia, who felt that the from the World Health Organization if

setting-up of an expert committee was the W.H.O. tackled the health aspects of the

best way in which W. HT 0. could prepare for population problem. It is no secret that

the World Population Conference, and, the Roman Catholic group of countries was

above all, that it was the only way of pro- very active in collecting support for the

viding the necessary technical information view that W.H.O.- should not touch this

for India and other countries which might problem. As the discussion showed that

approach W.H.O. for advice and guidance.* there was unfortunately no possibility at all

A counter-proposal was suggested by the of passing any resolution of a constructive

delegates of Belgium, Italy and Lebanon, and positive character, all proposals were

inviting the Assembly to resolve " that withdrawn and no action taken. The

from the purely medical standpoint popula- World Health Organization was neverthe-

tion problems do not require any particular less bitterly attacked in the leading paper

attention on the part of W.H.O. at the of the Vatican, L'Osservatore Romano.t

present time. " This j oint proposal was

supported by the delegates of Austria, I.L.O. and UNESCO

Puerto Rico, France, Ireland, Japan, Por- Of the other specialized agencies, I.L.O.

tugal and Spain. They felt that the problem and UNESCO are directly concerned with

of over-population is a local one which matters which are closely related to certain

should be dealt with by the government of aspects of the population problems. I.L.O.

the country concerned, that it was an is,. first and foremost, interested in the

economic and not a medical problem which influence of changes in populations on

should be' solved by economic measures, the standard of living generally and on the

that what was needed was to increase question of employment specifically, and,

* It should be noted, of course, that W.H.O. can in no * It should be noted that the Norwegian proposal did

way limit the full freedom and sovereignty of any not mention family planning, but used the much wider

country. Only the national governments which ask for term: Health aspects of the population problem.

services will get them.

tA.XCII-Num. I34, June 8th, I952.

UNITED NATIONS AND WORLD POPULATION

25I

further, in the migration of populations. UNESCO-which has on the whole shown an open and liberal- attitude regarding several controversial subjects-must of course take population trends into consideration in planning its programme of fundamental education and cultural and scientific progress.
Population Commission As far as the UNITED NATIONS itself is
concerned, the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations, as long ago as October I946, established a population commission with the following terms of reference:
"The Population Commission shall arrange for studies and advise the Council on: (a) Population changes, the factors associated
with such changes, and the policies designed to influence these factors; (b) Inter-relationships of economic and social conditions and population trends; (c) Migratory movements of population and factors associated with such movements. (d) Any other population problems on which the principal or subsidiary organs of the United Nations or the specialized agencies may seek advice."
This Population Commission met twice in I947, and since then has held one session every year. The Commission has dealt with a number of important topics such as demographic methods, population estimates and forecasts, trends in mortality and fertility, demographic aspects of ageing, of labour supply and employment and unemployment, and of technical assistance.
Studies have been started to trace the inter-relationship of population trends and economic and social factors, size of population of trust territories, surveys on demographic legislation, etc. It goes without saying that many of the projects of the Population Commission are long-term ones involving exact planning and the cumbersome collection of basic data before analyses can be undertaken. Vital statistics, too, are in many countries at such a primitive stage that reliable and extensive data are not available. The Population Commission has been working intimately with the specialized agencies, especially the W. H.O. and I. L.O. The

Population Commission therefore is an
important part of the machinery of the
United Nations. The material which is gradually being compiled and analysed is
already an indispensable source of informa-
tion for all interested in population prob-
lems. The Commission has, so far, limited
itself mainly to the collection and tabula-
tion of data, and has avoided some of the
more controversial aspects of the population
problem. The same holds true for the
Economic and Social Council itself.
To UNESCO goes the credit for having taken initiative in the matter. The represen-
tatives of UNESCO proposed to the Popu-
lation Commission of the United Nations
at its third session in I948 that a conference on world demographic problems be convened in I950 or I95I. The last conference of this nature was held in I937 under the
auspices of the INTERNATIONAL UNION FOR
THE SCIENTIFIC STUDIES OF POPULATION,
a non-governmental organization. The Population Commission of the United Nations at that time felt that it was not advisable to hold such a conference until the principal results of the various censuses which were to be taken in or around I950
were available. At its Sixth session (I95I) the Population
Commission considered a proposal by the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population that a world population conference be called by the United Nations. It was felt by this international non-governmental organization that it would be an advantage if such a conference could be convened under the auspices of the United Nations itself. Finally the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations in resolution 435 (XIV), June ioth, I952, approved the " holding in I954 under the auspices of the United Nations of a world population conference of experts in close collaboration with the International Union for the Scientific Study of Population and interested specialized agencies." The Council decided that the " conference shall be devoted solely to the exchange of ideas and experience on population matters among experts in the fields concerned." The

252 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Secretary-General was requested " to invite in their individual capacity, experts nominated by (a) governments, (b) non-governmental scientific organizations concerned anid (c) interested specialized agencies, and, in addition, to invite a small number of experts with a scientific interest in population questions. In carrying out this provision, the Secretary-General shall determine, with the advice of the Preparatory Committee, the number of experts to be invited in each of the categories mentioned."
Before this decision was taken by the Economic and Social Council, the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, following the decision of the Economic and Social Council
in its resolution 389/C (XIII), had consulted
with various specialized agencies and nongovernmental organizations as to the sponsorship, scope, emphasis, size and possible financing of such a conference and had also addressed " an enquiry to governments in order to ascertain their views with respect to holding such a conference and the date, agenda and the composition of the conference if it is to be held."
Of the specialized agencies, W.H.O., UNESCO, F.A.O. and I.L.O. expressed interest in and support of the proposed conference:
The Director-General of W.H.O. wrote, ... . I should like you to know that I believe that this is a most important subject." Subsequently, the Executive Board of W.H.O. adopted the following resolution:
"The Executive Board having noted the report of the Director-General on the proposed population conference,
(i) Endorses the I)irector General's reply to the questionnaire sent out by the United Nations Department of Social Affairs which indicated W.H.O.'s desire to participate in the conference;
(2) Emphasizes the desirability of holding the conference no sooner than early I954 S0 that figures from I950 and 195I censuses will be available, and
(3) Requests the Director-General to proceed with the necessary planning for participation in this conference, in co-operation with the United Nations and otherinterested specialized agencies."
The Director-General of UNESCO, in a document submitted to the UNESCO Execu-

tive Board by which it was subsequently endorsed, stated that
" In the view of the Director-General, the world population situation is a matter of the utmost importance, closely related to UNESCO's work in fundamental education and social science. The results of such a population conference would be of interest to UNESCO, which should participate in it."
The Assistant-Director-General of the I.L.O. replied that
" The work of the International Labour Organization is closely affected by many aspects of population problems and policies. A world population conference would be useful in furthering our knowledge in this field...."
The Director-General of the F.A.O. pointed out that F.A.O. is much interested in the whole question of population, particularly from the point of view of the needs of the increasing world population for food, shelter and clothing, and from that of employment opportunities on farms, in forests, and in non-agricultural occupations. He stated that all these matters are of very direct concern to F.A.O. in the fields of nutrition, agriculture, forestry, and agricultural economics, for which they are responsible.
Up till June 3rd, I952, answers had been received from thirty-three governments. Of these thirty-three countries, thirty approved in principle the convening of a World Population Conference. Only three countries did not answer, or gave other answers. A large majority of counties preferred the sponsorship of the United Nations in collaboration with interested specialized agencies and nongovernmental organizations. To the question "Should the conference be primarily a scientific discussion of experts with the purpose of finding solutions for the current population
problems for the world ? " thirty countries.
answered "yes ". It has therefore been decided that the
world population conference under the auspices of the United Nations will meet for nine working days during the first half of September 1954. The International Union for the Scientific Study of Population, the International Labour Office, the Food and

UNITED NATIONS AND WORLD POPULATION

Agriculture Organization of the United taking into full consideration the population

Nations, the United Nations Educational aspects. To make ends meet, it is as necessary

Scientific and Cultural Organization, the to consider methods for control of the

World Health Organization and the Inter- number of mouths to feed as to consider

nAtional Bank for Reconstruction Develop- methods for production of food for those

ment will collaborate with -the United mouths. Nevertheless, F.A.O. has so far

Nations in. organizing the conference. A dodged these problems and has limited itself

preparatory committee has been established mainly to pointing out the more and more

in accordance with the resolution of the striking discrepancy between the rapidly

Economic and Social Council to assist the growing population and the tragic lagging

Secretary-General in formulating an agenda behind- in food production.

and in making the necessary arrangements It is impossible to plan or execute a health

before the conference. This preparatory policy-as W.H.O. is trying to do--without

committee consists of seventeen members, regard to the health aspects of the population

representatives of the United Nations, of problem, including such questions as heredi-

collaborating organizations and of some tary disease, congenital non-hereditary dis-

internationally recognized population experts ease, fertility, hygiene of childbirth, planned

serving in their individual capacities.

parenthood, abortion, etc. There is also

The first meeting of the preparatory little sense in saving millions of lives through

committee was held in Geneva in November combating deadly diseases and improving

I952, the second meeting in Rome in environmental sanitation, if the survivors

September I953. The preliminary list of are to die from hunger, or live the miserable

topics for discussion at the Conference will, life of under-nutrition or mal-nutrition.

of course, be studied with great interest. The Death control must be balanced by birth control.

list as well as the composition of the prepar- Nevertheless, the World Health Organization

atory committee can be found in documents has also, so far, dodged the problem and

E/CONF.I3/INF.I. July 24th, I952, pub- limited itself mainly to dealing with vital

lished by the United Nations Economic and statistics and a passive recording of the

Social Council.

development in population growth. In a

Looking into the tentative lists of topics similar way, UNESCO and I.L.O. have so far

to be discussed at the Conference, one is only expressed their interest in various

struck with the very wide scope: Mortality aspects of the population problem, but have

and fertility trends with special attention to not faced the problems squarely.

areas of lower death-rates and of higher Finally, it is impossible to plan or execute

death-rates, international migration, pros- an active and positive programme for peace

pects for future population changes, varia- and secutrity in this world withtut taking

tions in age composition, population in fully into consideration the unique and

relation to national resources and agricultural unprecedented situation in which the world

'development, in relation to capital forma- at large and most countries find themselves

tion, -investments and employment, social through the extremely rapid growth of

aspects of population changes, methods of populations in the last I50 to 200 years. It

demographic measurement and analysis, still does not seem to be generally realized

relation of population changes to distribu- that this explosive growth of population,

tion of genetic factors, legislation, admini- which, since i650, has produced an eight-

strative programmes and services relevant to fold increase in the number of Europeans and

population, etc.

their migratory descendants overseas, and

trebled the population of the rest of the

Conclusion

world, is one of the fundamental factors-

It is obviously impossible to plan or perhaps the most important single one-

execute a food policy-as F.A.G. is trying to contributing to the present picture of the

do-nationally or internationally-without world with its economic, social, and, as a

254 - THE EUGENICS REVIEW

consequence, political and military tension. Nevertheless, the United Nations itself
and its Economic and Social Council have so far mainly limited themselves to the purely demographic aspects of the population problem.
It is now high time to make the ostrich lift its head from the sand and face facts. All
efforts must therefore now be concentrated on making the First World Population

Conference in I954 a success, and on counteracting those forces which will again, undoubtedly, make every effort to dodge and smokescreen one of the basic problems of our day, and even more of the future.
Collection.of data is essential, but the time has now come when the peoples of the world
riglhtly ask for conclusions to be drawn from
the overwhelming evidence, and action to be taken accordingly.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION AND
INTER'NATIONAL LAW Founded in 1894

President: Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, Q.C., LL.D.

Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice DENNING

Editors: Professor F. H. LAWSON, D.C.L.

J. E. S. FAWCETT, D.S.C.

Honorary Secretary: E. H. WALL, T.D.

Honorary Treasurer: JOHN COHEN

i

Annual Subscription: THIRTY SHILLINGS for U.K. subscribers

INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW QUARTERLY. Articles, Notes,lNotices of Books, etc.
Address: NUFFIELD LODGE, REGENT'S PARK, LONDON, N.W.I

IN THE JANUARY I954 NUMBER OF
PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
Edited by Warder C. Allee, University of Florida EFFECTS OF OZONE ON ORGANISMS. By ARTHUR C. GIESE and ELEANOR CHRISTENSEN, Stanford University. MANIFESTATIONS OF VITAMIN BT (CARNITINE) DEFICIENCY IN THE LARVAE OF THE MEALWORM TENEBRIO
MOLITOR. By L. G. FRAENKEL and PEH-I CHANG, University of Illinois.
DE-SEMINATION OF FERTILIZED DROSOPHILA MELANOGASTER FEMALES. By RENZO E. SCOSSIROLI, Instituto,di Genetica,
Universita Pavia, Italy. MATE-KILLING IN PARAMECIUM AURELIA, VARIETY 8. By R. W. SIEGEL, University of Indiana and University of Pennsylvania.
PHXSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July and October Subscription $io per volume. Single copies $3. Canadian postage 2oc. Foreign postage 5oc.
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO
Euenies Review, Vol. XLV, No. 4

