MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN
His Contribution to Eugenics and the Society By Professor E. W. MACBRIDE, D.Sc., F.R.S.

THE present number of this Journal the physically incapable. He showed that

contains the Galton Lecture by our in natural species it was precisely this ele-

honorary president, Major Darwin; ment which was eliminated by the struggle

and it may possibly be his swan-song.

for existence, but that in human society

As one looks back over the eighteen years these groups of the unfit were not only pre-

of his active presidency a feeling of longing served but encouraged to propagate. It was

and regret surges up in the mind-a cer- against this propagation that Major Darwin

tainty that although future presidents may protested. The aim of the Eugenics Society

wisely govern the Society and contribute was then to endeavour to maintain a high

much to its influence none can ever exactly general average of physical and mental fit-

fill his place. " Later loves may right dear ness, not to aim at producing exceptional

prove yet they liken not first love." For people by forced mating. This reasoning

Major Darwin, though not the actual first went straight to the heart of the biologist,

president, was the first who, so to speak, although in the comfortable pre-war days,

reared the Society from babyhood and when it was first promulgated, the man in

sketched out for it a coherent policy. the street would not listen to it. But in the

I had made my first contact with the terrible war days that were approaching the

Society in I9I2, when Major Darwin and the merciless logic of events drove the lesson

then secretary, Mrs. Gotto, realizing that home. In I914, owing to the enterprise of

sound eugenic thought can only be built on the President and the Secretary, Dr. Binet,

a foundation of biological knowledge, estab- joint author with Dr. Simon of the famous

lished in the Imperial College a series of Simon and Binet Mental tests, was induced

afternoon classes in elementary biology for to come to London and deliver an address to

the instruction of eugenic neophytes. In the Society. This address drove home the

these classes I was asked to help. When I conviction of the inborn nature of mental

joined the Society in I9I3 I had very vague ability. During the war the ordinary

ideas about the aims of eugenics. At the monthly meetings of members were inter-

time I imagined that the ideal of eugenists mitted, and the whole energies of the Society

was to select healthy young men and women were directed to propaganda amongst ele-

and subsidize them to mate in order to pro- mentary school teachers. This propaganda

duce healthy children. Some such view was one of the most valuable and successful

had actually been adumbrated by Sir Francis Galton. But in June, 1913, I

efforts ever made by the Society. In I9I7 when the appalling losses of the very cream

heard the Presidential Address delivered by of our young manhood were causing deep

Major Darwin, and my whole view about apprehension to all thoughtful persons,

eugenics was changed, and I realized that it Major Darwin, who had served in Parlia-

was based-as indeed all science ought to be ment as member for a Midland constituency,

-on sound common sense.

headed a movement in the Society to ask for

In that address Major Darwin pointed out relief to income-tax payers in the task of

the burden upon society and the contamina- bringing up their children. Owing to the

tion of its blood, caused by its failures in the respect and affection with which he was

shape of mental deficients, criminals, and regarded by all political parties, this move

7

8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was successful. It is within the recollection ing in a warm bath of unreal, mawkish

of all the present members that another move emotion. We were behaving, as the Dean

in the same direction was initiated two or said, as if we had come into a fortune, not as

three years ago by Major Darwin; and this if we had just spent £8,ooo,ooo,ooo.

request, although at first refused by the Any society such as the Eugenics Society

Chancellor of the Exchequer, commanded whose object is social reform, is sure to

such a large amount of sympathy amongst attract to its ranks a number of extremists

the Conservative party that the Chancellor and faddists who seek its countenance for

had to yield.

their aims. As eugenics is necessarily con-

Eugenics, although by this time dis- nected with reproduction, people with mor-

sociated in the public mind from Galton's bid and abnormal views on sexual matters

ideas of forced mating, was still confused had a tendency to become vocal at its meet-

with irrelevant matters. In some quarters ings, and Major Darwin had a difficult, task

it was supposed to consist mainly in a cam- to restrain their effusions. He stood like a

paign against venereal disease, in others, rock for the sanctity of marriage and the

even in certain sections of the Society itself, validity of the ordinary rules of morality.

it was visualized as an endeavour to produce In so doing he was not only expressing the

more babes co4te-qui-co4te. Patiently, line soundness and cleanness of his own charac-

upon line, precept upon precept, Major Dar- ter, but he was also doing the greatest pos-

win pressed home the idea that the basis sible service to the Society, for if eugenics

of eugenics was just ordinary common here- is ever to gain wide influence, it must attract

dity, and that mental ability as well as phy- to itself the support of the ordinary respect-

sical fitness was inherited. There was no able Englishman. He also laboured with

point in producing more babies unless those great perseverance to induce scientific men

babies were of good stock. In all these to join the Society, so as to obtain for it the

efforts Major Darwin was warmly seconded prestige of a solid phalanx of scientific

by the Dean of St. Paul's, whose clear, in- opinion. In this he had only a moderate

cisive intellect cut through the false senti- amount of success. Though deeply re-

mentalism that luxuriated immediately after spected by scientific men, he was unable to

the war. Against the opposition of a cer- convince many of them that the Society was

tain section of the Society, Major Darwin purged of faddists. Even Dr. Bateson, the

induced the Dean to give what may almost prophet of Mendelism and the inventor of

be called his iconoclastic Galton Lecture of the word " genetics," could not be induced

I92o-a lecture afterwards incorporated in to join it. It will, we fear, require the still

his Outspoken Essays. This lecture nearer approach of schemes of fostering the

might be compared to a salutary cold douche unfit before scientific men in general rally

applied to the British public-then wallow- to our support.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 1.

