EUGENICS IN NORWAY

By C. B. S. HODSON, F.L.S.

T HE world at large has become aware -education in the form of publication of

of eugenic progress in Norway owing results-and finally formulation of legislative

to the passing of the Sterilization Law proposals for the practical realization of race

in May of this year. English eugenists, how- hygiene. Here one may deduce an important

ever, have known something of the long and point-namely, the necessity for such a com-

strenuous work which has preceded this bination in any fruitful attempt at lasting

achievement, for the EUGENICS REVIEW has human progress. Improvement based merely

been fortunate in receiving, from time to on theoretical ideals and ignoring the funda-

time, articles from Dr. Jon Alfred Mjoen mental natural laws which can only be

dealing with various aspects both of his own probed by careful scientific investigation,

work and of that achieved in his Institute, builds, if it builds at all, on sand; indeed,

the Winderen Laboratory.

more often than not such well-meant but ill-

It may be of interest to go more into detail founded attempts bring results widely dif-

in the history of the movement in Norway, ferent from those desired. On the other hand,

partly as a study of methods of achieving research isolated from practical problems and

effective eugenic propaganda; partly for the practical issues may, for a long time, give

demonstration which that history gives of neither tangible nor valuable results.

the value of interchange of thought between Another interesting point about the work

one country and another. Indeed, it would of the Laboratory in general is brought out

be a difficult task to disentangle the priority by the degree to which preliminary researches

of the eugenic movement, stage by stage, as on animals can and may be used to indicate

between Germany, Scandinavia and Eng- which lines of investigation on man can most

land; for while Francis Galton is the recog- conclusively be undertaken for the solution

nized founder of eugenics, the labours in of any particular problem.

Germany of Ploetz and his friends round In the following survey it will be noted that

about I900 precede the crystallization of the a number of subjects have been followed up

group of eugenic workers in England in I908, at the Winderen Laboratory, and later by

while in Norway it was in I906 that Dr. Norwegian Committees, which by English

Mjoen first set up the Winderen Biological eugenists would not be considered as falling

Laboratory.

strictly within their field. Although the

It should be interesting at some future date terms race hygiene and eugenics are some-

to get the precise story of the interchange of times taken as interchangeable, they cannot

ideas between Germany and Norway; the be so regarded in this particular instance.

veteran leaders, whose influence still figures Race hygiene for the Norwegians has meant

so large in the International Federation of more than eugenics pure and simple, in that

Eugenics, recall schemes laid before the it has covered a number of factors influencing

foundation of the Laboratory for an inter- maternity and the healthy life of unborn

national meeting, and an informal gathering children, as well as embracing those factors

took place in Germany prior to the London which concern a remoter posterity, namely,

Congress in I9I2, which ranks as the first heredity and selection. Indeed, in the brief

International Eugenics Congress. From the outline of the work at Winderen which was

first the Winderen Laboratory made biology published for its twenty-five year jubilee by

of man the pivotal point of its work. It has Professor Dr. 0. Reche, the objectives are

combined in a happy way biological research described as being heredity and race hygiene.

41

42 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE 1908 PROGRAMME

making the merchant responsible for with-

It was in I908 that Dr. Mjoen made public holding intoxicants from certain categories the programme of measures aimed at race in the community, the Mjoen plan, as it has

hygiene under the following headings:
I. Negative race hygiene (measures for diminishing undesirable racial elements).
(a) Permanent segregation of recidivists in working colonies.

been called, taxes alcoholic drinks according to their content of alcohol, so that from a
small tax on light wines and beers a steeply graded tax leads up to an almost prohibitive price for spirits.

(b) Sterilization of the unfit.

THE CONSULTATIVE EUGENICS

2. Positive race hygiene (measures aimed COMMISSION

at the increase of valuable racial elements). The eugenic section of this programme of

(a) Selective internal colonization with I908 was considered by a commission which

schemes for diminishing the movement grew out of the London Congress. In Paris

from country to town. Agricultural this commission in I9I3 accepted the pro-

organization independent of urban gramme as a basis for eugenic endeavour.

centres. Decrease of rates and taxes Subsequently, the Norwegians succeeded in

according to family.

forming a group known as the Consultative

(b) Maternal insurance. Introduction of Eugenics Commission of Norway. In addi-

human biology in school and univer- tion to eminent Norwegians, other Scan-

sity curricula, with discouragement of dinavians have served from time to time on

the tendency for the education of girls this commission, notably, up to the time of

to approximate to that of boys by his death, Professor Johannsen of Copen-

laying stress on preparation for mother- hagen and Professor Herman Lundborg.

hood. Recently Professor Herribert Nilsson of

(c) Centrally controlled propaganda in Lund has replaced Professor Johannsen.

knowledge of the renewal, health and This Commission has been of importance

nutrition of the population, with not merely for Norway and Scandinavia, but

bureaux for giving information on for the International Eugenics movement.

questions of racial hygiene.

It has attracted, one after another, a number

3. Prophylactic race hygiene (protection of the unborn child).
(a) A campaign against racial poisons, venereal diseases, narcotics, etc.
(b) Measures to make these part of the functions of public health control.
(c) Certificates of health before marriage, including the discouragement of marriage with widely unrelated races.
(d) Biological assessment of the whole population. Introduction of individual registration including health data.
(e) Immigration control based on biological standards, with powers to prevent admission.

of eminent Scandinavians, and the difficult work of careful periodic revision of the practical programme was left largely to that
group. Between the International Congresses in New York in I92I and I932, this
Committee secured comments and critiques
of the Norwegian programme from practically all the outstanding eugenists of Europe and America and published their opinions as a commentary. This is a document of very considerable interest, giving cross-section references to the opimnons of those whose researches and studies, either in eugenics itself or in kindred sciences, entitles them to be heard with attention, and we believe that not a little of the favourable

Certain sections of this programme received public opinion which has resulted in recent

full development somewhat later, in particu- eugenic legislation in Norway is due to the

lar the control of migration and the drink existence of this Consultative Commission.

laws. As for the latter, whilst Sweden has The original members were undoubtedly wise

tried to put down excessive alcoholism by in securing membership of lawyers, social

EUGENICS IN NORWAY

43

economists, and men of affairs as well as data incorporated in the identity book

medical men and biologists. It is only by (Kennbok) and more effective biological

such co-operation that sound practical mea- control of migration. It is noteworthy that

sures can be outlined, while on the other hand the Sterilization Bill was introduced by a

enactments supported by eminent people of cousin of Dr. Mjoen, representing the agri-

such different standings are more readily cultural interests of his country, and was

accepted than the findings of scientists passed with one sole opposing vote.

unsupported by those with political know- The researches at the Winderen Labora-

ledge. tory have turned mainly in two directions;

CONFLICTS OF OPINION
Acceptance of eugenic measures was not
won without prolonged and sometimes acri-
monious opposition, proceeding not only from the uninstructed laity but from scien-
tists as well. There would be no special interest or profit in studying in detail the phases of the conflict, but one aspect should be mentioned, namely, that the group which
has worked most keenly for contraception
and for the legalization of abortion has, in the main, been in the opposite camp to the
eugenists proper. Norway does not stand alone in this; the same type of cleavage has appeared in the Eastern United States and has cropped up from time to time in the course of the German movement. England has perhaps shown best that such opposition is not inherent in the two positions when they are properly understood. Here we have come nearer to realizing that contraception is
primarily a question of maternal hygiene, to be wisely used for health in pregnancy in the mother, which naturally contributes in its turn to the well-being of the offspring. Such health measures are outside eugenics in the strict sense, but may be a potent practical ally. Birth-control has been proved to be of little use for the avoidance of pregnancy amongst the physically and mentally un-
healthy. On the other hand, its mere existence need not endanger the size of families amongst those naturally well endowed for parenthood where a sufficient eugenic incen-
tive exists.

on the one side the heredity of intellectual
capacity, and on the other the results of race crossing. Dr. Mjoen selected music as the chief subject of his psychological research, the first task being conceived as the isolation of basic faculties. In his earliest researches
published on musical faculty, this analysis isolated ten factors. Later these were further
subdivided or added to, and now number
twenty. Some of these are more definitely
diagnostic than others, but the value of them all for genetic studies is undoubted. A thousand families or groups of relatives cGvering two to four generations have now been investigated from the Winderen Laboratory, running to more than ten thousand individuals. The work has demonstrated the course of each particular faculty measured, so that
the study does not merely demonstrate inheritance of musical ability in general, but the type of inheritance for each of this considerable number of factorial capacities.
It was these studies which gave an early corroboration, in fact, to the Mendelian hypothesis that any character having mul-
tiple factors will be shown to be closely cor-
related with the family as a whole, including the collaterals; which is true to such an extent that the heredity of offspring should never be assessed and never can be assessed, with any truth, from that of the parents apart from their own relatives. It may be superfluous to recall that the faculties often found in musical ability include not merely some aspects of intelligence, but those temperamental or emotional qualities which

RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

we should speak of as inspiration, imagina-

With the passing of the Sterilization Bill tion and creative ability.

this spring, there remains but little of the
Norwegian programme which still awaits

RACE-CROSSING STUDIES

introduction. The two main outstanding In race-crossing studies the Winderen

points are personal registration with health Laboratory has shown the same prevision in

44 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

instituting a careful study to make clear the diseases. Hand grip also showed greater

fundamentals of the problem before embark- variation in the hybrids.

ing on particular research. Hybridization of The question of mental stability or insta-

widely different varieties of rabbit were made bility was not disregarded, but this difficult

and a careful study of the hybrids was under- diagnosis has not been fully worked out.

taken. These showed blending of antagonis- Mjoen suggests that hybridization amongst

tic characters was not to be expected, the races showing great similarity may have con-

hybrids presenting a mosaic of the parental points. Part of the bony skeleton may be inherited from one race, part from another, and physiological and psychological aberrations showed similar disharmonies in glandular and other tissues. When study of the offspring of Norwegian Lapps mating with Norwegian Nordics was undertaken, it was towards such indications of disharmony that the research was directed. Physical measurements of 6oo Nordics, 6oo Lapps and

siderable value, in that the aptitudes of one superimposed upon those of another may give very valuable combinations, particularly of psychological faculty, so long as the somatic and physiological kinship between the two is sufficiently close for there to be no
question of disharmony. The Winderen Laboratory has been a
training ground for a small but distinguished body of students, scientific and medical, of

300 hybrids showed the following points: human biology and research method, and it

wider variation amongst the hybrids in is to be hoped that these happy traditions

stature, facial symmetry, lung capacity and will, in the future, continue not only for the

skeletal structure, a higher incidence of good of Norway but of students of eugenics

diabetes and a loss of immunity from certain the world over.

CHARACTER AND PERSONALITY
An International Psychological Quarterly
Edited by ROBERT SAUDEK
Contents of March 1935 issue
Psycho-Sociological Problems of a Minority Group, by KURT LEWIN (Cornell University). Twin Investigations in the U.S.S.R., by S. G. LEVIT (Medico-Biological Institute, Moscow). Does Drawing Skill show in Handwriting? By JAN MELOUN. Character Types, by MAX DESSOIR (Berlin University). The Conversation as a Basis for Judgment of Personality, by T. H. PEAR and R. H.
MANSON (Manchester University).
The Development Test as Applied to Infants, by H. HETZER and A. BRAUN (Educational Academy, Elbing).
Congresses, News, Reviews.
Subscription, 7s. 6d. per annum; single copies, 2s.
LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD.
Eugencs leview, Vol. NVII, No. 1.

