ANIMAL HYBRIDS

And Another Method of Progressive Breeding By ELDON MOORE
(From the Imperial Bureau of Animal Genetics, Edinburgh.)

B REEDING humans to be of use to stance of heterosis in Drosophila under well-

themselves in a complex and variable controlled conditions which allowed of no

environment, and breeding livestock other interpretation. After carefully

to be of use to their owners in comparatively observing the longevity of two types, the

simple and uniform conditions, are two very vigorous wild Drosophila and a common

different things. Most such livestock are, pathological mutation with vestigial wings,

to begin with, pathological exaggerations, he crossed the two and obtained an F1

quite unfitted to survive at large and on generation whose average longevity was

their own merits, and with some one or two markedly superior to that of both parent

special characteristics developed to a stocks.

grotesque degree.

Mean age at death: Wild, 44 days; Ves-

There is, moreover, another important tigial, 14 days; and F1, 5I days.

difference. The popular belief, mentioned He continued a very pretty experiment

by Miss Fleming, that human hybrids in- by crossing the F1 both inter se and back to

herit the worst characters of both stocks, the parent stocks, and obtained clear-cut

has this foundation in common observation: segregation in the F2's. Not only did the

inter-racial crossing is more frequent among characters of normal and vestigial wings

degenerate types than among normal or segregate out in due proportions, but with

above-average people-whose pride of race, them went the longevity appropriate to the

race prejudice if you like, tends to keep two types: normal-winged flies reverted to

their line pure-and the offspring, conse- the length of life of their normal-winged

quently, do not have much chance to inherit grandparents, and vestigial-winged to that

anything except poor qualities. Among of the vestigial-winged grandparents. Since

animals, on the contrary, there are not he found, by amputation experiments, that

usually many degenerate specimens, while mere absence of wings in itself was no bar

the man who is deliberately making an ex- to a long life, one must conclude either that

periment in crossing tends to choose his best, the mutant gene was genetically or physio-

not his worst, animals as parents.

logically linked with other characters of

But after allowing for these differences of importance, or else that a whole complex

detail, the phenomena of hybridization of characters sometimes tend to segregate

appear to have certain common principles out together. The latter hypothesis is in-

throughout the organic kingdom; and the teresting in view of what I shall later have

first of these is heterosis, or hybrid vigour. to say about hybridization in the pig.

Miss Fleming's data do not indicate how Hybrid vigour has for long been a com-

marked this is among humans, and I do not monplace, though unexplained, observation

know what foundation in fact there is for among practical animal husbandmen. The

the common belief that the leaders of social prevailing genetical explanation to-day is

revolutions are nearly always hybrids-such that valuable qualities tend to be dominant

men as Eugene Chen. But Pearl, in his to their opposites of less value, and that

Rate of Living,* records a very striking in- first-cross hybrids therefore exhibit a

* Pearl, Raymond. The Rate of Living. London, double set of useful characters. Professor

I928. University Press.

Crew feels that there may be more in it

27I

'272 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

than this, and that the rationale may ulti- -or, rather, he used to import-our ' im.-

mately have to be sought in the bio-chemis- proved ' European breeds, which promptly

try of the cell-since one usually notices succumb to disease, mineral deficiency, lack

that the more violent the cross the greater of water, native husbandry, and the rest. So

is the vigour in the hybrid.*

the usual practice now is to import bulls,

However that may be, the experience of which are kept in nursing homes, so to

animal breeders certainly does not confirm speak, and only used to cross with picked

the view that hybrids inherit the worst quali- native cows. Usuallv (though there have

ties of both stocks.

been disappointing exceptions) the results

The prevailing theory that hybrid vigour are good, the F,'s inheriting the hardiness

is due to a mosaic of dominant characters, and resistance of their dams and a high

seems to be confirmed by the cattle hybridiz- degree of the milking qualities of their im-

ing experiments which have been made for ported sires' dams.

many years past in most of the tropical and

sub-tropical parts of the Empire. While

conditions and types of animals vary, of HYBRID VARIABILITY

course, they all have much in common. The So far, so good. It is in the next genera-

native cattle are usually small and either of tion, if these are crossed inter se, that the

the humped, zebu type, deriving originally disappointment comes, for the resulfing

from India (which some authorities, how- animals, according to most reports, inherit

ever, dispute), or else of a type that approxi- the worst qualities of both grandparental

mates to that of the newly named " West stocks. But the reports are vague, and the

African Shorthorn." In either case, they men who make them are not usually geneti-

are, as I have said, small and, to the eye of cists. There can be little doubt that what

an English farmer, hopeless in conformation actually occurs is rather different-a very

for either meat or milk. In fact, their milk high range of variation, some animals show-

yield is so low and so dependent on the ing one combination of qualities and some

natural suckling of the calf that they are showing other combinations, which is cnly

practically useless as dairy animals.

to be expected as the various grandparental

The advantages of these animals may be qualities segregate.

summed up in the two words hardiness and resistance. They can forage for themselves,

Consequently, the practice has grown up of going no further than the first generation,

go for long periods without water or trek and, therefore, of continually importing

considerable distances to it; mineral defici- fresh bulls to breed one single generation

ency does not seem to affect them very of desirable animals. It is a pity, for it

much, and they are comparatively un- means that these husbandmen, regardless of

harmed by the native's methods of hus- genetic probability, just stop short of the

bandry. Above all, they have a high resist- point of building up herds whose desirable

ance not only to the various tick-borne dis- qualities are permanent. There seems little

eases-piroplasmosis, East Coast fever, and the like-but also even to trypanosomiasis

doubt that out of the range of disappointing F2's could be picked one or two animals

(carried by the tsetse fly), rinderpest, and foot-and-mouth disease. In short, they are

possessing at least moderate milk yield combined with native hardiness and resistance.

not ' pathological ' specimens like some of A few such animals could be used as the

our own milk and beef breeds, but animals progenitors of a herd which, with careful

that have been naturally selected, through culling from generation to generation, would

many generations, for survival. But the incoming English agricultural
officer wants meat and milk, and he imports

be naturally hardy and naturally milk yielding. The problem should prove still easier if the expectation is fulfilled of certain

* Usually, too, such extreme hybrids are also observations of Mr. A. D. Buchanan Smith.

sterile, like the mule, for reasons not yet explained. It seems highly likely that one of the factors

ANIMAL HYBRIDS

273

for milk yield-probably that which differ- nition of the principle is evident in the

entiates medium from high yield-is sex- methods, a century and more ago, of the

linked, carried in the X-chromosome. If so, " great improvers " of English cattle and

it is not only transmitted from mother to sheep.

daughter, but also from mother to son to

granddaughter-though never through two consecutive males. Also, since the factor

CREATING " CATTALOS "

is thus isolated and well marked, it should This principle, too, is guiding those re-

be possible by continual back-crossing to the sponsible for a queer experiment in Canada,

native stock-and, of course, selection-to where, in Buffalo Park, an attempt is in

breed a herd purely native in all qualities progress to breed beef cattle that can with-

except those governed by. the X-chromo- stand bitter weather, and forage for them-

somes.

selves under range conditions and in snow.

Crosses were first made between domestic

COMBINING DIFFERENT QUALITIES
I have gone rather deep-for this REVIEW -into this purely technical agricultural

cattle-mainly beef Hereford and AberdeenAngus-and bison bulls. It was attended by much maternal and infant mortality; and, though the surviving female hybrids were

matter, because it illustrates the fundamental genetics of hybridization. The organ-

fertile when crossed back to cattle or bison, the few males were sterile.

ism, man or beast, is a product of the interaction of a large number of separate genetical factors, any two of which, provided they are not linked in the same chromosome, can and do separate in the breeding process. Miss Fleming is talking sound genetical sense when she suggests combining " the

Much the same difficulties attended some earlier experiments, which did, however,
produce an occasional fertile male, and, by crossing these with female hybrids, " cattalos "-a hybrid word itself which offends the sense of one who likes linguistic purity of race.

Nordic nose and the common sense of the half-caste's father, and the dark skin, musical ability, and lesser tendency to endocrine and nervous disorder of the coloured mother"-if it be granted that all these qualities are genetic in nature. On the other hand, the factors of different grades or kinds
of the same character cannot be combinede.g. high and low milk yield, nor, probably, the phlegmatic and the ' temperamental ' temperament. Or, rather, they can be combined in the F1, with a degree of dominance,

The next step was to import the Asiatic yak, which crossed successfully with both bison and domestic cattle, bridging the biological gulf between the species; and then to make various experiments in crossing the different hybrids, in back-crossing, and so on. It is not possible yet to say much more: the hybrids are queer, uncouth-looking beasts, in which the white face of the English Hereford, the beef qualities of the Aberdeen-Angus, and the hardiness of the bison are noticeable.

one way or the other, and-in human beings -diverting results! But in the next breeding process the factors responsible for the two characters will separate.
This, the existence, not of unit characters,
but of separate unit factors and their segregation, are the essence of Mendelism; and it is exemplified alike in the variation shown by the grandchildren of the European x native cattle crosses and in the varieties of colouring and temperament exhibited by the
children of mulattoes. An instinctive recog-

One series of experiments on pigs is interesting, since it illustrates the fact that hybridizing is always an experimental process, likely to yield unforeseen results. Simpson first, and since him several others, crossed domesticated pigs with the wild European boar; and here, at the Animal Breeding Research Department, there are two specimens of the progeny of the domestic pig crossed with the semi-wild New Hebridean pig (imported and lent by Dr. J. R. Baker). All experiments show the

274 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

same result in the progeny-neither the are combined in the same individual, com-

worst nor the best qualities of either stock pensate for their allelomorphs' defects.

are shown, but the majority of the qualities As I have tried to indicate, hybridizing is

of one stock, the wild, are almost completely a gamble, a mixing of unknown ingredients

dominant. It is a remarkable instance of in the first cross, with quite unpredictable

' pre-potency,' to use the old farmer's term, segregation and re-combination in subse-

and it is extremely difficult to tell the hybrid quent generations.

children from their wild parent-" a large There is one other method of breeding-

litter all much resembling the wild boar, selection. One finds that in those parts

having his colour [russety-grey, agouti], of the Empire where hybridizing and first-

snout, eyes, ears, length and size of legs, crossing are the practice, the native cattle

tail, shape of body, size, wildness, and exhibit, as would be expected, a high range

characteristic movements." To these may of variation among themselves. It seems

be added fertility, for a Tamworth x Wild more than probable, as many authorities

Boar female gave four pigs in a litter, which have declared, that the desired qualities

is about the same as that of the wild type, could be bred by pure selection; and they

and a long way from the normal ten-eleven would certainly be more stable and per-

of the Tamworth.

manent than those of even the fifth or sixth

generation of a cross. It is true that selec-

WILD x DOMESTIC CROSSES

tion is sometimes a slower process-though no slower than an unsuccessful gamble-but

The papers of Simpson and Spillman also it is surer, and for this reason. Adaptation

hint-no more-that in the F2 generation to surroundings-which is surely the most

all these different characters behaved like important quality for any being, if you

one pair of allelomorphic units, and segre- grant that a live dog is better than a dead

gated out in the I: 2: i ratio. As with the lion-is the function of a complex of quali-

flies, it is difficult to believe that all these ties, slowly built up by generations of

widely differing characters are physiologic- natural selection. It is easier to take that

ally linked (e.g. by some endocrine factor), as the basis, and to add by further selection

while a genetical linkage so wholesale is no the one or two particular qualities desired,

easier to digest. Body build and body than to take milk or beef qualities as the

colour, hair form, texture, and colour, type foundation and add the complex of adaptive

of bone and length of limb, type of face, characters. Pure selection has developed

snout, ear, and eye, health and vigour, good dairy cows from the zebu type

metabolism, habits, disposition, fertility- (Sahiwal) and one of the finest horses in the

these are all, apparently, carried in the same world-the only pedigreed all-purpose horse

portmanteau! It may be, indeed, that where -the French-Canadian, an animal which

the types crossed are widely separated, there is a physiological, a biochemical, incompatibility, which causes the two sets of chromosomes in the hybrid's gonads to part
company like two armies. Dominance is really a problem in physio-
logy, but the ' pre-potency ' of the wild type
may reasonably be explained by resort to the genetical ' presence-and-absence ' theory. The type and characters of the domestic pig appear to be due to the loss of

could survive at large and on its own merits. To the biologist-if he can forget his own
private race prejudices-human hybrids are
only interesting experimental material,
which generally confirm his observations of
other organisms. America, that land of social experimentation, which is always producing such amazing and unstable mixtures of hiuman qualities, is a good example both of the interest and the gamble. But, with-
out prejudice, it seems to me that we have here in this country enough good stock to

certain genetic qualities which are present choose from without overmuch experiment-

in the wild hog, and which, when the two ing in the dark.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 4.

