EUGENICS AND HUMAN ECOLOGY*

By G. C. L. BERTRAM, M.A., Ph.D.

Introduction
OR thirty-five years this Galton Lecture has been given annually in memory of that great man who both coined the term Eugenics and was this Society's first President. To be included in the long list of Galton lecturers, many of them persons of great distinction, makes me feel honoured above my deserts. I hope I may not fail in an effort to stimulate thoughts which will further the aims of Galton's society, our Eugenics Society, whose newly reissued " Statement of Objects " must surely spread far our eugenic ideals. My paper is divided into two main parts. In the first partEugenics and HumanEcology are defined and related, and then the peculiarities of our own species are described, followed by an insight into the complexity of our inter-relationship with our environment. The second part of the paper then deals with the actual numbers of mankind, with the concept of optimal populations, the problem of race and the differences between individuals. FinIally, something is said of the difficulty of the task of Eugenists.
Eugenics and Human Ecology
I attempt this afternoon to co-ordinate and relate the two sciences, concepts or call them what you will, of Eugenics and Ecology, both of them directly concerning our own species. Further, I want to orientate Eugenics within a still wider setting, and to do that with a particular perspective. For those who have perhaps kept themselves too rigidly confined in their interests, first I will provide brief definitions of the two terms, which cover ourselves and our surroundings in the broadest terms. " Eugenics " Galton defined in I904 as the " science which deals with all those influences that improve the inborn qualities of a race; also with those that
* The Galton Lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on February i6th, I95I.

develop them to the utmost advantage."
Thought quickly shows how wide then is the
scope of the Eugenist.
For Ecology I may quote Ernst Haeckel's
definition in I870. " By ecology we mean the
body of knowledge concerning the economy
of nature-the investigation of the total
relations of the animal both to its inorganic
and to its organic environment; including,
above all, its friendly and inimical relations
with those animals and plants with which it comes directly or indirectly into contact-in a word, ecology is the study of all those
complex inter-relations referred to by Dar-
win " (Galton's first cousin) " as the conditions of the struggle for existence." Human Ecology is, of course, the study of Ecology as
thus defined but in relationship to a single species.
From these definitions alone the linkage
between Eugenics and the Ecology of our
own species must be obvious: but in addition it must be clear that Eugenics encompasses not only knowledge but a purpose as well-to improve the inborn qualities of people-while Human Ecology consists of knowledge alone. This eugenic objective can only be achieved in a favourable ecological surround whose study includes
what are now commonly termed the social sciences. Of course, a large part of the personal environment is filled with other members of one's own species, and the kicks and kindnesses of social life are comparable with the wind of climate and the wine of bodily satisfaction.
The width of both Eugenics and Ecology, like geography too, causes them inevitably to suffer some scorn from those of narrower disciplines. To such, Eugenics is a bastard brother to genetics and Ecology the unwanted child of zoology. But such emotions are of no real import and spring up in minds which are wedded to clear-cut categories and advance in narrow fields.
Let me remind you of the analogy of the photograph, which is each one of us. The

II

I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Eugenist is primarily concerned with the but four generations to a century, so that

exposure, while the Ecologist keeps the shop the steps of evolution would seem not to be

where the film goes for development. Care capable of falling faster than once every 25

in development may produce a fair result years. Thus the evolution of our species,

from a bad exposure, and even faulty compared with most, is fast measured

development may yet permit a fine first directly in time; it is racing if measured in

image to appear of worth. But best results generations, between which the evolutionary

can come only from a superior first image steps must, in fact, be unusually large. Does

allowed to grow under the most skilled this encourage, or stimulate despair ?

development. Image or genes, development Compared with all other species our few-

or environment, are similar pairs, the first ness of off-spring is so marked, our parental

attracting the Eugenist in greater degree, care so great, our personal development so

the second the Social Scientist or Human slow. On a variety of grounds, anatomical

Ecologist. Regrettably, however, while the and otherwise, some have likened us to

Eugenist is actively aware and interested, at feetal apes, with so slow a development that

least in some measure, in both sides of the we become sexually mature while still

field, it seems rare for the Human Ecologist possessing various foetal or at least juvenile

or Social Scientist to display any real attributes compared with other mammals.

enthusiasm for the genes, and commonly too Our heads and brains are remarkably spheri-

little interest even in the nourishment of the cal and youthfully large in proportion, and

image.

our cranial axis remains at right angles to our

long axis. There is connection here with our

Peculiarities of our Species

upright posture, the freeing of our forelimbs from the needs of locomotion, and the

Now, apart from a natural self-regard, we presence of binocular vision. We even

are indeed a most interesting species to study parasitize cattle so that we can enjoy milk

-we are so peculiar.

long past infancy.

Though it has not always been so, we are We are generalized mammals, and we are

now, in fact, by far the most abundant of the large. That is of great importance. Our large

larger mammals, indeed of animals of any size and relatively unspecialized form, simple

kind above a quite small size. What species, pentadactyl limbs and upright carriage,

next in size to man, can show 2,000 million allow us physically, as well as mentally, to

individuals living at the same time ? Can the outstrip our fellow mammals. Puny our

rats do so ? Perhaps the cod can. But both bodies are not. True we cannot swim like

are far smaller than ourselves. Again, what seals or run like deer, but in a general

other large species is still increasing in integration we surpass all other mammals in

numbers following quadruplication over the our ability to traverse at reasonable speeds

last 300 years ?

a great variety of different terrains-we

Take another aspect of our peculiarity. It swim, we run, we climb-water, ice, rocks,

is evident that the appearance and evolution earth, trees, all can be surmounted. The

of human-kind is a phenomenon of the recent next most skilful large mammal I believe to

past: we are a sprouting twig at the top of be the polar bear, a swimmer, runner and

the phylogenetic tree. Man to-day is climber of real ability.

markedly different from his ancestors of Man's body is tough and adaptable, and

times not distant by geological reckoning. that, linked to a superior brain, brings him

Yet evolution within a species or group, so to a position of dominance which is remark-

we believe, takes place by little steps or able. It is salutary to remember, however,

changes which can occur only in that that in shaping the topography of the earth

ephemeral period of maturation and fusion of it is the most humble of animals, the

the gametes. With us, since we are such slow Foraminifera and the corals, which have the

breeders by common comparison, there are greatest and most lasting influence.

EUGENICS AND HUMAN ECOLOGY

But in many other ways we follow the normal animal pattern, in our bodily appetites and in the guiding and controlling factors of our lives. Our individual growth and population growth follow the normal
curves: till very recently our populations were controlled in the usual way by densitydependent factors: the factors of mortality, readjusted as they may be by medical philanthropy and war, are throughout most of the world of standard type.

biological and esthetic too. We cultivate, we modify by breeding our domestic animals and plants, we exert various degrees of
control upon some of our crop pests and diseases and upon some of those which
afflict directly our own persons. All of us peculiar beings, each with his own
personal gene content, personality and aspirations, are set in this vast ecological frame to some of whose facets I have drawn fleeting attention.

Interaction with Environment

Total and Optimal Populations

Of course, the interaction between ourselves I have now outlined, as it were, some and our environment has very many facets, features of the back-cloth. In the foreground
depending on factors which are multitudin- leaps ever upwards the advancing figure of
ous. Some of these factors are under our world population. The reasons for this
own control or could be under our own control leaping are well known to you and fortunately
if we so willed, while others are quite beyond are becoming daily more widely appreciated.
human interference though sometimes pre- That, of course, is the state of the total of our
dictable. What is controllable or controlled human species-a net annual increase which in respect of one group or section of human- is estimated to surpass 20 million each year. kind is not necessarily so in respect of The differing position of the many sub-
another: the incidence of smallpox in divisions of human-kind in their individual Britain and in Arabia is an example; so is the population cycles just magnifies the comdiffering availability of breadgrain to a rich plexity, increases the dangers of partial and to a poor importing country. Mortality understanding and multiplies the difficulty by thunderbolts is never likely either to be of solution. predictable or controllable, while certain We live to-day in a strange medley of fastaspects of the weather are already to some increasing numbers on the world scale and of degree predictable and may one day be diminishing replacement rates in advanced controllable. The factors in this interaction nations. Excess numbers, backwardness, between ourselves and our environment are, hunger and disease glare across the gulf at in fact, astonishing in their abundance, technological advance, plenty and medical variety and degree of controllability. For philanthropy which are, in large measure,
example, the further melting of polar ice, both their cause and their cure. Ignorance, probably inevitable and uncontrollable, and lack of a vision wide enough to encompass could raise world sea levels by another the whole, leads to emotional conflict beIOO feet or more, overwhelming a large tween groups, to optimistic reliance on this proportion of the population of the earth. or that single panacea and to special pleadThe changing sources and control of energy ing. Advanced nations with recent low have repercussions which may seem over- replacement rates seek selected migrants whelming. The social results of the spread of from other nations equally forward in the potato and of television are alike remark- diminished reproduction, and do so for able. In this general connection, further, we perfectly good reasons of compatibility and should note our influence, which could tradition, while spuming the excess hordes largely be controlled and rationalized, on the from spawning India. Kindly people from
world's flora and fauna; we should note advanced nations diminish, with the weapons both the spoliation and the conservation and of modem prophylactic medicine, the morproduction, with all their aspects, material, tality of the backward at speeds excessive in

I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

comparison with the slow increase of food production. Philanthropy and economics, with opposed systems of distribution of resources, vie with one another for the control of the stomachs of the masses.
Here, indeed, is a medley of forces and factors quite capable of confusing all but those whose vision is wider than the average. This is the pudding from which the plum must be extracted; this is the brew from which the essence must be distilled. The trouble is that our peculiarity, or more honestly called our stupidity, so far has never allowed most people to realize for our own species what is so abundantly obvious for both wild animals and domestic animals. So far few recognize the validity of an optimal population for lving within any particular environmental framework. Even when the concept of an optimum has been achieved, rarely indeed does that concept extend beyond the single criterion of food or standard economics. Yet within any particular environmental framework there must be in fact an optimal population relative to whatever criterion is held supreme, be it economic, nutritional, educational or spiritual. Further, the optimum may perhaps vary, even within the same environmental framework and with the same priority list of desirable criteria, according to the gene content of the particular population in question. For example, there may well be fundamental genetic differences concerned with gregariousness: there may be real differences here between, shall we say, Norwegian farmers and Levantine labourers. The complexity of such concepts does not detract from their reality.
An Aim Essential
The theoretical discussion of optimal populations is, however, somewhat barren. It can become pregnant with understanding so soon as we attempt to integrate the desirable criteria and express them as an agreed aim. As a precursor to actual agreement I have suggested an aim which should surely achieve some wide acceptance. Surely our goal should be a state of affairs in which every

individual shall have the opportunity to develop to the full, in the service of his fellows, all the talents with which he is endowed, physical, mental and spiritual. When that is our aim we shall soon realize that the optimal population which will allow approach towards it by no means necessarily will involve immensely high standards of material well-being, and one may guess that population density will be moderate. Remember the benefit which so many achieve through periods of solitude in the waste places of the earth.
Even when the validity of this line of reasoning is accepted, that is not the end of the story; very far from it, for, as I have said, the gene content of populations, even populations of equal size, varies very greatly. But if only a general aim could be consciously appreciated, a general aim which will allow within it some difference of more closely conceived or doctrinal aim based on differing religion, then some progress could be made. Yet any progress will be beset by immense problems and I propose to deal, in a moment, briefly with three of them.
Another Human Peculiarity
First of all, however, it is necessary to remind you that there are still further important peculiarities of our species which so far I have deliberately left aside. Alone we have speech and are capable of passing experience from one to another in writing; alone we have a highly developed consciousness of self, a moral sense, even a sense of destiny, a free will and an aim, though that often is blurred by circumstances. Finally, we can deliberately control our reproduction. That is of immense and saving importance. In contraceptive practice we have a means of directing the future for good or ill.
The Control of Numbers
I said I would deal with three particular problems: these must be solved if we are ever to approach the aim I have suggested as likely to be acceptable to most. The first of these problems concerns the control of

EUGENICS AND HUMAN ECOLOGY

I5

total population and eventual limitation to
optimal ranges.
I do not understand its origin but there
does seem to- afflict so many people, even the
most educated, a distaste amounting to a wilful blindness even for the recognition of population dynamics and the inevitability of change. Yet if one seeks a worthy goal,
even if one seeks a less worthy goal such as a
maximum of material well-being alone, then almost at once, if the mind is not peculiarly blinkered, surely must come the appreciation of the reality of an optimal population for a culture group, an economic conglomeration, a nation or the world. It should be equally evident, if the mind is allowed to roam and
possess and appreciate the evidence, that
optimal populations do not appear by magic, by waiting, or by unchecked reproduction but can only emerge by taking thought and finally appropriate action. At once, as so
often in man's affairs, comes then the
problem of personal freedom and the free
expression of personal conscience. Man
reaches his greatest stature by the right use of his individual free will. Self-imposed restraint is the highest expression of freedom-the use of free will to seek a con-
sciously appreciated goal in the general interest. This is true in all things, including the multiplication of our species. It concerns intimately any approach to those optimal numbers in the several parts of the world, or the world as a whole, which shall eventually allow the full development of all the attributes of all men. It is a far cry, and crisis in numbers is upon us now.
How much, it may properly be asked, do the crises in political and public affairs, within nations and between nations, derive from the unconscious but perhaps inevitable
repercussions of unsuitable population densities within the present frame of life. High population density in itself brings great and seemingly inevitable changes in the behaviour of lemmings, and even in the anatomy of locusts: it may be so in ourselves too,
and those changes cannot be considered desirable. That remains a fascinating if future field for research. Meanwhile, to the
west we have the seeming leaders of mankind,

far advanced in their own population cycles and turning a blind eye to the reality of the concept of optimal population, and to the east the reproductive torrent in mighty spate. Gerald Heard has described it thus:
Few sights so quickly staunch humanitarianism and stun humanism as the mere sight of too many human beings-just seeing how many human beings there actually are. The spate of life proliferating along the Ganges: the fecund density which spreads in China like a fungous growth mantling even the broad rivers themselves; there the actual triumph of the life force, the actual biological achievement of Homo sapiens, stir neither loyalty nor hope.... There is an awkward disregarded balance between quantity and quality. Not only does gold's value depend on its rarity: it is the same, at base, with bread. Beyond sufficiency, plenty simply collapses into glut. And life, too, the most precious of possessions, it also can be debased by the cheapening caused by unrestrained, unbalanced quantity.
The Problem of Race
Having dealt with numbers, the next immediate problem is that of race which recently has so teased the conscience of U.N.E.S.C.O. that there has been an abortive attempt to propound new doctrine. It seems perhaps unfair, but it is a fact, that we are born, equal perhaps in ultimate spiritual worth, equal in the right to freedom and opportunity, but so unequal in our genetic make up, so unequal in our personal attributes. In this connection reference must be made to Galton's Hereditary Genius, written in I869 and recently re-published at the instigation of this Society, where for the first time the genetic aspects of eminence in many fields was clearly demonstrated.
Let us boldly face this matter of race, if that term may still be used despite its imprecision and its attendant emotional, anthropological and other glosses. Of course, there are different races in the world, as any travelled and observant child of five will explain to you. They have different appearances, features, colour and so on, and go per cent of the people of the world can by a child be put into one or other of four categories, usually denoted by their skin colour. The analysis of figures for a single measurable

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

physical attribute may not conveniently taste for the ways of others. Thus it comes

determine the same major or minor cate- about that, in general, like breeds with like.

gories as does the, perhaps subjective but But because of that ingrained feeling that

none the less real, integration of many each one of us is the normal and that the

features.

other fellow who is different is the abnormal,

Attempts to classify living people, and we are only too prone to relate our own

peoples, by mental attributes or educable estimate of normality with propriety, with

potentialities lead to still less significant or quality and with superiority. Thus we can

happy results. It is not for me to enter into interpret the presence of emotional barriers

discussion of the worth or otherwise of the between our groupings. They are entirely

recent pronouncements by the U.N.E.S.C.O. expectablp, and respectable, in any swiftly

panel and the more recent denunciation of evolving species: the members of a par-

certain of those pronouncements by anthro- ticular group in general have an innate

pologists and others. My main point here is distaste for matings between that group and

to stress that genetic differences, physical, another. What is so reprehensible in our-

mental, physiological and otherwise, are selves is that we have failed to understand

expectable between different geographical the situation and in consequence too fre-

groups of our own species as they are quently are filled with an evil emotion, not

between particular groups of other species of simply a recognition of a difference and an

animal covering a wide geographical range. appreciation of sameness, but an evil

Geographical groups in any species may be emotion involving ideas of relative superior-

well- or ill-defined, and there will almost ity and worth as between races. We have

inevitably be overlap and intergrade, most been sufficiently dull-witted to make these

breeding within the group and some inter- subjective integrations of worth even in the

breeding with neighbouring groups. Remem- absence of equality of educational, social and

ber both that modern taxonomy is based on dietary opportunity. We have inflamed

phylogenetic assumptions and that the emotions which, I suggest, will far more

general ease of so-called natural classification quickly be suppressed by an honest apprecia-

is considered as evidence of evolution. Our tion of actual differences and of natural

own species, man, within which all individuals breeding barriers than by any attempts to

appear to be fertile one with another, clearly evade the issues, or any pretence that man

would be abnormal if there were not obvious is not divided into sub-sections separated by

genetic groupings. In insects we break down perfectly normal barriers of considerable

populations so far as to say that there are, variety and strength.

for example, so-called biological races, similar

in anatomy but differing in some aspect of habit, commonly a food habit. The result is

Personal Differences-the Core of Eugenics

an obvious tendency normally to mate So, thirdly, in our consideration of the vast

within the particular biological race, though besetting problems, we come to the central

abnormal matings outside it remain fertile. core of Eugenics, the recognition of differences

Whatever the interplay of genes and environ- in quality between individuals, and the hope

ment the existence of biological races in that by one means or another future general

insects is real.

tions may come to consist of higher propor-

So is it, I suggest, with our own species. tions of those possessed of the more desirable

There are groupings of a genetic nature, attributes. Many may feel that in a world of

which are commonly further differentiated by obviously and continuously increasing com-

habit, upbringing, culture or call it what you plexity no effort must be spared to increase

will. To each one of us usually our own the proportion of the wise, and thereby, in all

precise little ways of speech, feeding habits, probability, gradually to increase the capa-

social graces and so on seem so much the city for individual wisdom. Sadly, evidence

normal that we feel an oddness and a dis- has recently been adduced suggesting, if now

EIJGENICS AND HUMAN ECOLOGY

proving, something of the reverse trend in

our schoolchildren. Wisdom must be

increased anl( that cannot be done by

education and experience alone-they can

do no more than allow potentialities to

develop.

These differences in innate -qualities be-

tween, ourselves in one Sense seem so unfair,

yet at the samne timiie they providle the means

to a worthy huIm1ility in realization of the

talents of the other fellow, some of which we

have in minor (de-ree, seine of whiclh we seenm

to lack completelv. The_re have been, and

there still arc!, mIIanIIy wh1o, in their first youth,

feel that they J)rsonally are the equal, at

least mentally. of all men, if they would but

exert t hermselves. ut, of course, it is not so

mentally, just as so clearly it is nlot so

physically. Biut with all ithe various types of

attribute, the trzaLns!niissioni of quiality fronm-

oWIC gericratioll ts) anot hcr is surelv demon-

st iLble, if itot alw as siml)Vass.omne would

like. The )rocess of biological trinsnmissi )n is
largely obscured( l)' eii \ironmne ll a illnfi-

CIlVIC.(, nlltritiO-lLil, So()Cial, ((llC'aLtional. and(1 SO

oni. An(l, tliotit"Il WO imllpro\ve, l)v n1o mIeans

yet is ther- sial (ipp)rttiiuitN, fo1r- L1 ill these

CiXJirOIiuei it l ( r (i logCl 1factors. Biut, in

tIlis (CoMIri let eltl,

spurn the false

(l(sctrmell of eq(ua1;.l S>lr.-es.S for all inlci in all

tliilgs that is uon>' IS. Iie .!.ii, I repe.att,

is qa.lit- o ('i)plipiwV n attn environmnent
Ci th)ebl of di(,wilu- (ai;t} to (leVilol) 1) the

full ills ( er alt tFI lb)t .

It is h11e ;Wrc.He-»., Id .1nt this stage

h-ich Ii.s tT;tFlll"llt il iliipstaiice aLll(l Vo(.t
so sai(ily lacking. Furtlier, this- aiiii iniiist be
ti l'l t \NwOsrtiI , t jN! .I' s(( tIii-L after

I),'rseial c(oni
is at true retl,

ut hillt,
ionw (41 Ili

tlis )1h It'Iht
tingiLite thIt

perhiaps
t riviron-

r11 t in tCe ) IF( I ;LI i "..LlsiiiSI .

(oncIlusion
Fli I .IL\s It tCI I I Ist t0o IsfItitII IT t

ALM I.L 'I" t l it l t s l !L 1%tv ltt )oIIg

tO i 5) 1 i i'i> iI I. C li ii tInrIII I I

t ts

at! Tih)IItss 1 1. A' hiawu it t slt ion to souiw

{>f <(s1z I \;it i I tisi 11 lvin)l II(IIstnij I;uIrthitr 011.t1)IIt is > )t(oiI ( ,vt iWwlt sn-

ingly evident when we considered the total numbers of our species and the significance of optimal populations. Then came the
realization that there must be a widely acceptable aim, and that such an aim involves provision for the full development of all the
attributes of a free individual. I then stressed another great peculiarity of man, the ability to control reproduction. So we passed to the consi(leration of three particular problems; numbers, race and personal differences.
Finally, we must realize that most of these
problems are easily soluble by dictators, but
soluble in a way which is damnable. The
task of liberal Eugenists is inevitably a
difficuilt one, difficult for the very reason that they are so fully embued with the liberal
spirit, convinced both of the sanctity of
human life and the worth of the individual free will. Therefore it is that they must rely on education (which has been defined as ' that kind of culture which survives the forgetting of facts "). They must rely on the e(lucation of those who are born, so leading to the birth only of those with a sufficiency of worthy attributes, and then only in nuinbers which will allow the population to lie within an optimal range.
The aim of Eugenists, and their striving towards that aim with the aid of moral qualities, inakes, to my mind, very apt for remembrance that quotation from Thucy(lides taken by General Smuts for his rectorial address at St. Andrews.
" In freedomii lies happiness, and in
courage lies freedom." T'hat should I)e the motto of all leaders
t -(lay, and EIugeniists must indeed be leaders.

Mir. Cecil l3inney, in moving a vote of

thlanks to the lecturer, said that lhe had never

lit- ned to a lecture at any of the Societv's

in,e,st withl gre.;ttcr interest as the lecturer

iad(1 ir ferred to stich a large nuinber of

Im.! tcr's in w ic he himself was particularly

intmrtit(r(; it wzl;a unforltt niite that hie had

ul)t lmund tinie to (level)l) all tlhese. For

;;xm1Ple, r). BI ertmamni's r;.iiirks on IWr -II Mml0/llml,i,n thAt he Ihadt

the p)olar
recenitly,

tflom- withItIIOolo() i l knowled-,e been

OAT'mlciflli t IQ qlluesti)n, wlliichi of the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW animals would have been most likely to was a subject of great interest. Professor obtain the nmastery of the world in the Myres had pointed out that the position absence of human beings or creatures of a of the Greek colonies was governed by the
similar type. He thought the lecturer over- possibility of growing the olive tree. If it
estimated the value of being able to svimn had been possible to grow this in England it was more important to be able to hold this country might have become part of the things. The horse was a noble animal and Greco-Roman civilization, which it did not.
formed for speed, but, as any young child It was arguable whlethier the results of this who rode a pony could see, was confined to .still persisted. It wits frequently said that level ground, whereas the cat could go any- the Tartar invasions 'vere stopped by the lack where. Kittens could play with a ball of of grass in Bavaria to fee(d the lhorses of the wool, while a horse could not, and the paws inva(lers. If this were so it had undoubtedly of such animals could conceivably be saved Europeain civilizationi. Mr. Binney developed into hands. The elephant, though referred to the lecturer's mlention of the having the advantage of a trunk, was too lemmiing, a creature whliclh had alwa\vys large and cumbersome. On the other hand intereste(l hinm and was peculiarly approthe rodents were too small. Passing fronm the priate nowadavs as an eiiblenm of hluman animal to the vegetable kingdom, Mr. progres.s. After iimaking sonme observations Iinney regretted that the lecturer had not on the position in the Far East, .aInd the had time to develop the theine of the relations between different races, Mr. Biiiney influence of the potato on the human rac. concludle(d by saying how nmuchl the Society The influence of plants on lhuman historv were indebte(d to D)r. BertraTm for hiis lecttire.
ItIN VE RFNF.SS I'LACE. IiNlo()N W'. '
A Quarterlv journal ,on ern'd
wtt/i humafn relations anidl wit/h
the qualitv of livilg
Editcd l) II. J. B.L(AKIILM
L'dilori,al A dz isJr lPaw1! ~~~~~(ill.(). M1.(,lB<tt T';111C RU S}iSCH,
O.N., F.R.S., Lol0l (iio'101cV, Sit \i l;lt ( G(rcgor y, BT., I.R.S., B3arbharat W P
4_s. 6)d. /t,r alnmantr, P(ot fii(l
WR1IT FOR SAI')(.A,MFN COIY
Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIL, No 1.

