C. P. BLACKER,
M.A., M.D.
Voluntary Sterilization: Its Role in Human Betterment*

IN THIS OPENING session lasting an hour and a half, I am one of six speakers. If the available time is equally partitioned, I have
fifteen minutes. I hold it to be a grave discourtesy to other speakers, as well as an embarrassment to the organizers, if one exceeds one's time limit.
What is the role of voluntary sterilization in human betterment? It will certainly be contended at this conference that sterilization has many roles in human betterment; but it could be argued, and has by some been argued, that sterilization is more likely to cause human degradation than betterment. The issue turns on what we mean by betterment. I will arbitrarily distinguish four possible meanings of this controversial word.
1. Genetic or Eugenic Betterment First we might mean genetic, eugenic or racial betterment. It was in this sense, I think, that the term was mainly understood in the first two decades of the century. Attention was then given to certain families-or rather widely ramifying connections-in which fertility was abnormally high and in which pauperism, disease, defect and crime were widespread. Massive genealogies were compiled and the financial cost to the
community of these connections was estimated.
These retrospects were sometimes rounded off with a plausible guess at what the community would have been saved in cash and stress if, aided by sterilization or by other means, the original founder of the ill-fated dynasty had been childless.
These genealogical connections were some-
* Keynote address delivered at The First International
Conference on Voluntary Sterilization (convened by the Human Betterment Association for Voluntary Sterilization), April 16th, 1964, in New York City.

times contrasted with others which had pro-
duced a rich crop of able and distinguished people to whom the community and the nation
owed much. It was obvious that humanity could
be bettered by the discriminating use on the one
hand of the brake or pruning hook, and on the
other of the accelerator or fertilizer. There were
similar genealogical researches in Britain. We called the two groups problem families and
promising families. The former contained people
who presented multiple and burdensome social problems. In both our countries compulsion
was once held to be necessary as a restraining
measure; and at meetings of the London Eugenics Society forty years ago I recall the contention that the use of compulsion was justified by its acceptance in other spheres of life. Education is compulsory. We are all com-
pulsorily-and many think excessively-taxed.
We are compulsorily fined for minor offences
such as exceeding the speed limit or parking our cars in the wrong places. We are compulsorily conscripted in war time, and even in peace time. We are compulsorily certified and segregated if mental disorders make us dangerous to ourselves or to others. If we commit crimes we may be compulsorily imprisoned or even compulsorily executed. And I might add that if these discussions about the permissible uses of compulsion had been held in Britain after 1948, when the Children Act was passed, it might further have been pointed out that children could be compulsorily removed by the local authority from the care of parents who were deemed
unfit to look after them. This exercise of compulsion within the sphere
of the family is nearer to our topic: for if compulsion is justified in removing children from the care of "unfit" parents (as such parents

77 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1964, 56, 2.
ER--C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are called in the Children Act), compulsion sterilization is now being encouraged in India

might also be beneficently used to prevent and elsewhere in a socio-economic perspective

"unfit" parents from having more children on which, so to speak, transcends the family. I am

behalf of whom similar drastic measures would thinking particularly of the arguments of Mr.

probably have to be taken at a later date.

Gopalaswami of which I hope that we shall hear

Thus, it used to be contended, the principle of more during this conference. Together with

compulsion is already widely accepted. What other "targets" aimed at in India's third five-

was needed was the recognition of its applica- year plan, we hear of a sterilization target the

bility to people who, by merely reproducing attainment of which would bring betterment.

themselves, imposed grave burdens and evils on

themselves, their children and the community. 4. Moral Betterment

This idea of betterment is, I take it, losing Here we are on controversial ground. It could be

ground everywhere to-day. Yet it presumably argued on the one hand that any measure which

underlies the compulsory sterilization laws preserves and consolidates the family is morally

which, in diminishing force, are applied to praiseworthy. But on the other hand it can be

sufferers from mental illness and defect in most argued, and is argued by some, that sterilization

of your State Institutions.

is intrinsically wrong or morally reprehensible

It may be noted at this point that the ideal of and, in this assessment, it is bracketed with the

eugenic or genetic betterment is applied in a use of appliance methods of birth control and

converse sense by a minority who, sharing with abortion. This is an issue about which

Professor H. J. Muller's views, see in the argument is usually unprofitable. But to those

judicious use of artificial insemination a means who apply a moral veto, it is, I think, fair to put a

of human betterment.

question. At what cost is the veto to be applied?

If it is recognized that an exceedingly rapid

2. Betterment of Health

growth of population brings deprivations and

The idea that humanity can be bettered by hardships in its train, and if it is further acknow-

improvement in health has always been accepted, ledged that the morally permissible methods of

and I suppose that this is the way that most restraining fertility-such as continence and the

members of your association think of better- rhythm method-are likely to be impracticable

ment. That the health of an overtaxed mother in developing countries for some time to come,

can be preserved by sterilization is proved by the what is the price which opponents, by setting

numerous letters expressing thanks and gratitude their moral sights so high, would be prepared to

which most of us have received. Their thanks see paid (principally by women and children)

can be taken to include vicariously the thanks of for the moral frailty of men? The extremist

their already born children who will be spared would doubtless answer "any price. You must

the deprivations imposed on poor families by a never pursue good ends by bad means; never

very high fertility.

compromise with evil." I may say that I under-

stand this view though I don't share it; and I

3. Socio-economic Betterment

feel sorry for those who are genuinely

This kind of betterment seems to me to be new. "agonized" by the predicament. I may mention

It is in the minds of the leaders of developing that in 1954 Pope Pius XII, addressing the

countries where accelerating population growth participants in a world population conference

is stultifying carefully laid plans to raise levels of held in Rome, referred to the world's population

living. It is the quantitative emphasis which is problems as "agonizing" or "anguishing": he

novel. The benefits and betterments resulting spoke in French and used the word

from a well-geared adjustment of population "angouassant".

growth to the growth of resources are diverse. Yet a seemingly simple solution of this moral

They certainly include considerations of health dilemma has been advanced. Addressing in 1952

and nutrition. Indeed, these benefits may be the inaugural meeting of the third international

regarded as primary. As we all know, voluntary conference of the IPPF in Bombay, Dr. S.

78

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: ITS ROLE IN HUMAN BETTERMENT

Radhakrishnan, then Vice-President of India, substantial majority of from 75 per cent up-

told us that Gandhi "made a distinction between wards report themselves as entirely satisfied; a

what may be regarded as ideal and what is to be minority of from 10 to 15 per cent report

regarded as permissible." The sights were dissatisfaction not amounting to permanent

unfixed, so to speak, and treated as adjustable. regret; and a smaller minority, usually under 10

Harshness could be tempered and tolerance per cent and sometimes much less, express

inculcated if, in relation to the ideal, spheres definite regret. The larger the proportion of

could be delineated comprising the generally psychiatric cases in the sample, especially of

permissible or second best, the occasionally neurotics and sufferers from hypochondriacal

permissible in special circumstances, and the anxiety, the larger are these last two minorities.

never permissible. Thus, by admitting some In my third sense of socio-economic benefit, it

flexibility, the agonizing predicament caused by is too soon to venture an answer. The organized

the widespread inability, heavy with prospects of practice of sterilization in India, where it is

social disaster, to conform with a respected but hoped that sterilization may in due course help

uncompromisingly formulated ideal, could be to curb an excessive fertility, is in a transitional

relieved.

stage. In another ten years Indian demographers

and those of other Asian countries who may

Possible Scope of Sterilzation

follow India's example should be able to provide

What conclusions can I draw from my review of an answer. Hitherto the effect on the birth rate

these four meanings of the word "betterment"? must be negligible. But Colonel Raina will tell

In my first sense of eugenic betterment, us more later. The least that can be said is that definite conclusions are difficult to draw, for we if a majority of the sterilized people are happy,

don't know what stresses the women concerned more good than harm will have been done.

(for example those sterilized in your State Of betterment in my fourth category, of moral

Institutions) were spared by not having more betterment, our view will depend on standpoint.

children; nor do we know what sort of children Those who think that it is morally praiseworthy

they would have had, nor what sort of lives these to promote the well-being of the family will take

children would have led. We are likewise ignor- a favourable view if it can be shown that

ant of whether the community would have sterilization as now practised in the world

suffered or benefitted from their births. A little consolidates rather than weakens family ties.

light might be thrown on these uncertainties by Those who think that, in the absence of strong

a study of the children already born to the medical indications (such, for example, as those

inmates of your state institutions before they which call for prostatectomy in the male and

were sterilized. But I do not know of any such hysterectomy in the female), sterilization is

studies. Privately, I have little doubt that the intrinsically evil, will take an opposite view.

women themselves benefitted from being spared I conclude with two remarks. First, may I say

further pregnancies, and that the community that I well know that in many western countries

was spared social problems and burdens. Could sterilization is widely sought as a convenience.

not your Association promote an investigation An often well-to-do couple have had as many

of the already born children of a sample of your children as they want; and they wish to be

institutionally-sterilized women and of the later spared the bother-and the slight risk-of using

reactions of the women themselves to the contraception. I have not considered this

operation?

sizeable group in my paper because I don't

In my second sense of betterment in health, really think that its experiences have much

there is I think, little doubt. The question can bearing on human betterment which is the theme

largely be answered by simple statistics. I which Mrs. Proskauer Smith assigned to me.

recently reviewed the results of nine follow-up The issue is one of convenience rather than of

inqurines and this was my conclusion: there is a betterment.

general similarity of results of reported follow-up Secondly, I am inclined to think that steriliza-

inquiries of voluntarily sterilized people. A tion as we practise it to-day may, from the

79

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

standpoint of the historian of the future, appear as an interim measure. If, as I regard as almost certain, oral methods of birth control are perfected-that is to say when they are cheap (as they are not to-day), reliable (as they seemingly are to-day) harmless (as they apparently
are to-day) and devoid of occasionally unpleasant side-effects (as they are not to-day)-then I think that the demand for sterilization will dwindle. But no one knows how long we will

have to wait before oral methods of contraception are thus perfected. Intra-uterine devices for preventing conception-if they fulfill current expectations-may likewise diminish the need for sterilization. Until these new methods are perfected my guess is that there will be an increasing demand for voluntary sterilization which must be discriminatingly met. And my belief is that on balance the results will conduce
to human betterment.

THE AMERICAN JOURNAL
OF
HUMAN GENETICS
A quarterly record of research, review and bibliographic material relating to heredity in man.
Official Journal of THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF HUMAN GENETICS Editor: H. ELDON SUTTON
Department of Zoology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas 78712 The editor and his staff of associates witl be glad to consider manuscripts pertaining to human genetics.
Subscription to THE AMERCAN JOURNAL OF HUMAN GeNrrcs or information pertaining to subscription should be addressed to Grune & Stratton, Inc., 381 Park Avenue South, New York 16, New York. The subscription price per volume is $10.00. A volume consists of 4 numbers. Single numbers cost $3.00. The first volume was published in 1949. One volume has been published each year since then. Correspondence pertaining to membership in The AMERICAN SoceTY or HuMAN GENTCS or to general society affairs should be addressed to the Secretary of the Society, Dr. S. H. Boyer, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore 5, Maryland.
8o

