COURTSHIP AND MATING IN AN URBAN COMMUNITY *
By MOYA WOODSIDE

"It is this intimate interrelation between the lar lines were conducted by Kirkpatrick and

objective and the subjective aspects of culture, the relation between the inner life of the person
.and the traditions and current standards of society, that demands further research."

by Buttenwieser, the aim being to discover the temperamental compatibility or other-
wise of spouses. Davis (I929) studied the

E. W. BURGESS. sek life of 2,200 women, mainly colege

THIS paper describes some findings in graduates, again using a questionnaire.

the first field-work study on marriage
to be undertaken in this country. It was originally planned as a genetic and psychiatric research on assortative mating. But as material accumulated it became obvious that certain findings had unexpected
sociological and psychological significance,
presenting as they did a composite picture of behaviour patterns on one level of urban

Slightly different in approach is the study of i,ooo marriages made by Dickinson and Beam (I932). This was based on consultingroom records, and represents the experience of a group of upper-class patients.
Perhaps the most interesting research is that of Hamilton (I929). Using a combination of the written question and the personal interview, he obtained exhaustive informa-

culture. This systematic collection of life histories, while providing much novel statistical material, has also revealed in cross section how economic and social pressures
mould the individual and determine mental attitudes.

tion from married couples on all aspects of sex behaviour, psychological attitudes, effect of environment and upbringing, etc. Burgess and Cottrell have published a study (I939) on the prediction of success or failure
in marriage, worked out from the rating of

couples after completion of a " background-

Other Studies of Marriage

information" questionnaire.

Research up till now has mainly been con- Due to war-time difficulties, a number of

fined to North America. A certain amount important references are not available to the

took place in pre-Nazi Germany and in student in England, so an up-to-date

Austria before the Anschluss; but this work account of American work cannot be re-

was later suppressed, and little information liably given. It is known that a large-scale

is now available. In America the favourite field-work investigation of sex behaviour is

method of approach has been the question- in progress in one city, under the direction-

naire, completed under supervision, or sent of Alfred Kinsey, but no details have

through the post with a covering letter. reached this country.

Questionnaires used have varied greatly in In his cultural and psychological study of

scope, length, and complexity.

the family, Folsom (i943) describes and dis-

The work of Terman in this field is well cusses the American investigations of marital

known. His monumental study (I938) of happiness, homogamy, etc., and gives an

the psychological factors in marital happi- extensive bibliography. Methods and tech-

ness is based upon questionnaires filled in niques of this type of research are reviewed

separately by husband and wife. Couples and criticized in a symposium on prediction

takdng part were-drawn from the professional edited by Horst (I94I).

and business classes. Investigations on simi- The outstanding limitation of all these

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on January 15th, I946.

studies is that they have been confined to the educated and better off, and little or

29

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nothing has been done to investigate habits What follows is an account of generai im-

and attitudes of low-income groups. A pressions, valid for " control" and " neu-

further limitation is the proven inadequacy rotic " group alike. At the time of writing,

of the questionnaire, if not supplemented data were available from I25 couples and

and checked by personal interview. Burgess from a further 26 husbands whose wives

and Horst both point out the need for com- refused to co-operate. Subsequent experi-

bination of statistical and case study ence, now amounting to over 400 controlled-

methods, and Hamilton also stresses the situation interviews, has confirmed rather

importance of collecting subjective data than altered these impressions.

within an easily comparable statistical

framework.

How Partners Meet

Our present research goes a considerable In general, meetings are completely hap-

way in meeting these requirements; and hazard, and the one recurrent factor is that

though it is on a limited scale this is oom- of residential propinquity. This however

pensated by uniformity of approach to the has been modified since the war by the

material, by the use of the double interview- "shuffle-up " of evacuation, industrial trans-

plus-questionnaire technique, and by its fer, and service away from home. Many

pioneer nature in this country.

have known their future mates at school, or

have played together as neighbours. Others

Method of the Study

have met " outside " or " at the top of the

All subjects were individually interviewed, road," and discovered they belonged to the

husbands at hospital and wives in their same district. The street offers most oppor-

homes. Information asked for covered a tunities for making acquaintance with the

brief family history, personal history in- opposite sex, and formal introductions are

cluding health, school and work record, the dxception. " We just started talking."

social interests, circunstances of courtship, "We passed the time of day." "I crashed

marital and sexual adjustment, contra- into her and apologized" typify many

ceptive methods, attitude to family limita- beginnings.

tion. The questionnaire of 48 Yes or No Places of entertainment such as dance

items, designed to elicit neurotic traits, was halls, ice-rinks, pubs, come next, and then

presented as a " personality test." No in- parties arranged by friends. A fair number

telligence tests were given, but a rough meet through work in the same factory,

assessment was made at interview. Care shop or business. Clubs and similar mixed

was taken to avoid possible sources of bias activities are rarely mentioned, perhaps

in selection and to preserve the random because they are little patronized by low-

nature of the sample; but no strict approxi- income groups. The few who did cite

mation can be achieved in this type of re- tennis clubs or other societies were signfii-

search, dependent as it is on the voluntary cantly among the better educated and

co-operation of those approached. For "white collar" members of the sample.

example, the findings relative to happiness This also applies to the one or two who met

are obviously influenced by the self-exclusion through common work for a political

of couples on the point of divorce.

organization. No one mentioned any Church

In civilian life our subjects had belonged activity as a place of meeting; and though

to the artisan and working classes. Repre- no specific questions were asked on this

sentative pre-war occupatrons for men were point, organized religion seems to play small

labourer, transport worker, mechanic, part in the everyday life of the sample.

plumber, carpenter, with an occasional Yet in spite of the fortuitous nature of

clerk, commercial traveller or shopkeeper. most meetings, a study of the life histories

Women had worked before marriage as of the partners shows that selection has in

factory operative, domestic servant, shop fact occurred within a very limited range.

assistant, waitress, dressmaker or typist. Husbands and wives resemble each other

COURTSHIP AND MATING IN AN URBAN COMMUNITY

3I

closely in respect of background, social ordinary; indistinguishable from the great

standing, outlook, interests, even degree of mass of their fellows; and often lacking in

intelligence. Chances of unselective mating, looks, charm, or intelligence. Hence it is

as depicted in the " shopgirl-marries-boss" evident that " romance " and the subjective

wish dreams of the cinema, are negligible. approach perform a biological function in

bringing together many who otherwise might

Why They are Attracted

remain unmated. This can be well seen in

Most striking here is the apparent irre- the following account of his courtship given

levancy and triviality of reasons given for by a 23-year-old labourer. (The account was

attraction. But allowance must be made subsequently corroborated by his wife.)

for lapse of time and memory, for having to Both partners were physically unattraetive,

produce an immediate answer, and (this and below average in intelligence.

applies throughout) the difficulty most subjects find in expressing themselves when descriptions of feeling and abstract concepts are called for. Typical of this is the summing up of all personality characteristics
under the oft-repeated " His/her ways." Generally some factor of appearance or

He met his wife in the cook-house in the barracks at Colchester. She was in the A.T.S. and also stationed there. He was scrubbing the floor when she came in and asked for " a strong man " to help press down cabbage in a boiler. He volunteered to do it, but she laughed at him, so he seized hold

behaviour is selected. "He played the of her and held her in his anns to show that

piano lovely." "Her voice-it was sort of he was strong. Immediately after this

hoarse." "He had good manners-helped you off the bus and all that." "She was
the Hedy Lamarr type." "He knew all
the nice things to do like buying flowers." Even (cryptically) "the hairs on her legs." These remarks may or may not be amplified by mention of other qualities such as good

encounter he thought " that's just the girl would make me happy. I wonder if I'll ever get her ? "
He was attracted by the way she looked at him and " the way she ddne her hair." " It was love at first sight." Two evenings later he took her to the pictures and they saw A Desert Song. He felt " it drew us together."

nature, kind-heartedness, common sense, He told her how he felt about her, and after

being " interesting " or " intelligent."

another two days he proposed and she

A few men recognize sexual feeling as
primarily responsible for attraction, but on the whole the value placed on sex during courtship is negative. "She's not that sort of girl." " She wasn't the flirtin' type." " You could tell from her ways she was a
decent girl." " She was clean living." Such comments are from men irrespective of

accepted. They then had sex relations in a park. He said to her: "If you're good enough to let me do it now, you're good enough to marry." It was their first experience, and " both of us were frightened, but
passions got the better of us." Next day he was transferred to another
unit; they corresponded for a month, writing
two or three times to one another every day.

their own sexual experience. And from Then he came on leave and they got married.

women: "He didn't try to muck about

like other chaps." "He was restrained Pre-Marital Sexual Experience

about sex." " He was very decent and not Figures available at the time of writing

sexy-didn't try to put his hands where he were as follows: Of the I5I husbands, 79

shouldn't." "He wasn't the average young admit pre-marital sex relations, either with

fellow who makes crude propositions to a. their wives or with other women. Only 26

girl." of the I25 wives make a similar admission.

A favourite reason given by both sexeg 4 husbands deny relations with their wives,

is: " He/she was different." Variants are: the wives admitting it; by contrast, ii

"Something told me it was her." "He wives denied relations when 'already ad-

wasn't like other boys." Yet to the ob- mitted by their husbands. No information

jective eye both individuals are perfectly was obtained from 22 wives, due chiefly to

32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

lack of privacy at interview (children or narrow-minded and would have put me out

other adults present). The remaining 62 the door if I'd been caught."' " We never

wives say they had no sex experience before had the chance: mother was always in the

marriage.

next room."

To those unfamiliar with methods of Among the younger and more intelligent

psychiatric interview, such findings will have couples there are signs of a swing away

questionable validity. (" You don't sup- from unthinking acceptance of the traditional

pose people are going to tell you the truth code. Either they made frank admission of

about that sort of thing" is a usual cri- pre-marital experience, or explained their

ticism.) But the setting of the interview is continence as the result of individual deci-

such that individuals who elect to take part sion. This rational attitude is exemplified in:

do so in a sincere and serious manner, and " We talked it over and decided not to."

in only a small percentage is there reason " We were glad afterwards we'd decided to

to suspect falsehood or suppression. Further- wait." " We had quite heated discussions

more, a matter-of-fact and unemotional about it. But we waited because we felt if

approach to the " taboo " subjects tends to we didn't there wouldn't be anything new

elicit a corresponding response. It is notice- when we got married."

able that people are less inhibited than It is too soon to judge of the success of

formerly, and most can discuss sexual topics the Government's anti-V.D. campaign, with

without salaciousness or excessive embarrass- its appeals for " clean living" based upon

ment. fear. None of the sample who married

Several comments on the data can be during the last two years and who might

made. First, the fact that more than three have been expected to have been influenced

times as many men as women admit to pre- mentioned possible venereal infection as a

marital relations should not necessarily be reason for continence. Only two of all the

taken as indication of greater truthfulness; 276 subjects specifically referred to V.D. in

but rather that the " double standard " of this connection, and both were middle-aged

morality is still accepted by both sexes. and married over IO years. These findings,

This makes it easier for men to be frank, as incidental though they are, suggest that

they have only to admit condoned, but propaganda should be on other lines.

women condemned, behaviour. One man

expressed the prevailing outlook when he Marriage

said: " I divide girls into two classes: the At this level of society, the practical ad-

homely type and the -others." And a vantages of marriage weigh more with most

woman: "'We sort of got near the mark people than subtler considerations of tem-

sometimes, but he respected me too much."' peramental compatibility. For women,

It was my impression that most of the marriage means an escape from competitive

women who denied pre-marital relations had wage-earning and from the dominance and

not in fact had them, and similarly with supervision of parents. For men, it means

many of. the younger men. "We were both comfort, personal attention, escape from

amateurs when we got married" was the lodgings or the parental home; and pro-

apologetic remark of one young wife. But vides one sphere in an increasingly mechan-

pressure of conformity remains strong enough ized and impersonal existence where the

to cause the contradictory statements of II individual can still exercise sovereign power,

wives and 4 husbands.

even if only over wife and children.

Many women are frank that they were The struggle for security and economic

only deterred by fear of consequences, lack independence is such that once these are in

of opportunity, or parental attitudes. "I some measure achieved, ambition goes no

was always afraid of being 'caught '." "I farther and contentment is found in the

was too scared." "It was always drummed simple facts of family life-home, children,

into me by my parents." "Dad was small pleasures, just being together. These

COURTSHIP AND MATING IN AN URBAN COMMUNITY

33

sources of satisfaction, taken for granted probably responsible for most subjects

in higher social strata, are differently attributing their happiness to some practical

valued by those who grew up, as did most characteristic in the partner. "He always

of the sample, with hardship and unemploy- helps you in the house." "He does any-

ment for background. Hence the tendency thing I want him to do." "She's ever such

for " marriage " and " home " to become a good mother." " She's a good cook."

synonymous in many people's minds. " It's " She's very houseproud and saving." " Give

somewhere to come home to." " My atti- and take," " trust," " pulling together " and

tude to life is my wife and home and boy." " understanding each other" are thought

"'Avin' your own 'ome to come 'ome to." essential for success.

" All I want is a little home of my own with

a garden." "You're in your own home. II. THE NEGATIVE CONCEPTION

You've got what you wanted all your life" Much of married happiness is defined in

are typical appreciations of the married negative terms, especially by women. This

state. is so common as to be universal. "'E's

not a bully." " He never treats me coarsely."

I. HAPPINESS

"He doesn't drink or order me about."

Most say they are happy. But in this " He's never lied to me." From men: " She

respect the sample is selective, as those on never argues." " She doesn't keep bad com-

bad terms with each other were usually un- pany." "She isn't the nagging sort."

willing to co-operate in the study. It was Appreciation of more positive values is shown

possible to interview both partners in a by younger couples; but this again may be

small number of such cases, providing disillusion deferred, rather than fundamental

material of great psychological interest.

change of attitude.

It must also be remembered that war conditions have had a distorting effect, and III. CAUSES OF DISCORD

the study can only represent what people The sample shows no direct correlation

feel and experience in abnormal circum- between neurosis and unhappiness, as of the stances. Many subjects pointed this out i8 seriously unhappy couples I2 were in themselves. Prolonged separation, perhaps the " control" group and only 6 in the

with the husband overseas; evacuation and " neurotic."

disruption of the home; the fact that when Infidelity, known or suspected, is the interviewed the couples were lving apart, major cause; and linked with it is jealousy.

husbands being in hospital, all tend to post- Although the number of cases is small, they pone the time when, in David Gascoyne's are worth analyzing in some detail, as the

words, " imperfections of substance: dross attitudes disclosed are probably representa-

of the day by day: banality, unlove and tive.

disappointment " become increasingly mani- Distributed evenly between both groups fest. there were I2 instances of actual infidelity
A further qualification to be borne in mind and 8 others where it was suspected. Of

is the well-known " halo " effect (Terman's these, 8 husbands and 4 wives were un" generosity factor ") whereby the subject, faithful. In one case both husband and wife rather than face reality, views his or her had been unfaithful, each with several

marriage in the light of wishful thinking. different partners, and still lived together. The double interview technique used gave 7 husbands suspect their wives, but only i

ample opportunity for observing this psycho- wife suspects her husband.

logical mechanism at work, and the idealized Men have two main types of reaction to

picture presented by husband or wife was this situation: the traditional and the

often found to be far from fact.

reasonable. About half were obsessional,

The difficulty of expressing abstract con- suspicious, jealous to a pathological degree,

ceptions, referred to under Attraction, is regarded their wives as " property." The

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

others adopted a "forgive and forget" husbands of meanness; husbands their wives

attitude; tried to understand; believed of bad management. Drink was cited in

that other qualities in their wives were of only 2 cases, but in both these it was a

greater importance. Without doubt, choice major cause of unhappiness.

of reaction is conditioned not so much by Interference of relatives, much exacer-

circumstance as by individual temperament. bated by- housing shortage, is commonly

Some of the most exaggerated jealousy was mentioned, and many otherwise promising

exhibited by men who had least reason; relationships are spoiled by the daily friction

and in these cases it was obvious that and compromise involved in having to live

sooner or later, serious friction would arise. with " her/his people." A fair number of

Women, perhaps because of the lingering husbands were disappointed with their wives'

influence of the " double standard," tend to intellectual equipment or lack of outside

accept infidelity with resignation. They interests; and though most of them loyally

ignore it; are indifferent; or helplessly refrained from criticism it was obvious that

make the best of it. A few are understanding no real companionship could exist on any-

and regard their husbands' extra-marital thing higher than the " bed"and board"

adventures with sympathy and tolerance. level.

Childless wives were predominant in this The remainder of the unhappy or poten-

group.

tially unhappy made less specific complaints

After infidelity and jealousy, " nerves" about " he/she doesn't understand me," or

and ill-health. But as half the husbands spoke of " selfishness " or " drifting apart."

interviewed were under treatment for neu- In cases of this sort one felt there was

rotic illness, the sample is inevitably genuine temperamental incompatibility, and

weighted. I4 wives complained of their that the couples remained together through

husbands' " nerves," irritability, unreliabi- habit, inertia, or neurotic dependency.

lity, lack of self-control, loss of interest, etc.

(3 of these were among the "controls"); IV. WOMEN SUFFER MOST

2 husbands made similar complaints about On the social level of the sample, women

their wives. Sometimes the trouble was due incontestably shoulder the main burden of

to personality change; sometimes to more adjustment. If things go wrong,, it is the

deep-seated constitutional traits.

woman who puts up, gives in, makes the best

No positive link was found between of it. This is less due to fundamental

neurosis and sexual maladjustment, another difference between the sexes than to economic

frequent cause of discord. Frigidity among and social pressures. The man is free to go

women is so common as to be the norm (see or stay as he chooses; the woman, who

under next section), and added to this for usually has children to care for, faces

many is fear of pregnancy, or psychological problems of maintenance, court orders,

inhibitions arising either from upbringing home and job finding, etc. It is not sur-

or from traumatic personal experience. prising that few women are either courageous

Excessive demands from husbands amount- or desperate enough to overcome both the

ing to actual cruelty occurred in a small practical difficulties and the cultural dis-

number of cases, and amongst these appeared approval which are entailed in leaving home.

the most tragic individual life stories (in- One young wife described the neglect and

terestingly enough, all from the " control'" indifference she endured from her husband

group).

in the early stages of marriage. She left

" Money" is a common source of trouble. him, intending to return to her people, but

The effects, both economic and psychological, her mother refused to take her in, saying

of prolonged unemployment were often " You've made your bed," etc., and she had

mentioned as spoiling a previous good re- to go back. " I cried my eyes out, but I

lationship. Poor wages caused similar stress knew I'd got to stick it." Wives who re-

in the home. Some wives accused their ported such past misdemeanours of their

COURTSHIP AND MATING IN AN URBAN COMMUNITY

35

husbands usually affirmed " He's better contact was kept for general social work

now" or " He's learnt his lesson," but often reasons) provided an interesting demon-

it seemed with more optimism than con- stration. Here both husband and wife were

viction.

neurotic with bad family histories and in both

cases a record of pre- and extra-marital

V. THE NEUROTIC IN MARRIAGE

sexuality. The husband was unstable and

The neurotic goes through life with many violent; the wife, though unusually intelli-

handicaps, and tends to be an unhappy gent, a definite hysterical personality.

person in himself. Whatever he undertakes When first interviewed, soon after the

is accordingly more difficult and compli- husband's return from service abroad, they

cated than for the non-neurotic, and chances had just decided following lengthy con-

of success less favourable. Where neurotic fessions, recriminations, repentances, to

and non-neurotic mate, the more stable " start all over again," " forget the past,"

partner, after initial bewilderment, usually try for a baby, and have the existing imle-

bears the brunt of adjustment and the gitimate child adopted. During the next

marriage is held together by the degree of I4 months, Mrs. X. appeared twice in

patience and understanding he or she is able desperation. She couldn't go on; her

to show.

husband was (variously) unfaithful, irre-

Yet in other cases it seemed as if the very sponsible, brutal, mean. Could some job be

necessity for taking thought had produced found for her; the new baby (legitimate)

a better and richer relationship. Many be placed in a nursery; a separation order

neurotic subjects who had grown up in an obtained ? But as soon as concrete pro-

atmosphere of parental disharmony were posals were placed before her there was

explicit as to how this had made them always some reason why they couldn't be

realize that happiness was no automatic by- carried through.

product of the marriage vows, but something Each time the phase of resolution worked

requiring conscious effort.

up through "scenes," tears and violence to

When both spouses were genuinely neu- reconciliation, sexual reunion, and exhausted

rotic, the picture was sometimes that of a calm. " Everything's changed." " I know

tortured dependency. However unhappy he's difficult. But I'd never be happy

and ir-suited they might be, they were in- without him." This precarious " happi-

capable of breaking away and through habit ness." would last a few weeks or months till

endured behaviour which appeared quite in- emotional tension accumulated again.

tolerable to objective observation. Though A similar cycle, though in less acute form,

often articulate enough about their diffi- was recognized in a number of other mar-

culties and prone to indulge in endless riages. In psycho-analytic literature it has

emotional analysis, suffering with and been clearly described by Fromm (cf. p. I25),

through another person was preferred to Homey, and Lazarsfeld. Fromm believes

even the smallest step towards independence the dependency to arise from the interaction

and freedom.

of sado-masochistic trends, and the striving

Subjects in this situation tended to agree of the neurotic for security through domi-

with interpretations and suggestions, would nation which masquerades as love. Hence

admit their misery and the improbability any suffering is better than loss of the love

of improvement; but when it came to the object. Whatever the psychopathology, the

point where some active decision was re- outward result is frustration and waste of

quired, they retreated with a defence of lives.

" But I love him/her." "I couldn't leave

him/her."

Sexual Intercourse in Marriage

" Fresh starts " are another characteristic Average frequency is twice a week, a

of this sort of relationship. One marriage figure coincident with American findings;

in the gample (the only case where prolonged but information on this point could only

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be obtained from those, chiefly in the upper thinks it's wonderful but he wants twice as

age group, who had experience of marital much the next day, whether I want attentions

normality. The majority of the younger or not. I hope you will understand what

subjects who married since the war have had no opportunity of living together except
during the husbands' periods of leave, and many have no homes of their own. How-

I'm trying to say to you but it's very awk-
ward to find the right words. I don't know
what you can do to help me but I would be very grateful if it was possible to keep him away from me for a time at least."

ever, there is enough evidence to suggest that the bi-weekly figure does represent
common practice. Men find their sex lives satisfactory. If
any complaint is made, it is usually on the
score of " coldness " or lack of interest of their partners. Not so women. Here all shades of dissatisfaction are expressed, ranging from indifference and distaste to
actual dyspareunia. Some have never experienced complete orgasm; and for most it is " sometimes," " occasionally," " now and again," " Only if I'm in the mood," etc. This state of affairs is regarded as normal, and the resultant attitude of most women towards sex in marriage is that of boredom or resignation.
Husbands are commonly valued in inverse ratio to their sexuality. "-,He's very good-he doesn't bother me much." " We're lucky-we're not terribly passionate." " He never touches me without he asks me." " He's not at all lustful." " The one part of marriage I could do without." " He's pretty bad that way." " It was a sort of nightmare at first." The following extract from a letter written by one of the subjects to the psychiatrist about her husband, a miner before call-up, is both human and revealing:
"Also impress on him that instead of being proud of the fact that he's got two children and only 22 he ought to be sorry and that he shouldn't have any more for a few years, at anyrate. Apart from the fact that he is ruining my health; I've got a job to keep

Since few, if any, of the subjects had ever
been given specific sex education, and
entered marriage equipped only with what
knowledge they had picked up for them-
selves, often from inaccurate sources, it is not surprising that sexual maladjustment is
widespread. Ignorance, far from ensuring bliss, has meant embarrassment, fear and misery. Men are lacking in the rudiments
of erotic technique, and have been brought
up to think that frankness in such matters
is improper. This inhibition is well illus-
trated by the response of a middle-aged brewer's drayman in answer to a question about his wife's feelings: " I respect my wife. I would never talk intimate to her." And a wages clerk of 38, I7 years married, father of five children, said he " didn't know" if his wife enjoyed intercourse or not. " It's very embarrassing- ." He
even found it "embarrassing" if she chanced to see him in his bath.
But among younger married couples it is noticeable that the more intelligent are aware of sex as a source of mutual satisfaction, and are able to discuss it with each other. " It took us a long time to get adjusted; but we're all right now" (wife, 24). " We aren't afraid to talk about it. I always get what I want" (wife, 27). Some husbands are concerned about the failure of their wives to achieve orgasm frequently enough; many ask for advice on this or on sterility or contraceptive methods. Without doubt, those who have this franker

my teeth now and my legs are very painful attitude derive greater enjoyment from the

now with bad veins. I've no guarantee that sexual side of marriage.

his children will be of much use to the

country.

Contraception

" You have diagnosed my husband's trouble Frequency of mention of different methods

as Anxiety Neurosis to me it seems more like a case of excessive sexual indulgence, dishonesty and lies. He's home nearly all day

(I25 couples plus 26 husbands):
Coitus Interruptus or Withdrawal Condom "Rendell's"

Cap

long and if he leaves me alone for a day he

65

54 34 12

COURTSHIP AND MATING IN AN URBAN COMMUNITY

37

Unspecified or

picked up their own knowledge. Requests

"Chemical" "Wife takes precautions" Douche Volpar
II 8 6 2
Sponge Safe Period Wife Holds Back "None"

for suitable books were often made, either for adults or children. It was not uncommon

I I1

I i6 for husbands to ask the interviewer to talk

Some couples mentioned more than one to their wives, and advise, explain or re-

method; others had used different methods assure.

at different times. Those under the heading Lack of a sexual vocabulary presents great " none " probably practised withdrawal, but difficulties. People don't know, or don't

clear information was not obtainable. Simi- know how to pronounce, the correct terms

larly, some who said " chemical" are likely for their sexual anatomy or the repro-

to have meant " Rendell's." In a small ductive processes, and hesitate to use

number of cases (I4) sterility of one or other common equivalents, hence their inability

partner obviated the need for contraception. to discuss the subject without connotations

These figures, and the experience of the of obscenity. For this reason alone, many

research, suggest that some method of family working-class parents are deterred from in-

limitation is probably practised by all. structing their children, and the vicious

Furthermore, even the most stupid and un- circle continues. In this connection, it is intelligent realize the possibility of control, interesting to read Margaret Mead's account

however unsuccessful or indifferent they may of the sexual education of Samoan children

be in practice. As attempted control of and its effect on adult attitudes.

fertility by means of withdrawal is historic, Frigidity and dyspareunia are other pro-

and common to all countries and civiliza- ducts of ignorance, in its widest sense.

tions, the high figure for its use in the sample Stekel considers that the apparent sexual

indicates that population decline cannot be anaesthesia of women is in large measure due

directly attributed to wider knowledge of to the inexperience and maladroitness of

contraceptives. Another conclusion to be their partner; and to this must be added

drawn is that the birth control clinics have the mental "set" of the woman herself,

a small sphere of influence, and their clients which is often that of fear or disgust. Much

are selected. (Subjects who relied on cap of the resistance to scientific contraception

plus chemical method of protection had arises from ignorance, both about its nature

almost all been referred to a clinic or fitted and about the structure of the female genital

by their own doctor for reasons of health.) organs. Confusion with abortion is common.

It is hoped to deal more fully with this If biology could be taught in all schools,

subject and that of attitudes to family and children and adolescents given sex

limitation in a later article, when the case education by teachers who were themselves

material is complete.

well adjusted and had some positive ethical

DISCUSSION Urgent Need for Sex Education

approach, there would be a great increase in personal happiness.

This was one of the unexpected findings, What Do Men Want From Their Wives?

yet it was emphasized over and over again Very little, it seems, beyond comfort,

in psychological or physiological context. unstimulating companionship, and the satis-

There is no doubt that the desire for accurate faction of physical needs. This was a dis-

knowledge is widespread; but unfortunately appointing but inevitable conclusion to be

by the time the need for this is realized, drawn from the study. The majority of the

faulty emotional attitudes have already been average or below average in intelligence

formed and the mere imparting of informa- were well enough matched in respect to

tion has limited value. Most parents, when mental capacity and interests; but in the

asked, thought that sex education should be case of the more intelligent, a wide dis-

part of the school curriculum, and regretted crepancy was nearly always evident.

the unsatisfactory ways in which they had A man would be seen who impressed by

38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

his quick understanding, thoughtfulness, against the security and biological fulfilnent

grasp of abstract ideas, broad outlook, which in this society can only be found

obvious potentialities-these qualities in re- within the framework of marnage.

lation to a background of nine years' elemen- Another factor in the situation is that

tary education and, usually, some manual men do not appear to have kept pace with

occupation since. Yet more often than not women's new ways of thinking. They may

his wife was found far behind him in intelli- respect the independent woman and enjoy

gence, incapable of sustaining conversation her company; but they still tend to choose

on anything but personal issues, her horizon as their life's partner someone who approxi-

limited to home, children, and relatives. mates to former ideals of wife, mother,

Such women could not offer real under- homemaker. (Significantly, the highest

standing or bring out the best in their praise given by many subjects to their wives

husbands. "Why do men pick such dull was: " She's all for the home.")

wives ? " one reflected again and again. This ambivalence of attitude and its social

" Why are domesticity and intelligence in- results have been interestingly discussed by

compatible ? "

Folsom. Psychological motivation, accord-

The answer to these questions (if indeed ing to Harding and Lazarsfeld, is thought to

they are considered as questions at all) will be related to underlying insecurity and the-

vary according to individual valuations and need of many men to feel themselves superior

Weltanschauuung. Many would say, often with to their partner. It could be argued that

considerable justice, that the routine of mate selection on this basis is dysgenic for

household drudgery within a narrow sphere intelligence. Whether one agrees with these

leaves neither time, energy nor inclination views or not, it seems certain that a different

to develop inherent intellectual capacities. set of attitudes must be developed if mar-

But this cannot be more than a partial riage is to meet the needs of a changed and

explanation. To me, it appears that one of changing society.

the most important factors in the situation

is the changed economic status of women, Conelusion

and the revolution this has brought about Nothing final can be said. The sample is

in their attitude to marriage.

-too small; material is incomplete; the war

Women have always worked, it is true, has produced an abnormal social situation.

but rarely for an adequate living wage; and Many findings of eugenic and sociological

marriage offered a haven of relative security. interest have not yet been analyzed, e.g.

Higher in the social scale, a woman who education, jobs, "We-They" attitude, etc.

worked was regarded with somewhat don- But even within these limitations, the

temptuous pity, the implication being that study has given some picture of the part

she did so only because she had failed to pla,yed by sex and marriage in the lives of

attract a mate. Again, if a married woman working-class men and women.. As an

worked, this was considered a reflection on experiment in social research, it brings out

her husband's earning capacity. (These possibilities for a new integration of the

attitudes are by no means extinct, though technliques of psychiatry and sociology.

temporarily obscured by war-time con-

scription.)

REFERENCES

But now that most occupations and professions are open to women, to some extent on equal terms with men, it follows that

ADLER, H. M. (1927) Am. J. Psychiat., 6. BIBBY, C. (I945) Sex Education. BLACKER, C. P. (I933) Human Values in Psycho-
logical Medicine.

many women are dissatisfied with the BURGESS, E. W. (I933) Ment. Hyg., 14.

traditional r6le assigned to them. Con- - and COTTRELL (I939) Predicting Success or

sciously or unconsciously, they weigh up the sacrifice which will be required of their in-

Failure in Marriage. CHAPMAN, G. (I940) Culture and Survival. DAVIS, K. B. (1929) Factors in the Sex Life of

dependence, interests and individuality 2,200 Women.

THE GALTON LECTURE, I946

39

DICKINSON, R. L. (I938) Control of Conception. - and BEAM, L. (I932) A Thousand Marriages.
DOLLARD, J. (I935) Criteria for the Life History. ELLIS, H. (I933) The Psychology of Sex.
EXNER, M. J. (I932) The Sexual Side of Marriage.
FLUGEL, J. C. (I934) Men and Their Motives.
(I935) " Psychological Aspects of Marriage and the Family," in Psychology and Modern Problems.
FOLSOM, J. K. (I942) The Family and Democratic Society.
FROMM, E. (I942) The Fear of Freedom. HAMILTON, G. V. (I929) A Research in Marriage.
HARDING, E. (I933) The Way of All Women. HORNEY, K. (I937) The Neurotic Personality of
Our Time.
HORST, P. et alia (I94i) The Prediction of Person-
ality Adjustment.
KIRKPATRICK, C. (I937) Am.J. Sociol., 43.
LAZARSFELD, S. (I940) Woman's Experience of the Male.

LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS (I935) New Survey of London Life and Labour.
LUNDBERG, G. A. (1942) Social Research. LYND, R. and S. (I929) Middletown. MANNHEIM, K. (1943) Diagnosis of Our Time. MEAD, M. (I938) Coming of Age in Samoa. MOWRER, H. (I935) Personality Adjustment and
Domestic Discord.
MYRDAL, A. (194I) Nation and Family.
OSBORN, F. (I940) Preface to Eugenics. POPENOE, P. (1938) J. Soc. Psych., 8. PRATT, G. K. (1930) Am.J. Psychiat., 9.
STEKEL, W. (1926) Frigidity in Women. TAWNEY, R. H. (I92I) The Acquisitive Society. TERMAN, L. M. (I938) Psychological Factors in
Marital Happiness.
and BUTTENWIESER (I935) J. Soc. Psych., 6.
THURSIONE, L. and T. G. (I930) J. Soc. Psych., 1.
WALKER, K. (I 935) Sex and a Changing Civiliza-
tion.
WILLOUGHBY, R. R. (I934) J. Soc. Psych.. 5 and 6.

THE GALTON LECTURE, 1946
Presentation of the Society's Gold Medal

O N Februiary I4th, I946, before a large gathering of Fellows, Members and guests at Manson House,
London, Lord Keynes, on behalf of the Eugenics Society, presented the first Galton Medal to Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders " in recognition of outstanding contributions to the study of eugenics and unremitting service to the Society extending over thirtyfive years"; and following this agreeable ceremony Professor Godfrey Thomson delivered the Galton lecture under the title "The Trend of National Intelligence."
Award of Galton Medal
Opening the proceedings, Lord Keynes said:
It is a satisfaction to take part in the presentation of the first Galton Gold Medal, both in piety to the memory of the great

Galton and in recognition of a worthy and appropriate recipient of a medal established in his name.
I say " appropriate," because the virtue of Carr-Saunders as of Galton lies in his belonging to, and overlapping, several
branches of relevant knowledge instead of over-specializing in one, and having, in particular, reached sociology and eugenics, not from the economic side, but from the
side of biology and Darwinianism. It is, I think, suitable to preface the
presentation of this medal by a few words of piety and remembrance to Francis Galton. His various and peculiar genius-so different from that of his kinsman Charles Darwinlay, not in continuous concentration of mind, but in continuous diffusion; not following
a single inspired idea to its logical and experimental conclusion, but striking out sparks in every direction, many of which

