VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

A SYMPOSIUM*

Dr. C. P. Blacker's Contribution
R. BLACKER said that his contribution to the symposium was to
give an historical retrospect. Much
could be said. But time admitted of little more than an abstract of a complicated
story. It was only between the years I928-39
that there existed in this country an active interest in the possibilities of eugenic sterilization. The climax of the period was the year I934 at the beginning of which the Brock report was published.
The practice of eugenic sterilization could be regarded as having begun fifty-four years ago, when in I897, the first operation, a salpingectomy, was performed in the U.S.A. Two years later (I899) the first vasectomy was performed by Dr. Harry Sharp of Indiana.
In the years before the first war, many women were doubtless sterilized for therapeutic and prophylactic reasons which are strongly applicable to women but scarcely applicable at all to men. The possibilities of eugenic sterilization were occasionally mentioned, notably by Havelock Ellis. After I9I8, reports of the practice reached this country from the U.S.A. There was, moreover, in the twenties, much discussion of rejuvenation: the name of Voronoff was much heard. Vasectomy was proclaimed by some to be a method of rejuvenation, and the operation was performed on ageing men with this end, though how extensively it would now be difficult to say.
In early I926, an advisory committee was organised in the U.S.A. by Mr. E.H. Gosney of California: this committee was later incorporated as the Human Betterment Foundation. This Foundation was largely concerned with investigating and publicizing work on eugenic sterilization. Between
* The three papers that form this symposium were read at a members' meeting of the Eugenics Society on November 20th, 1951.

I927 and I930, twenty-six papers were sponsored of which one, The Effects of
Vasectomy on the Sexual Life, by Mr. Paul Popenoe, was widely noticed in this
country. Though the Mental Deficiency (Wood)
Committee (I929) was not concerned with the subject, its findings and recommendations suggested how sterilization might be employed. Discussions at this time were largely centred on mental defectives. The Wood Committee's investigators found, in six sample inquiries, nearly twice as many mental defectives as had been found in a comparable investigation (that of the Royal Commission for the Care and Control of the Feeble-minded) twenty years before. The ratio per thousand of 8X56 (Wood Committee) compared with that of 4X6 (Royal Commission). How far the ascertained increase reflected a real. increase was debatable; the Wood Committee concluded that it was " hard to believe that there had not been some increase." The same Committee estimated that there were 300,000 mental defectives in England and Wales, and they recommended that institutional provision should be made for a third of this numbera big expansion on the provision which existed then or has existed since. They further recommended what they called a " new conception " of the institution. Its aim should be to stabilize and train as many inmates as possible for life in the general community; it should resemble, in its social function, a flowing lake rather than a stagnant pool. Here was an obvious field for sterilization. Everyone agreed that mental defectives should not have children. Indeed, in its annual reports, the Board of Control had recommended with this end the legal prohibition of marriage of mental
defectives. The stimuli provided by the publications
of the Human Betterment Foundation and by the report of the Wood Committee prompted the Eugenics Society to take the

i8o

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

i8i

matter up. In various pamphlets and other agreement. In February I932, a deputation

publications it put forward a case which consisting of representatives of the County

subsequent events proved to be moderate Councils Association, the Association of

and jiustifiable. But in so doing it was Municipal Corporations and the Mental

attacked on both flanks. On the one hand Hospitals Association-all important bodies

we were criticized by those actively concerned -submitted to the then Minister of Health

with the welfare of mental defectives who (Sir Hilton Young: now Lord Kennet) a

saw their objectives (improved conditions request that the matter be impartially

for defectives) endangered; on the other by investigated. The Minister complied by

those who saw in widely-applied measures appointing the Brock Committee.

of sterilization a means both for reducing As remarked before, the Committee pro-

numbers of mental defectives (who were duced its report in January I934, and it is on

thought to be increasing at an alarming the recommendations of this Committee,

rate) and for effecting drastic economies which endorsed and indeed (in two respects)

(in expenditure on institutions and colonies) went beyond what the Society had advo-

for the ratepayer. By the latter group our cated, that the case for sterilization now

proposals were condemned as timid and over- rests.

cautious. Two Parliamentary Bills were The report had a large and, on the whole, a

drafted, one relating to mental defectives sympathetic Press, and numerous organisa-

alone, the other to mental defectives and tions which had previously been in doubt

" mental convalescents " as defined in the came down in favour of its recommenda-

draft Bill. During the years I929-34 the tions. There was formed a Joint Committee

Society was active in putting its case, and on Voluntary Sterilization (Lord Horder,

much support was forthcoming. Resolutions Chairman) which was largely subsidised by

favouring the Society's proposals were, for the Eugensics Society which also accommo-

example, passed by the National Association dated it in its house. A most impressive

for the Feebleminded, the National Union of list of supporting resolutions was collected

Societies for Equal Citizenship, the National of which a conspicuous feature was the

Council for Mental Hygiene, the Women's favourable-indeed enthusiastic-attitude of

Co-operative Guilds and the Conservative organizations connected with the blind. No

Women's Reform Association.

less than thirty-two of these passed sup-

But the persons and bodies directly porting resolutions.

responsible for the care and control of mental Efforts were made in Parliament. In these,

defectives were reluctant to commit them- Major A. G. Church, Wing-Commander

selves: most were understandably conscious A. W. H. James and Mr. Hugh Molson took

of how the innovation could be abused so as prominent parts.

to defeat the main objectives they were But an adverse wind was beginning to

pursuing, namely an improvement of the blow. The beginning of I934, when the Brock

conditions under which defectives had to report was published, was also the occasion

live. In discussions, much breath was wasted of an event which increasingly told against

in saying that sterilization was " not a us. The Nazis promulgated a sterilization

panacea "-which no responsible person law with compulsory clauses. There is no

had ever declared it to be. During this time to discuss the German enactment.

period, invaluable help was given to the Suffice it that the course of international

Society by Dr. R. Langdon Down, to whom events generated suspicions of any measure

we shall always be in debt.

which had even distant affinities with Nazi

There grew up a demand for an authori- practices. The argument was increasingly

tative and impartial survey. The Council of heard that the cautious and moderate

the British Medical Association made a recommendations of the Brock Committee

preliminary move by appointing in Novem- were the " thin end of a wedge " of which

ber I930 a committee which did not reach the thick end would be a compulsory system

c

182 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

operated by Eugenic Courts, the instruments of a dictatorship.
The Government of the day felt that the measure had ceased to be a purely medical question: it had acquired dangerous political
overtones. Subsequent experience has demonstrated
what we all knew, that sterilization was open to abuse; but it has also shown, as will be heard from a later speaker, that it can be so safeguarded as to be a valuable instrument of preventive medicine. Other countries such as Denmark and Sweden, no less democratic than ourselves, have sterilization laws which work well. Indeed they are supported by a large volume of medical and lay opinion.
The subject has, as the Chairman said,
been in the doldrums since I939. The time
has now come when it should be revived.
Mrs. Moya Woodside's Contribution
To my mind, people in this country take a rather insular outlook towards the possibilities of eugenic sterilization. Ignoring or unaware of successful experience in Scandinavia, Switzerland and the United States, they are apt to think of it as a dangerous sort of experiment which easily lends itself to misuse. From a strictly genetical point of view they may feel it has very limited value, as even if all certified persons were sterilized the much larger group of " carriers " in the normal population is untouched. Or-despite the word voluntary-they may believe that sterilization is something " done " to people, perhaps against their will, and which has damaging psychological results. The whole topic is greatly befogged by speculation and emotion.
When I went out to North Carolina, now nearly four years ago, I was most curious to know how a sterilization law worked in everyday practice. And I was curious about how men and women felt who had actually had the operation. In the course of my study, it became apparent that many of the theoretical dangers and difficulties associated with sterilization were, in practice, negligible or non-existent. But there were difficulties of a social and economic nature, which, in the

particular circumstances of North Carolina,
proved an effective brake on the best
intentions of the law.
Let me sketch in very briefly the background of eugenic sterilization in the United
States. It is no new experience there, since the earliest law was enacted over forty years ago, in the state of Indiana. Shortly after, in I909 and I9II, California and Iowa passed
similar laws and other states soon did the
same. Today, in I95I, twenty-seven states have sterilization laws in active use. The total of officially reported sterilizations to January Ist of this year was 52,233: 2I,250
of these were male, 30,983 were female: 26,858, or rather more than half, were undertaken on grounds of mental deficiency.
The remainder were on grounds of mental
disease.
Now all this happens, and has been hap-
pening for forty-three years, without fuss
or fanaticism in a country where individual liberty is respected as much as here. I
would like to stress that the character of these various state laws is entirely demo-
cratic, and their administration is in the hands of informed and responsible people. The Eugenics Board in North Carolina, for instance, consists of the Attorney General, two institutional psychiatrists, a senior administrative social worker and a senior public health doctor. I attended several
meetings of the Board when sterilization petitions were being considered, and I was impressed by the almost microscopic way in which every detail of a petition was scrutinized so that no medical or legal requirement was unfulfilled. In fact, the
outside criticism most often made by doctors and social workers about the functioning of
the Eugenics Board was in terms of " red
tape " and ultra-cautiousness. North Carolina is roughly the size of
England, excluding Wales. It has a popu-
lation of 31 million people, nearly a third of
them Negro. The predominant religion is Protestant fundamentalist, and Catholics are in a very small minority. North Carolina has had its present law for nineteen years, and during that period, 2,696 sterilizations have been done. As in the other twenty-six

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION

I83

interested states, the law refers onlSr to cases of mental disease, feeble-mindedness and epilepsy. Nowhere is there statutory provision for sterilization on grounds of transmissible physical defect, such as deafmutism or hxmophilia: a mental condition must exist as well. Sterilization of normal individuals for medical reasons is not covered by law, and is left to the surgeons'
discretion. There is nothing wholesale about the
application of the law: in fact, petitions are only presented for a very small proportion of those eligible. Operations are not considered for permanently-institutionalized persons (which eliminates the large group of chronic psychotic and low-grade defective). Nor, in the case of women, are they necessary once the menopause is past. There is selection, tou, within the diagnostic categoriesat one of the North Carolina mental hospitals the medical superintendent tried to recommend all cases of recovered puerperal psychosis. At another mental hospital the preference went to high-grade defectives with epilepsy. The correctional and mental deficiency institutions tend to select cases where, in addition to feeble-mindedness, there is a record of anti-social sexual behaviour. No patient or inmate anywhere is recommended for sterilization unless they themselves understand what it means and give their own consent. Nor would any surgeon operate on an unwilling patient, even though their sterilization had been specifically authorized by the Eugenics Board.
To illustrate the type of patient selected, here are two cases from Eugenics Board
records:
A married woman, age twenty-four, diagnosed as severely epileptic, who is the mother of five children ranging in age from six years to four months. She has been in Court several times for sexual misdemeanour, and has also been guilty of maltreatment and abandonment of her children.
A single girl, age seventeen, mentally deficient, who was committed to a training school for being an inhabitant of a disorderly house. Her mother is dead, her father is an alcoholic. Her father was suspected of incest. Two brothers have prison records for stealing. On an intelligence test she received an I.Q. of 58.

I had rather imagined that medical superin-
tendents, when considering eugenic sterilization, would draw up family trees of their patients and weigh the pro and con of Mendelian inheritance. But not at alltheir decision was based on the immediate
welfare of the patient and the social surroundings to which he or she would return. They spoke of protection (this was a word I often heard used about the operation).
Sterilization protected a woman's physical and mental health, and protected indirectly
her family. Feeble-minded girls were protected from undesirable pregnancy, and the community protected from the burden of supporting their handicapped children. This to me was a new way of looking at negative eugenics; but it seems one that Galton would have approved.
There were two main practical difficulties about getting sterilizations put through.
First, the complications of petition procedure, which requires a medical examination, psychological tests, consents from next-of-kin or guardian, a social history,
naming of surgeon who will operate, and
provisional arrangements for hospitalization. All this calls for time, care and skilled
social case-work, since it may take several interviews with relatives before they will give their consent. This is particularly so when dealing with patients from the Social Problem Group, since their relatives are likely to be of low intelligence themselves (and, in North Carolina, often illiterate and very superstitious).
The second difficulty was a shortage of hospital beds, of qualified surgeons and of public funds to meet the cost. However serious the laws' intention, operations
cannot be performed if there is no accommo-
dation available and no money to pay the
surgeons' fees. Remember, there is no compulsory health insurance coverage in America, and medical services in the poorer Southern states are shockingly inadequate. Whether or not recommended persons got sterilized often depended on where they lived. If it was in a rural area without hospital service (in I948 thirty-six of North Carolina's IOO counties had no hospital

i84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

beds whatever) the administrative diffi- Carolina is regarded as a medical and social

culties of getting a patient admitted to a welfare measure, and is carried out in that

hospital in another area, for an operation spirit. If we here could create a similar

not regarded as urgent, were almost insuper- unemotional climate of opinion, the practice

able. Again, if the local hospital were of voluntary sterilization would be greatly

Catholic-controlled (as was the case in one forwarded in this country.

or two counties) no co-operation was forth-

coming. If it had no beds for Negro patients, then Negroes went unsterilized. If the local surgeon were uninterested or hostile, steri-

A Synopsis of Mr. Cecil Binney's
Contribution

lizations did not get done.

Mr. Cecil Binney, M.A., barrister-at-law,

But my most unexpected discovery in dealt with the legal position regarding

North Carolina was the extent and popularity sterilization. He remarked that he had

of sterilization outside the eugenics law. given considerable attention to this subject

Known as therapeutic sterilization, these since the occasion many years ago when the

operations were performed on physical Eugenics Society, before he became a member,

grounds such as heart or kidney disease, and kindly employed him to produce a pamphlet

social factors of poverty and high fertility on the subject. He had then found the

were taken into account. When possible, utmost difficulty in coming to any conclusion

the operation was done immediately follow- about the law and further consideration

ing a woman's confinement, so that one stay made the problem no easier. There could be

in hospital sufficed. The surgeon obtained no doubt that a sterilizing operation if done

informal written consent from the patient for therapeutic reasons was as lawful as

and her husband before she was admitted. other surgical operations. It was equally

No stigma was attached to the procedure: certain that it was unlawful to perform

those who'd been " fixed " or had their such operations except for therapeutic rea-

"tubes tied" (to quote the vernacular!) were sons on persons incapable of giving their

rather objects of envy among prolific consent or unwilling to do so. The question

friends and neighbours.

which concerned the Society was as to the

I interviewed forty-eight married women legality of the operation if performed with

of normal mentality who had had this sort the patient's consent on eugenic grounds,

of operation. There were both white and though this might involve the larger question

Negro in the group; some were well-off, whether the operation was illegal when

but most were in poor circumstances. A performed for less worthy motives. The

few had University education; a few were legal position had been slightly clarified since

near-illiterate. The average number of the question was first mooted in that it was

pregnancies was five. With three exceptions, now plain that the consent of the patient

all had nothing but good to report. General was not necessarily in itself a defence to a

health had improved, anxiety and worry charge of unlawful wounding, while it was

diminished, interest in sex had revived, and obvious that any sterilizing operation must

marriages were happier. Husbands also come under the definition of wounding.

approved. As one Negro mother who had The question still remained open in what

had fourteen pregnancies said: " It's the most circumstances wounding might be held to be

wonderful thing that ever happened. I unlawful because it was done with a com-

wished they had given it to me six years mendable motive. The question whether a

ago." The enthusiastic testimony of these prosecution was likely to be brought against

women left no doubt in my mind that sterili- a doctor performing a sterilizing operation

zation in appropriate cases could only was quite a different one from the question

benefit mental and physical health.

whether it was against the law, and one on

One last point. Sterilization in North which he could not express any opinion.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIII, No. 4

