THE WELFARE STATE: A EUGENIC APPRAISAL*

By Professor F. A. E. CREW, M.D., F.R.S., F.R.C.P.(Ed.).

T has long been a cherished dream of claim such interest and importance that

mine that perhaps some day I might possibly it is desirable that it shall be

be thought worthy of being invited to examined by a variety of people whosO'

deliver this Galton Lecture. This dream, interests differ and whose approaches are

I must confess, has always contained an different. As you have been informed, I

element of anxiety, for I have ever doubted represent that field of interest and activity

that my performance would be found worthy which has claimed, if not earned, the title

of the occasion. I have always looked for- Social Medicine. As I understand it, social

'ward to an opportunity such as this when I medicine is primarily concerned with the

might publicly acknowledge my indebtedness search for and the presentation of knowledge

to Francis Galton, pay homage to him and of a medical kind that can aid agovernment,

express my gratitude. He played a most local or central, to give effect to its pro-

important part not only in the development claimed aim of preserving and augmenting

of a science but also in the creation of a the health and welfare of the people. From

climate of opinion which made possible, the study of the interconnections between

even inevitable, the institution of academic the variety and magnitude of disease occur-

departments of genetics, with one of which ring within different biological and social

I was connected for a quarter of a century. categories, social medicine attempts to give

A great deal of the abundant joy that was definition to the biological and social needs

mine during those years stems directly from of man and to discover those agencies within

Galton's thought and philosophy.

a human society that are involved in disease

I chose this particular topic for considera- causation. Thus social medicine, or socio-

tion for entirely selfish reasons. It is one ecological medicine, is a source from which

concerning which I ought, in virtue of my there can be secured knowledge that can

present academic position, to have ideas form the springboard of social and political

and opinions. To make this appointment action directed toward the elevation of the

with you would, I thought, compel me to health and well-being of the community

clarify such ideas and to formulate such as a whole'and of various categories within

opinions. My fear of your adverse criticism it. It is medicine as a social science and as an

of these would compel me to examine them instrument of social policy.

very carefully; so I could not but profit.

I am therefore vastly interested in any

Maybe I have profited, but now that I am development that has for its proclaimed

here I find it necessary to crave your purpose the amelioration of the conditions indulgence, for that which I have to offer of the people and the augmentation of their

seems very commonplace and hardly worth health, happiness and efficiency.

the offering. Moreover, it was only a year ago, on this very occasion, when that eminent sociologist, Professor Marshall, dealt very adequately indeed with certain of the
most important aspects of this very subject. To what he then said I can add nothing. But the subject is so many-sided and can

I propose to examine two sets of ideas and ideals and their interconnections: those from which the Welfare State emerged and which have fashioned it, and those which mould the views of the eugenist.
To give exact definition to the Welfare State is beyond my competence. All States

* The Galton Lecture, delivered on February i6th, 1954.-

would claim to be welfare states in the sense'that they are actively concerned with

8I

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

-the well-being of their people. They differ divine governance of the world. He taught

markedly among themselves in respect of that God had so ordered the world that every-

structure and organization; in some only a one pursuing his own interests would best

few know best what is good for the rest promote the interests of all. In every-

and act upon this assumption; in others one God had implanted the desire to im-

it is the opinion of the majority that decides. prove himself. God had done all the planning

In some the State is interested in the well- and all that man had to do was to avoid

being of certain categories within the commu- interfering with the arrangements.

,nity; in others it is interested in the well- By the end of the eighteenth century this

being of all. There are vast differences in idea of laissez-faire had assumed an inelastic

respect of the content of welfare and also and doctrinaire form. The State was to be

in the methods by which it is provided.

concerned solely with protection against

In so far as this country is concerned, the disorder within and against enemies without.

idea of the Welfare State, the idea that the The only sound governmental policy was to

Government should display an active patern- leave all things to the competent judgement

alist interest in the affairs of individuals and of the competent individual who was quite

groups within the community, is of very long capable of looking after himself.

standing. It was in the reign of Elizabeth I

Our rulers will best promote the improvement

that' the English Government first came of the nation by strictly confining themselves to

to be concerned on a large scale with
economic as well as political matters. The mercantilism of those days demanded a

their own legitimate duties, by leaving capital to find its most lucrative course, commodities their fair price, industry and intelligence their natural reward, idleness and folly their natural

planned economy and so the State became punishnment; by maintaining peace, by defending

concerned in such matters as employment, property, by diminishing the price of law and

wage levels, the conditions of apprenticeship, 'the promotion of industry and the relief
of the poor. In connection with this discussion the last of these, the relief of the poor, is of the greatest interest. I assume that compassion played but little part in focusing the interest of government upon the poor and that the considerations that
moulded action were primarily economic. However,' because no adequate administrative machinery existed, such intervention by the State was largely fruitless. It is to be noted that'at this time the citizen could not claim State help as a right.
With the passing of time there came into being a reaction to this planned economy. Under the stimulus of the French physiocrats and of Adam Smith there developed the philosophy of laissez-faire. The physiocrats desired to establish the rule of Nature, holding that the world was governed by natural law coming from God and that
therefore within the State there'ought to be a minimum of legislation and of control.
The teaching of Adam Smith was based
upon a curious system of natural theology

by observing strict economy in every department of the State. Let the Government do this; the People will assuredly do the rest.*
This doctrine was the dominant orthodoxy of a large part of the nineteenth century in this country and from it stemmed the Poor Law Act of I834 which finally brought to
an end all grants to the poor, restricted outdoor relief and established the workhouse.
It is to be noted that this action, and many others like it, was based upon the concept that all men were born free and equal in respect of opportunity but unequal in respect of goodness and that social success was a true measure of* individual worth. In free and fair competition, it was held, the successful, strong in their goodness, were rightly rewarded and the weak, weak because of their own wickedness, deserved not pity but punishment. Poverty and destitution were fit and proper punishments for wickedness.
These attitudes derived from the sincerely held views, regarded as being essentially reasonable, of upright God-fearing men. To the eugenist, whose views are shaped

which he devised in order to explain the

* Lord Macaulay, I830.

THE WELFARE STATE: A EUGENIC APPRAISAL

83

by scientific knowledge that has become Crises of mass unemployment recurred

available since that time, these attitudes to make massive State intervention in every

are of particular interest. They will com- function of the national economy necessary.

mend themselves to him, or not, according In them both capital and labour turned

to whether or not it can now be reasonably to the State for rescue and in every instance

assumed that wickedness and goodness, as such intervention was a further step in

then defined, are in fact the equivalents the development of a planned national

of biological inadequacy and adequacy economy. These crises indicated clearly

and that social status and the possession of that the national economy was one and

wealth are indeed fair measures of biological indivisible, and so it was that the need for

worth. In those days the action of certain some kind of planning authority came to be

selective factors was intense. Intelligence, recognized. Indeed in every country in the

pertinacity, thrift, industry, aggressiveness, world today the principle of State interven-

egocentricity, the lightness of the load of tion is admitted, overtly or taditly, though

family responsibility, were among the pos- there are differences in the frankness of

sessions that greatly advantaged the seeker the admission, in the objectives and in the

-after wealth and security. Lack of them degree of the efficiency of such intervention.

spelt failure that led to destitution. So During these events it became increasingly

also did the handicap of defect, derangement obvious that the disaster of unemployment

and disease. To the eugenist the question of and consequent poverty was in no sense

importance is whether or not these properties a penalty of sloth or incompetence and that

are of high social importance, are partly or its causes were far beyond the power of the

wholly genetically determined, and whether individual to control. The philosophy

as a consequence of such selection there that had justified laissez-faire became dis-

came to be a widely disproportionate credited. The reputedly free and equal

distribution of genes advantageous to the individuals who competed for reward mani-

individual and to the community within festly did not enjoy equality. Unrestrained

the population, tending to become con- competition left but little scope for freedom

centrated in the more successful, whether for the handicapped. The moral foundations

such selection tended to bring into being upon which laissez-faire rested became more

"two nations " in th,e biological sense.

and more undermined as it became increas-

But as we know, this strict doctrine of ingly obvious that the system which pur-

laissez-faire was never completely applied, ported to wipe out inequality, and which to

for under the growing pressure of public some extent did so, bred and tolerated new

opinion moulded by the literati, the idealists, and gross inequalities of its own. Gradually

the religious revivalists, the social reformers and progressively there evolved certain

of those days, humanitarian legislation was notions which gained widening acceptance.

introduced, though but slowly, to improve These were: (i) that only a minority in a

the lot of 'the child worker, the woman society such as then existed could hope to

worker and ultimately of workers in general, provide against the hazards of illness,

and to protect these against the more unemployment, poverty and old age;

extreme forms of exploitation. Compassion no individual acting alone could successfully

and consideration for the underdog found cope with the conditions and circumstances

expression. It came to be shown that a that obtained within the socio-economic

very great deal of the destitution, vice, milieu and which largely determined the

sickness and untimely death that disfigured individual's destiny; (2) that the com-

society was caused by the conditions in munity as a whole could do much that

which the masses lived and worked and lay far beyond the competence of the

that much could be eradicated by improving individual; (3) that the State was not only

these conditions by adequate social and strong but was also wise, its collective

political, action.

wisdom being far greater than the wisdom

84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the individual, and (4) that all individuals seen the inception and development of a

were equal in the sense that everyone had social insurance scheme with its workman's

the same claim to the " protective" services compensation, its old age and widows'

of the State as a right.

pensions and its sickness and unemployment

These notions rapidly gained strength benefits. We know of the Beveridge Report

under the impact of two forces: (i) the and the Acts of Parliament that are based

Benthamite principle of utility, according upon its recommendations which removed

to which the aim of all endeavour was to be many of the imperfections and inade-

the greatest happiness of the greatest quacies of earlier acts which experience

number, and (2) the vast enlargement of the had revealed, which introduced children's

franchise by which the masses gained allowances and medical care for all and

overwhelming potential political power. With which attempted to eradicate unemployment.

this expansion, with the growth of trade Thus the State, in its instrument of

union organization and with the universali- government, has now accepted as its prime

zation of education there came into being aim and responsibility the task of preventing

an increasing and ever more persistent unemployment, of abolishing poverty and

demand that governmental action to abolish of doing whatever lies in its power to promote

unemployment, destitution and preventable the health and welfare of the people. That

illness should be unleashed. It was the the social order of the nineteenth century has

refusal on the part of labour to compete to become transformed, as though by a revolu-

the point of exterminating the less efficient tion, into one in which State intervention

for the hypothetical good of the whole and State planning are not only necessary

community that played havoc with an but imperative would seem to be beyond

economic system based upon the principle dispute.

of unlimited competition withi rewards for Whatever you and I may say of the

the successful. There developed the view organization and functioning of this new

that in the name of justice the wealth of the social order, we surely must agree that

country should be redistributed more the ideas and the aims that lay behind

equitably.

action were possessed of a certain magni-

It was the Fabians who gave to the ficence. There is always a vast difference

term Welfare State the connotation it now between the dream of the idealist and the

possesses, a State primarily organized for project of the planner that attempts to

the provision of the means whereby certain make the dream come true. Is not its

needs of the individual and of the group real purpose one to which Francis Galton

could be satisfied, a social organization in himself would have subscribed? I remind

which a very large proportion of the earnings you of the quotation that decorates the

of the citizens, being collected by govern- front cover of the EUGENICS REVIEW.

mental agencies, is spent by other govern-

Man is gifted with pity and other kindly

mental agencies in ways meant to advantage the health and happiness of the people and in which many of the more important

feelings; he has also the power of preventing many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall
well within his province to replace natural selection by other processes that are more

instruments of production and distribution merciful and not less effective. This is precisely

are taken over by the State.

the aim of eugenics.

As ideas became transformed into policies Disregarding for a moment the implica-

and projects the State, in increasing measure, tions of the phrase "not less effective,"

assumed the responsibility of protecting for eugenics in this quotation read govern-

those who could not fend for themselves. ment, for economic considerations apart,

In our own time we have witnessed a vast and* these are of the strongest, it was pity,

expansion of this intervention by the State compassion, a sense of fairness, that moved

to ensure the welfare of a wide variety of the social reformers to work for the removal

categories within the population. We have of the causes of suffering, for replacing the

THE WELFARE STATE: A EUGENIC APPRAISAL

85

awful selective agents that operated when protection to all without means of their

the fires of the dark Satanic mills of industry own against want, unemployment and sick-

were fed with the health and happiness of ness, the danger will arise that a benevolent

the human stock by others less merciful. State may be forced to transform itself

It became the will of government to ensure into an authoritarian State, driven to a

that every individual within the population degree of regimentation and control that

should enjoy equality in respect of today would be regarded as obnoxious.

opportunity, to give to every citizen, as a The second point is this. Practically

birthright, safeguards against insecurity, everybody in this country now accepts

poverty, preventable disease and untimely the view that society has an obligation to

death. For reasons such as these the eugenist, provide decent standards of living for all

qua eugenist, must surely rejoice. But its citizens and also that society has an

since between the aim and the effect of a obligation to provide the opportunity for

project such as this there can be a world of everyone within that society to work. But

difference the eugenist must withhold judge- for the present it is not generally accepted

ment until the effects of this drastic and that society has both an obligation and a

dramatic change in the role of government right to see that the people so safeguarded

can be assessed.

shall perform that work. There is no modern

It is difficult indeed for one of my age equivalent to the discarded economic whip

and experience objectively to examine the as an incentive to work and as a distributor

Welfare State as it now exists in this country. of labour. Work and remuneration still

I am the p5roduct of a world that now retain their outmoded connotations and

exists only in the nostalgic memories of the we await the developmrnt of a new philosophy

old, a world in which, largely as a conse- that will furnish a new incentive for the

quence of the thrift, industry and philo- new social habit of work, work primarily

progenitiveness of my parents, I enjoyed for the welfare of society as a whole. Thus

many advantages and many privileges. I it is that many are anxious lest the pater-

came to know that in it there was much to nalistic activities of government should

be deplored and condemned but to me it retard or prevent the achievement of social

was a gracious world. That in which I maturity on the part of the citizens, should

now live and attempt to serve is to me weaken the initiative and the independence

distinctly uncongenial. Nevertheless, I, of the worker.

like the rest of my generation that has As the statesman knows full well, in

survived two wars, attempt to the best of certain instances there can be-; no better

my ability to refashion my ideas and, method of assessing the effects of these

especially, my sense of values and to play changes in social organization than . by

my part, however small, in what surely must reference to certain indices of the reactions

be regarded as a most important experiment of the human population. to them, such

in social engineering. The object of this is indices as live expectancy, the changing

to examine the possibility of reconciling age structure of the population, the move-

democracy with State planning.

ments of the birth and death rates, of the

I do not propose, nor am I competent, infant mortality rate, of the mortality

to discuss the economic consequences of the rate among women of the age range I5-44

vast changes that have taken place. But and of the maternal mortality rate.

I may perhaps attract your attention to There is no doubt whatsoever that the

two points. The State can give only that progressive and general uprising of the

which it exacts and it may be that should standard of living, the progressive improve-

the country ever, on account of the changing ment in the conditions in the home and in

mean age of the population, of the stubborn the workshop, the ever rising standards of

opposition of the relatively opulent or for education, nu-trition and social security aifd

any other reason, find it difficult to provide the expansion of the social -and medical

86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

services are collectively responsible for the external physical and social worlds and

pramatic halving of the death-rate that has that it is rare for the genetic endowment

occurred within the last hundred years, for to become fully expressed. Health, for

the fall of the infant mortality rate to a example, is not a quality that is prede-

quarter, for the extension of life expectancy termined by the genetic constitution, for

at birth by twenty-five and more years. The it is much more than the absence of ill

main result of the startling rise of the health. There are defects and derangements

survival rate interacting with the halving disadvantageous to the individual and un-

of the birth-rate has been a progressively desirable in the opinion of society which

rising mean age of the population.

are the direct expression of genetic action;

As a result of the changed age structure if the individual is to be healthy he must

of the population, due in part to the pro- lack the genes corresponding to them; To

gressive growth of the power to prevent this extent the quality of health is genetically

the occurrence of certain diseases and to predetermined; but the vast majority of

control the course or mitigate the effects diseases of individual and social importance

of others, the whole pattern of morbidity are either the reactions of the individual,

and mortality has changed. Today the prone to contract them by virtue of his

great killers are in the main the degenerative genetic constitution, to the stimulus of a

and malignant diseases that particularly particular agency or set of agencies present

affect the older age groups.

in his environment or else are purely

Birth and death are phenomena that environmental in origin.

command the attention of the eugenist In so far as the defects and derangements

for it is through the portals of birth that (of body and of mind) of genetic origin are

reinforcement reaches the community and concerned, those among us who are involved

by death that losses are endured. The in the application of gepetical knowledge in

eugenist is not primarily interested in the general field of medicine are greatly

birth-rates and death-rates as such but impressed by the effects of the activities of

with the biological quality of those who are the Eugenics Society upon public opinion.

born and of those who die before the end Among the educated and socially respon-

of their reproductive phase has been reached. sible sections of the population there is an

There can be nothing more difficult than ever increasing number of potential parents

to define this quality in which the eugenist who are unwilling to transmit defect and

is rightly interested; and even when it has derangement to their offspring. There is

been defined its recognition is by no means every reason to assume that this attitude

easy. I assume that it will be agreed that will become ever more widespread. Granting

the attributes which the eugenist would this, the problem that will increase in

regard as being desirable in all societies at importance is that presented by those

all times are health, intelligence and ability within the population who do not regard

of a general or of a special kind and that parentage as a serious responsibility.

the quality of the individual is determined For the present it is not known who these

by the extent to which the precursors of are or what their number is. Among those

these attributes are represented in his untouched by the educatioiial system of

genetic constitution. The eugenist is per- this country are two categories, the

suaded that the foundations of these ineducable and the unfortunate. Of the

attributes are laid in the genetic endowment former certain sub-categories are readily

of the individual which sets a limit to what identified either by the grossness of their

the individual may beoome. But he recog- deficiencies or, in the case of lesser grades,

nizes that in general the ultimate characterisa- by the results of tests now available. But

tion of the individual is the outcome of the latter are engulfed in a mass of those

the interplay of this endowment and a who, being too greatly handicapped by

wide variety of influences present in his illness or being contorted by the conditions

THE WELFARE STATE: A EUGENIC APPRAISAL

87

and circumstances in the home, family and no preparation for a task and a responsibility

community that attended their infancy, that, from the point of view of society, is

childhood and adolescence, were never undoubtedly the most important of all.

able to acquire that which was within their But these matters are well known to you

-competence.

and concerning them you are more know-

In so far as the defects and derangements ledgeable than I. I refer to them only

of genetico-environmental and environmental to make the point that the eugenist is indeed

causation are concerned, and these are interested in all action which tends to

remarkable for their disproportional distri- bring into being an environment in which

bution among the different socio-economic genetic potentiality in respect of qualities

classes of the Registrar-General, their advantageous to society and to socialized

recorded incidence being markedly lower man finds full expression. To the eugenist

in the higher classes and higher in the lower, the best of all social orders is one in which

the improvement of the environment, the proportion of the healthy, of the highly

physical and social, that is the aim of the intelligent, of the greatly able, of those whose

Welfare State has reduced and will continue actions are moulded by a deep sense of

to reduce their incidence. The control of social responsibility is regarded as being of

the environmental factor in the case of far greater importance than the total

diseases of genetico-environmental origin number of individuals within it.

-nullifies the action of the genetic component. The extension of the life expectancy and

This is true also for the quality of general the profound change in the mean age of the

intelligence and general ability and for the population are not directly of eugenic

capacity to become socialized. It is estab- interest in that the effects have been to

lished that environmental forces play their increase the proportion of those past their

important part in determining the extent reproductive phase, of the pensionable,

to which these attributes are expressed. whose contributions to posterity in the

Continuous illness, lack of protection, affec- form of offspring have already been made.

tion and appropriate care during childhood The progressive reduction of the infant

can inhibit and contort the development mortality and child mortality rafes means

of the qualities which the individual possesses that of the children that are born far fewer

-in potential. Here again the basal problem now die in infancy and childhood but live to

is that of distinguishing between those reach maturity and to beget offspring. To

incapable of creating a micro-environment the eugenist the question of importance is

optimal for the smooth development of the whether or not the mortality that used to

immature by virtue of their genetic con- operate was selective in the sense that it

stitutions and those who, though capable removed the relatively inviable and left

of doing so, have never learnt how to do it. only the more biologically efficient, efficient

In my view, in a society such as ours, largely for, genetic reasons, to perpetuate

industrialized, urbanized, education for the stock.

parentage is very necessary. In this society There is no sure evidence that this

child-bearing and child-rearing do not mortality was selective in this sense. It was

command high public esteem as they do in due in very large measure to diseases of the

others. The greatest gift to the community respiratory and alimentary systems, to the.

which can be made is not, according to the ingestation and inhalation of specific micro-

prevailing opinion, a genetically well-endowed organisms causing inflammation of the

child,. well nurtured. To do so is probably bowel or of the lungs in an individual too

the most arduous of all undertakings, even young to have been able to develop a

though it may be the most rewarding. Our resistance to their attack. Any infant

young men and women are trained for being so attacked, irrespective of any many things and acquire much relevant differences in genetic constitution, was in

knowledge and skill, but for them there is danger ;of death. Differences in the quality

D

88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of parental care and of medical- and nursing the action of disease-evoking agencies within

attention were mainly responsible for the the environment.

differences in survival. There is no suggestion In this connection it is profitable to

of any close relationship between the consider tuberculosis. If it be held that a

qualities of social importance and proneness marked proneness or susceptibility to con-

to enteritis and broncho-pneumonia in tract this disease is a genetic character and

infancy.

that in the causation of this disease the

This mortality was and is selective in that tubercle bacillus is greatly aided by a

gross defect and derangement of certain constellation of unsatisfactory environmental

kinds is responsible for a high proportion factors (e.g. malnutrition, overcrowding,

of stillbirth and neonatal death and doubtless poverty) and by behaviour that involves

also of prenatal death. There can be close contact with an infective case, what is

nothing dysgenic in a further reduction of the correct policy? To control all the

infant and child mortality. There will contributory causal agencies, to gain mastery

come a point, however, when such reduction over the bacillus, would not affect the

will be halted; this will be reached when susceptibility of individuals. While they

the only causes operating to cause death lived their lives in a milieu from which these

will be gross defect or derangement due to causal agencies had been removed they

genetic action or to developmental mishap. would not develop the disease. Should the

The same question arises in the case of milieu change, however, they and all who

the survival of those adolescents and matures had inherited this proneness would quickly

who in former days would certainly have succumb. Surely the policy is to make all

succumbed. Is the intervention, medical milieux safe for the prone, for tuberculosis is

and otherwise, which makes survival possible the great enemy of achievement in every

dysgenic ? Nowadays quite a number of part of the world and there is no evidence

genetic imperfections can be repaired by which even suggests that proneness to

appropriate therapy, for while the genetic tuberculosis is particularly prevalent among

basis of a disease cannot be reached the individuals of low overall biological or

results of such genetic action can often be social worth.

nullified. Individuals thus repaired can The fall of the birth-rate is of special

-flourish and transmit their defects, poten- interest for a variety of reasons, but in

tial or actual. Genes of an undesirable kind connection with the present discussion its

could thus become multiplied among the interest centres round the question as to

population and an increasing number of whether it is due in large part to a differential

individuals in every generation need treat- fertility that distinguishes sections of the

ment without which their defects would population that can truly be classified as

became manifest. But surely all this is with- genetically more and genetically less desir-

out significance unless the kind of civilization able from the point of view of society as a

that we know is overthrown. Doubtless the whole. It is important to know also whether

accumulation of undesirable genes of this kind such measures as maternity benefits and

in our population is now such that if we were children's allowances tend to enlarge or to

suddenly thrown back into the equivalent of diminish this disparity in respect of fertility,

our own tenth century very large numbers if this exists. Undoubtedly this differential

among us would quickly become inviable. fertility did distinguish and still distinguishes

But since it is our aim to move forward into the socio-economic classes; the higher the

the thirtieth and not to move back into the class the lower the fertility, stillbirth and

tenth century it seems to me that we have to infant mortality. But the gradient is not

accept the policy to neutralize in so far as nearly so steep as it used to be and the gap

this is possible the action of disease-evoking has narrowed. The semi-skilled and unskilled

agencies within the genetic constitution, workers are, however, still rather more fertile

just as it is the accepted policy to combat than the rest. It is reasonable to maintain

THE WELFARE STATE: A EUGENIC APPRAISAL

89

it is in the lowest socio-economic class of the
Registrar-General that there is the greatest concentration of the socially inadequate and that of these a proportion are inadequate
for genetic reasons.
But as yet there is no way of knowing
what this proportion is or whether the fertility of the genetically inadequate is
as high or higher than that of the rest of
this category whose inadequacy is an
acquisition and who would not have been so had they enjoyed opportunities for develop-
ment equal to those available to the members of the higher socio-economic classes.
The aim of the Welfare State can be
regarded as the provision to all of these
classes within the community of the advantages now enjoyed only by the top. Should
this come about then it might be expected
that the birth-rate, stillbirth rate and infant mortality rate would soon show no social
gradient. Certainly the aim will command the support of all, but it must not be forgotten that advantages mean little or nothing unless they are utilized and it is quite certain that they would not be utilized to the same extent by all within the community. As Professor Marshall pointed out, children
in different schools, grouped according to differences in respect of general ability, are exposed to different curricula and this competitive selection yields a variety of products. He also pointed out that in the
Welfare State, as we know it, there is considerable economic inequality and that the segregation at the school level is associated with a corresponding segregation at the occupational level. This stratification is inevitably associated with differences in cultural pattern which in their sum must influence the wish and the ability to make use of the services provided by the State. Thus so long as any form of social stratification exists it is to be expected that there will remain a gradient in respect of fertility, though not necessarily the existing kind.
If it be granted that the concept of the welfare state is admirable it is by no means
certain that this country will always be able to afford to provide complete protection to all its citizens against want, unemployment

and sickness. The productive capacity of the country is rising but slowly. The load of the non-contributors to the common weal is heavy and grows heavier and a part of this load is undoubtedly composed of individuals suffering from gross defect or
derangement of genetic origin who by reason of their disability could never be selfsufficient in any kind of society. Before attempting to deal with the problem these
constitute it is necessary and desirable to know everything possible concerning
their numbers. This knowledge will become
available only when it has been amply demonstrated that these defects are truly
genetic in origin and are not in any significant
way to be ameliorated by envirorimental agencies. Then, if the genetic system con-
cerned is relatively simple and not a form of the more complicated kind envisaged by Penrose, genetic counselling would become really helpful.
But in these matters, as in most of the
others that have been surveyed, it is quite obvious that if the Welfare State is to flourish and if by its actions society and the general public are to be advantaged, it is imperative that our society shall be an educated society. The State, exercising constructive functions, is striving to create a social organization in
which the opportunity for creative activity in the service of the community can be enjoyed by all. Its efforts will be successful only if the citizens themselves come to be so equipped educationally that they can take full advantage of the opportunity so provided. If this is so, then the eugenist's interest in the genetical varieties of the uneducable, and his anxiety lest the general level of intelligence in the population should fall, are more than justified. Moreover, it is only in an educated society that eugenics as a science can influence public opinion.
Thus far government has been concerned with the amelioration of the environment, for which it has adopted certain standards of excellence. It has left the definition of standards of excellence in man to others and has assumed with much reason that improvement of the habitat will be followed by the betterment of its inhabitant. But

90 THE EUGENICS REVIEW-

to such betterment there is a limit quickly reached. If more is desired then it can be achieved only by an uprising of the general level of the genetic potential. When this is attempted it will be essential that there shall exist a far more comprehensive knowledge of the genetic basis of personality and of intelligence and of human genetics

in general than is now available. It is necessary that immediate research into these matters shall be greatly encouraged. In the future, it can confidently be expected, much praise and much gratitude will be given to this Society for the quality of the foundational work of this kind that is being undertaken under its auspices.

NEW ISSUES
GALTON LABORATORY

THE WORLD'S GREATEST
BOOKSHOP

EUGENICS LABORATORY PUBLICATIONS MEMOIR SERIES

XXXVI

- FAMED FOR ITS EXCELLENT

Race Crossing in Man. The Analysis of Metrical Characters.

MEDICAL BOOKS DEPT.

ByJC... Trreevvoorr,, . .-Ph.D.

_ Alilclatnioenw. BSoeockosnadvhaainladblaendonradraeyBooofkpsubo-n

Price 12s. 6d. net

every subject. Stock of over three miltion
- volumes.

XXXVII
An Introduction to Human Biochemical Genetics.

Subscriptions takenfor British, American
aanfdirCsto-nctlianssenPtoasltamlagLaizbiranreys.; and we have
- Foyles have departments for Records,

l ByByH. Harris, M.D.

1l -. MaunsdicM,ateSrtiatliso.nery, Handicrafts Tools

Price 15s. net

|| We BUY Books, Coins, Stamps.

Copies may be obtained from any bookshop or from the publishers.

119-125 CHARING CROSS ROAD LONDON, W.C.2

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

GERrard S66o (i6 lines) Open 9 to 6 (Thurs. 9 to 7)

IBentley House, 200 Eustonl Road, Lonldon,p N.W I || E

Two minutesfrom Tottenham Court Road Station

ILiE

VVISS HOLD A LARGE STOCK OF BOOKS ON EUGENICS AND ALLIED SUBJECTS. FOREIGN BOOKS NOT

IN STOCK OBTAINED UNDER BOARD OF TRADE LICENCE. CATALOGUES

ON REQUEST. PLEASE STATE PARTICULAR INTEREST.

SECOND-HAND BOOKS: A constantly changing large stock of Medical and Scientific Literature on view, classified under subjects. Lists and quotations post free. Libraries
or small collections purchased.

LONDON: H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd., 136 Gower St., W.C.1

Telephone: EUSton 4282.

Business hours: 9 a.m. to 5-50 p.m., Saturdays to 1 p.m.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 2

