REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

327

no small merit to those who are already aware of the social need. It is

probably this habit of conciseness in statement which causes the chapter

dealing with Eugenics to appear too abrupt and too definite in state-

ment, for although the author, in dealing in a few paragraphs with

hereditary transmission of taints, states that our knowledge is as yet very

incomplete, he pronounces with a definiteness upon certain points which

does not indicate the present vagueness of our information. This is a

tendency somewhat characteristic of American literature on sex-education.

Qualifying one's remarks, however, with this caution, one has no hesita-

tion in recommending this book as an aid towards instruction of parents,

teachers and social workers.

N. MARCH.

Marett, MR. R. R. The Threshold of Religion. London: Methuen and
Co., Ltd.; price 5s. net; pp. 220.

MR. MARETT'S work is of interest to eugenists, for he places anthropology as a branch of biology, and the one that is likely to bring us to the true meaning of life. This book is a new issue, with additional chapters. It is made up of papers and addresses bearing on the nature and experience of rudimentary religion. The primordial category of religion is held to consist in the notion of power rather than in the notion of spirit. Several positions advanced by Dr. Tylor, Dr. Frazer and Mr. Lang are acutely criticised. Some very interesting things are said respecting Tabu, Mana, and the Bullroarer. Tabu is regarded as the negative side of the supernatural to which Manza corresponds as the positive side. The Bullroarer is " perhaps the most ancient, widely spread and sacred religious symbol in the world."
Very suggestive and original is the chapter " The Birth of Humility."
The volume closes with a fascinating account of a visit to the caverns of Niaux and Gargas. " The spirit of awe and mystery still broods in these dark galleries within a mountain, that are to a modern mind symbolic of nothing so much as of the dim subliminal recesses of the human soul."
J. B.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
ENGLISH. JOURNAL ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY, June, lxxvii., 19I4. Pp. 705. Suggestions for Recording the Life History and Family Connections of every Individual, by Walter Hazell. The author proposes that each individual should be provided with two numbers, that of the registration district in which his birth occurred and an individual number. These two numbers are to be produced by him throughout life whenever a record of marriage or birth is made, and also to appear upon his death certificate. A life card for each person born will be preserved at the general register office, and, with the help of the system of personal numbers, entries of important occurrences throughout his life will be made, as they are reported, upon his life card. The idea is that an interested party, for instance, an intending bride or bridegroom, armed with the numbers could, from the life card, glean particulars of importance, the degree of information available depending upon the minuteness with which the system was carried out. Mr. Hazell justly remarks in favour of his scheme that :-" First, it would tend to raise the life records of men to the level already attained by pedigree animals. This is not sarcasm, as I observe with some shame that we seem to care less for the family history of a man than that of a beast." Mr. Hazell's paper, which was read at the June meeting of the Royal Statistical Society, provoked a lively discussion, to which the RegistrarGeneral and several other official statisticians contributed. Some of the

