'be )6ugenfc _Ebucation Zocdetxe.

bon.

Secretary:

Vres9bent *MAJOR
MRS. A. C. GOTTO.

LEONARD DARWIN. lton. Creasurer:

MR.

VON

FLEISCHL.

lton. imembers:

THE RT. HON. A. J. BALFOUR, P.C., F.R.S.

SIR ARCHIBALD GEIKIE, K.C.B., F.R.S.

HER GRACE, THE DUCHESS OF MARLBOROUGH.

PROFESSOR A. WEISMANN.

VicewVrezbent: -

SIR JAMES BARR, President, Liverpool Branch.

DR. BENHAM, President, New Zealand Society.

SIR JAMES CRICHTON-BROWNE, Ex-President, I908 to I9o9.

BISHOP D'ARCY, President, Belfast Branch. PROF. STARR JORDAN, President, Eugenic Section, American Genetic Association. MR. W. C. MARSHALL, President, Haslemere Brarich. RIGHT HON. LORD MOULTON, President, Birmingham Heredity Society. M. EDMOND PERRIER, President, Soci&t6 Fran9aise d'Edigenique. DR. A. PLOETZ, President, International Society for Race Hygiene. PROF. E. B. POULTON, President, Oxford Branch. PROF. SERGI, President, Comitato Italiano per gli Studi di Eugenica. PROF. SEWARD, President, Cambridge Eugenics Society. BISHOP WELLDON, President, Manchester Branch.

MR. CROFTON BLACK.

iIenmber0

of

Council:
LADY OWEN-MACKENZIE.

SIR E. BRABROOK, C. B.

MR. ROBERT MOND.

MRs. THEODORE CHAMBERS.

DR. F. W. MOTT, F. R. S.

HoN. SIR JOHN COCKBURi, K.C.M.G.

MR. G. P. MUDGE.

MR. R NEWTON-CRANB.

MRS. G. POOLEY.

MR. A. E. CRAWLEY.

MR. W. REA, M. P.

SIR H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.I.E.

DR. A. REID.

DR. LANGDON DOWN.

MR. JOHN RuSSELL.

MR. HAVELOCK ELLIS.

DR. ETTIE SAYER.'

PROF. J. FINDLAY.

MR. F. C. S. SCHILLER, D.SC.

MR. E. G. WHELER GALTON.

PROF. A. SCHUSTER, F.R.S.

MR. M. GREENWOOD, JUN., M.R.C.S.

MRL EDGAR SCHUSTER, D.Se.

DR. W. HADLEY.

DR. C. G. SELIGMANN.

MRS. HENDERSON.

PROF. J. A. THOMSON.

MAJOR HILLS, F.R.S.

DR. A. F. TREDGOLD.

TH% VERY REV. W. R. INGE, D.D.

MRS. ALEC TwIERDiE.

MISS KIRBY.

MR. W. C. D., WHETHAM, F. R. S.

Ma. ERNEST LANE, F.R.C.S.

-DR. DOUGLAS WHITE.

MR. W. C. MARSHALL.

- DR. A. GORDQN WILSON.

Branch Represenstives on the General Council, z913-14.

Oirmtngbam:

MR. QAREY GILSON.

MR. HUMPHREY HUMPHREYS.

MR. PERCIVAL MILLS.

ltverpool:

MR. R. T. BODEY.
bastemere:

MR. R. D. LAURIE.
flSancbester:

-ALD. T. R. GULLEY.
:|effa0t:

Mr. W. C. MARSHALL.

DR. MUMFORD.

PROF. J. A. LINDSAY.

Ilew Zealanb:

09torb:

ADMIRAL HENDERSON. THE HION. T. A. MACKENZIE.

DR. E. SCHUSTER.

IRew Soutb Male:.

Irigbton:.-

(To be a pointed). 1Researcb Committee:

MR. A. J. HALL.
ebucatton Committee:

MR. EDGAR SCHUSrER, D.Sc., Chairman.

MR. J. RUSSELL, Chairman.

MR. A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, Secretary.

MRS. T. CHAMBERS, Secretary.

DR. GREEENWOOD.

Miss BONWICK.

MR. LIDBETrER.

MR. HOPE-JONES.

DR. TREDGOLD.

MR. NICHOLS.

MISS TRENCH.

pub[icatton Committee:
This Committee consists of the-Executive Officers of the Society, Chairmen aa4 Secretaries of Sub.Conimit

and the

8ranch repentativs N.B.-Other Committees are appointed from time to time for special purposes.

"Eugenics is the study of agencies under social control that may improve or impair the racIal qualies offrture generations either physically or mentally."

OBJECTS.

.it

I.-Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to int he respect of bringmg all matters pertaining to human parenthood under fl-T2 spread a knowledge of the Laws of Heredity so far as they are surely

modify public opinion, and create a sense of respone

the domination of kcnown, and so far

aEsutgheantcknidoewallse.dge

mag'

affect

improemeet I1 ..-To

offurtthheerra,cEeu.Kgenic

Teaching,

at

home,

in

the

schools,

and

elsewhere.

-

MA-e1s1Ts1o^cmibaetrsemlXembership - SUBSCRIPTION.

One uin#s Five Shillings

per per

Annm Annum.

PRIVILEGES.

Attendance at, Letures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use of Librair.

Menbers only receive THE EUGENICS REVIEW free.

.- ws- of APPlication for Membership and Assate Membrp and full -a of h 5

>|;w - -OF.- F<'W;U-'H'O=UKRO-SF'FII1CC0".nE8bS0e-.o&bmta.i-HnteOd o6uf Wtuhe iH,onn.oSe5_ctaar¶y-H:WZ .c aa.im tOo 1I Dp.m-

-

-

NOTES AND COMMENTS.
The Scientifle Study of MIan.-The science of eugenics lives and grows by a beneficent parasitism on studies organized for purposes other than its own. In particular it should search for and eagerly absorb any knowledge which would facilitate intra-racial classification according to natural qualities. We welcome therefore the establishment of the " Institut BulsTempels " which was opened at Brussels on January 20th. Although it is primarily a school of pedagogy, yet, if its ends are achieved, it will undoubtedly contribute knowledge of which we stand in need. This it will do directly by organising experimental researches, having for their object an understanding of the child and indirectly be training teachers capable of carrying out such researches. A course of instruction to last for two years has been arranged. In the first year lectures will be given on embryology and heredity by Dr. Paul Heger, director of the Solvay Physiological Institute. He will deal particularly with the inheritance of instincts, normal psychological inheritance and the inheritance of disease. Dr. Victor Pechere will lecture on the physiology of the child. The laws of growth and the technique of anthropometry will receive particular attention. General psychology will be treated from its experimental side by Professor Ley, and Dr Henrotin will discuss, under the heading of Puericulture, such subjects as infant mortality and the nutrition of the new-born child. Instruction in school hygiene, including under this heading sex education, will be given by Dr. Ensch, and Dr. Croly will lecture on psychogenesis or the psychology of the growing child. His lectures fall into two groups, of which one treats the subject of mental tests in theory and practice.
Knowledge of the utmost value to the eugenist would also be likely to accrue if the propaganda of Mr. Arthur MacDonald attain results commensurate with the energy displayed in making them public. He has, for example, addressed a letter to the Home Secretary urging the importance of the proper

154 EUGENICS REVIEW.
study of the criminal, and making practical suggestions how this may be done without incurring a great deal of expense. He proposes that the inmates of penal and reformatory institutions should be studied in each country by young men with
medical, psychological and anthropological training. The work should be international in character, and done in each country in a uniform way in order that comparable results might
be obtained. We have received from Mr. MacDonald a copy of this letter, together with another addressed to University students, in which he points out the importance of studying the criminal pauper and defective classes, and suggests that some might choose it for their life work. He gives an indication of
the sort of training which those who do so should adopt.
In this connection it is interesting to note that among the
questions to be discussed at the International Penitentiary
Congress, to be held in London in 1915, are whether laboratories should be installed in Penitentiary institutions for the scientific study of their inmates, and whether such study is likely to lead to knowledge of the causes of criminality and the best methods
of treating criminals. The Eugenic Aspect of the Employment of Married
Women.-The recent discussion in the London County Council on the advisability of employing married women as school medical inspectors and the circular issued by the Post Office, stating that postmistresses and sub-postmistresses would be dismissed on marriage, show that the practice of barring married women from skilled employments is being widely adopted, and may be affecting such a number of women as to be of eugenic importance. It may, perhaps, be asserted that a department should not decide whether to employ married women or not on any other grounds but those of economy and efficiency, and that therefore eugenic considerations are irrelevant. But this
position is not one likely to be seriously maintained by thinking people at the present day, and public institutions are generally expected to set the example of not seeking to obtain immediate advantages at the expense of the general welfare of the community. Although we are well aware that the whole question
is too complicated to discuss adequately in the space of a short

NOTES AND COMMENTS.

I55

note, we will endeavour to state as briefly as possible the case which may be urged on purely eugenic grounds against the dismissal of women from skilled employment when they marry. It is generally recognised that under utopian conditions the married woman should never be forced by economic pressure to leave her home and children, and we do not imagine that many married women with children would undertake extraneous daily work at all, unless forced to do so to maintain the home. The main question is therefore not whether married women should be allowed to work, but whether those who must work should pursue the calling for which they are trained, or whether they are to lose on marriage the advantage of their professional qualifications, and thus be forced to seek some other employment under conditions which may be more detrimental to the well being of the family.
The prospect of having to adopt the latter alternative is likely to deter many women from marrying at all, and to retard the marriage of others. Both these consequences are dysgenic. Among wage-earning women, those who have proved their efficiency by earning their living at skilled work are probably superior in energy and intellectual capacity than the remainder, and, as the excess of women over men makes it impossible for all women to marry, it is just these who should not be prevented from so doing. It may, perhaps, be argued in answer to this that such women even if they do marry are likely to have very small families, but the answer to such an argument is that small families are better than none at all. Even if marriage is postponed for them and not actually prevented the results are not much better, since late marriage admittedly leads to many evils, apart from the consequent reduction in the size of the family. There are also other grave objections to conditions which tend to place unreasonable restrictions on marriage, besides those we have been considering. For it may well be expected that the people affected will try to minimise the hardship entailed, either by contracting secret marriages or by entering into irregular unions. Where the restrictions are really unreasonable such unions might come to be condoned by public opinion, and thereby the institution of marriage itself

156 EUGENICS REVIEW.
would fall in prestige. We hold that the essential method of eugenics is the ennobling of marriage, and thus regard any contrary tendency as undesirable in the highest degree.
The Feeble-Minded in Australasia.-We learn from the Adelaide Advertiser that the Australasian medical congress, held at Sydney in I9II, decided to make systematic investigations into the problems connected with the feeble-minded population of Australia and New Zealand. For this purpose they appointed a representative in each State to form a local committee, and in addition organised a central committee consisting of Dr. Jones (Inspector-General of the Insane in Victoria) and three others. The function of the central committee was to collect and coordinate the data and to report to the New Zealand Congress at the beginning of this year. Their report has now been completed, but is in some ways disappointing as they were unable to make anything like an accurate estimate of the prevalence of mental defect. This was due partly to the unwillingness of the medical profession to supply the information asked from themout of the 2,450 who were approached on the subject only 211 responded-partly to similar unwillingness on the part of the heads of schools, and in Queensland to the hostility assumed by the Director of Education towards any enquiry in the State schools. From such returns as were available the committee concluded that at least four per thousand of the total number of school children were definitely feeble-minded, and three times that number were dull enough to require special training.
The committee recommend the establishment of special day schools and of residential schools, both paying and non-paying, where children suspected of being mentally defective might be kept under observation, so that those found actually to be so might be properly trained, while the rest were sent back to the ordinary schools. They further recommend the establishment of residential colonies with separation of the sexes for the permanent care of the feeble-minded when grown up. They suggest that moral defectives might be dealt with to a large extent by these institutions, or might require some special provision.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

ENGLISH.

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF MICROSCOPICAL SCIENCE. Vol. 59, Part 4.

February, 1914. Chromosomes, Heredity and Sex. By L. Doncaster,

Sc.D. Pp. 487-521. In this paper is presented a review of the present

state of the evidence with regard to the material basis of hereditary

transmission and sex determination. The author summarises it as fol-

lows :-" In the first section a summary is given of the main lines of

argument leading to the conclusion that 'Mendelian characters are deter-

mined by chromosomes.' Some indication is given of the restrictions,

which must be placed on the meaning of this phrase in respect of the part

played by cytoplasm in heredity. It is concluded that the arguments in its

favour, though very strong indirectly, are not supported by sufficient

direct evidence to be regarded by themselves as indisputable. In the

second section the chief classes of facts are reviewed which suggest a

relation between chromosomes and sex-determination, and a preliminary

account is given of a new case of an unpaired ' sex-chromosome' in the

female, in a strain of the moth Abraxas. It is concluded that the argu-

ments for a relation between chromosomes and sex are much stronger

than those connecting chromosomes with Mendelian factors.

In the third section the facts of sex limited inheritance are discussed;

these are regarded as strongly reinforcing the arguments of the two pre-

ceding sections.

Lastly, certain difficulties are considered, and it is concluded that sex

cannot be determined directly by the presence or absence of a factor which

merely determines whether an ovary or a testis shall develop, but that

the determining factor causes a certain type of metabolism, which in turn

leads to the production of one sex or the other. If such metabolism is

induced by other causes, an individual of one sex may probably arise from

gametes which, in the absence of disturbing causes, would have given rise

to the other sex."

E. H. J. S.

JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY. Vol. XVII. No. 2. March, 1914.
The Action of Various Anxsthetics in Suppressing Cell-division in Seaurchin Eggs, by Ralph S. Lillie.
This is an interesting paper dealing with the inhibitory action of certain anaesthetics upon cell-division. It is suggested that the rhythmical process of cell-division, as well as the rhythmical contraction of heart muscle and cilia, depends upon some reversible change in the permeability of the cell-membranes, and consequently that neuro-muscular anaesthesia is caused by inhibiting these changes in the permeability of the membrane. It is also concluded that since the concentration, in a great number of anaesthetic investigations, required to arrest cell-division is the same as that required to produce neuro-muscular anaesthesia in the larv?e, it is inferred that both phenomena depend upon the same alteration in permeability.
BEDROCK. Vol. II. 1914. Biological Termns, by G. Archdall Reid.
Pp. 515-538. When shorn of its controversial character, this article is a
protest against the mis-use of the words " innate," " acquired," " inherit,"
and "reproduced." Its interest for eugenists lies in the stress laid upon the essential character both of nature and nurture, for without both these factors nothing can be reproduced-nurture, to convert to an actuality the potentiality inherited. The author contends that it is meaningless to say that characters can be either " innate " or " acquired." These words must only be applied to likenesses and differences. Nothing can be inherited but a bundle of potentialities, nothing can be produced without a stimulus, so that all characters must be both innate and acquired, or else neither. It is as ridiculous to say that the ordinary muscular develop-

I76 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ment of a man is "innate," but the additional muscular development of the blacksmith " acquired," as it is to call a wall " innate," but the top

layer of bricks " acquired." He contends further that had these terms been used correctly, the Darwinian and Lamarckian controversy would never have existed, for the disputants supposed that acquired characters were evoked by something (i.e., nurture) out of nothing, and that innate

characters were evoked by nothing out of something (i.e. nature); whereas

in reality, both nature and nurture have co-operated to produce the char-

acters in question. The words " inherit " and " reproduce " are also said to be confused.

When a child is said to inherit the character of his father, the meaning

of " inherit " is shifted to the meaning of " reproduce." The child repro-

duces the character, the potentiality for which he inherits from his father.

The author, however, does not hesitate to say that mental and moral traits

are " wholly " developed in response to experience (i.e. nurture), when he

wishes to show the necessity of still further improving the environment

of school children and the poor.

H. 0.

BEDROCK. Vol. III. No. x. April, 1914. The Instruction of School-

children in Matters of Sex, by Mrs. T. La Chard.

This somewhat discursive article divides the problem of sex-instruc-

tion into two parts, " Sex-biology " and " Sex-hygiene." The writer quotes from several early authors and appends a useful though unsubstantial bibliography. The view taken is that sex-biology should be taught at an early age as part of the school curriculum, and that instruction in sexhygiene should be given to boys and girls at a more mature age, by doctors, parents, school teachers and perhaps clergymen, in a manner which must be decided upon by further experience.

Directions of Recent Work on the Inheritance of Acquired Characters,

by H. M. Fuchs.

This interesting paper summarises the most recent work on the inheritance of acquired characters. There are two possible ways in which characters may become inherited. (i) By means of stimuli which affect the soma and through it the germ-cells which form the next generation, (2) by means of stimuli which affect the soma and the germ-cells simul-

taneously. The first method is designated " somatic induction " and the

second " parallel induction." The latter is considered by the author to have been established by the experiments of Standfuss, Fischer and others. He then proceeds to summarise two classes of experiments. (a) Those in which the soma is subjected to unusual conditions, to see whether the offspring are affected, e.g., Tower's experiments with 'the potato beetle, Leptinotarsa, and Kammerer's experiments with amphibia; and (b) those in which ovaries are transplanted to a foster-mother, to see whether somatic characteristics affect the offspring, e.g., Guthrie's experi-

ments with hens, and Castle and Phillips' experiments with guinea-pigs.

The interesting work of Seczerov, with a view to ascertaininog the extent to
which external stimuli can directly reach the germ-cells, is mentioned, as

well as other experiments in which the offspring of animals have been shown to have been affected by dyes and poisons administered to the mother. Although the author points out the necessity of using pure strains, and of avoiding the direct effect upon the germ-cellsof theunusual conditions due to the experiments, yet he does not lay sufficient stress on the necessity of rearing animals under normal artificial conditions in order to control the animals reared under abnormal artificial conditions, nor does he mention the extraordinary lack of numerical data and detailed description in both Tower's and Kammerer's experiments, or the curious chemical and other elementary inexactitudes that have appeared in the former's work. Further, no mention is made of the earlier experiments, Brown-Sequard's with guinea-pigs and Schiibler's with wheat, or of the important work of Wolff and others with micro-organisms.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

177

Dr. Reid on Biological Terms, by the Hermit of Prague. Terminological Inexactitudes: A Reply, by G. Archdall Reid.
In answer to an article by Dr. Reid in the last number of Bedrock, in which he maintained that to say " acquired " or " inborn " characteristics were inherited was meaningless, the Hermit of Prague, whose reply would be more forcible if it were less facetious, accuses Dr. Reid of confusing " class-names" with "class-definitions," for he holds that the words " acquired " and "inborn " are merely symbols that implicitly contain definitions which have been amply stated in the writings of the various biologists who have used them. Since, therefore, it is plainly ridiculous to substitute a "class-name" for a "class-definition "-unless the original definition is kept in mind-he concludes that Dr. Reid is wrong in supposing that any man (much less Darwin, Spencer and Weismann, who are implicated) would be so ignorant as to use them repeatedly without due consideration for the obvious fact-so much insisted on by Dr. Reid-that all characters are a product of potentiality and stimulus (i.e., nature and nurture).
With Dr. Reid's answer, which appears in the same number, the argument becomes rather tedious, especially as he never appears to come really into touch with his critic, but contents himself with much repetition and with pointing out the fact that the Hermit is not very happy in quoting the definitions said to be implied in the class-names "inborn" and "acquired " by the various authors mentioned-no easy task, con-
sidering how many pages Dr. Reid has needed to define his own meaning. Finally, Dr. Reid does not attempt to defend himself for having in a very lucid footnote inadvertently slipped into the terminology he wishes
to discard.

HIBBERT JOURNAL. Vol. XII., NO. 2. Jan., I914. Eugenics and Politics,

by Dr. F. C. S. Schiller. Pp. 241-259. Dr. Schiller emphasises the neces-

sity for politicians never to forget that the family, and not the individual

or the society, is the unit that should receive primary consideration. He

points out that progress is dependent upon the continued foresight of the

human race, and is not automatic. The difficulties of civilisation are

increasing, and will be immeasurably greater when the present supplies of

coal and oil are exhausted, so that though Malthus was mistaken, yet

Malthusianism is no false alarm. All nobilities by their nature fail to

reproduce themselves, and tend to die out, though this ordering of society

cannot always have existed, for there must have been a time when the

fitter survived. Now, however, biological progress has come to an end,

and sociological progress has superseded it. Though this is in itself a

gain, yet it has introduced the phenomenon of social contra-selection,

the elimination of the fit, which has resulted in the birth-rate being

recruited from the less able-witness the present lack of officers and

clergymen. If politicians do not see that this is reversed by assisting

the family-unit and refraining from taxing the middle-classes out of

existence, the human race will come to join the physiological failures

with the dinosaurs in the museums of the future.

H. 0.

HIBBERT JOURNAL. Vol. XII., No. 3. April, 1914. Contains a discussion of Dr. Schiller's article, " Eugenics and Politics," by John L. Heaton, R. M. Maciver, and E. H. Bethell.

JOURNAL OF STATE MEDICINE, April, 1914. Sexual Disease and the Individual. A. Corbett Smith. This is, after an introduction in a previous number, the second of four papers on venereal diseases. It is of a popular character and is well calculated to interest the average reader. The author, who is also the editor, is a fluent and readable writer, and
there is a demand for such information at present. This lecture gives a
popular account of syphilis in its various stages, and discusses its import-

i78 EUGENICS REVIEW.
ance to the community. It is not free from mistakes and errors of judgment. Ozoena, e.g., does not mean "bone diseases"; aneurysm does not mean a gradual closure of the arteries. The quotation from the Registrar's returns is misleading. The conclusion that " at least one-half of all disease, if not a still larger proportion, is due more or less directly to syphilis," is quite unjustified by his premisses; and this sort of statement is the most serious defect of the article, with the general purpose of which we are in agreement. The facts are bad enough; to exaggerate them in this manner is to bring the movement against venereal disease into dis-
repute.
The May number of the same journal gives an account of " syphilis insontium," explaining how this disease is handed on to innocent wives and their offspring, and bringing home to the reader its disastrous effect in infantile mortality. Infection of doctors, nurses and others is also dealt with. It is, on the whole, a fair, if a highly coloured, picture; we must only protest at the suggestion, which nobody would now defend, that rickets and syphilis are identical. The series ends with the June number. Here we find an array of statistics, many of which are interesting. Unfortunately, Mr. Corbett Smith has got confused in his interpretation of the figures, and allows himself to abuse other writers without obvious justification. The Berlin figures which he quotes represent persons who were under treatment on a given day; Dr. Blaschko gives an estimate for the proportion of adult males who have at some time or other contracted disease under 30 years of age. The two figures are hardly likely to correspond. He forgets, or does not understand, that syphilis, until the advent of Ehrlich, was rarely cured, and that most persons who acquired syphilis remained syphilitic. Nobody pretends that 7 per cent. of the whole Melbourne populace are infected every year, or that there are 500,000 new syphilitic infections annually in London; but these may be quite reasonable computations of the syphilitic population of each city. This sort of misapprehension has introduced confusion into the figures given in this paper.
These, however, are the defects of a popular writer. We are, on the whole, glad that these papers have been written; and the attitude of mind exhibited in the closing pages is eminently reasonable. He looks to education of the public and the introduction of better facilities for treatment as the two great lines of advance; and in this we feel sure he is right.
SOCIOLOGicAL REVIEW. Vol. VII., No. x. April, 1914. Abnormal Psycho-
logy. Professor William Brown. Pp. 37-49. In a rather disjointed paper, the author refers to several well-known phenomena associated with abnormal psychology-hysteria, automatic writing and double personality, as well as hypnosis and the "hypnoidal " state. He believes that "functional diseases are produced by mental causes, and can be cured by mental
means." Dr. Morton Prince's case of Miss Beauchamp, from whose
personalities he was able to obtain some important introspective records, is outlined; and in addition, the author gives the theory of Freud, that wishes repressed in early childhood may re-appear in later life as the material of hysteria. These repressed wishes are realised in the dreams of normal subjects, for during sleep the censor of consciousness is not able to
prevent their appearance, but can only disguise them, so that they fulfil a counter-wish formed by the waking self against the unwelcome desire.
H. 0. NATURE. Vol. 93. No. 2,32I. April 23rd, 19I4. Mutations of Bacteria, by R. T. Hewlett. This is a note mentioning various methods of altering the morphology and the physiological characters of certain bacteria, especially the observation made by Mme. Victor Henri of the fact that B. anthracis can be very materially affected by subjecting the sporing bacillus to ultraviolet light in a quartz tube.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

179

UNITED EMPIRE. The Royal Colonial Intstittute /ournal. Vol. V., No. 5. May, 1914. The Empire and the Birth-Rate. By C. V. Drysdale, D.Sc. Pp. 398-4I6.
This paper examines the facts as to the almost universal decline of the birth-rate in civilised countries, and tries to correct certain popular ideas with regard to this decline.
The writer has deduced from his investigations the existence of a law, which he calls " The Law of Correspondence between Birth and DeathRates." In support of this deduction he gives the figures of the birthrates, general death-rates, and infant mortality rates in various countries. (It should be noted that in this case the infant mortality rate is not put in the usual form, as so many deaths per I,OOO births in any given year, but as so many infant deaths per i,ooo of the whole population, which gives very different results.)
These figures are mostly given in the form of a very simple diagram, showing the birth-rate, death-rate, and infant mortality rate, per i,ooo of the population, one above the other, each being differently coloured, so that the rate of natural increase (the excess of births over deaths) is easily seen at a glance.
Dr. Drysdale claims to be a strong Imperialist, and he devotes the greater part of his paper to the consideration of the position of the various parts of the British Empire with regard to this natural increase of population, afterwards comparing its position as a whole with that of the other important nations, to the advantage of the Empire.
He argues that the facts go to show that neither a rapid increase of population nor a high standard of national efficiency is secured by a high birth-rate. A high birth-rate means a high death-rate, and if this is checked by humanitarian legislation the result is a " process of reversed selection." He believes that the question is largely one of food supply, so that an increase of food production rather than of the birth-rate is the end to be aimed at.
He also advocates the limitation of families, especially among the poorer classes, and quotes the case of Holland, where an organisation for this object has been in existence since I88i, to prove that such a policy quickly produces improvement in national prosperity and national physique, besides an actually accelerated rate of natural increase.
The paper was followed by a discussion, most of the speakers on the whole agreeing with Dr. Drysdale's conclusions, though some of them thought they needed qualifying.

FOREIGN. ARCHIV FUER RASSEN- UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE, IX., 5; September-October, I913 (issued March 6th, I9I4). W. Weinberg: Auslesewirkungen bei biologisch - statistischen
Problemen, II. (p. 557-58x). A continuation of the author's exposition
and discussion of his methods of compensating for the effects of social selective factors (influences of the environment) and for such errors as result from the personal equation and its "artificially selective action" in the collection and interpretation of statistical material bearing on problems of heredity. For example, when a transmitted character appears with different intensity in different individuals, the more evident cases are apt to, be first seen and noted and the less evident overlooked, and the same applies to families in which many members are bearers of a particular character as compared to families in which only one member is affected. The possibility must also be considered that when a character is manifested with great intensity in a family, there are more individual bearers of it than in the average affected family. It is further evident that such characters as seldom appear until a certain age has been reached, and which become manifest as a result of the mutual action of inciting

I80 EUGENICS REVIEW.

external forces and
must vary greatly in

complex intensity

transmitted factors and are frequently

of unknown number, passed over unnoticed.

Weinberg shows that the study of biological problems by the statistician

leads to the discovery of sources of error which are hidden from purely

individual and clinical methods of research and to the recognition of the

necessity of compensating for the effects of external, especially social,

influences on the development of transmitted characters. He strongly

recommends a national organisation for research into problemsof heredity.

W. Claassen: Rekrutierungsstatistik des Deulschen Reiches, I9021913, und Friedensprasenzstarke (p. 582-585). In accordance with the

provisions of the new German defence law, the peace strength of the

German army and navy has been increased by I20,000 men. It is claimed

by some military authorities that this has been done without lowering

the physical standard of fitness. Claassen shows that unless the per-
centage of fitness has suddenly risen by 71 per cent., which is not

probable, in view of the fact that it sank over 3 per cent. during the eight

years preceding I9II, this cannot well be the case.

Julius Wolf: Religion und Geburtenruckgang (p. 586-594). An

answer to certain writers who deny the influence of religion on the birth-

rate. Practically all religions encourage the propagation of the race, but

the Roman Catholic Church, by reason of its explicit condemnation of the

use of preventives and its greater control over the individual, is able to

bring a more powerful influence to bear from this point of view than the

other confessions. Lutheranism, in spite of its "Catholic " sexual

morality, is, in Dr. Wolf's opinion, less favourable to a high birth-rate

than Catholicism, and this is mainly due to the absence of the confes-

sional. That the influence of religion is small in the centres of industry

is generally recognised, and that this finds its inevitable expression in the

birth-rate can be statistically proved, although great care must be taken

to isolate the religious from the many other factors involved.

Dr. Grassl: Der Erfoig alter und neuer ehelicher Geschlechtssitten in

Bayern (p. 595-627). An interesting if not wholly convincing paper by a

well-known opponent of Neomalthusian and feminist doctrines. Grassi

considers that if one allows for two years between successive births and

for the fact that a large number of women marry at a later age than

twenty-three years, that ten is the normal number of children born to a

Bavarian woman who nurses her own offspring. He views with evident

alarm the headway which Neomalthusian practices are making in the

country districts, where the fertility of the average marriage used to be

considerably greater than it is to-day, and he differs from many com-

petent authorities, including the statisticians of the Bavarian Home Office,

in refusing to believe that a high birth-rate and its accompanying high

rate of infant mortality is either wasteful over-production or an injury to

the health of the race. On the contrary, he endeavours to prove that a

high birth-rate is an unmixed blessing, that the districts in which the

greatest number of children are born relative to the number of women

of marriageable age supply the largest proportion of recruits fit for

military service, and that the Boers and the Bulgarians, the Russians

and the Poles, the Servians and the Turks and other prolific peoples of

Eastern Europe are of a higher average physique than the men of

Western Europe. Dr. Grassl suggests that women should be enabled to

work less in order that they may have more energy to devote to child-

bearing, and proposes that in the grain-raising districts the authorities

should see to it that during the winter, the men, who are then for the

most part idle, should take upon their own shoulders the duty of caring

for the live-stock instead of letting their wives do it as heretofore.

Mothers should be advised and assisted (by lightening their labour) to

nurse their children for a full year, so that bevond taking advantage of

the usual temporary sterility during the period of breast-feeding no

attempt need be made to limit the number of offspring. Public institutions

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

I8i

for the care of infants are an evil, because they encourage mothers not to nurse their children. " The ancient and medieval custom of limiting marriage to the physically and mentally fit, of taking the fullest advantage of such selected married couples as producers of children, and especially of the wife as Vollmutter who nurses her infants for at least a year, would do far more towards safeguarding the existence and the anthropological and consequently social development of the population than the modern customs of high frequency of marriage, the limitation of the size of individual families, and the bringing up of the child without the physical and often without even the intellectual assistance of the wife as mother." Although much of what Grassl says is quite to the point, especially his insistence on the importance of breast-feeding, it is obvious that the question of the birth-rate cannot be satisfactorily dealt with unless one has as thorough a knowledge of the economic, social and psychological factors that determine its fluctuations as of its more purely medical and biological aspects.

Dr. Fritz Lenz: Rassewertung in der hellenischen Philosophie. 1. Der Kynismus (p. 628-644). Antisthenes, and Plato, whose teaching was greatly influenced by Antisthenes, were the most consistent expositors of race hygiene among the Greek philosophers, and their sympathies were with the aristocratic and patriarchal ideals of the Spartans rather than with Athenian democracy and cosmopolitanism. Antisthenes taught that

civilisation, with its loss of natural conditions of life and its mating of

the strong and capable with the inefficient and weak, inevitably leads to

racial decline. Some of his characteristic utterances were, " the object of

marriage is not the enjoyment of love, but the rearing of children,"

4 only the wise man knows whom he should love and marry," "agriculture,

pastoral pursuits, hunting and war are the vocations of strong men."

The apparent contradiction between the contempt of pleasure of the

Cynics and the Dionysiac elements of the popular religion of the period

was removed by intellectualising the latter. Lenz thinks that the

eugenists of the future will be neo-Cynics.

HENRY BERGEN.

ZEITSCHRIFT FUER INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE. Bd. xi. Heft 4. March, 1914. Breeding Experiments which show that
HIybridisation and Mutation are Independent Phenomena. R. R. Gates.
Pp. 209-279. This paper describes the results attained by crossing
different forms of oenothera. The conclusions at which the author has arrived are of great importance. Mendelians have suggested that all new characters originate through the loss and recombination of unit characters. The author claims to have shown that some mutations "owe their origin to a cause which is independent of the mere mingling of characters in hybrids. He concludes that " the combination and sorting of
characters which exist is one problem, and the origin of those characters, whether it be sudden or gradual, is another. These two problems must be kept in separate categories, for Mendelians misinterpret the facts and confuse the issue when they assert that the latter are in any way included in the former. Any clear view of the facts now known must lead to the conclusion that the origin of new characters is one question, and their hereditary behaviour after they have originated is another." He further claims to have shown that unit characters are capable of modification
contrary to the view generally held by Mendelians. Erblichkeitsstudien an Schmetterlingen. II. R. Goldschmidt and H.
Poppelbaum. Pp. 280-3I6. Two years ago the first-named of these two authors published in this journal the results obtained by crossing Lymantria dispar with L. japonica. Various gynandromorphic forms appeared and the results were interpreted on the supposition that not only were factors for sex and secondary sexual characters present, but that these factors differed in potency. Further experiments have been under taken to test this supposition, and it is claimed that it holds good.

I82 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Studien an gynandromorphen Schmetterlingsbastarden aus der Kreuzung von Lymantria dispar L, mit japonica Moisch. H. Poppelbaum. Pp. 317-354. This study of gynandromorphism was suggested by the facts discovered in the previous paper.

ZEITSCHRIFT FUER INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE.

Bd. xii. Heft 2. April, 1914. Uber alternative Vererbung bei Kreuzung

von Cyprinodontiden-Gattungen. M. W. Gerschler. Pp. 74-96. This

paper describes the results obtained by crossing the genera Xiphophorus

and Platypoecitius, both of which are sexually dimorphic. The bastards

at first sight present the appearance of blending, but upon further analysis

of individual characters show alternative inheritance. The sexual di-

morphism enables an analysis of the nature and inheritance of sexual

characters to be made. A complicated formula is arrived at which differs

from those given by Bateson and Goldschmidt.

Duplicate Genes for Capsule-Form in Bursa bursa-pastoris. G. H.

Shull. Pp. 97-147. These experiments form another example of that

type of Mendelian inheritance first discovered by Nilsson-Ehle, in which

the same apparent or "Phenotypic" character can be produced inde-

pendently by any one of several Mendelian factors which are not allelo-

morphic to one another. These experiments have reference to the shape

of the capsule in B. bursa-pastoris, which may be either triangular or

top-shaped; the first is shown to be due to either one of two independent

determiners. The author distinguishes sharply between "plural" and

"duplicate" determiners; according to him the presence of "duplicate "1

determiners has now been proved for the presence of a ligula in oats,

red pericarp colour in wheat, yellow enclosperm colour in maize, and the

triangular capsule form in Bursa.

A. M. C.-S.

EUGANIQUE, March, 1914. Transmission Here'ditaire d' Attributs Psychologiques dans deux Familles Gallo-celtes de Mime Souche observees pendant Quatres Sie'cles, by Dr. Oriou. Pp. 65-69. This is a
brief account of a study published in the Revue de Bretagne et de Vendee
in June and July, 1913. The author has studied biographically the
descendants of two Frenchman derived from the same Irish stock, who differed essentially in character. The same differences distinguished their descendants for eight generations.
Sur la Receptivite' He'reditaire relative des Ainis et des Cadets, by M. Lucien March. Pp. 70-83. M. March describes in simple language methods for avoiding statistical pitfalls in studying such problems as the comparative fertility of degenerate and normal stocks and the relative liability of first-born and later-born members of families to defects. The
special case of tuberculosis is discussed as an example, and reference is
made to the criticisms of previous work on this subject contained in
memoirs by Dr. Greenwood and Mr. Yule (Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, January, 1914), and by Dr. Weinberg, Archiv fur Rassen-und Gesellschafts-Biologie, 1913, Heft x.

EUGPNIQUE, April, 19I4.
lOAct de 1913, by M. Lucien

MLaerschI.nfiPrpm.iteiso8-Miein8t.aleMs.

en Angleterre et March discusses

the increase in numbers of the insane as shown by census returns in the

British Isles and in France, and explains the provisions of the Mental

Deficiency Act. He concludes by demanding fresh legislation in France

to deal with mentally defective persons of all grades, legislation which

should have for its objects the protection of these persons and the

utilisation as far as possible of their faculties, the protection of their sane

fellow citizens as well as of the race.

BULLETIN DE LA STATISTIQUE GPNE'RALE DE LA FRANCE. Tome III.,
Fasc. III. April, 1914. La Fetcondite des Femmes suivant leur origine
aux Etats-Unis. P. 253. A summary of the results obtained by Mr.
J. A. Hill from the census returns of the state of Rhode Island, published

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

i83

in the Journal of the American Statistical Society. Figures of the same

nature based on the 1905 census were communicated by Mr, Hoffman to

the Eugenics Congress (Problems in Eugenics, p. 334.)

Influence des conditions du travail de la m&re sur la mortalite de la

premiere enfance aux Etats-Unis. Pp. 253-256. From The Report on

Condition of Woman and Child Wage-earners in the United States,

Vol. XIII. Infant Mortality and its Relation to the Employment of

Mothers, by Mr. E. B. Phelps. Although it is difficult to disentangle the

various factors to which excessive infant mortality might be due, the

figures obtained by comparing towns in Massachusetts, in which it is

high, with those in which it is low, appear to indicate that a high birth-

rate, a high proportion of foreign born mothers and illiteracy are more

closely related to a high rate of infant mortality than the employment of

mothers outside their own homes. The foreign-born mothers for the most

part belong to the very poorest classes, so that in general there is some

ground for the conclusion that the fault lies more with extreme povertv

and ignorance than with married women's employment.

Budgets de Familles en Divers Pays, by M. L. Duge de Bernonville.

Pp. 297-336. The author first discusses the methods which have been

adopted in ascertaining the manner in which working-class incomes are

spent, and then summarises such enquiries as have been made on this

subject in different countries. Certain general conclusions emerge. For

example, as the income increases the amount spent on food increases

absolutely, but decreases relatively. The relative amount spent in rent

remains about constant, but that on clothing and such things as amuse-

ment and intellectual needs increases. The nature of the food eaten

changes so as to include more meat and less bread and potatoes. With

an increase of the number of mouths to feed goes a very slight restric-

tion of the amount consumed; but the proportion spent for each adult

man falls considerably. It also appears that in most cases the conditions

are capable of amelioration by a more judicious expenditure of the avail-

able income.

E. H. J. S.

REVUE DE P1DOTECHNIE, ire Annee, No. I. October-November, 1913. This is the first number of a new journal, whose aim is to deal with the scientific study of the child and its practical applications. It is published by the Societe Belge de Pedotechnie with the collabo;ration of the Institut
bI-J Rousseau (Geneva). The director of the editorial committee is Dr.
Decroly. Les Notes Scolaires ont-elles une Valeur Pedotechnique2 Ed.
Claparede. Pp. 9-20. The writer concludes that, providing the marking is scientifically carried out, and provided aptitude is estimated distinct from zeal, schoolmarks constitute a source of information which is indispens-
able to the teacher. Employed as a method for stimulating activity, they are only justified if they form a means of permitting the pupil to know
himself, to understand and interest himself in his own mental progress. Les Classes Homog&nes et l'Examen Mental par la Methode des Tests
de Binet et Simon. Dr. Decroly. Pp. 2I-44. The present article consists mainly of a brief discussion of certain advantages and limitations of the Binet-Simon tests. A further article is promised containing the results of an application of the tests to irregular or abnormal children.

L'ENFANCE ANORMALE, NO. 25, January, 1914. Le Temoignage des Normaux et des Alienes (suite et fin). Drs. Ley and P. Menzerath. Pp. 3-13. The article continues the description of a series of experiments upon
the testimony of normal and abnormal subjects of different types; and
gives a concise summary of the chief conclusions reached in the psychology
of testimony, with special reference to that of defectives and the insane.
Les Arrire's Scolaires d'apre's un Ouvrage Recent (suite et fin). Dr. Armand Laurent. Pp. 14-20. A critical review of a medico-psychological

184 EUGENICS REVIEW.

publication of joint authorship dealing with various aspects of abnormal

children.

C. B.

ARCHIVIO PER L'ANTROPOLOGIA E LA ETNOLOGIA. Vol. xliii., 1913, No. 3. This periodical, published under the auspices of the Italian Society of

Anthropology and Ethnology, contains inter alia a serious study of fingerprints, their classification, and the question of their transmission by

heredity. Prof. Dalla Volta, the writer, bases his conclusions mainly on the results obtained by comparing the fingerprints of the members of one

hundred families (fingerprints, not thumbprints only), including six cases of three generations. These were normal individuals drawn from various

classes of society. The article, with its numerous tables and photographic

reproductions of fingerprints (too often somewhat blurred), gives evidence

of very careful research, but it is perhaps doubtful whether the data justify the generalisations somewhat elaborately deduced. Few, however, will

quarrel with the general conclusion that heredity counts and that the

influence of one parent is not more marked than that of the other. H. R.

THE POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY. Vol. LXXXIV., No. 4. April, 1914. Eugenics and Euthenics, by Prof. Maynard M. Metcalf. Pp. 383389. Prof. Metcalf claims that human progress has been entirely cultural,

and while fully recognising the social value of efforts directed to the

advance of culture, in its widest sense, urges the importance of improving eugenically the innate mental, moral, and physical qualities of man. He

believes that mendelian analysis will ultimately supply the knowledge

requisite for this purpose and pleads for patience, but not for inaction, while the knowledge is being acquired. As an immediate policy he

urges caution in legislation, the promulgation of eugenic ideals of mar-

riage, and the collection of data for the study of human inheritance.

The latter purpose will be the more readily attained the more the public is taught to realise the potential value of eugenics.
The Psychological Limit ot Eugenics, by Professor H. A. Miller. Pp.

390-396. Professor Miller is a sociologist and much afraid of eugenics.

" If eugenics succeeds in establishing in the popular mind the tremendous social value of heredity that it is trying to establish, it will overthrow a

mass of valuable work of the last decade which has been pointing the

way to a fundamental solution of many of our social problems." So he

proceeds to limit its scope by disputing the inheritance of mental and moral qualities. The following misquotation meets with his approval: "' Heredity ' is the chief explanation tyros offer for any collective trait

that they are too stupid or too lazy to trace to its origin in the physical

environment, the social environment or historical conditions." In spite of this Professor Miller admits that there is a great deal of good in the

eugenic movement. He is quite within his rights in criticising some of

the exaggerations and dogmatic statements made by certain of its

exponents.

The Racial Origin of Successful Americans, by Dr. F. Adams Woods. Pp. 397-402. From a study of the frequency of different surnames in Who's Who in America, Dr. Woods concludes that " In the four leading American cities, New York, Chicago, Philadelphia and Boston, it is

safe to say that at the present time, those of English and Scottish ancestry are distinctly in possession of the leading positions, at least from the standpoint of being widely known, and that, in proportion to their

number, the Anglo- axons are three to ten times as likely as other races

to achieve positions of national distinction."

THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY. Vol. V., No. 2. February, 1914. In-
juries to the Germ Cells, by Dr. C. R. Stockard. Pp. 58-64. (Abstract of

an article in the American Naturalist, November, 1913.) Dr. Stockard's experiments are already well known, and have been much quoted in the

consideration of the effects of alcohol on the germplasm. They consist in

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

I85

rearing young from guinea-pig matings of the following four classes: (i) Alcoholised male x normal female; (2) normal male x alcoholised female; (3) alcoholised male x alcoholised female; (4) control
experiment, normal male x normal female. The alcoholised parents were made to assume this condition by being subjected daily to the fumes of alcohol until they had reached a certain condition of intoxication. Dr. Stockard rightly considers the experiments in Class i to be of the greatest theoretical importance, since in Classes 2 and 3, where the mother was drugged, it is impossible to decide whether the effect of the alcohol is on the developing embryo or on the germplasm. Fifty-nine matings of Class I have reached term. Twenty-five of these gave negative results or early abortions. Thirty-four resulted in conceptions which ran the full term. Eight, or about 24 per cent., of these were still-born litters containing in all iS dead individuals. Many of them were somewhat premature. Twenty-six, or only 44 per cent., of the matings produced litters of living young, containing a total of 54. Twenty-one, or almost 40 per cent., of these young animals died within a few days or less than four weeks after birth, and only 33 of them survived. Only one still-born litter occurred in 35 control matings.
Mendelism in Great Britain, by Professor Punnett. Pp. 86-89. A brief account of the establishments in Great Britain at which experimental work on mendelian lines is being carried out, and of the nature of the work.

THE JOURNAL oF HEREDrrY. Vol. V., No. 3. March, 1914. Pure Lines and Selection, by Prof. W. E. Castle. Pp. 93-97. Professor Castle discusses briefly and lucidly the evidence for and against the habiiual occurrence of " pure lines " of animals or plants within which selection for reproduction can effect no racial change of characters. He concludes that no adequate proof of their occurrence has yet been brought forward, and what appears to be direct evidence to the contrary exists in his own experiments with the hooded pattern of spotted rats (a mendelising unit character). " The experiments show that plus selection and minus selection are both effective, and that selection away from and back to any modal
condition are equally easy of accomplishment." Marriage Selection, by Prof. R. H. Johnson. Pp. i02-i io. Professor
Johnson considers the reasons which prevent men and women of the educated classes from marrying, or cause them to marry late. He suggests various expedients for promoting earlier marriages, including a shortening of the time of preparation for the learned professions and the provision of the right number of dances (not too few or too many) for each individual.
Tests for Mental Defects, by Howard A. Knox. Pp. 122-130. Mr. Knox is assistant surgeon in the United States Public Health Service at Ellis Island, New York, and thus has before him the problem of judging the mentality of immigrants as speedily and accurately as possible in order that the federal law against the immigration of mentally defective persons may be enforced. In choosing a series of tests that should be applicable to a large variety of people of different ages speaking different languages, he has followed Binet and Simon in devising an age scale of intelligence, but the performances demanded from the subject at each age are less dependent on the subject's knowledge of language. A favourite type of test follows the main idea of the jig-saw puzzle. The simplest of these which he employs should be done by normal children of six years of age, the most complicated by children of twelve. A fuller account of these tests is to be published in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

THE JOURNAL oF HEREDMY. ential Fecundity, by Prof. W. F.

Vol. V., Wilcox.

No. Pp.

4. April, 1914. 141-148. In this

Differ-
address,

i86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

which was delivered before the first National Conference for Race Better-

ment, at Battle Creek, Mich., on January ioth, 1914, is contained a brief

review of the data available for ascertaining the relative rate of increase

of various racial constituents in the American population. Considering

the importance of the question, the slenderness of the data is remarkable,

and is due largely to the fact that much raw material which might be

turned to service is not available because the United States census returns

of I890, I900, and I910 have never been tabulated so as to throw light on the problems connected with fertility. The Immigration Commission, in

its report for igiI, utilised a fraction of this material and arrived at the

following conclusions dealing with married women under 45 years of age.

" Of the negro wives who had been married between io and 20 years, one

in five had had no child; of the native white of native parents, one in

eight; of the native white of foreign parents, one in I6; and of the foreign-

born wives, one in I9. The proportion of sterile marriages among the

foreign-born is highest among wives born in Scotland or England; lowest

among wives born in Poland, Bohemia or Russia." " With reference to the

average number of children born to these groups of wives of various

countries of birth, the smallest number is to wives of native American

birth and parentage. Ten such marriages have resulted in 27 children.

Ten negro marriages in 3I children; io marriages in which the wives

were born in England, in 34 children; and at the other extreme, io

marriages with wives born in Russia, in 54 children; Io with wives born

in French Canada, in 56; and io with wives born in Poland, in 62." The

results agree in general with the results of investigations made in certain

individual states such as Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York and

Rhode Island. As there appears to be little difference in the mortality

of the native and foreign-born, the differences in birth-rate really indicate

differences in the natural rate of increase. The negro death-rate is,

however, much higher than that of whites and the natural rate of increase

appears to be lower and to be falling at a more rapid rate, thus the

colour question may solve itself automatically by the extermination of the

negro.

Eugenics in the Colleges. P. I86. There are now 44 colleges in the

United States giving either a complete course in eugenics or some lectures
on it as part of another allied course; I5 in the East, 14 in the middle

West, four in the South. Sixteen teach it in their zoology department,

iI in the biology department, and II in the sociology department.

E. H. J. S. THE TRAINING SCHOOL BULLETIN, XI., 2, April, 1914. The Problem of the Moral Defective. Samuel C. Kohs. Pp. 19-22. The writer briefly

discusses the following problem: " What is there to support the belief

that moral defectiveness is only a symptom of mental defectiveness? "

" Everyone," he observes, "working with the problem of juvenile delinquency is crying for more facts." The article would have been more

satisfactory if the writer had from his experience given us more facts, on the lines of a recent discussion of the same problem in the Genevan Archives de Psychologie, or of previous experimental contributions in the Bulletin. He classifies moral obliquity quite a priori into three groups:

that due to lack of control; that due to poor judgment; and that due to a combination of both. He concludes: "It would seem that the only

ones we can really hope to redeem are those lacking in moral judgment
alone."

Mentally Deficient Children. George D. Auden. Pp. 23-25. (Ex-

tract from a report presented to the Birmingham Education Committee by

the Chief School Medical Officer.) In this excellent little paper, the writer develops certain theoretical considerations, based on Professor Spearman's hypothesis of two factors (general intelligence and special faculties) and discusses their practical application to the examination of

mentally deficient children.

C. B.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

187

BULLETIN OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE. Vol. XV., Nos. I

and 2. February and April, I9I4. These numbers contain further instal-

ments of the papers read at the thirty-eighth annual meeting of the

Academy held at Minneapolis in June, 1913. Dr. Edith Spaulding and

Dr. William Healy contribute an interesting study of the hereditary

factor in crime, based on the examination of I,ooo young recidivists

referred for report to the Juvenile Psychopathic Institute of Chicago.

Excluding cases where the family history was defective, the authors

worked out in detail the personal and hereditary data in 668 of these

criminals. In 245 cases they found distinct evidence of mental deficiency

or epilepsy in the offenders. The remainder comprised 27I cases in which

there was no known criminality in earlier generations, and 152 cases in

which there was a history of ancestral criminality. Each of these latter cases

was carefully analysed with a view to establishing the possible causative

factors of delinquency, and in all but I5 cases it was ascertained that in

environmental conditions or in hereditary influences apart from crimin-

ality there was adequate explanation of anti-social conduct. Even in the

I5 cases where a direct inheritance of criminal tendency might be sug-

gested as possible, the authors considered it very improbable. On the

other hand, they found ample evidence of an indirect inheritance of such

tendency through conditions of nervous defect and disorder, epilepsy,

insanity, and feeble-mindedness. Their conclusion is that a direct in-

heritance of criminalistic traits as such does not occur. The paper is

illustrated by pedigree charts of a number of the cases. Dr. Newkirk,

who writes from his experience as surgeon to the Hennepin Countv

Juvenile Court of Minneapolis, puts forward the very reasonable view

that physical defect, while, of course, of very secondary importance in

comparison with bad environment or faulty heredity, may nevertheless

have a part in predisposing to crime when, for instance, adenoids or

errors of refraction act as a further cause of strain to an unstable, over-

irritable nervous system. In a paper on "Social Factors Affecting the

Volume of Crime," Professor Gillin refers to the influence of divergent

legal systems in the different states of the union as tending to decrease

respect for law and so to diminish one of the chief forces of social

restraint. As bearing on the same point, he mentions the very interesting

fact that, while the criminality of immigrants into the United States is

not notably high, the criminality of the children of immigrants is exces-

sive. It has been found, for instance, that of the delinquent children

brought before the Juvenile Court in Chicago in the ten years, I899-I9o9,

72'8 per cent. were children of foreign-born parents. The cause of this

higher criminality may be sought in the dissolving influence of the new

moral environment on the social traditions and standards of the home.

On the question of the value of imprisonment, the author adopts a some-

what neutral attitude that prisons have little effect either in manufacturing

criminals or in curing them. While specially emphasising the importance

of economic conditions in determining the movement of crime, Professor

Gillin recognises also to the full the part which belongs to the individu-

ality of the criminal, and on this point he agrees with Dr. Goddard, who

contributes a separate paper on the subject, in estimating the proportion of

mental defectives in the delinquent class as at least 25 per cent. The

aspects of the problem dealt with in the other papers are for the most

part of less direct interest to eugenists.

W. C. S.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.
CENTRAL SOCIETY. April 2nd.-At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Dr. E. C. Snow on "Evidences of the Operation of Natural Selection in Man." Chairman, Major Leonard Darwin. April 28th.-Dr. Simon before the Eugenics Education Society on "La Mesure de l'Intelligence," at Burlington House (by kind permission of the Royal Society). May 7th.-At the Grafton Galleries, 5.15 p.m., Dr. J. Cowper on "Eugenics as a Basis of Hope." Chairman, Major Leonard Darwin. June 4th.-At the Grafton Galleries, 5.I5 p.m., Dr. C. W. Saleeby on " The National Birth-rate Commission." Chairman, Mr. Newton Crane. July 2nd.-At the Grafton Galleries, 3.30 p.m., the Annual General Meeting, followed by a Reception by the President and Mrs. Leonard Darwin.
COMMITTEES.
May 1 5th.-Executive Council Meeting.
,, Ith.-Informal Council Discussion, 12, Egerton Place. Subject, " Is it for or against the Interests of Eugenics to bar the Employment of Married Women in the Teaching and Other Professions?"
June I7th.-General Council Meeting.
MEETINGS.
March 26th.-Miss Norry before the Walton Women's Club on "Eugenics and Social Problems."
April ist.-Miss E. Corry before the Society of the Spoken Thought, Blackheath, on " Some Aspects of Eugenics."
April I7th.-Mrs. Penrose at the Children's Welfare Exhibition on " Eugenics in the Home."
April 2gth.-Dr. Ham at the National Conference of Nurses and Midwives at the Horticultural Hall, on "The Influence of the Nursing Profession in the Prevention of Venereal Disease."
May 6th.-Mrs. Gotto at the Day Nursery for Jewish Infants, Commercial Road, E., on "Eugenics."
May 27th.-Major E. H. Hill on " The Permanent Care of the Feeble-
Minded " at a Drawing Room Meeting, Minehead,i on behalf of a pro-
posed Farm Colony for Bristol and Somerset. At the invitation of the Victoria League the Society sent an exhibit
of charts and literature to the Imperial Health Conference and Exhibi-
tion organised by them at the Imperial Institute from May i8th to 24th. June i6-I7th.-Dr. D. White represented the Society at the Ports-
mouth Conference of the International Abolitionist Federation, a report of which will appear in the next number.
LIVERPOOL BRANCH. The Council met on May 26th and nominated Alderman Bulley, Mr. Laurie, and the Hon. Secretary to represent the Branch on the General Council. Only one meeting has been held since the last quarterly report; Mr. D'Aeth read a paper on March 31st on " Personal Qualities in Relation to Eugenics," giving a tentative classification of human qualities as manifested in behaviour; discussion followed upon the heritability of such qualities and the extent to which they may be influenced by training. Outside our own series, an important lecture was delivered in St. George's Hall by Professor Karl Pearson, F.R.S., on " Some Aspects of the Problem of the Relative Intensity of Nurture and Nature." The Medical Officer of Health for the City of Liverpool presided. The lecture was concerned largely with official records of Liverpool children furnished for

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

I89

the laid

puunrdpeorsec;onttrhieburteicoonr.ds

of several other towns
The general conclusion

of the North were was that the effect

also upon

infant mortality of rent, wages, type of house, ventilation, sanitation,

employment of the mother, etc., was in each case considerably less than

that of the parental health and habits, the heritable factors.

Edueation.-InEugenies and Elementary

R. T. BODEY, Hon. Sec.
recent years the Society

has urged the introduction of adequate training in sex-hygiene into the

training colleges, it has approached the authorities on various occasions,

and in March last year organised a conference of head masters and

mistresses, at which a resolution was passed asking for an enquiry as to

the advisability of introducing eugenics into the educational systems.

The report which has just been issued by a special section of the Ele-

mentary Education Sub-Committee of the London County Council is

therefore of special interest to the Society. This section were instructed,

in April, 1913, to consider what action, if any, could be taken with refer-

ence to the question of instruction in sex-hygiene and purity in the public

elementary schools. After hearing the evidence of head masters and head

mistresses, school doctors, and others, they concluded that under no cir-

cumstances should sex-hygiene be taught in class in elementary schools,

the main grounds being the different types of homes from which the

children came, the varieties of temperament to be met with, and the

danger that the children's natural modesty and reticence might be broken

down, and that as the result of such teaching undesirable conversations
and'would take place. This last opinion was endorsed by head teachers

all witnesses except one. A large proportion of the witnesses were in

favour of individual talks to boys and girls on leaving school. Though

not, therefore, recommending the inclusion of sex teaching as a class

subject, the committee arranged for consideration to be given (i) to the

importance of the subject of sex-hygiene during the early adolescent

stage, and to the possibility of suitable guidance being given in connection
totherewith to students attending the evening institutes; and (2) the

advisability of making provision for teachers in training to receive some

advice which will enable them to deal with undesirable habits in the

children entrusted to their charge.

The opinions here expressed seem to be in general agreement with

those of the National Union of Teachers, who, at their conference at

Lowestoft in April, passed a resolution " That in view of the increasing

attention given to it by the Press and educational bodies in this country,

the conference is of opinion that instruction in the subject of sex-hygiene

should be a part of every teacher's equipment, and to insure this it should

become a part of the curriculum in all training colleges both for men

and women." The question had been previously considered by the Ladies

Committee of the Executive, who had decided that it was neither prac-

ticable nor desirable to give class instruction in the subject, but that it

might with advantage be taken up by the students in the training colleges.
EducationGalton Day In New South Wales.-The Eugenics

Society in New South Wales gave a dinner during February last in

commemoration of the birth of Sir Francis Galton. The State Governor,

Sir Gerald Strickland, was the guest of the evening, and in replying

to the toast of his health, spoke of the science of eugenics and the part

to be played by the Society. Eugenics he likened to the Chinese ancestor

worship or to the English and Scottish love of pedigrees lifted into a

higher plane. Professor A. Stuart said "The Eugenics Education

Society intended to put before the people of Australia the conditions

of human life as to heredity on the one hand and environment on the

other, which would act and react and act again upon the individual. If

man was to be a rational being and not altogether an irrational char-

acter, a certain amount of consideration would greatly tend to the

well-being of the race." Professor R. F. Irvine, of the University

Igo EUGENICS REVIEW.

of Sydney, spoke next. He was not of opinion that the human race

could be improved by legislative enactments in the present state of our

knowledge, and he disputed views expressed by certain biologists that

the environment was an unimportant factor. His remarks appear to have

been reported in a form which gave rise to some misconception as to

his real views, and so he stated them again clearly in a letter to the

Sydney Morning Herald of February 26th. Here he expressed himself

as completely in accord with the main objects of the Society, but insisted

that the problem of how to produce a superior civilisation is both bio-

logical and sociological. It is a matter of breeding on the one hand,

and a matter of social organisation and adjustment on the other. The

two aims must go together if valuable results are to be arrived at. Pro-

fessor Irvine's letter was followed on March 3rd by a letter to the Daily

Telegraph (Sydney) by Mr. J. C. Eldridge, the Secretary of the State

Labour Bureau in New South Wales, who is the Secretary of the Eugenics

Education Society of New South Wales. He explained that Professor

Irvine's contention was fully admitted by the Society, who, if they insist

on the importance of heredity, do not do so by belittling environment, but

aim We

MaetdsiteraelngtIhnesnpiencgtiaolnl
have received from

agencies which may improve the human race.

of Sehool Children
Mr. J. C. Eldridge full

in New South Wales. particulars of the medical

examination of school children which has been instituted there. Each

school is apparently to be examined about once in four years. The par-

ticulars ascertained about each child are entered on a separate card.

They are provided partly by the child's parents or guardian, partly by

the teacher, and partly by the school doctor as a result of the medical

examination. The parents are asked to give information concerning (i)

the number of children of each sex, living or dead, in the family; (2) the

child's place in order of birth; (3) their own occupations and nationality,

and the nationality of their own parents; (4) any family history of con-

sumption, rheumatism, heart disease or nervous trouble; and (5) certain

particulars concerning the health of the child. The teacher measures the

height and weight and chest of the child, records the hair, eye and skin

colour, gives an estimate of mental capacity in comparison with other

children of the same age, and ascertains something of the home condi-

tions, hours of sleep and of work in or out of school, and notes the nature

of the clothing and anything of interest in the physical characters of the

child. The actual medical inspection seems fairly comprehensive and if

all the data obtained from the parents, teachers and doctors could be

thoroughly relied on, a mass of data valuable for ascertaining something

of the conditions associated with physical and mental defects would be

obtained.

The Seeond International Eugenies Congress will be heId at the

Atome2r8tihc,aIn915M.useTuhme

of Natural History, organisation, as thus

New York City, September 23rd far completed, stands as follows:

Alexander President;

Graham Madison

BGerlaln,t,HoTnreoarsaurryer.PresEixdeecnutt;iveHeCnormymiFtatierfei:eldHeOnsrbyorEn.,

Crampton, Chairman, Professor of Zoology, Barnard College, Columbia

University, and McKeen Cattell,

CPurroafteosrs,orAmoefriPcsaynchoMluosgye,umCoolf umNbaituaraUlniHviesrtsoirtyy;;JaChmanss.

B. Davenport, Director of the Station for Experimental Evolution, Car-

negie Institution of Washington, and Resident Director of the Eugenics

Record Office, Cold Spring Harbour, L.I.; Franklin H. Giddings, Pro-

PfessyscohriaotfriScocIinostliotguyt,e,

Columbia University; August Wards Island; Edmund B.

Hoch, Director of the Wilson, Professor of

Zoology, Columbia University; Frederick Adams Woods, Brookline,
Mass.; Arthur E. Hamilton, Secretary, Extension Department, Eugenics

Record Office. There is in addition a strong General Committee contain-

ing many well-known men of science and other influential people, and

there is every prospect that an interesting and successful gathering will

be organised.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

I9I

Eugenies at the Italian Congress of Seienee.-The Italian Com-

mittee for the Study of Eugenics has approached the governing body of

the Italian Society for the Progress of Science with the suggestion that

there should be henceforward a eugenic section at their annual congress.

In consequence
Bari in October.

a

section has been arranged for their next
Professor Sergi, President of the Eugenic

meeting at Committee,

is giving the inaugural address.

Eugenies at the Manchester Sehool of Teehnology.-At the

request of the Manchester branch of the Society, Mr. Maxwell Garnett, Principal of the School of Technology, arranged a series of lectures to be

delivered there if an audience of I5 people could be guaranteed. As

double that number
being the lecturer.

have The

entered, Society

the has

course
made

is in progress, a small grant

Dr. D'Ewart towards the

payment of students' fees, as those imposed by the college placed the

lectures out of the reach of many elementary school teachers.

of

Hygiene Liverpool

and Heredity grants a degree

at of

Liverpool University..-The
Master of Hygiene (M.H.) on

University the recom-

tHpmheeerrrneiedeodadittimyooofnnatnshodtsfu'tdEhynecvoifSuorerronsnaetmtheeeonfatdf.te"legerrcetreuerpeoesrxtteafnnrddosmportvahecertiFctaawcloulytweyoarroksf

Medicine. The and includes a on "Genetics,

A Eugenies Education that a dining club under this
members meet regularly and
subject and to do useful work.

Society in Chieago.-We
name has been formed in
hope to develop a general

are informed Chicago. The interest in the

Cytology and
the Royal Society his subject, " The
main contentions

Heredity.-The Croonian lecture was delivered before
on June iith by Professor E. B. Wilson, who took for Bearing of Cytological Research on Heredity." His were that it is possible to explain the combinations

atcssuwwhennhheaeixrrost-oiewslsmmnigmbpoonaooofskliorreolnddntdemiearfMenfee,hbetevenrynirdestdteneiitetdhtnlhniiogeigectluarsyeesgonahtuichmfnipaoonenstruothtlhceotedtrhfhhiaremetinobyaanmehnlevomecexisiremceogilaatbmwhunedyetsddestich.tvqoadheucnteoaltulreaisb6atithllrhniueeee;fbsfiiyltlnnwihinaanhtgtsmkehreaeotdegafhduefenieetsthmcsyteaho;hlrooectioftw,hhmhenraoaoatfsnmnabodtcoemhtstteeawothsceahmfctaeeapetcnslsttatsshayhotenerehroedydeyf

Galton Laboratory Leetures.-rhe staff of the Galton Laboratory doPsoNhP"eufrnaaeSfbotavejtfourceNehertmsaces,eottebs,snieoco"AoeorfsnhdunapaePragnellsedtodcieauovtrrEdeDsiansurrnpioge.oacpnnedfnlgenDduaaitaadtrthcevhbsepsedaiLoitddirPpaovturtehHpalohrehetaUbpaytrrnolvseioioeeinnvlnltmqh,eeiuecrchoerootsnwa,ifvuihstertitaaertylronheneeceddacCepteoorRmnoloneoLtfluvlfileiacpvytgntrheuemcicebr,ievovepatnerinolhDtcocoeuuaIulllcnnlsusoetddsnoaeeotiecnnmecrsdasee..cipsMaata.gsyacirsiTyooetohnrPufysier2neo2NdsDafnulrnedaora.ssd,ftstsuolHertmlerneheeectractinKottutatanurlnar'roeeldlsefsd

The Campaign against Venereal Disease in Liverpool.mAiaaaC"tnennoTdddmGhtitmehechwoineeaantelSsrtiConaMeocislsfeaittfuoyiyipClotcpuofoeo2torgmfit7irmoohtctfniLehae,itldhMvtteweehAabehrdelsyepitiyphoccetc,ohaichollentnaawssnLuhIaidongasosstrusftpirdiarnatbtdeghteMusdeeteairodindeyfVoesoentnsflnrhteaioeedndirroairmefneobeasdraytdlcdhateetDDinrthrvioide.esntesoRccgateCoiseacch-tenmotaoustpmtpor.ilebalr"oreeainaomstg,tfeDnenvrwJL.e.aiwwnosviieMfEettrai.rhhecnppaaroWaaltloo.hilmmeds.SieitpHcneseeohetercaapiniiseoncare,n,gel,

ADDITIONS TO LIBRARY.

*ABBOT, L., I9ii. The Spirit of Democracy. Pp. 2I5. (L. 643.)

*ALDEN, M., 1912. Child Life and Labour. Pp. 192. (L. 65i.)

ARCHIVES OF NEUROLOGY AND PSYCHIATRY, 1914. Vol. VI.

PP- 345. (L. 62!.)
*AVEBURY, LORD, I909. Peace and Happiness. Pp. 386. (L. 20.)

BRANFORD, V., 1914. Interpretations and Forecasts: A Study of

Survivals and Tendencies in Contemporary Society. (L. 620.)

*BRAY, R. A., I9I2. The Town Child. Pp. 333. (L. 632.)

BRIEUX. Damaged Goods. Translated by J. Pollock. Pp. 244.

(L. 654.)
*DADSON, A. J.,

I9OI.

Evolution and its Bearing on Religions.

Pp. 264.

(L. 627.)

*DICKENSON, G. LOWES, 1913. lustice and Liberty: A Political

Dialogue. Pp. 229. (L. 144.)

*EUCKEN, R., I9o2. the Problem of Human Life. Pp. 582. (L. 635.) FAIRCHILD, H. P., I9I3. Immigration. Pp. 456. (L. 622.)
*FLINT, R., I9o8. Socialism. Pp. 354. (L. 639.) *GEORGE, W., 1913. Woman and To-morrow. Pp. I88. (L. 667.)

*GOFF, A., and LEVY, J. H.. I9o6. Politics and Disease. Pp. 291.

(L. 625.)

GRANT, C., and HODGSON, N., 1913. The Case for Co-education. Pp.

325. (L.
*HAGGARD, H.

6I9.)
RIDER,

I9II.

Rural Denmark and Its Lessons.

Pp. 335.

(L. 633.)

*HIRSCH, W., I897. Genius and Degeneration. Pp. 333. (L. 664.)

*HOUGH, W., I914. Culture of the Ancient Pueblos, etc. Pp. 138.

(L. 666.)

*KELYNACK, T. N. The Drink Problem. Pp. 300. (L. 644.)

KROPOTKIN, P., I910. Mutual Aid, a Factor in Evolution. Pp. 348.

(L. 634.)
LAYTON, F. G., 1914.

Philip's Wife: A Play.

Pp. 64.

(L. 653.)

LECKY, W. E. H., 1904. History of the Rise and Influence of Rational-

ism in Europe. Vol. I., pp. 408; Vol. II., pp. 430. (L. 65o.) *MAYREDER, R., 1913. A Survey of the Woman Problem. Pp. 275.

*McCAR(LT.H6Y3,6.)C., I908. The Causes of Poverty. Pp. Iio. (L. 66i.)

*McDOUGALL, W., I9II. Body and Mind. Pp. 384. (L. 662.)

MITCHELL, C. A., 1904. The Cultivation of Man, according to the

Teaching of Common Sense. Pp. i68. (L. 624.)

*MOND, F., I908. The Burden of Woman. Pp. 236. (L. 628.)

**MMOUNNTSETSESROBREIR,GM,.,H.1,9II29.IO.TPhreobMloenmtessosforTio-Mdeatyh,odf.romPpt.he3P7o7.int

(L. of

659.) View

of a Psychologist. Pp. 220. (L. 637.)

*NORDAU, MAX, I906. Paradoxes. Pp. 343. (L. 642.)

*REEVES, Mrs. PEMBER. Round about a Pound a Week. Pp. 231.

(L. 626.)

*ROWNTREE, B. S., I9OI. Poverty: A Study of Town Life. Pp. 437.

(L. 663.)

*RUSSELL, C. E. B., and RIGBY, L. M., I906. The Miaking of the

Criminal. Pp. 362. (L. 638.)

SALEEBY, C. W., 1914. The Progress of Eugenics. Pp. 259. (L. 658.)

(Presented by the
*SAVILL, T. D., I908.

author.)
Clinical

Lectures

on

Neurasthenia.

Pp. 226.

(R. L. 649.)

*SIDGWICK, H., I902. Philosophy, its Scope and Relations. Pp. 252.

(L. 647.)

N.B.-Those marked by an asterisk were presented by Mr. E. J. Thompson.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

I93

*SPRIGGE, S. S., I905. Medicine and the Public. Pp. 293. (L. 630.)

*STOCKER, R. * TAGORE, R.,

D., I9I0. Social 1913. Sadhana.

Idealism. Pp. i86.
The Realisation

(L. 629.) of Life.

Pp.

I64.

(L. 645.)
*TALBOT, E. S., I898.

Degeneracy, Its Causes, Signs and Results.

Pp.

372. (L. 64I.) *THOMPSON, H. B., I905.

The Mental Traits of Sex.

Pp. i88.

(L.

646.)
TREDGOLD, A. F., 1914. Mental Deficiency (Amentia). 2nd edition.

Pp. 49I. (L. 66o.)

URWICK, E. J., 1912. A Philosophy of Social Progress. Pp. 300.

(L. 652.)
*VILLIERS, B., 1908.

The Socialist Movement in England.

Pp. 339.

(L. 648.)
*WEDGWOOD, J. and E., 1913.

The Road to Freedom and what Lies

Beyond. *WHITBY, C.

J.P,p.I911056..

(L. 253.) Makers of Man:

A

Study

of Human Initiative.

Pp. 424. (L. 623.)

*WRENCH, G. T., I9II. The Mastery of Life. Pp. 5i8. (L. 63I.)

M.B.-Those marked by an asterisk were presented by Mr. E. J. Thompson.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

Citti del Comitato Italiano per gli Studi de Eugenica. (Publisher:

Societa Romana di Antropologia, Rome, 1914. Pp. I4.)

Co-Education in Practice, being an address delivered in Cambridge in

February, 1914, with many additions and three appendices. J. H.

BADLEY, M.A. (Publishers: WV. Heffer and Sons, Cambridge. Price

IS. Pp. 40.)

Criminology. BARON R. GAROFALO. (Publisher: Heinemann, London.

1914. Price i6s. net. Pp. 478.)

Damaged Goods, by BRIEUX. Translated by John Pollock. With a

Preface by Bernard Shaw and a Foreword by Mrs. Bernard Shaw.

(Publisher: Fifield, London, 19I4. Price is. Pp. 244.) The play

treats the problem of venereal disease in relation to society in a

serious spirit. The author believes that a knowledge of the prevalence

and nature of the far-reaching effects of the disease would lead to

its prevention. He vividly depicts the tragedy of innocent infection

and advocates men being required by social custom to give medical

certificates of health to the bride's parents before marriage, in the

interests of the future generation.

Example of True Hermaphroditism in the Domestic Fowl, with Remarks

on the Phenomenon of Allopterotism, An. S. G. SHATTOCK and

C. G. SELIGMANN. Report from Transactions of the Pathological

Society of London. Vol. 57', Part I., i9o6. Pp. 69-I09.

Feeble-Minded in Ontario. H. MACMURCHY. Eighth Report. For the

year 19I3. (Publisher: S. K. Cameron, Toronto, 1914. Pp. 30.)

Golden Heresy, The. MAX PLOWMAN. (Publisher: The Author, London,

1914. Price 2S. 6d. PP. 40.) Interpretations and Forecasts: A Study of Survivals and Tendencies in

Contemporary Society. VICTOR BRANFORD. (Publisher: Duckworth,

London, 1914. Price 7s. 6d.
Kinship and Social Organisation.

Pp. 424.) W. H. R. RIVERS, M.D., F.R.S.

(Pub-

lishers: Constable and Co., Ltd., London, 1914. Price 2s. 6d.

LegisPFpati9o6n.)for the Feeble-Minded, by Miss A. H. P. KIRBY. (Publishers:

The National Association for the Feeble-Minded, Denison House,

Vauxhall Bridge Road, S.W. Price 2d.) An excellent pamphlet

stating briefly and clearly the scope of the Mental Deficiency Act,

194 EUGENICS REVIEW.

drawing attention to the eugenic bearing of the principle of per-

manent care for the mentally defective, and urging the citizen to

take his or her share in securing the effective administration of the

Act.

Observations made to ascertain whether any relation subsists between the

Seasonal assumption of the " Eclipse " Plumage in the Mallard (Anas

Boscas) and the Functions of the Testicle. C. G. SELIGMANN and

S. G. SHATTOCK. Reprint from the Proceedings of the Zoological

Society of London, 1914. Pp. 23-43.

Observations upon the Acquirement of Secondary Sexual Characters,

indicating the Formation of an Internal Secretion by the Testicle.

S. G. SHATTOCK and C. G. SELIGM4NN. Reprint from Transactions of

the Pathological Society of London. Vol. 56, Part I., 1905. PP. 57-8o.

On the Relative Length of the First and Second Toes of the Human Foot,

from the Point of View of Occurrence, Anatomy and Heredity. C. A.

MERRITT HAWKES, M.Sc., B.Sc. Reprint from lournal of Genetics,

Vol. III., No. 4. April, 1914. Pp. 249-274.

Philip's Wife: A Play. F. G. LAYTON, M.R.C.S. (Publisher: Fifield,

London, 1914. Price is. Pp. 64.) The author is a medical man very

much alive to the need of public education as to the far-reaching and

congenital effects of venereal disease. He treats the subject most

skilfully, in a way which is convincing without repelling the reader

as much as the more pathological treatment of the same subject by

Brieux.

Preparation for Marriage. WALTER HEAPE, M.A., F.R.S. (Publishers:

Cassell and Co., London, 1914. Price 2s. 6d. Pp. I68.)

Progress of Eugenics, The. C. W. SALEEBY. (Publishers: Cassell, Lon-

don, 1914. Price Ss. PP. 260.)

Problem of the Nations, The. A. CORBETT-SMITH. (Publishers: John

Bale, Sons and Danielsson, London, 1914. Price is. 6d. net. Pp. 107.)

Sex. P. GEDDES and J. A. THOMSON. Home University of Modern

Knowledge. (Publishers: Williams and Norgate, London, 1914.

Price is. Pp. 255.)

Should We Remain Silent Any Longer 7 by MRS. M. SCHOEMAKER-

FRENTZEN, Leyden, Holland. (Publisher: A. W. Sijthaff's Uitgevers-

Mij.) The translation of a pamphlet written in Dutch by the wife of

one of the leading surgeons of the Town's Hospital in the Hague.

It deals with the need for educating women in the dangers of

venereal disease to themselves and their children, and urges that

parents should require their future sons-in-law to undergo medical

examination before marriage.

Social Disease and How to Fight It, The: A Rejoinder. L. CREIGHTON.

(Publishers: Longmans, Green, and Co., London, 1914. Price is.

Pp. 87.)

State and the Poor, The. GEOFFREY DRAGE, M.A. The Nation's Library.

(Publisher: Collins, London, 1914. Price is. Pp. 264.)

Sexual Ethics: A Study of Borderland Questions. ROBERT MICHELS.

(Publishers: The Walter Scott Publishing Co., London, 1914. Price

6s. Pp. 296.)

Teaching Sex-Hygiene in the Public Schools. DR. E. B. LOWRY. (Pub-

lishers: Forbes and Co., Chicago, The Training of a Working Boy. REV.

1914. H. S.

Price 50 cents. PELHAM, M.A.

Pp. 95.) (Publisher:

Macmillan, London, 1914. Price 3s. 6d. Pp. i65.)

The Threshold of Religion. R. R. MARETT. (Publishers: Methuen and

Co., What it

London, 1914. Price Means to Marry, or

Yss.ounPgp.W2o20m.e) n

and

Marriage.

DR. MARY

SCHARLIEB. (Publishers: Cassell and Co., London, 1914. Price 25. 6d.

pp. 140.)

White and Black. ETHELBERT STEVENS. (Publishers: Simpkin, Marshall,

Hamilton and Kent and Co., Ltd., London, 1914. Price 6s. net. Pp.

284.)

