THE REVEREND D. SHERWIN BAILEY, Ph.D.
Public Morality and the Criminal Law

W HEN THE WOLFENDEN (Homosexual of the relation which it implied between law and

Offences and Prostitution) Report ap- morality. Is there any connection between sin

peared in 1957, interest was focussed and crime; and should the criminal law attempt

mainly upon its proposals for revision of the law, to define or enforce morality, and punish im-

and especially that relating to certain forms of morality? These were some of the questions

criminal homosexualism. In subsequent discus- which Sir Patrick (now Lord Justice) Devlin set

sion, Parliamentary debate, and legislation (the out to consider in his Maccabaean Lecture

Street Offences Act, 1958), legal reform of one delivered in March 1959.4

kind or another has continued to be the domi- Lord Devlin recognized that the criminal law

nant issue. Recently, however, attention has been cannot now justify itself simply by reference to a

directed to a question of greater ultimate impor- moral law; since the State leaves religion to the

tance, namely, the juridical principle stated in private judgement and does not enforce any

Chapter II of the Report, and emphasized from particular, or indeed any, belief, it has forfeited

time to time in the chapters which followed. its right to enforce a morality founded on

Some of the implications of this principle are religious doctrine. What then must provide the

considered in a valuable essay* contributed to basis for the criminal law? In order to answer

the Church of England Moral Welfare Council's this question, three others must be asked: Has

current series of pamphlets, a review of which society the right to pass moral judgements? If it

affords an occasion to survey the course of the has, may it enforce its judgements by law? And

discussion to date.

if so, may the law be invoked in all cases, or may

Expressed in the simplest terms, the "Wolfen- exceptions be made-and on what grounds?

den principle" asserts that for legal purposes Lord Devlin replies on the following lines:

crime cannot be equated with sin-that moral Society has a right to pass moral judgements

and legal wrongdoing are not necessarily one and because the very notion of society implies a com-

the same, and that consequently there is a realm munity of ideas and, therefore, a common

of private morality in which the operative sanc- morality founded upon general agreement as to

tions are ethical, and the determinant of right what is good and what is evil; and the individual

behaviour is personal responsibility and not fear must submit to the bondage of this common

of criminal penalties-a realm, therefore, into morality as part of the price which he must pay

which it is not the law's business to intrude. It for the society which he needs. It follows that

was inevitable that such a principle should arouse society has the right also to legislate against any-

criticism. It has been objected that the implied thing that constitutes a breach of the common

distinction between crime and sin is superficial, morality and, therefore, a threat to the common

that private morality cannot be isolated from good. To this right no theoretical limit can be

public, that the delimitation of a realm of private set; the attempt of the Wolfenden Committee to

morality exempt from the sanctions of the set such a limit by introducing the qualifying idea

criminal law deprives the law of its preceptive of exploitation of human weakness as a special

function and its power of moral restraint-and circumstance warranting the intervention of the

so on. Such criticism showed the need for a law, is vitiated by the simple fact that all wrong-

thorough examination of the principle itself, and doing involves exploitation of some kind. None

* Quentin Edwards. What is Unlawful ? London, 1959. t The Enforcement of Morals, Maccabaean Lecture in

Published for the Church of England Moral Welfare Jurisprudence of the British Academy, 1959. London,

Council by the Church Information Office. Pp. 14. Price 1959. Published for the British Academy by Oxford

Is. 6d.

University Press. Pp. 26. Price 3s. 6d.

201
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1961, 52, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the less, flexibility is necessary in practice. self-evident, being based on divine commands or

Morality embraces both public and private the rational conclusions of human reason, he

interests, and they must be reconciled in such a founds it rather upon something primarily sub-

way as tq, permit the maximum individual free- jective: the feelings of the "man on the Clapham

dom consistent with the integrity of society; but omnibus." The latter is the type of that legal

the limit of toleration is reached when a "real fiction, the "reasonable man"-and "reason-

feeling .of reprobation" is aroused. Society's able," as Lord Devlin points out, does not mean

standard of moral judgement is that of the "rational." The attitude of this "reasonable

"reasonable' man" "the man on the Clapham man" may be nothing but a bundle of emotional

omnibus," and when anything excites him to prejudices; but if the majority in a society shares

emotions of "intolerance, indignation, and his feelings, a common morality is established,

disgust," it is an indication of the presence of and according to Lord Devlin's theory, may be

immorality demanding the intervention of the enforced by law.

law. It is true, of course, that the limits of Professor Hart subjects this view to a search-

tolerance shift;. but the law reacts slowly to such ing scrutiny. Its fatal weakness, of course, lies in

'changes, and the tendency is to avoid any the fact that if a general attitude of intolerance,

alterations or concessions which might convey an indignation, and disgust may in some instances

impression 'of weakened moral judgement.

be well-founded, in others it may equally be due

expTlhauins.etdhearnidghtdeoffetnhdeedl.awFtionaelnlfyo,rctehmeorcallaiitmy

is is

to prejudice, superstition, ignorance, or misunderstanding. It would be disastrous if the law

advanced that there is a definite and proper had no firmer basis than the emotions of the

relatio'n' 'between crime and sin. Morality is majority-if dispassionate reason, knowledge,

necessary to society, but it must be taught (which and common-sense were not also allowed a voice

is the ,offce of.religion) as well as enforced (which in its determination. Yet this is precisely what

is the.office of law); religion, therefore (which in has happened in the realm of private morality

a Weste,rn context means the Christian religion) which is concerned with sexual relation. Homo-

.is.the ultimate basis of the public morality ex- sexual practices between men in private are

pressed in the standards of conduct approved by deemed to be criminal (but not lesbianism,

the "reasonable man," even though the law fornication, or adultery) simply because such

cannot enforce that morality on doctrinal practices arouse in the "reasonable man" feelings

grounds, but' only on grounds of general accep- of reprobation so strong as to demand expression

tance'by society..

in repressive statutes. It is not difficult to explain

Lord Devlin's argument, in effect, amounts to why the emotions of the "reasonable man" are

v4 repudiation ofthe liberal principal that the only excited by the thought of homosexualism and
justification for coercion of the individual by the not by the thought of fornication or adultery;

communim,ty, is to prevent harm to others-for but to explain such emotions does not make them

this is.the principle implicit in the postulation by right or rational. Lord Devlin's conception of

-the Wolfenclen Committee of a realm of private public morality could be invoked to defend our

morality into which it is not the law's business persecution of witches in the past, or the various

to intrude. In a broadcast criticism of The En- forms of racial discrimination with which we are

forcement of Morals,* the Professor of Juris- only too familiar to-day.

prudence in the University of Oxford observes Before legal effect is given to the judgements of

that the novel feature of Lord Devlin's lecture is a public morality based on feeling, it is necessary

his view of the nature of morality-that while to ask whether behaviour which is emotionally

earlier opponents of the liberal view have offensive to the majority (or which the majority

rejected it on the ground that morality is in fact can be induced to regard as emotionally offen-

sive) is harmful, either in itself or in its reper-

* H. L. A. Hart, Immorality and Treason, a talk given cussion upon the general moral code. In Professor

on the B.B.C. Third Programme; it was reproduced from T7he Listener in Family Planning, Oct. 1959, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. -9.

Hart's view, Lord Devlin does not satisfactorily consider and answer this question. He recognizes

202

PUBLIC MORALITY AND THE CRIMINAL LAW

that a morality based upon the consensus of a morality); nor must crime and immorality be

majority, even if that consensus is one mainly of treated as necessarily synonymous, for not all

feeling, is essentially a democratic notion, and declensions from public moral standards are

that democracy means the running of risks which regarded as meriting criminal penalties.

are inseparable from majority rule. But he insists From these distinctions it is apparent that

that loyalty to democratic principles does not there is a group of wrongs or offences which are

require us to maximize these risks, "yet this is sinful or immoral (or both) but not criminal, and

what we shall do if we mount the man in the are also public in the sense that they may involve

street on top of the Clapham omnibus and tell others than the agent, and are capable of disturb-

him that if only he feels sick enough about what ing the harmony of society. Into this intermediate

other people do in private to demand its suppres- category come offences such as slander, and also

sion by law, no theoretical criticism can be made acts of venereal wrongdoing. Although they are

of his demand". And in this connection it is well not criminal, they are for all that unlawful, either

to remember the adventitious and irrelevant in the strict sense of lacking the express approval

means by which such sickness can so easily be or protection of the law, or in the broad sense

induced-the propaganda and pressures of many that they are contrary to the accepted standards

dubious kinds which can build up artificial of good morals or the implications of the com-

emotions of reprobation to the point where they mon law. This conception of the "unlawful," as

have to find expression, and may do so through Mr. Edwards admits, is necessarily somewhat

the law.

imprecise, especially in the sexual realm, where

On the other hand, it is good and necessary "the law's sexual morality is the highest common

that society should be able to give authoritative moral factor of the mass of the people"-a

expression to its genuine and well-founded moral definition which does not seem to differ greatly

judgements. This is most appropriately done, in in substance from Lord Devlin's idea of public

Lord Devlin's view, by means of legal sanctions morality, and is open to the criticisms made by

-a method which Professor Hart clearly re- Professor Hart. None the less it has practical

pudiates, though he suggests no alternative; in value because, among other things, it would

fact, this is a matter with which he is not directly enable the law to register and declare in the least

concerned. For consideration of such an alter- objectionable way the current moral judgements

native, we must turn to the essay by Mr. Quentin of society.

Edwards to which reference has already been At present, such judgements can only be ex-

made. pressed through the sanctions of the criminal

More precisely than the other two authors he law; whether or not they are so expressed de-

distinguishes between moral codes and criminal pends, as we have seen, upon the emotional

codes, and between sin, crime, and immorality. attitude of the community to the behaviour upon

As to the first division, moral codes are mainly which its verdict is being passed. Thus in the

hortative and must be flexible enough to bring realm of private venereal conduct there is an

under condemnation even those offences, the irrational discrimination between male homo-

culpability of which can only be measured sub- sexualism and most other forms of immorality,

jectively; while criminal codes are almost entirely resulting in the imposition upon one class of

prohibitive, and must be rigid enough to define offender of exemplary penalties which have no

offences so exactly as to reduce to a minimum the conspicuous deterrent or reformatory value, and

degree of discretion vested in the magistracy. As appear to serve merely as a release for feelings of

to the second: sin is commonly defined as the hostility against a non-conforming minority and

contravention of God's will by thought, word, its practices-relatively harmless though the

deed, or the omission to do what is enjoined, and latter are to society when compared with adultery

must not be confused with crime (behaviour or fornication. It is manifestly just as unsatis-

which is declared to be punishable by the law) factory that the law should be prostituted by

or with immorality (behaviour which is below, making its penalties the instruments of unpre-

or contrary to, the standards of current public dictable or unreasonable social antipathies, as

203

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

it is right and necessary that society should be
able to demonstrate in a proper manner its considered and reasonable disapproval of behaviour which is contrary to public morality, yet unsuitable for criminal punishment.
The solution of this difficulty proposed by Mr. Edwards is worthy of serious consideration. An Act, for example, giving effect to the recommendations of the Wolfenden Committee could begin by declaring all homosexual practices, male and female alike, unlawful, and could then proceed to make certain specified practices criminal-those, for instance, involving minors. Likewise, it should not prove difficult to write into appropriate legislation a clear and, if necessary, reiterated affirmation that fornication and adultery are also unlawful acts. In the face of such a declaration it would be impossible to maintain the objection commonly made against the Wolfenden proposals, that they would appear to excuse immorality if not, indeed, to license it. And society would have a more suitable, yet still legal means of expressing its disapproval of behaviour contrary to the standards of public morality.
The concept of unlawfulness would, of course, still remain juridical rather than moral or theological. Not every sin could, or ought to be so defined, but only those in respect of which, for the better ordering of society, it is deemed salutary that the strictures of the law should reinforce those of religion and ethics, where a

suitable legislative opportunity presents itself. On the other hand, it would permit the law to exercise a preceptive function more acceptably than is possible through criminal sanctions. At the same time it would give at least qualified recognition to the Wolfenden principle, by protecting the realm of private morality against unwarrantable intrusion by the law, while admitting that private and public morality are inseparable and react upon one another.
In the long run, the Wolfenden Committee's attempt to define the nature, range, and limitations of the criminal law as it affects venereal wrongdoing may prove to be of greater significance than its specific recommendations upon the legal issues which fell within its terms of reference. It is encouraging, therefore, that attention is now being given to the principle which the Committee laid down, and to the questions which arise from it. The contributions reviewed in this article clarify some of the problems which emerge
from consideration ofthe relation between public
morality, private morality, and the criminal law;
but they also raise others. The whole matter is
evidently one of great consequence, for moralists,
theologians, and sociologists as well as forjurists,
and it is to be hoped that before long some one
will develop comprehensively and with authority the themes necessarily treated in brief by Lord
Justice Devlin, Professor Hart and Mr. Quentin
Edwards.

204

