WAR AND EUGENICS
By LEWIS F. RICHARDSON, D.Sc. (Physics), F.R.S.

W ARS have been regarded from included. Thus Quincy Wright (I942),

many points of view. There are having made a list of 278 wars, remarked

military historians who write about that probably ten times as many might have

the technique of winning wars. There are been added. The astronomers count stars

popular romances which emphasize the hero- by first arranging them according to bright-

ism of their own side and the wickedness of ness. I applied this idea to wars by first

their opponents. The adventure and fun in arranging them according to the number of

war have been picked out by Alexandre people killed. Statements of casualties are

Dumas and by Ian Hay. There are also sometimes uncertain by a factor as large as

literary historians who, long after the event, three. So the subdivisions had to be broad.

make carefully impartial sumniaries of the It seemed statistically convenient to proceed

motives of both sides. Apart from descrip- by factors of ten. The first world war caused

tions of particular wars there are investiga- about IO million deaths. The next smaller

tions of wars in general with a view to their magnitude of wars was taken to have caused

avoidance. The Nye Committee (I935) each about a million deaths, the next IOO,OOO,

investigated the influence of arms manu- the next io,ooo. But why stop there?

facturers, so did Noel-Baker (I936). One Although smaller incidents would not ordi-

volume of Pitrim Sorokin's Social and narily be called wars, it seemed natural to

Cultural Dynamics (I937) is concerned with extend the classification to quarrels which

wars, ancient and modern. Quincy Wright had caused respectively about i,ooo or IoO

has published a comprehensive Study of War or IO or i deaths. The last class are

(1942), its aim being not to win wars but to ordinarily called murders. Some name was

prevent them. My own work has the same then needed for any member of this wide

purpose. The findings may seem emotionally class. At first I called them all fatal quarrels.

bleak. It is impossible to combine honest But a more appropriate adjective would be

research with a gratification of any one lethal or deadly.

nation's patriotic feelings. The Eugenics Let the " magnitude " of any deadly quarrel

Society is notable for having had the intel- be defined to be the logarithm, to the base

lectual courage to attend to emotionally ten, of the number of persons who died because

embarrassing problems. I shall rely on that of that quarrel. The middles of our successive

courage here. My results are offered as true. classes are then at magnitudes 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2,

Truth, even if at first it seems like tribulation, I, O. To make a clean cut between adjacent

should in the long run yield peaceable fruit. classes we need to know, not the middles of

Loss of Life Caused by Quarrels

the classes, but their boundaries. Let these
boundaries be at 7-5, 6-5 5.5, 4.5, 3.5,

Every accountant is interested in both 2a5 . . . on the scale of magnitude. For

income and expenditure. Although the main example, magnitude 3 5 lies between 3,I62

concern of eugenists is with the income of and 3,I63 deaths, magnitude 4-5 lies between

human life, they may on occasion be willing 3I,622 and 3I,623 deaths, magnitude 5 5 lies

to attend to an item on the other side of the between 3I6,227 and 3I6,228 deaths, and

account.

so on. This concept of magnitude has several

Anyone who tries to make a list of " all functions: (i) It tidies an intellectual

the wars" is embarrassed by a multitude of muddle; (ii) It helps the research-worker to

minor incidents which perhaps ought to be decide what was important, apart from his

* A revision of a paper read before the Eugenics Society on December 6th, I949.

national prejudices; (iii) It disguises the distressful facts, so as to allow one to think

25 D

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

about them undistracted by emotion. Such emotional detachment has, however, its dangers for society.
The whole range of deadly quarrels is shown in Fig. i, which is reproduced, together with a numerical digest, by permission of the American Statistical Association of Washington, D.C. (Richardson, I948, c). The enormous ranges necessitate logarithmic scales.
7
It6
S%

quarrels has been computed and is summarized in Table I.

TABLE I

THE TOTAL NUMBER OF PERSONS WHO DIED

BECAUSE OF QUARRELS DURING THE 126

YEARS FROM A.D. I820 TO I945

Ends of range Total number

of magnitude of deaths in

millions

How computed

7±i 36 6+J 6-7 IBy summation over a

5 ±i 334 ? list of quarrels

4:EI °075 J

3+ o0.30 From the circular arc 2 i + 0-40 Sin Fig. (i) by the
I+1 2-2 J method described in
(Richardson, I948, c)

o±J 9 7 Fromcriminalstatistics

Total 59

cz \\\ WORLD-TOTALS
0 \ FOR 126 YEARS z 2 1820 to 1945
cc
z
Z0 tX
0.
oR0 T
06
7
lr \
0 I 2 34 567a9
/ LOG, (NUMBER OF QUARREL-DEAD)
FIGURE 1. THE WHOLE RANGE OF FATAL QUARRELS THE HORIZONTAL SCALE EXTENDS FROM A SINGLE PERSON ON THE LEFT TO THE POPULATION OF THE WORLD ON THE RIGHT. TRE THREE DOTS AT THE LEFT HAND TOP REPRESENT THE MURDERS. THESHORT HORIZONTAL LINES REPRESENT THE WARS GROUPED BY MAGNITUDES. ONE OF THESE LIMES IS DOTTED. BECAUSE IT SHOULD BE RAISED TO AN UNKNOWN HEIGHT.
Fig. i
There is a gap between the small wars and the murders, because world totals are here lacking. The slope of the graph between magnitudes 2 and i is, however, supported by some local samples, one of banditry in Manchukuo and one of ganging in Chicago.
By these and other methods the, total
number of persons who died because of

A remarkable feature of the above table is that the heavy loss of life occurred at the two ends of the sequence of magnitudes, namely the world wars and the murders. The small wars contributed much less to the total. The total deaths because of quarrels should be compared with the total deaths from all causes. There are particulars given
by de Jastrzebski (I929) and in the Statistical
Year Books of the League of Nations, which allow the total to be estimated. A mean world population of I 5 X IO9 and a mean death rate of twenty per thousand per year would give during I26 years 3*8 x IO9 deaths from all causes. Of these the part caused by quarrels was i-6 per cent. This is less than one might have guessed from the large amount of attention which quarrels attract. Those who enjoy wars can excuse their taste by saying that wars after all are much less deadly than disease.
Intermarriage as a Pacifier
The emotions aroused by quarrels are intense, especially if the quarrel threatens to cause loss of life. What can be strong enough to compete with such an emotional disposition ? Modem war affects everybody. In present democratic conditions the drift towards, or away from, war is influenced by whole populations. The formal decision to make, or not to make, war, may be legally reserved for a few statesmen; but in fact leaders are often pushed from behind.

WAR AND EUGENICS

27

Abstract ideas which might have convinced an intellectual statesman of the
eighteenth century may, therefore, be of
little avail to-day. As to what might in-
fluence the population in general, it would
be wiser to take a hint from a request brought
by a small boy to a public library: he said " One love story and one murder; for my mother." The librarians, of whom I was one, felt that the child had summarized the
popular taste. The strongest motives that bind ordinary
individuals to live harmoniously together are
sexual attraction and family affection. Let us, therefore, consider the possibilities of
international marriage, on account of the strength of the emotions which marriage involves.
Various objections to international marriage will readily occur to you.
First, the social relations might be strained. A bachelor said to me: "Is it worth while to abolish war at the expense of ruining all marriages ? " In Shakespeare's All's Well that Ends Well, Bertram remarks that " War is no strife, to the dark
house and the detested wife." Second, the genetic constitution of the
offspring may be unsatisfactory for certain crosses. Notable at present is Dr. Malan's policy of racial segregation (Apartheid) in South Africa. " All marriages between Europeans and non-Europeans will be prohibited" (I948, p. 8). I shall return to genetic questions later. The difficulty, of course, is to distinguish between a dislike of those manners and customs which could be changed by education, and a reasonable fear of irreversibility. By irreversibility I mean that it may be very easy to let foreign genes into a population, and almost impossible to select those genes out again.
Third, that international marriage on any large and rapid scale is impracticable, and does not meet the demand of those peacemakers who insist that " We must do something now ! "
In view of these objections I wish to point out that the problem of pacification goes back as far as history; and that there have been
some very long delays between aspiration

and satisfaction. Leonardo da Vinci made a drawing of a flying machine. Four centuries of mechanical invention and discovery, much of it at first sight irrelevant to the problem of flight, intervened before any man flew. The results of aviation are partly joyous, partly disastrous. Although the problem of pacification feels urgent, there may be no quick solution. There is a scarcity of reliable pacifying influences; so that peace-makers may have no option but to attend to methods that would be both troublesome and slow. It may be necessary to plan now for our grandchildren or great-grandchildren.
Other Pacificatory Influences
The following other influences have been mentioned or advocated as pacifiers: (i) distraction by sports, (ii) hating a different group of people, (iii) hating the evil in oneself, (iv) armed strength, (v) collective security, (vi) international trade, (vii) plenty of living space, (viii) fewer frontiers, (ix) a common government, (x) a common language, (xi) a common religion. I wish to say something about each of these in turn. The list is perhaps not complete.
Distraction by sports. Alistair Cooke, in a
B.B.C. broadcast on October 7th, I947, from New York, stated that the newspaper headline " Reds have atom bomb," though large, was not so large as a headline announcing the defeat of the New York baseball team. The Communists were temporarily forgotten during an- interest in baseball. It seems, however, hardly likely that the release of international tension by such distraction could be maintained permanently.
Hating a different group of people. This is
an ancient device, used, according to Shakespeare, by an Archbishop of Canterbury, to protect the Church by setting King Henry V against France. The same device was used by the Nazis when they focused German hate on to the Jews. The present example of this psychological mechanism is perhaps accidental rather than deliberate: during I945-9 British hate for the Germans has diminished while British hate for the Russians has increased. These are special cases of the Freudian doctrine of the permanence,

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and transferability of affect. Some other

political examples have been collected by me

* s *UEMPIRES AiR btKtD

in a paper soon to appear (I95ob). Among
psychological processes, the diversion of

i_l REARDED AS W*OLES

hatred seems to be unusually mechanistic

and reliable. But it does not tend to pacify

the world as a whole.

Hating the evil in oneself. C. G. Jung Z 5

has recently suggested (I947) that people

should take their political quarrels home into 04

themselves. Personally I view this recom-

mendation with the greatest respect.

Armed strength. This has been the policy o in which many nations have put their trust. 2

3ut§ *iII ttS.

.

Few people feel the need for any statistical

test of this policy, because the proposition £2 *CLAR.2 M.,8a.0

that " if we are strong, we shall not be at- WGet-:t-L4VJlfS" L @.t

tacked," seems to most people quite obvious. O O*S 1t

1.5

We reach that conclusion by merely letting

PREWAR DEFENCE', £ PER HEAD PER VEAR

our thoughts flow easily in an instinctive

Fig. 2

channel. Moreover factual examples of the success of the policy are easy to find. In February, I948, some Guatemalans proposed
to invade British Honduras, to which
Guatemala had long laid claim. Then Britain sent warships carrying land forces, and the active threat from Guatemala subsided; although up to September, I949, there was no agreed settlement (K. 9I53, 9636, I0277). Please notice, however, that the powers of Britain and of Guatemala

up towards the right. The facts in the diagram do not support either of these conflicting theories. The correlation is so small as not to be worth calculating.
Perhaps, however, it was injudicious to divide the pre-war defence expenditure by the population of the whole empire. So in Fig. 3 the divisor is the population of the metropolitan core only. But again neither of the opposing theories is confirmed. One

were very unequal. When disputes have

occurred between nations of roughly equal
power, the effects of armed strength have
been remarkably different. Fig. 2 shows a statistical test of the policy

EMPIRES ARE REPRESENTED BY THEIR
METROPOLITAN CORES

of armed strength for all the nations which

took part in the first world war. For com-

parison with the ancient Roman adage that z

" If you desire peace, you should prepare his

for war" the abscissa represents a nation's 4
insurance against war, and the ordinate

represents its subsequent sufferings by war. The same theory asserts that the correlation

AUST tRca-

should be negative; that the points should cc2 2 slope from the left down to the right.

"cZ

About the year I9IO an American pro- I

SLAVS 0f RUssia

fessor, whose name I have unfortunately

forgotten, published a book in which he

01ITZCABAIM N sMZL

said, " What you prepare- for, that you will

PRtEWAR 'DEFENCE', £ PER HEAQ PER TEAR

get." On his theory the points should slope

Fig. 3

WAR AND EUGENICS

29

may conclude, from this sample, that the

effects of armed strength were erratic and

PS~~~~~~~- 0 O

t00 40

60 60 -

_____

/_____

untrustworthy. Further particulars can be

seen in the microfilm Arms and Insecurity

(Richardson, I949).

20 42

0

ISO

a 0I3

The process whereby armed strength z

SU

antagonizes Great Powers, instead of pacifying them, has been analysed from the finan-

3c r

e--~0" 160

cial point of view by comparing their total " defence " expenditure with the rate at

IL~~~~

which that total increased. The main cleav-

7

0

age of policy in Europe in the year 19I3 was

POF"

that between France and Russia on one side

versus Germany and Austria-Hungary on the other. Britain and Italy were not then

140 IS0 too 200 220
U, f.t TRIPLE ENTENTE

240

so obviously attached. The total of the

Fig. 5

defence expenditures of the four Powers
chiefly concerned is stated as U + V in Table II and is plotted in Fig. 4 against its
time rate. These are quotations from a
monograph published by the British Psychological Society (Richardson, I939). A straight line appears. The more those Powers spent on so-called defence, the more rapidly did they increase that expenditure.

The Triple Entente was composed of
France, Russia and Britain. The Triple Alliance was composed of Germany, Austria-
Hungary and Italy. Their " defence " expen-
ditures were expressed as sterling and were
denoted respectively by U1 and U2. The
main diagram shows how the two sides went along together. The top left hand inset is of
special interest. Here S= U1 + U2; ,JS is

TABLE II THE ARMS RACE OF 1909-14 Defence budgets expressed in millions of £ sterling

the mean of S for successive pairs of years; and SS is the annual increment. A strong

I909 19IO 19II I912 1913 positive correlation appears, confirming that

France . ... 48-6 50*9 57'I 63-2 74.7
Russia ... ... 66'7 68'5 70-7 8i'8 92*0
Germany ... ... 63.1 62o 62.5 68'2 95-4
Austria-Hungary ... 20o8 23'4 24.6 25'5 26'9
Total= U + V ... 199-2 204.8 214.9 238.7 289go Time= A(U+ V)/At 5'6 10-I 23'8 50'3

the more they spent on so-called defence, the faster did they increase that expenditure. Further particulars are offered in the form of microfilm (Richardson, I949). The simplest mathematical description of mutual

(U+ V) at same date 202'0 209'8 226.8 263-8 reprisals is the pair of simultaneous differen-

50

- -_

_

tial equations.

dx
_=y ,

dy
-=X

dt dt

I started from that idea in I9I8. Various

so-

- 1-I 1

- - other terms were afterwards put in, so as to

01 1

191 to'1

make the equations describe the financial

statistics of the arms races.

This financial analysis was suggested by a

psychological analysis, namely that one of

19D9_ 0 l Z the usual reactions to threats is to make

190

200

210U+V 220 230
Fig. 4

240

250

260

20 counter-threats, if possible of a stronger character. There is mutual stimulation by mutual threats. Gregory Bateson has pro-

The same arms race was afterwards re- vided a suitable technical term to describe

examined much more thoroughly with the the process. He calls it " schismogenesis,"

results shown in Fig. 5.

that is to say the growth of a cleavage.

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In his book Naven (1936) he described two kinds of schismogenesis in the Iatmul tribe
in New Guinea.
In order to explain national moods during the first world war I found it necessary to take a hint from depth-psychology so as to regard each mood as consisting of a

likened to the police versus a criminal; whereas wars of one nation versus one nation may be likened to ordinary quarrelling. The number of deadly quarrels of each type " r versus s " is shown in Table III, which is quoted by permission of the Royal
Statistical Society (Richardson, I947).

Long

Sudden

Long

Sudden

arms race

outbreak

attrition

armistice

{ Friendly

f Friendly

Hostile

Hostile ~)

War-weary

FriendlyJ

Hostile J

Friendly y War-weary J

Hostile J

conscious part and a subconscious part.

TABLE III

The following summary is quoted from a recent paper in Psychometrika (Richardson,

DEADLY QUARRELS OF ALL MAGNITUDES GREATER THAN 3-5 WHICH ENDED FROM
A.D. I820 TO 1939 INCLUSIVE

I948, a and b). The name of the overt mood 6

o There were also, beyond

is set above that of the subconscious mood. 5

See the adjoining table, which spreads across

4 S3

o o bounds of this table: 0 0 0 2 wars of 7 versus i, i war 0 I 0 o of 9 versus I, I war of I6

both columns.

2 3 2 I i o versus 5. Thus making a

The changes of mood on one side of the I 42 24 5 5 2 I

total of gi wars

conflict are supposed to have been caused

12 3 4 5 6

partly by the existence of moods on the other

r

side: again a mutual stimulation. The There were thus forty-two quarrels of the

mathematics is rather like that of epidemics type one versus one, and only eleven quarrels

of disease. I took the first notion of it from of four or more versus one. It is seen that

a paper by Kermack and McKendrick on collective security is a new proposal and is

cholera (1927).

contrary to national habits.

From all this mass of evidence I conclude International trade. A more direct op-

that the popular policy of armed strength is ponent to the indignation and suspicion of

untrustworthy; on some occasions it has the arms race is needed. In I938 I argued

been a pacifier; on others a dangerous thus. The opposite to war is not peace in

irritant leading to war. Let us pass on to the the sense of tranquil inattention to the

next policy, namely:

doings of foreigners. The opposite to war is

Collective security. The theory is that the active co-operation with foreigners. Of the

large majority of peace-loving nations should various forms of co-operation, foreign trade

forcibly repress a small minority of aggres- then occupied the greatest number of

sive nations just as the police force sup- persons. Therefore, foreign trade seemed the

presses a small minority of criminals. most hopeful antidote to war. This supposi-

Ranyard West (I942) has pointed out that tion was later examined in connection with

in the course of a few years a nation which the financial statistics of the arms race, and

we may have been accustomed to regard as those of the simultaneous foreign trade.

criminal may be found to have joined the The results are available in detail only in the

police, and vice-versa. We may, however, form of microfilm (Richardson, I949). The

consider the proposition that justice con- rapidly falling foreign trade of the years

cerning any one international dispute is to I929-33 coincided with a steady high value

be decided by the nations in majority on of the " instability co-efficient " deduced

that occasion, apart from whatever opinions from the expenditures on armaments. It

they held previously. If so, then wars of would be reasonable, therefore, to expect

many nations versus one nation may be that a rapid increase in foreign trade would

WAR AND EUGENICS

31

occur along with a less instability of the
political relations. But to quell the subse-
quent arms race of I933-9 by reducing the instability co-efficient to zero would have required, if proportional, a boom of foreign trade two and a half times more rapid than
the exceptional slump of I929-33. In brief: foreign trade is a pacifier, but not nearly
strong enough.
Plenty of living space. The standard treatise on this subject was written by our
President, Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders (1936). I will only remind you that there are two motives: to seek more space and to seek more company. At first glance these motives seem simply opposite. Further consideration shows that their interaction is more complicated. Sir James Jeans (I929) explained how stars would be formed in a hypothetical primordial gas by the interaction between gas pressure and gravitational attraction. A slight modification of Jeans's theory enabled me to explain how towns would be formed by the interaction between population pressure and gregarious
attraction (94I)).
Fewerfrontiers. There is a positive correlation of 0 * 77 between the number of frontiers which a State has, and the number of its external wars. This is shown by Fig. 6 (Richardson, I950). For the peace of the world it would be desirable to have fewer frontiers; but, of course, they are not easily altered.

0

U) 0

0~~~~

z0~~~~~
-LJ

x< 0

00

0

0 0

00

00

0

0 5 10 *I5 20 FRON TIERS
Fig. 6
preparation. The results for the world as a
whole are shown in Table IV.

TABLES IV

Personis in each cell io,ooo,ooo 3i,ooo,ooo Ioo,ooo

Cell-edges in A.D. I9I0

between nationas within nations

I67 3144

592 2,100
3,900 48,000

The actual fightings during the interval

A.D. 182o, to 1929 in the whole world have

been classified so as to correspond to the

geographical opportunities by taking the

deaths to be about 2 per cent. of the cell

population. This is indeed a very rough

correspondence; but it leads to a striking

result, shown in Tables V and VI.

TABLE V

Persons killed in the quarrel ... ... ... ...
Pairs of opposed belligerent groups, A.D. I820 to 1929 inclusive between nations ... ... ... within nations ... ... ... ... ...

From 3I6,227 to 3I,623
52 23

From 3I,622 to 3,I63
137 33

From 3,162 to 317
224* 179

* Corrected for incompleteness of collection in the ratio 354 / i88. See Richardson, L. F., 1948 C., pp. 523-46.

The geographical opportunities for con-
tiguous fighting have been estimated by attending to maps on which the population is divided among compact cells, each containing the same number of people. Such
maps were shown to, and discussed by, the Geography Section of the British Association in September, 1949. A full account is in

The smallness of the last two fractions in
Table VI shows that fighting within nations has somehow been prevented. National governments usually try to prevent fighting between subordinate groups within their territory. Another possible explanation is that the subordinate groups may have inter-
married with one another.

32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE VI

ACTUAL FIGHTING PER GEOGRAPHICAL OPPORTUNITY

Between nations ...

52
= 0'31
I67

137 = 0o23
592

224 = 0O11
2,IOO

Within nations ...

23 - = oi6
144

33 = o-oo8
3,900

'79 = 0.004
48,ooo

_

The duration of common government prior to an outbreak of civil war is shown in Table VII.
These facts may be explained by saying that obedience to a common authority is easily broken when new, but becomes a habit after a generation or two. Alternatively one may ask whether intermarriage occurred. Two roughly similar time lags have, however, occurred in circumstances where intermarriage was unlikely. Alliances welded by wars have gradually fallen apart. Retaliations against a former enemy have become less frequent as the time interval increased. We may compare the rates at which these effects fade away by naming the time at which they are half gone (as in radio-activity).
Showing disloyalty by civil war ... 23-5 years Breaking an alliance welded in war 14 years Retaliation against a former enemy 15 years
It looks as though learning and forgetting were the main causes of these time lags.
The unifying effect of a common language and a common religion has often been mentioned. To see whether they deserve this reputation I sorted out the number of pairs of opposed belligerent groups who had a common language for political purposes. They were gathered from the whole world over the iio years from I820 to I929. The observed numbers were compared with expectations deduced, according to various theories, from the total number of persons who had that language. Thus P1 was derived

from the theory that wars are made by leaders with a world-wide range of action;
P2 from pairs of populations each of a million with a world-wide range of action; P3 from
pairs of populations each of a million, in compact cells and capable of fighting only
with neighbouring cells. Preliminary results were discussed at the British Psychological Society's meeting at Oxford in April, I943. The argument may soon be available in
microfilm (Richardson, I950). It was found that there was something in the Chinese way of life, up to their revolution of A.D. I9I1,
which had prevented fightings between
Chinege. Contrariwise it was found that there was something which stimulated fightings between groups who both spoke Spanish. For the other chief languages the statistics
neither confirmed, nor refuted, Zamenhoff's
belief that a common language, by promoting mutual understanding, would have a pacificatory effect. There may have been such an effect; but, if so, it was lost among
the various ambiguities. A similar statistical technique was applied
to the effect of a common religion. That of
China has already been included as part of its way of life. At first sight it looked as if Christianity incited wars between Christians; also as if Mohammedanism prevented wars between Moslems. These suggestions, startling to the author, were, however, found not to be statistically reliable. There was clear evidence of more fightings of Christians versus Moslems than would be expected from
their numbers in the world.

Preceding years of common government Observed pairs of opposed belligerents ... Geometrical progression ... ... ...

TABLE VII
o 20 40 60 Over to to to to 8o Totals 20 40 6o 8o

41 20 13
37'I3 22.46 13.59

5 15 94 8*22 12-59 9399

WAR AND EUGENICS

33

Summary of Pacifying influences other than that English and Dutch in South Africa were

Intermarriage

freely intermingling and intermarrying, and

The old Chinese religion and the habit within the next thirty years or so even their

of obedience to a common authority have most fervid racial politicians would find it

both been effective. Less effective is inter- hard to distinguish an Englishman from a

national trade. Fewer frontiers might help. Dutchman. (The Times, London, January

Armed strength is erratic. Collective security I5th, I943, p. 2, col. 5.)

would be a new acquisition. These pacifiers Persia. Alexander the Great, after con-

are neither so many, nor so convenient, as to quering Persia, held a great marriage feast,

make attention to international marriage in which he and ninety of his generals and

seem unnecessary.

friends were married to Persian brides.

After Alexander's death there was fighting

Examples of Intermarriage

between his generals, but the division was

We need some short name for a population not the former one of Macedonians versus

resulting from intermarriage in a bounded Persians. (H. G. Wells's Outline of History,

area during many generations. It used to I920, pp. I9I, I94.) be called a race; but the Nazis spoilt In Louisiana soon after I769, when the

that word. The anthropologists call it an Spanish took it over by treaty from the

endogamous group. Let there be no pretence French, " Many French Creoles were ap-

of racial purity. Each endogamous group pointed to office, intermarriages of French

will be characterized by its statistical and Spanish and even English were encour-

distribution of genes.

aged by the highest officials, and in general

England. About a century after the a liberal and conciliatory policy was followed,

Norman conquest, Richard Fitzneal, Treas- which made Louisiana under Spanish rule

urer of King Henry II, stated that the quiet and prosperous." (E. 14, 430.)

English and Normans had so intermarried In New Zealand there were wars between

and the nations had become so inter- the Maoris and the British from i86i to

mingled that among the free classes it was I87I (W. P. Reeves in E. 16, 40I). By I929

impossible to distinguish between them. the situation of the Maoris was described

That is quoted from D. J. Medley (I90I). thus: " At present the native people number

Wars between Normans and English in about 54,000, but the percentage of white

England had ceased before Fitzneal's time, blood is rapidly increasing, so that ultimately

and did not recur. The French and English miscegenation may be expected to absorb

languages remained distinct and both in the Maori into our New Zealand population."

use in England for three or four centuries (R. Firth in E. 14, 834.)

after the Conquest. (G. M. Trevelyan, I926.) In Germany the Nazi discrimination

England and Scotland. After the union of against Jews was moderated for those who

the Parliaments in A.D. I707, the Scottish had one non-Jewish parent or three non-

peers journeyed to London. One conse- Jewish grandparents.

quence was a progressive intermarriage The racial mixture in Brazil is described

between the Scottish and English aristocracy. by Calogeras (I939, pp. I8-30). The Portu-

This is conspicuously shown in the guese discoverers called the natives Indians.

genealogies of Scottish families. For this " Unions with Indians of both sexes evoked

information I am indebted to the Rev. no criticism except when they were illegal

D. W. P. Strang, M.C., D.D. The last notable or contrary to religious sanctions." Negro

fighting of Scots versus English occurred in slaves from Africa were imported from A.D.

A.D. I746, and those Scots were mostly I538 to I850. The Negroes constituted the

Highlanders.

lowest social stratum of the colony, and

South Africa. The High Commissioner for racial crossing with them was looked upon as

the Union of South Africa, Colonel Deneys degrading. Yet, in spite of everything,

Reitz, told the Press on January I4th, I943, crossing between the Negroes and Portuguese

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

began very early, and has persisted with intermixture also of Spaniards and Italians. There has been " a progressive and noticeable
whitening of the skin of the local population in large sections of Brazil." " Roosevelt
rightly pointed out that the future has
reserved for us a great boon: the happy solution of a problem fraught with tremendous, even mortal dangers-the problems of a possible conflict between the two races. "
In assessing the pros and cons of such a
mixture between Europeans, Amerinds and Negroes, it must be noticed that Brazil has not been particularly law-abiding nor peaceful. Numerous armed insurrections are mentioned in Brazilian history; but usually with particulars insufficient to fix the magnitude. From the interval A.D. I820-I939 I have collected sixteen deadly quarrels, probably of magnitudes between 3.5 and I . 5, Their alleged causes include local autonomy, Conservatives versus Liberals, discontent in the navy, fanaticism, personal ambition, and the world economic depression of I929-34. Only one of them was a conflict of races. It occurred in I87I between the Government and Negroes in the province of Minas Geraes.
(H. H. 23, 66i.) A contrast between Argentina and Peru
during the years A.D. I8I0-24 is described by Levene in his History of Argentina (I937, p. 3I6) in these words:
When the Spanish-American colonies revolted against the motherland in i8io, the viceroyalty of Peru remained apart from that movement. Two chief causes explain that phenomenon: first, the heterogeneous character of its population which was composed of aborigines, Negro slaves, and the mestizos resulting from the admixture of Indians, Africans and Spaniards. The cohesion which the fusion of races had caused
in the provinces of La Plata,. and which early
produced among us the phenomenon of a spontaneous democracy did not, therefore, exist in Peru. A second cause was due to the powerful Spanish resistance in Peru.
Levene's statement is certainly relevant to the relations of intermarriage to co-operation, yet its indications are not clear. For the more thorough race-mixture in La Plata was accompanied not only by " spontaneous democracy" but also by revolt against authority and by numerous faction fights.

Jews in England and U.S.A. Dr. Eliot
Slater (I947) collected some evidence that in
England and the U.S.A. the marriage of Jews with non-Jews is now occurring so frequently that in two generations there may not be much distinction left for the antiSemites to talk about.
In the foregoing examples intermarriage was accompanied by common government, so that it would be possible to argue that pacification was caused by either or by both. The following examples are specially interesting because they relate to intermarriage apart from common government.
In Europe, Professor Arnold J. Toynbee
has expressed the opinion (I937, p. 37) that
royal marriages made on the whole more for peaceful change than for new trouble.
Italy and U.S.A. A pacifying effect in the midst of war was reported by the British Broadcasting Corporation on September 6th, I943. Six British soldiers had maintained themselves for a week behind the Axis lines in Italy, having been given bread and cheese by Italians. " Nearly every Italian they met claimed to have relatives in the United States."
Intermarriage may not have a pacifying effect if there are strong religious differences. For example:
(a) The Moslems of China have had wars against the Confucians. Edgar Snow (I937, p. 322) noted that ". . . while markedly Turkish features are not infrequent among them, the physiognomy of the majority is hardly distinguishable from the Chinese, with whom they have for centuries intermarried."
(b) In I947 the Government of the Soviet Union forbade Russians to marry foreigners. The British have been complaining about the retention by Russia of the wives of British men who have left Russia.
Action Suggested
Marx and Engels ended their Communist Manifesto of I848 with the slogan " Working men of all countries, unite," meaning " unite in organization against the owners of prop-

WAR AND EUGENICS

35

erty." The experience of the first world war showed that the bond of the socialist international organization was not strong enough
to restrain national patriotisms. Lenin complained about it in I9I5 (reprinted I940).
There does not seem to be any immediate
practical possibility of whole nations inter-
marrying. In peace-time it is the wealthier and more enterprising part of the population which travels abroad, and which experiments in new customs. International marriage is already noticeable among those classes of society. So, taking a hint from Marx and Engels, I suggest the slogan:
" Managers of all countries, unite-by
matrimony, in order to hold the world together ! "
An inner mentor reminds me that it is very rash thus to indulge in a full-throated slogan before the social scientists have
thoroughly investigated the proposal, especially its irreversible genetical effects.
So I come back to the genetics of the socially desirable qualities such as courage, kindliness, memory and intelligence. Here I feel deplorably ignorant. Moreover, I recently asked an eminent psychologist and an eminent geneticist, and they both said that
there was not much sure knowledge on the subject. Strong opinions, however, abound. One is told that half-breeds have all the vices of both parental races. One hears also the
counter-argument that the vices of half-
breeds are due to the social contempt which they suffer from both parental races. How
shall truth be disentangled from amongst
such intense prejudices ? I suggest two sieves for straining out prejudice and letting truth pass through:
(i) Lay aside, meantime, all general impressions, and attend only to definite tests, designed to be as little dependent on schooling as possible. These at present relate mostly to intelligence and to memory.
(ii) Collect the results of tests on half-
breeds only from places where race-prejudice is weak or non-existent, so that there halfbreed children grow up in a socially approved environment. According to Romanzo Adams
(I934) one such place is Hawaii. According to Levene (I937, p. 316) another is Argentina.

Intelligence and the Race Crossing

S. D. Porteus (I937), Director of the Psy-
chological Clinic of the University of Hawaii,

made a study of young persons aged 9 to i8 attending Honolulu schools and found the

following average test-quotients on the form

and assembling test:

Boys

GIRLS

Number Average Number Average

tested T.Q. tested T.Q.

Chinese

... 114 I02*2 170 ioo8

Chinese-Hawaiian 145 I0I*7 121 95*2

Hawaiian

... 94

97 7

77 89-i

That is to say the half-breeds were on the

average intermediate between the averages

of the parental races.

Russell Munday (I934), a schoolmaster in

Buenos Aires, compared the intelligence

of I9I children whose grandparents were

all from the same nation with the intelli-

gence of II7 children having grandparents

from more than one nation. He found no

significant difference. The nations considered

were European. Negroes and Amerinds

were not included.

These quotations from Porteus and from

Munday relate to the average intelligence of

groups of people. But it should be noted

that individuals are usually scattered about

the mean of their group to an extent greater

than the difference between the means of any

two well-known races. For example the Scot-

tish Council for Research in Education (I933)

found that the average differences in intelligence quotient between Scottish, Californians and English (at Halifax, Yorkshire) were negligible in comparison with the
standard deviation of individuals from their

means.

Ruth Byrns (i936) studied intelligence and nationality among 78,560 high school students in Wisconsin, U.S.A. She listed
twenty-seven European nationalities, also

Negro, Syrian and the large American group. The nationality of the pupil was taken to be

that of the parents. The intelligence was tested. The fact that all of these pupils had completed approximately ten to twelve years of schooling minimized the influence
of educational differences and tended to

eliminate the differences due to language difficulty. The selective influences of migra-

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tion and of schools are such that it is not profitable for our purposes to compare the mean intelligences of these different national groups; but (p. 459) Byrns states that ".... the full range of ability is found within every natio-racial group."
Porteus (I93I, p. 363) tested a very primitive people, the Australian aborigines, and found them, on the average, far below the Americans in intelligence quotient, thus: Americans 97, Australian aborigines 8o. Yet Porteus remarked that ". . . there are at present among the aborigines, individuals whose planning capacity is decidedly above the average of whites...."
The managers of all countries, whom it was suggested should unite by matrimony, would, of course, be selected individuals, superior to the averages of their countries.
Conclusion. I submit that a strong prima-facie case has been made for the further consideration of international marriage as a hopeful pacifying influence.
REFERENCES
Adams, Romanzo (I934), in Race and Culture Contacts, edited by Reuter, E. B. London: McGraw
Hill. Bateson, Gregory (1936), Naven. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. Byrns, Ruth (1936), Journ. Social Psych., 7, 455-70,
Clark University Press. Calogeras, J. P., trans. Martin, P.A. (I939), A
History of Brazil. University of North Carolina Press. Carr-Saunders, A. M. (I936), World Population.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. E. refers to the Encyclopadia Britannica, 1929,
14th edn. H.H. refers to Historians' History of the World (1907),
edited by Williams, H. S. London: The Times. Jastrzebski, S. de (1929). Article " Death-rate " in E. Jeans, Sir James (1929), Astronomy and Cosmogony.
Cambridge University Press. Jung, C. G. (1947), Essays on Contemporary Events.
London: Kegan Paul.

K stands for Keesing's Contemporary Archives, Bristol. Page numbers are given.
Kermack, W. O., and McKendrik, A. G. (1927), Proc. Roy. Soc. London, A, 115,, 700-22.
Lenin, V. I. (1940), Socialism and War. London: Lawrence & Wishart.
Levene, R., trans. Robertson, W. S. (I937), A History of Argentina. University of North Carolina Press.
Malan, D. F. (1948), What " Apartheid " Means. Public Relations Office, South Africa House, Trafalgar Square, London, W.C.2.
Medley, D. J. (I9OI) in Traim & Mann's Social England, 1, 534. London: Cassell & Co.
Munday, Russell (I932), Brit. J. Educ. Psych., 2,
1-7.
Noel-Baker, P. J. (1936), The Private Manufacture of Armaments. London: Victor Gollancz.
Nye Committee (I935) Report No. 944, Part 2.
United States Government Printing Office.
Porteus, S. D. (I93i), The Psychology of a Primitive
People. London: Arnold. (I937), Primitive Intelligence and Environment.
New York: Macmillan.
Richardson, L. F. (I939), " Generalized Foreign
Politics," Brit. J. Psychol. Monog. Supplt., No. 23.
(I94I), Nature, of December 27th. (I947), J. Roy. Statistical Soc., 109, I30-56.
(1948, a and b), Psychometrika, 13, 147-74 and
197-232.
(1948, c.), J. Amer. Statistical Assn. Washington, D.C. 43, 523-46.
(I949), Arms and Insecurity, a book in micro-
film, from the author, 2nd. edn. (I95o, a.), Statistics of Deadly Quarrels, a book
in microfilm, from the author. (1950, b.), Brit. J. Psychol. (Medical Section).
Scottish Council for Research in Education (1933), Intelligence of Scottish Children. University of London Press.
Slater, E. (I947), EUGENICS REVIEW, 89, 17-21. Sorokin, Pitrim A. (1937), Social and Cultural Dynamics. American Book Co.
Snow, Edgar (1937), Red Star Over China. London: Victor Gollancz.
Toynbee, A. J. (I937), in Peaceful Change. London: Macmillan.
Trevelyan, G. M. (1926), History ofEngland. London: Longmans Green.
Wells, H. G. (1920), Outline of History. London:
Cassell. West, Ranyard (1942), Conscience and Society.
London: Methuen. Wright, Quincy (1942), A Study of War. University
of Chicago Press.

ic. Review, VoL SII, No. 1

