C. P. BLACKER
Eugenics in an Atomic Age*

Features of an Atomic Age

intelligence and to their ability to profit from a

D URING THIS CONFERENCE two themes
are being discussed on separate days. One is Population in an Atomic Age: the other is Education for Family Life. The two themes could be combined. We could consider Education for Family Life in an Atomic Age. What are the characteristics of what we call

higher education.
The atomic age of the future will be more
complex than this. With increasing numbers
and rising standards, problems of organization, administration and control will become more intricate. They will make increasing demands on what can be literally called the governing class

the atomic age? I will consider two.

which includes (among others) elected representa-

The first is its power for good or evil. Atomic tives,members ofthe civil service and the moulders

science resembles the ancient Roman god of doorways, Janus, after whom the month of January is named. He had two faces looking in
opposite directions. Or it resembles a medal with two sides. On the one hand, atomic science can give us vast sources of physical power at a time

of public opinion. The need for intelligent, incorruptible, disinterested and high-principled leaders will become more pressing. A central problem of democracy will come to the fore: how to secure that the members of the governing class will possess the needed intellectual and moral

when supplies of fossil fuels (coal and oil) qualities; or in other words how to overcome are seen to be exhaustible; hand in hand the main weakness of democracies-the facility

with other advancing technologies, it could with which unscrupulous, self-seeking, and powermultiply amenities and raise standards of living. loving men bribe and cajole themselves into In this aspect, nuclear power is a bountiful authority. (The less educated, less critical, and

cornucopia, a horn of plenty.

more suggestible its electorate, the more easily

But there is the other aspect which to-day does a democracy become corrupt.) It has been

haunts the world. By the pushing of a button said that a democracy gets the leaders it deserves.

nuclear power can be used to exterminate in a A problem of education, which will be accentu-

single cataclysm millions of human beings; it can cause an orgy of devastation the mutagenic effects of which will reverberate through future
generations. That is the first characteristic of the atomic
age-the twin faces of the new god. The second is the influence of atomic science on our ideas about education. The newly available power is

ated in the atomic age, will be so to fashion children that when they grow up they will
deserve (by being able to recognize and choose) good leaders. An atomic age will need not
only able physicists and engineers, but also a capable and upright governing class. It will also need men and women versed in the sciences concerned with human beings.

not easy to tame and harness. The youth of to-day must be taught more science, and

Two Fields of Science

those capable of later adding to knowledge must be sought out. There is now a rush to enlarge the scientific departments of universities and to enlist students of the necessary calibre. Attention is turned to the quality of the student population, particularly to their

In his paper given this morning my old friend
and tutor of forty years ago Sir Julian Huxley did well to remind us of two aspects, national
and personal, of all population policies. From the national standpoint, numbers (quantitity) are of chief, though not exclusive interest. From the personal standpoint, quality is the central issue.

By planning their families in the light of their

* A paper delivered at the Sixth International Conference on Planned Parenthood, held at New Delhi, on February 15th, 1959.

living conditions and resources, parents can better nurture their children whose prospects of

2I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1959, 51, 1

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

survival and well-being are improved; and the mother's health, otherwise taxed by too numerous pregnancies and perhaps by abortions, is conserved.
Science, Sir Julian reminded us, has been mainly applied to improving humanity's external conditions: water is conserved by engineering feats, purified, and harnessed to do work; food supplies are increased and made transportable; lethal and crippling diseases are controlled. What we to-day call the population explosion is attributable to advances in science.
A more subtle task now confronts scientists. It is a balancing task whose field is not the external conditions of man but man himself. The sciences here involved could be broadly described as human or anthropological. Among them we recognize human ethology (dealing with behaviour including customs and traditions) and human ecology (concerned with the interaction between man and his environment or habitat). There emerge from these sciences problems for the philosopher and moralist with whom the scientist should come to terms. The central problem is that propounded by Plato: What is the good life? From this follows: How can the good life best be attained for the largest number of men in the atomic age? And: How should children be educated so that they can understand the good life and strive to attain it?
Mr. R. A. Piddington has well shown in his book The Limits of Mankind (1956: John Wright, Bristol) how an excess of human beings can stultify the good life; and how this stultification by mere numbers is aggravated by rising standards of living. His book raises in our minds further semi-philosophical questions with a geographical cast: How can the good life be best realized in different latitudes? How can optimal conditions for the inhabitants of diverse geographical areas be harmonized in the interests of the world as a whole? Moral questions are here intricately blendedwithagronomic, industrial, political and climatic factors.
Conservation and Eugenics
In what we do to-day we must also take account of the needs of the future. Exhaustible resources must not be irresponsibly squandered;

irreplaceable heritages must be protected. Here are raised broad questions of conservation to which Dr. William Vogt has made notable contributions. The obverse of conservation is eugenics, both being concerned with the future. The province of conservation is the world in which man lives; the province of eugenics is man himself.
Stages in Education for Family Life
How does education for family life in an atomic age bear upon the problems which confront the humanistic sciences? People can be educated for family life at several stages of their growth. The process can begin early. I recently noted the following dictum on a calendar which Lord Simon of Wythenshawe (to whom this Federation owes much) sends to his friends instead of a Christmas card:
By the tales told at their mother's knee do men live or die. Praise the Gods, mother, that you told me tales of open-breasted Gods and not of vermin.
Tales of courage, generosity, truthfulness and kindness (especially of kindness to animals in which children are deeply interested), if told by parents for whom children have affection and respect, will inculcate ethical values which persist till death. These values will guide their conduct as citizens and their choices as voters.
The educative movement can be continued at school. Here I commend to your notice an official booklet: Sex Instruction in Swedish Schools published by Sweden's Royal Board of Education. Courses of instruction on sex questions, for the use of teachers, are here set out for children of different ages. The information is skilfully combined with education for family life and with education on ethical questions.
The movement of education for family life is taken forward another stage by many Marriage Guidance agencies who regard it as their business not only to salve marriages which are foundering, but to prepare engaged couples for the problems which lie ahead-among others, problems of rearing children. At a conference of this Federation (the I.P.P.F.) held in Berlin the year before last, I suggested a yet later measure-seminars for primigravidae.

22

EUGENICS IN AN ATOMIC AGE

These are some of the stages in education for duce these human treasures than others, they

family life. Success, whatever the gradations of might hesitate less than, say, Englishmen in

the programme, will favourably influence approving and offering the requisite induce-

character and thereby facilitate the task of the ments. A tradition in this field has already been

eugenist and the scientist whose province is man. established in Russia. Heroine mothers of

His raw material (humanity) will become more exceptionally large families have been recognized

malleable in the measure that men and women and honoured. It would not be a big jump to

are enabled to recognize worth-while objectives recognize and honour hero fathers and heroine

which transcend their own lives and which, as mothers of exceptionally gifted children. In an

ends in themselves, evoke disinterested effort. atomic age the nation that produces the largest

Such objectives should be kept firmly in view at number of such children, and which makes fullest

the beginning of the atomic age.

use of their abilities, will forge ahead.

I mentioned the Japanese. Since the end of

Eugenics: Its Potential Value in an Age of the war these have produced astonishing results

Nuclear Competition

in reducing fertility; and they are now attacking

I now turn to eugenics. In a democracy where with apparent success the difficult task of replac-

methods of compulsion are excluded, eugenics ing time-honoured habits of abortion by the

can operate only by means of public opinion novel and unfamiliar practice of contraception.

and of publicly approved incentives. There are Having perceived the need, the Japanese have

two well-attested facts: there is, first, an inborn adopted vigorous measures to deal with the

and inherited factor in (measurable) intelligence, quantitative problem of population. If they

which is brought to fruition by education and by recognize as clearly that the needs of an atomic

other (perhaps fortuitous) experiences; and, age call for measures to deal with a qualitative

secondly, there are inborn and inherited factors problem, they might act no less energetically.

in special abilities and in the complex of traits

we call temperament and character. Character, Eugenics and Political Stability in an Atomic Age

though assessable, is not measureable on a scale But as remarked above, the needs of an age of

as is intelligence. In the florescence of character nuclear competition not only call for mathema-

the circumstances of childhood and the atmos- tical geniuses and scientific prodigies. Unless

phere of family life are primarily important. their increasingly complex frameworks are to

There are two practical problems of positive disrupt in organizational chaos, strikes, dis-

eugenics: first, how to "ascertain" (or discover) affections and recurrent political crises, parlia-

people, women as well as men, who are above mentary democracies will need an able, honest

average in natural ability and in qualities of and trusted governing class, elected and selected

character; and second, how to induce such people in an approved manner. Here is a more accept-

to have an adequate number of children-how, able field for positive eugenics than that provided

in other words, to provide incentives which will by international nuclear competition. First

counteract the prudential considerations favour- must be produced in sufficient numbers the men

ing small families which operate widely to-day, and women endowed with the exceptional

particularly in periods ofeconomic depression. qualities necessary for leadership; second, the

These are difficult problems to solve without cultural standards of the average man must be so

resort to arbitrary discriminations which, in an raised as to enable him to deserve (by recognizing

egalitarian age, excite opposition. I have a feeling and choosing) good leaders.

that these problems might be more boldly

tackled in Communist than in non-Communist Conclusion

countries with, among the latter, the possible It has been contended that, from the stand-

exception ofJapan. If, for example, the Russians, point of political stability in face of the increasing

in their search for first-class mathematicians and complexities of an atomic age wherein humanity

physicists, were to discover that certain families is quickly multiplying, and also from that of

or family connections were more likely to pro- the international nuclear competition which

23

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

calls for able men, there will be a need for better Two fields of science can be compared, one

education for family life and (as a product of concerned with events external to man, the other

such education) there will be scope for eugenic with man himself. Problems of conservation and

policies. It would be timely if all countries gave of eugenics, both concerned with these contrast-

thought to such policies.

ing aspects of man's future, are likely to come to

the fore.

Summary

Communist regimes may have quicker man-

The international nuclear competition which euvrability than others if they come to recog-

characterizes the present early phase of the nize the inheritance and familial incidence of

atomic age creates a demand for people of high special abilities as in a practical sense relevant

intelligence with gifts for mathematics and to the age of nuclear competition. Such r6gimes

science.

may be quicker than non-Communist to introduce

The atomic age, which will present intricate eugenically orientated incentives.

organizational problems in a differentiated It would be timely if, on the threshold of the

economy, will also call, if it is not to founder, atomic age, all countries gave some thought to

for able, honest and trusted leaders and, among positive eugenic policies.

the masses, for the ability to elect and select the I am grateful to Sir Julian Huxley for helpful

right leaders.

criticisms of this paper.

the Review of the ITALIAN COMMITTEE FOR THE STUDY OF POPULATION PROBLEMS
and of the ITALIAN SOCIETY OF GENETICS AND EUGENICS edited under the auspices of the National Research Council
Editor: CORRADO GINI
Summary of Volume XIII, December 1957.

C. GINI

Progres et instabilit6.

L. E. TAVENER A New Approach to Urban Geography.

G. GIUROVICH Alcune considerazioni sulla concentrazione della popolazione Italiana prima e dopo l'ultima guerra.

A. OKASAKI Growth of Urban Population in Japan.

Recensioni

Reviews of Italian, English, American, French, German, Dutch, Belgian, Chinese and SouthAmerican books.

GENUS
accepts scientific articles, papers, notes and communications written in Italian, English, French, German
and Spanish in the field of the different sciences related to population problems (Demography, Sociology, Economics, General Biology, Genetics, Eugenics, Anthropology, Social Hygiene, Psychology, Geography)

Orders should be addressed to: grOteria del Comitato I o per lo Studio dei Problemi della Popolauione, Via ddle Terme di Diocliziano, nO 10-Roma (11I4) (Italy).

24

