SOCIAL STATISTICS OF BRITAIN

By Sir CHARLES ARDEN-CLOSE, K.B.E., F.R.S.

THE Registrars General of England and of the total population of 48-84 million, a

Wales and of Scotland have introduced little over I2 million of each sex were

" an innovation of considerable interest married, say half. There were about three

and importance in the trend of census times more widowed females than widowed

development in Great Britain" by the males, the sort of result that might have

publication of sample tables.* Part I, just been expected. The total number of divorced

published, gives the analysis of the results persons, male and female, was somewhat

of a one per cent sample of the figures in more than 200,000. The largest group of

the four categories Ages and Marital married men is that between the ages of

Condition, Occupations, Industries and 4o and 45, and of married women, that

Housing of Private Households.

between 35 and 40.

The reason for this innovation is the desire But this kind of statement will, it may be

to shorten the long period, which has hitherto feared, give little idea of the mass of informa-

been necessary, between the taking of a tion provided by these tables. There are some

census and the full analysis of the results. twenty-eight pages ofstatistics concernedwith

The Registrars General describe the method this heading alone, giving the facts relating

as " providing a quick advance picture of to marital condition with regard to standard

census features which will be treated at regions, counties, towns, administrative

length in later volumes."

areas and four " conurbations," an ugly but

The method of sampling is very well known useful word. If the inquirer, for instance,

to statisticians, the primary requirements should wish to compare the marital con-

being that the samples should be fair and ditions of the Midlands with those of the

representative, and that the numbers dealt northern region of England, he will find the

with should not be so small as to increase material here. And so on.

unduly the chance of error. It is explained The second section of the report is con-

that a io per cent sample involved far too cernedwithOccupationsandthisinvolvesmore

much labour. One per cent was chosen, than fifty pages of statistical information.

though this required much care in selection. There are twenty-seven categories, including

An account is given of the procedure adopted. one entitled Retired orNot GainfuUy Employed,

The methods were ingenious, but chiefly of to which the present writer belongs. It

interest to statisticians, and we can now would be difficult to convey in a few words

turn to some of the results of the sample an adequate idea of the mass of information

analysis of the four categories dealt with. presented. Thus, there are tables giving the

It,is a great advantage that this report numbers by ages of the different groups,

deals with the whole of Great Britain. In their marital condition, and their distribution

describing the report let us ignore the throughout the country. If, for example,

refinements of calculation and indicate a few you want to know how many married

broad outlines and the general character plumbers there are at work, between the

of the results. Thus, as regards Marital ages of, say, 55 and 6o, you will here find the

Condition, it is well known that, in Great answer. There is considerable interest in the

Britain, in I95I, there were two million table of the main occupations ofthe whole male

more women than men. It appears that out population. The largest group is that of the

* General Register Office. Census 195i: Great metal workers, then those engaged in trans-
Britain. One Per Cent Sample Tables. Pt. I. Ages and port, then commercial occupations, then

Marital Condition, Occupations, Industries, Housing of Private Households. London, 1952. H.M. Stationery Office. Pp. I59. Price 17s. 6d.

unskilled workers, then agriculturists, then the builders and then the black-coated

I4'

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

professional class, and down low on the list the miners. The three defence services only
account for 558,ooo. We may usefully say something of one
particular group out of the twenty-seven, namely, the group of those employed in
agriculture, including horticulture and forestry. These occupations are of more
importance to us than any of the others.
We find that there are only 448,ooo
male agricultural workers. To these must be added female workers, farmers, bailiffs, market and other gardeners, giving a total of a little over a million for Great Britain. Then there are occupations ancilary to
agriculture, namely, those of land agents, estate managers, and men concerned with
agricultural machinery. If we add these,
we get a grand total of i-i8 million engaged in agricultural pursuits, out of a total population of Great Britain of 48.84 million.
That is 2-4 per cent, a very low proportion.
SECTION III deals with Industries in the space of a few pages. It is explained that, in the industry tables, individuals " are classified according to the industries to which their occupation contributes.... Thus a carpenter working for a brewer would be classified occupationally under " Carpenter " but industrially under "Brewing." We need not spend any time on this section.
SECTION IV is of more interest. It is
entitled Housing of Private Households and
takes up more than fifty pages of the report.
The headings are, briefly, Dwellings and
Households; Size and Rooms Occupied;

Households and Density; and Households Without Exclusive Use of certain Household Arrangements. The term private household means a group of persons lving together in the sense of sharing the same living room or eating at the same table. There may be
more than one household in the same dwelling. Persons living in hotels, boarding houses, institutions, etc., are in non-private
households. The total number of private households
in Britain is about I41 milion, and the average number of persons per household is
3*2I. In England and Wales the number per household was 3-72 in I93I, and it is now 3.i9, a considerable reduction. Persons per room diminished from o083 to 0*73. The student of social customs will be interested to know that about 51 million households, involving about 17 million people, had no fixed bath in I95I.
All this touches the housing problem. A really valuable review of the condition of housing in this country and a comparison
of the state of affairs in I95I with that in I93I, with reference to these statistics in Section IV, and to such matters as rent
restriction, is to be found in a leading article in The Times of August 7th, I952.
In Part II of this report, which is yet to be published, there will be more statistical information about households, and there will also be sections dealing with Education, Nationality, Fertility and the Welsh and Gaelic Languages, subjects at least as interesting as those mentioned above.

Eugenim Rviews, Vol. X , No. 8

