THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stage is properly set for a rational approach to volume) to confute the somewhat crude attempts

the understanding and interpretation of pro- to interpret social development as having a basis

jections. For example, the single page devoted to in biological evolution, which were current at the'

the choice of a time-span explains how for some beginning of this century. In this he was fully

purposes it is advantageous to look far ahead justified, but from some of his work he gives the

while for others only the next few years need be impression that he underrated the importance of

contemplated. Similarly the value of a set of the genetic endowment of individuals; in any

alternative projections and the best concepts for case he did not concern himself with those

a range of such a set are expounded succinctly problems which are of special interest to students

and clearly.

P. R. C. of eugenics.

Of the essays in this volume, that on sociology

is the one which will probably be of greatest

SOCIOLOGY
Hobhouse, L. T. Sociology and Philosophy: A Centenary Collection of Essays and Articles. Preface by Sydney Caine. Introduced by Morris Ginsberg. London, 1966. G. Bell for the London School of Economics. Pp. xxvii +340. Price 45s.

interest to readers of THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
This essay, which originally appeared in the Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics in 1920, sets out the task of sociology as Hobhouse saw it, and can be read with profit by those who work in any of the special social sciences, demography, for instance. His view is summed up in a

THIS VOLUME CONTAINS twelve essays and quotation which Professor Ginsberg extracts

articles reprinted from various sources and an from another article, not reprinted here, which

interesting introduction by Professor Ginsberg. appeared in 1908: "General Sociology", he

This reprinting is very welcome; all the papers in wrote, "is neither a separate science complete in

the volume are written with the clarity and itself before specialism begins, nor is it a mere

vigour so characteristic of Hobhouse and can be synthesis of the social sciences consisting in a

read with profit to-day. It is a great service to mechanical juxtaposition of their results. It is

have rescued these writings from the semi- rather a vitalizing principle that runs through all

oblivion of encyclopaedias and learned journals social investigations nourishing and nourished

and to have made them easily accessible to a wide by it in turn, stimulating inquiry, correlating

public. Hobhouse, who died in 1928, was the results, exhibiting the life of the whole in the

most outstanding English sociologist during the parts and returning from the study of the parts

first quarter of the present century. His work to a fuller comprehension of the whole".

covered a very wide range; he was a scholar in more than one field and he also made notable

A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS

contributions to the discussion of the social and

political problems of his day.

ECONOMICS

The topic which inspired his main work was that of social development, a topic which, as Professor Ginsberg says, is again attracting

Meade, J. E. The Stationary Economy. London,
1965. Allen and Unwin. Pp. 238. Price 35s.

attention after having been out of favour for a ALMOST EXACTLY THIRTY years ago Mr. (as

time. Hobhouse was careful not to equate social he then was) James Meade published his

development with progress; for him social successful textbook An Introduction to Economic

development was a process of mental learning Analysis andPolicy in which he expounded, at an

through experience the course of which had to be introductory level, the then new ideas about

traced by establishing the facts while judgement employment and income, and about imperfect

of facts had to be kept distinct from judgement competition. He was concerned to stress espec-

of values. When expounding his view of social ially their implications for policy problems,

development, which can hardly be contested, and he actually used some of the new technical

Hobhouse was concerned in some of his writings concepts in advocating particular economic

(though in none which are included in this policies. This latest volume from Professor

102

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

Meade launches a somewhat similar enterprise. suggests fresh angles and aspects-new at any

But this time the work is hardly, in any sense, an rate to this reviewer-as, for example, on the

"introduction", though just how post-intro- terms of trade.

ductory it is, is not easy to say. I should rate it In Chapter XII Professor Meade uses his

at least as suitable for the third-year specialist allocation analysis to draw the implication that

undergraduate. Also, the scope of the Principles his perfectly competitive, omniscient, or trans-

of Political Economy, of which this volume is parent, self-adjusting model, will operate at a

"Part A", is much more extensive. Further kind of "optimum" where no individual can be

projected volumes are mentioned on (B) Capital, made better off without someone else being

Growth, and Fluctuations, (C) Beyond Competi- made worse off. He emphasizes that, depending

tion, and (D) and (E) on applied problems, and on the initial distribution of factors, the actual

international economic relationships. But "how "Pareto-optimum" reached in his economy may

far in fact the work will proceed is a matter of be one with an extremely unequal distribution of

great uncertainty" (p. 9).

income, morally intolerable by many people's

On the other hand, as in his introduction of ethical standards.

thirty years ago, Professor Meade is concerned Professor Meade then switches (Chapters

to bring together recent technical advances in XIII-XV) to a centrally planned model, for

economic analysis and to present, compre- which all the assumptions correspond with those

hensively, their implications, above all for policy. of the competitive model, except, of course, for

For somehow to improve economic policy by that regarding markets, and except, it seems

means of more refined analysis is the keystone of also, regarding the certainty and completeness of

Professor Meade's intellectual creed, momen- knowledge possessed by the central planning

tarily shaken, but not essentially shattered, by authority as contrasted with the individuals in

the discovery, about fifteen years ago, that pure the competitive economy. Professor Meade's

analysis and taxonomy are by no means enough. central planning authority seems to need trial-

After an enlightening, but all-too-brief, and-error adjustments more than his competitive

introduction, which raises several fundamental firms, indicating some difference or asymmetry

questions about the relations between economic in the degree of knowledge assumed. But his

analysis and policy which one would have liked central planning authority seems to have

Professor Meade to argue further, he takes us off available a great deal of precise, correct, and

into his remote model world. This volume is certainly predictable data, so that its decisions

concerned with a starkly simplified model simply emerge by calculation or computation.

described in Chapter I. The model is one of a Chapter XIV, on the organization of production

completely closed economy, with no government, in the centrally planned economy, provides a

no public goods, perfect competition through- most instructive exposition of some of the key

out, no increasing returns to scale, no capital, no concepts in linear programming.

continuing technical progress, and a very As a textbook of pricing and allocation analysis

simplified monetary system, with all markets this is undoubtedly, as one would expect, a most

self-equilibrating at full employment. Above all, distinguished work. It is with regard to the

Professor Meade is concerned with a world of precise extent and nature of its suggested

certainty; every individual knows, and can relevance for policy that doubts arise. It is surely

predict correctly and certainly, everything irrelevant to state that "on the strict assumptions

relevant to his economic decisions.

made in Chapter I and which have been main-

Professor Meade then takes us through a tained throughout this volume, there would seem

course of static price and allocation analysis to be little to recommend the replacement of a

which covers the greater part of the volume laissezfaire competitive economy with a centrally

(Chapters I-XI). Much of the ground has been planned economy" (p. 234). Certainly Professor

covered in countless textbooks, but Professor Meade warns that "the fact that on the assump-

Meade's exposition is quite masterly in its clarity tions of the present volume there is little case for

and precision, and, at a number of points he a central economic plan should not be supposed

103

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to beg the question for the choice of institutions But this line of criticism may not merely seem

in the world of reality" (p. 235). But when he rather carping, it is also premature. One will not

adds that "many features of the real world be able adequately to judge the -emphasis of

which are particularly relevant to the choice of Professor Meade's work until further instalments

the best institutional mixture have been assumed are unfolded. One should certainly look forward

away throughout this volume", one is inclined to to these confident that, as with the present

suggest that "many" should be amended to "all". volume, one will be treated to a masterly and

A Pareto-optimum is simply a Pareto-optimum, instructive example of detached, lucid and

and can be described in terms of a highly simpli- precise analysis.

fied competitive economy of omniscient in-

T. W. HUTCHISON

dividuals, or of an economy organized by an

omniscient central authority, or of various

mixtures of the two. The significant problems of

CONTRACEPTION

economic policy and of the choice of appropriate institutions are not problems of how to calculate or compute "optima" from complete data, known and predictable with certainty, as

Mears, Eleanor. Handbook on Oral Contra-
ception. London, 1965. Churchill. Pp. xv+107. Price 20s.

represented in textbook and blackboard dia- DESCRIBING ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES, Dr.

grams. They are problems of how best to Mears writes "it is probably true to say that no

provide against ignorance and uncertainty, how other group of drugs in general use has been

to cope with "externalities", which are not subjected to so much careful investigation on a

exceptions, or curiosa, but the very stuff of a world-wide basis". This handbook is a remark-

modern economy in which motor-cars and more ably compact and efficiently constructed summary

spacious housing are the main desiderata. of all the work which has gone into studying

Professor Meade is, of course, perfectly well oral contraceptives up to the beginning of 1965.

aware of these points, but hardly seems to give In a mere 100 pages it covers the clinical usage of

them due weight in his conception of the "the pill" and sets it in its correct biological

relationship between his highly abstract analysis context, and includes, in addition, chapters on

and policy conclusions.

very recent advances, such as sequential therapy.

It might be dangerous if undergraduate The book has arisen out of the work of the

students get the distorted impression of the Oral Advisory Group of the IPPF Medical

nature of policy problems that, given the Committee. To a large extent it gets the best of

necessary value judgements, wise and realistic two different worlds. On the one hand, it

decisions are, or can be, reached by calculations benefits from a single authorship which leads to

or computations from complete data known with continuity and avoids the excessive length (and

certainty; and that they should therefore devote a price) of volumes that attempt to cover a large

large part of their time and energy to the field by calling on several authors. On the other

cultivation of purely analytical, logical or hand, it has the advantages of a symposium in

geometrical analysis. The belief in the supreme that many distinguished authorities on oral

importance of precise and subtle, but highly contraception have been closely associated and

abstract, analysis rather resembles that of the partly responsible for large sections of the book.

senior Guards officer's belief that the best In summarizing the scientific aspects of the

training for the battlefield was for the soldier to subject all the most significant work on both man

spend much of his time performing meticulously and animals is adequately covered. All the

precise drill-movements on the barrack-square; controversial issues that have arisen around oral

or the belief of the classics masters that devoting contraception are faced squarely and honestly:

much of one's time to Latin and Greek com- possible effects on the pituitary, on blood

position was the best training in clear thinking clotting mechanisms and on liver function, and

and expression (admittedly not nearly as bad an any long-term risk of carcinogenesis are closely

idea as some of those which have superseded it). discussed. Perhaps one of the most useful

104

