OTHER NOTICES

Chugerman, Samuel. Lester E. Ward: The American Aristotle. A summary and interpre-
tation of his sociology. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. Pp. 59I.
Price 5 dollars.
LESTER WARD was a distinguished personality,
whose work is perhaps too little remembered in this
country at the present day. Self-educated till the age of 26, he entered the field of sociology from that of the natural sciences, and was actually in the employment of the United States Government as a
paleo-botanist when he published his Dynamic
Sociology in I883. This was followed at intervals by his Psychological Factors in Civilization, Pure Sociology, Applied Sociology and other works; though it was only in his last seven years (I906-I3) that he enjoyed the relative calm of academic life, and could give himself up to the teaching and
exposition of the subject which he saw as the queen of all the sciences. The scope of his work and the breadth of his outlook were immense; trained as a scientist, his approach to the study of human life was nevertheless essentially philosophic, and he thought in terms of a universal evolutionary process in the course of which physical, biological,
psychological, and social phenomena are seen to be related along the lines of a creative synthesis in-
duced by the principle of " Synergy." He laid stress on feeling as the chief dynamic agent in animals and man; but above all emphasized the importance and possibility of intelligent direction of human affairs in the interests of social progress.
He was a pas'3ionate believer in the need for
equalization of opportunity, the spread of education, and the cultivation of science in the service of man and as a means of opening up a better future for the masses. The ultimate aim of social science was in fact for Ward nothing less than the con-
struction of a moral order in which men, as human beings, could find their happiness and their fulfilment.
Despite its length, the seeming extravagance of its subtitle, and the spirit of hero-worship in which it is written, Chugerman has provided us with a useful introduction to, and summary of, the work of a pioneer American sociologist who has some pretensions to rank with Comte and Spencer in the line of great social synthesists and systematizers. Not the least interesting parts of the book indeed, are the chapters or sections of chapters in which the outlook of Ward is compared with that of Spencer, whose individualism he so strongly opposed; and it should in fairness be said 'that the author not only brings out clearly the massiveness and internal consistency of the system he describes, but makes us feel that we are in touch with a powerful intellect and a noble mind. Readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW. incidentally. will find in Ward an en-

vironmentalist who, whilst admitting that the laws of heredity " can neither be altered nor supplanted," maintained that the right road to human improvement was through such an adjustment of external circumstances as would " allow the hereditary forces to operate freely under improved conditions."
Those who propose to make the acquaintance of Ward for the first time through these pages would doubtless have preferred a brief introduction of the more sober and critical kind to which the modest volumes in the British series on " Modern Sociologists " have accustomed us; but if they are not repelled by the exuberance and scale of this " summary and interpretation " they will find much in it that repays a careful reading.
E. I. B.
Jones, William (Ed., Fisher, M. W.). Ethnography of the Fox Indians. Washington, D.C., I939. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnography, Bulletin I25. Pp. I56. Price 25 cents.
WILLIAM JONES was the product of a mixed marriage. He spent his early childhood among the Foxes, his grandmother's people, and when later he went to Harvard he took his degree in anthropology and did much fieldwork among the Algonquian tribes. This book is a collection of notes on certain aspects of Fox culture: cosmogony and mythology, everyday life and customs, ceremonies and games. It makes no attempt to cover the whole ground, being essentially intended to supplement more comprehensive accounts. Of principal interest are the vivid, conversational descriptions of daily life and incidents, which illustrate the writer's familiarity with his subject matter. The generous supply of footnotes amplifies the general exposition, and draws attention to instances where Jones's data are atypical or conflict with other evidence.
- K. J. STEPHEN.
Thomas, P. Women and Marriage in India. London, I939. Allen & Unwin. Pp. 22I. Price 7s. 6d.
THIS may certainly be classed as a eugenic book. It is written from the feminist point of view, asking for the better treatment of women in India, but it stresses throughout the necessity for quality and the worthlessness of mere quantity. The author gives a painful, but true, picture of the condition of women throughout the ages and all over the world, with special reference to India. He, or she, shows how marriage has frequently been used as a means of enslaving women and thereby injuring not only

221

222 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

women, but their children and menfolk as well; and maintains that you cannot have a country of value unless the mothers are physically sound and mentally alert. The work contains many incisive judgments, admirably expressed. It is a sociological document, alike deserving of study and fas-

cinating in its choice of material and human expression. On the last page we find: " It is not always truth that wins." This particular truth is one which should not be lost sight of at the present critical time in the history of eugenics.
URSULA GRANT DUFF.

HRDLICKA ANNIVERSARY VOLUME
OF THE
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF
PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Volume 26, 1940, has been designated as the
HRDLICKA ANNIVERSARY VOLUME
in honour of the 70th birthday of
Dr. A1e8 HrdliCka
EDITED BY
T. D. STEWART, Chairman
RAYMOND PEARL, W. M. KROGMAN, and M. F. ASHLEY-MONTAGU,
of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists. Papers by the following will appear in this volume:
ASHLEY-MONTAGU; BORBOLLA; BUNAK; COBB; CONNOLLY; CUMMINS; DART; DAVENPORT; GREGORY AND HELLMAN; HOOTON; KEITH; KROGMAN; MATIEGKA; SCHULTZ; STEGGERDA; STEWART; TERRY; WEIDENREICH; BOAS; DUBOIS; GOLDSTEIN; PEARL; SCHLAGINHAUFEN; SERGI; SHAPIRO; VALLOIS AND OTHERS.
The Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology
Woodland Avenue and Thirty-sixth Street, Philadelphia, Pa. Annual subscription rates: $6.oo, domestic: $6.5o, foreign

