SPEECHES AT THE GALTON DINNER

HERE was a record attendance of

Fellows, Members and guests at the Galton Dinner which was held at the io Hotel on Tuesday, February i6th, Lord Horder, President of the Eugenics

in the Chair. Among the guests of

Society were Mr. R. Cartland, Mr. Cohn

k, Mr. Arnold Forster, Viscount Gage,

D. V. Glass, Mr. Wilson Harris, Mr.
F. Harrod, Mr. H. D. Henderson, Mr.
las Jay, Mrs. J. M. Keynes, Dr. R. R.

Wynski, Sir Walter and Lady LangdonSir Walter Layton, Miss Layton,

* E. M. H. Lloyd, Lord and Lady Milne,
.,C. Porter, Mr. H. E. Raynes, the Bishop
Rochester, Sir Arthur Salter, Lord and y Wardington, Mr. H. G. Wells, Lady hys) Williams, Dr. Kent Wright, and Pro-
r James Young.

troducing the Galton Lecturer, Mr. Keynes, Lord Horder said: We are

iwiliar with the Chairman who says he going to make a speech, and proceeds
ake one. We are equally familiar with Chairman who is sure it is unnecessary

troduce the speaker and proceeds to do

This evening I propose to be as good as
word-Mr. Keynes. Keynes's lecture on " Some Economic

uences of a Declining Population" is

lishalon page I3'Walter Layton, editor of the Economist chairman of the News Chronicle, propos-
the vote of thanks to the lecturer, said.
en I was asked some time ago to

the vote of thanks to Mr. Keynes,
wepted with alacrity partly because it ealways interesting to hear what Mr.
Ces has to say, and partly because
Wsglad to have the opportunity to say ord about him. It always seems to me

1*a pity to wait until a man is dead before
say what you think of him.

geerwehoasree

some people friendship is

whom at once

one meets a stimulus

an inspiration- Mr. Keynes is one of

t. I first made his acquaintance in Pro-
Marshall's lecture room a generation

ago. He had just taken his degree-and there was a bad moment when he contemplated taking the new economic tripos as a sideshow-for it is obvious that if he had sat for the tripos he would have set so high a
standard that my chance of a First would have gone west. Fortunately he decided to take the Civil Service Examination instead, so all was well, and the war found us lecturing together at Cambridge.
That chapter was ended on August the fourth or fifth. I recall meeting him at the corner of Silver Street in the wicker sidecar of a motor-bicycle driven by his brotherin-law, Professor Hill. As they pulled up at
the corner, he told me that he was driving up to London as he had been telegraphed for by the Treasury.
If there are any civil servants present, they will appreciate that the consequence of
that journey was a saving to the nation of perhaps hundreds of millions as a result of
Keynes's work during the war, and everyone knows how at the end of it he leapt into fame with his Economic Consequences of the Peace. The rest of the story is public property.
Mr. Keynes is not everybody's meat. On
some of his qualities there is complete agreement. His activities are immensely varied and range from the Russian ballet
and cinema management to trust-company investment and the control of college estates. Again, everyone who has read any of his writings must appreciate his rare literary gift which is displayed not only in his sketches, but bursts out occasionally in purple patches in the most technical of his books. Some of his phrases have greatly
influenced public opinion. Consider, for example, the cunning in the word " refla-
tion," which skilfully avoids all the bad
connotations attached to the word " infla-
tion." " Managed currency " again contains
a very subtle flattery to those who have the responsibility of management. Indeed,
though it has taken a very long time to
accustom the City of London to the idea,

33

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I think that the conception has now got such a hold that it would require a great upheaval to induce them to surrender the privileges of " management."'
But on his contribution to opinion, his judgment on policy and his forecast of
events, there are sharp differences of opinion; for Mr. Keynes is one of those who always
contrive to be a centre of controversy. He is a redoubtable antagonist and most people think twice before crossing swords with him. It is said with some truth that he is an iconoclast, for there is no man who takes more delight in exploding comfortable orthodoxy. Others point to cases where his judgment of events has been wrong. No man is infallible and Keynes himself would not claim that he has always been right. But I venture to think that the verdict of history will be that he has correctly forecast important economic developments more often than any contemporary economist or politician of his generation.
It is not my purpose, however, to give a considered verdict of Mr. Keynes's career; it is rather to say that those who think of him only as a man of brilliant intellect, as an accomplished literary stylist, as a hardheaded administrator or as a walking encyclopaedia of the current price of stocks and shares, only know half the man. The other half is a very human one. Many here know him as a loyal friend. He is one of those who take the greatest trouble in helping the young men with whom he is in touch at Cambridge in starting on their future careers. And for my own part, I know of no
one whom it is more easy to interest in cases
of hardship or of injustice. Moreover these emotional qualities are
aroused not for individuals merely, but they
colour his political outlook. For he has given
unstintedly of time, money and effort to
causes in which he believes. Those who can read between the lines will
see this trait revealing itself in the lecture
which he has just delivered. On some points
in his economic argument there will be
differences of opinion. This is hardly an
appropriate occasion to discuss these matters in detail, but it may well strike this audience

as something of a paradox that Mr. Ke
should be so much perturbed by the po bility of unemployment in circumstances
a stationary or declining population. For the plain man, the phenomenon of unemplo ment would seem to be most threate
when the population is increasing fast. would add in parentheses, however, that t numbers of occupiable males of adult ag will continue to increase long after the popu lation has become stationary.)
But Mr. Keynes is right, I think, in sa that with a stationary or declining populatio there must be important economic chang if the process of adjustment is to take pla without causing dislocation which in tu would create unemployment. The most important of these changes is a reduction o
the proportion of the national income tha is saved and an increase in the proportion o0 the national income that is consumed; an these conditions are not consonant in th1
long run with a high rate of interest. Some may think that the results Mr.
Keynes desires will tend to come about of
themselves and that his fears are exaggerated.. But Mr. Keynes sees the possible danger that business tradition, financial and industrial'
power,, and possibly even national policy,
may thwart the beneficent tendency tow.] wards high consumption and low interest3 rates. This is a prospect calculated to rouse Mr. Keynes's inbred radicalism; and I feel sure that his intellect and his emotional sense of justice were in harmony when he penned those words in which he expresses the hope that hereafter we may get the best
of both worlds and " maintain the liberties and independence of our present system,
while its more signal faults gradually suffer
euthanasia as the importance of capital
accumulation and the rewards attaching to-^
it, fall into their proper position in the social
scheme."~ Many other questions will doubtless have-
been present in the minds of Mr. Keynes's
listeners while he spoke. Is it certain that
the population will decline and if so when
will the process begin ? What will be its
political effects both from the point of view
of social structure and of national defence ?

SPEECHIES AT THE GALTON DINNER

35

definitely scientific questions will also to be considered, such as preventing propagation of the unfit. All these
ions are linked inextricably together,
*ty and environment combine to me the characteristics of the nation. accept the proposition that quality not
*ty is to be desired, the prospect of a or declining population is not
g to be feared. But it is one which i assuredly raise new problems. Mr.
's economic demand is one, though one, of the primary conditions that will
to produce the ideal nation. It is in this that his thesis is related to the essential
ples of this Society. H. D. Henderson: I have much in seconding this vote of thanks; consider that the Eugenics Society has ed a valuable service in inducing
'Keynes to direct his mind to what I long felt to be the leading economic
.vocial question of the day and of the generation. Like Sir Walter Layton, I had a long personal association with Keynes; and having been not only a
le but a pupil of Mr. Keynes, I can to the justice of Sir Walter's phrase as stimulus and inspiration which Mr. has always been to those associated him. But I hope to have many more tunties before Mr. Keynes is dead of what I think of him; and I shall
ore devote my remarks this evening necomments upon his address. m in substantial agreement with the mai propositions which Mr. Keynes at-forward, at any rate if I may restate *as' follows: first, that the substitution
stationary for a rapidly expanding
ition offers a potentiality of a more improvement in the standard of life
hiterto; secondly, that it is only too that that potentiality will in practice
* ted. But I doubt if the favourable * tiality, having regard to the population
ak that actually confronts us, is as
as Mr. Keynes implies; and I should stes on rather different considerations
lA-the second heading. Mr. Keynes has
Wed himself to elaborating one danger,

namely that there may be a prevailing tendency to save in excess of our investment
needs, and that as a consequence there may be what he calls a " breakdown of effective
demand." As a practical problem for the next generation I am not so worried as Mr. Keynes about that particular danger; and I'm disposed to emphasize rather the concrete difficulties of industrial readjustment which are likely to arise. Before very long, for example, we shall not need nearly
as many new houses as we do to-day; we shall not- require nearly as many workpeople in the housebuilding industry, and it may become necessary accordingly to transfer many of the workpeople now engaged in building houses to other industries. It is never an easy task to transfer people from one industry to another, and it is the more
difficult to do so the older those people are.
Now I am afraid, though I must not stop to
develop the argument, that we shall have to shift people from one industry to another more frequently and on a larger scale when numbers are stationary or declining than we
had to when numbers were expanding rapidly. Moreover, a larger proportion of the people we shall have to shift will be middle-aged or elderly persons. It is for reasons of this kind that I expect that we shall waste a considerable part of our growing productive power per head in the form
of unemployment. But there is quite a different way in
which we may waste our resources, namely in the form of heavy expenditure upon armaments, and as matters are drifting, it
looks as though that is what we shall do.
Of course that depends upon international political developments which are outside
our scope this evening. But if we are to be realistic in our speculations as to the future
we must take this likelihood into account. The prospect of a new international regime
under which peace is felt to be securely established must unfortunately be regarded
as a distant one; and until that prospect is realized, it seems to me that we must expect armament expenditure on a scale that will
make a very big hQle in the potentiality of a rising standard of life. The larger that

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
that potentiality is,- the larger is the arma- declining population accrues in an ear ment expenditure that nations can afford phase of the movement, in the phase ifiwhi without actually reducing their standards of we are now, when the proportion of depe life; and the larger accordingly, under the dent children is abnormally low, and wh pressure of competition and of technical the proportion of people in the prime of developments, is their armament expenditure is abnormally high. The working populatio likely to become. It is for that reason that of to-day have fewer dependants to suppo I feel less concerned than Mr. Keynes about per head than they have ever had to suppo the rate of interest and effective demand. before, or than they are ever likely to ha Armament expenditure has always made an to support again. In a generation's important contribution to the aggregate there will be many more elderly person demand for capital; and I thought that either retired or unfit for work, or unem Mr. Keynes in his references to the Defence ployed because demand has shifted from th Loan minimized unduly the importance of industries in which they are skilled, who wi the contribution it is likely to make in have to be supported, directly or indirecfly,i future. It is not to be-measured by the sums by the labours of a much smaller populationw that the Government may borrow. Arma- in the prime of life. By that time, too, I ment manufacturers at every stage of think it is not unlikely that public opinion~ production will require additional capital; may have become thoroughly alarmed byj
and I suggest that the total demand for the prospect of a rapid decline in numbers,
capital arising in one way or another from so that the size of the family may be increas armament expenditure is likely to be very ing once more, and there may be more large. Though I can well believe that dependent children per head. Thus, a
eventually, under more settled international generation hence, the population in the1 conditions, the problem stated by Mr. prime of life may have to sustain a double Keynes will assume real and senrous im- addition to the burden of dependants that'
portance, I very much doubt whether over is borne by the present generation. In other the next generation on the average of years words, we are enjoying now in large measure the demand for capital, including capital for the jam, such as it is, associated with a,
armament purposes, will prove insufficient decline in numbers, and incidentally we are to carry off our savings, diminished as those showing what a mess we can make of that will be by inevitably higher taxation. On jam. The powder remains for the next
the other hand, this means that the chance generation. of realizing a large improvement in the However black the devil of Malthus may standard of life is not so good as it might have deserved to be painted, I suggest that otherwise be for about a generation to come. it is clear that the fall of the birth-rate in
If we look further ahead, there is another Western countries has already gone too far, consideration to be borne in mind, which indeed dangerously far. There is no advanbrings me to my final observation. Mr. tage to the standard of living, not even a Keynes threw out almost parenthetically at potential advantage, still less one likely to the end of his address the admission that it be realized, in a declining population as was possible that the population might contrasted with a stationary population. decline too fast. But the prospect with There are many and serious disadvantages which we are actually confronted is that of in an ageing population, and it is immediately
a population which will eventually decline for an agemng, and ultimately for a rapidly very rapidly indeed unless there is an decliniing, population that we are heading
increase in the average size of the family, On the basis of our existing fertility rates
and which, before it declines rapidly, will which have probably not yet reached their
age rapidly. Now it is important, I think, miinimum. I emphasize that, because I feel
to appreciate that a large part of the potential there is some danger that Mr. Keynes's treatadvantage to the standard of life from a ment might lead people to underestimate

.. I .1 -;

.,- ,- %- , t4" ..

.14E- I

I -1

S"

the very real gravity of the situation that
-A-T-' -'-l E -DI-N ER'.-,,1- .actually confronts us.

37. allow me to judge at what point the eulogism eased. atid the discussion began, so that I

Lord Horder: We have departed a little was unable to save you from what I hope

from the tradition of the Galton Dinner in you fiially enjoyed. But the resolution really

adding a discussion of the Galton Lecture. is a vote of thanks; if that has quite been

My own knowledge of economics does not forgotten I should like to put it from the Chair.

JOURNAL OF* COM;PARATIVE LEGISLATION
AND INTERNATIONAL LAW:

THIRD SERIES

VOL. XIX. PART I

FEBRUARY I937

1. ARTICLES-

CONTENTS

On the Statualityof Law. Cotributed by Professor Giorgio Del Vecchio.

The Doctrine LL.eM.

of

Evasion

of

the

Law

in

England

and

America.

Contribued by Ronald H. Graveson, Esq.,

Recent Modifications of French Company Law. buted byMare amie Denoyer.

Competition and the Law. Contributed by E. Wynam White, Esq., LL.B.

A

Comparative Contribed by

Study
Philip

of the Anti-Trust
Strickland, Esq.,

Laws
BA.,

of the
LL.B.

British

Dominions

and

of

their

Adnistration,

II.

Responsibility for Piracy in the Middle Ages Gontributed by Edward Lewis, Esq., MA. ||

Liberal Thought and Undefined Crimes. Con*ibuted by Dr. jur. Paul Weidenbaum.

l

International Arbitral Percival, K.B.E.

Tribunals

and

the

Mexican

Claims

Commissions.

Conributed by Sir John H.

Notes on Imperial Constitutional Law. Contributed by Professor A. Berriedale Keith, D.C.L., LL.D.

|2 NOTES.

3. NOTICES OF BooKS.

Anu S on, One Guinea.

SOCIETY OF COMPAA LEGILATION, I Elm Couk, Temple, E.C.4.

-~~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~- Igni bviOWr Vol. 1h No. 1.

