REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

Westermarek, E., Ph. and LL.D. Marriage Ceremonies in Morocco.

London. Macmillan and Co., Ltd.; 19I4; price I2s.; PP. 422.

THE possibility that a sort of eugenic instinct exists in the human race is

suggested by the fact that marriage is surrounded by more ritual than

any other human function and by the special character of some ceremonies.

In number and variety the symbolic and magical performances collected

by Prof. Westermarck are remarkable. His general explanation, which

will serve as a working hypothesis for the study of all ceremonial, is that

marriage ritual is an application of magical ideas for the purpose of

ensuring the safety and welfare of the bride and bridegroom. "A verv

large number of marriage ceremonies spring from the feeling or idea

that bride and bridegroom are in a state of danger, and therefore stand

in need of purification and of special protection against magical influences

and evil spirits." To this chief class belong such customs as shutting up

the bride in a box, dressing her as a man and the groom as a woman,

and the curious quivering noises made by the attendant women on all

possible occasions. Ceremonies with a positive intention include many

whose object is to, make the bride a mother and a mother of male off-

spring.

Thus the bridegroom's mother sings a song praying for male twins

" or even one son "; or she carries a sieve or a bundle of her son's old

clothes on her back, like a baby. A married woman who is blessed with

children is selected to tie the magical knot, hayek, that the bride also

may be fruitful. An interesting detail is that the more beautiful of the

two young wedded people performs the usual ablution before the other on

the wedding night; it is believed that the children will resemble that

parent. Again, precautions are taken to prevent the offspring being

diseased. Superstition in the service of eugenics has evidently been a

force in human history.

Other sources for this or that ceremonial are justly admitted by the

author. The origin of many is mixed. For instance, there are several

which express or symbolise sexual bashfulness, a fact in itself indirectly

eugenic.

Prof. Westermarck has resided among the tribes whose customs he

has detailed so carefully, for various periods amounting in all to six

years. This condition enhances the value of one of the most important

contributions to the history of marriage.

A. E. CRAWLEY.

Reisshelmer, HERMANN. Evolution by Co-operation. A Study in Bioecononmics. London. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co.; 1913; price 3S. 6d. net.; pp. 200.
IN this book the author attempts to show-what he regards as a new principle of evolution-that a necessary condition for advance of type is that the organism should contribute at least as much to the total supply of nature as it takes from it. The relations of organisms should be like those of manufacturers, each produces something which the other lacksif an organism lives at the expense of another without contributing anything in return, it ifso facto degenerates. When a species lives " legitimately " it adds diiectly or indirectly to the total food supply, and thus the Malthusian doctrine of over-production of individuals is said to fail. It is, of course, obvious that if an organism lives in such a way as to
increase its own food supply, as in the case of an insect which feeds on
and at the same time fertilises a flower, it has a better chance than one which merely destroys its food, and further that species which have a wide choice of food and habit are more likely to give origin to new forms than those which are specialised for one set of conditions. Apart from giving

