GERMAN EUGENIC LEGISLATION

An Examination of Fact and Theory By AUBREY LEWIS, M.D., M.R.C.P.

LEGISLATION intended to serve eugenic ends has been put forward in Germany with a vigour that is the
ground for much pride and optimism among the foremost geneticists in that country. It is a drastic, even Draconian, measure, compelling the sterilization of a not inconsiderable fraction of the population. The text of the original law has been translated in an earlier number of the EUGENICS REVIEW (October I933, page I79), and a report on its juristic aspect was supplied by " Regierungsrat " in the last issue (page I37). It is of considerable importance that one should know how that law is being put into effect, and what consequences have so far become evident.
The following is mainly concerned with the two official Ordinances (Verordnungen) and the Minister's " Rundschreiben," with the semi-official Commentary by Riidin, Giitt and Ruttke, and the well-informed commentary upon this Commentary by Luxenburger, together with some reports on how the law is actually working as regards mental disorder. Finally, a brief account is given of Professor Eugen Fischer's view of the biological conception of the Folk-state (" Volkischer Staat "), of which this legislation is an expression.
OFFICIAL ORDINANCES
The first Verordnung was promulgated on
December 5th, I933, the second on May 29th,
I934: both were issued by the Reich Ministers for Home Affairs and for Justice.
In the first, the following provisions are of interest (the complete text is not reproduced, from considerations of space):
The application for sterilization is not to be made if great age or other causes render procreation impossible, if the operation would endanger life, or if the patient has to be permanently

detained in a " closed " institution. In the last
instance, he may not be discharged or given parole until the application for sterilization has been made and the decision given. Sterilization
is not to be undertaken before the completion
of the tenth year. Punitive institutions in the sense of the law
are institutions where convicted prisoners or prisoners on trial are detained, or in which
measures associated with the loss of liberty are carried out for the purpose of securing or improving persons.
If a qualified doctor in the course of his
profession gets to know a person who has a
hereditary disease as specified, or who suffers
from severe alcoholism, then he must immediately report it to the official doctor. The same duty rests on other persons who have to do with the treatment, examination or advising of patients.
If the official doctor thinks sterilization is
called for, he shall set about getting the person to be sterilized or his legal representative to put forward the proposal. If this fails, he must do so himself.
The Eugenic Court or Upper Eugenic Court can, after hearing the official doctor, order the commitment of the person to be sterilized to an appropriate hospital for a period up to six weeks. If sterilization is finally decided upon by the court, then the official doctor has to call on the patient in writing to be sterilized within two weeks; the appropriate hospitals are to be enumerated in the notification. If the patient has not alone put forward the proposal for his sterilization, he must further be informed that the operation will be done, even against his will.
If the person to be sterilized has obtained
admission at his own cost to a " closed " institu-
tion, which guarantees that he will not procreate,
then on his proposal the Court orders that the
operation shall not be undertaken as long as he stays there or in a similar institution. If his legal representative made the application for this before the patient had completed his eighteenth
year, then the patient can, on attaining this age, apply to be sterilized.
If, after the given period, the operation has not been performed and the person to be sterilized has not been admitted to a " closed" institution, or has left such an institution, then the operation is to be carried out with the help of the police, if necessary by the application of

i83

i84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

direct force, in an institution designated by the the Psychiatric Research Institute at Munich;

official doctor. Direct force may not be employed for the sterilization of young people until they have completed their fourteenth year.
A patient whose sterilization has been decided

Giitt, of the Ministry of Home Affairs, and Ruttke. It is not possible to summarize the contents of this work, which also gives the

upon, but who has been admitted to a " closed " text and a commentary on the Law of

institution, may not be discharged or given parole November 24th, I933, against Moral Offen-

unless he has been sterilized or the decision has been reversed.
Any doctor who sterilizes or castrates a

ders and Recidivists, providing for castration, etc.; and further contains an appendix on

patient to avert a serious risk to life or health the surgical technique of sterilization in each

must report it in writing within three days to the sex.

appropriate official doctor.

The most active assistant and colleague of

In the second Verordnung, published as Professor Riidin at the Munich Research

from May 29th, I934, there are further ad- Institute has been Professor Luxenburger,

ministrative provisions. As a preliminary to who has this month issued an informative

the application for sterilization, the Amtsarzt article in which he examines disputable or

can invite the person to be sterilized to attend significant points in the Commentary. He

for medical examination, and if necessary calls attention to the incompleteness of the

can demand police help for this. Hospitals, Law in that it does not provide for the

institutions and doctors must supply infor- sterilization of the healthy uniovular twin of

mation to the Amtsarzt on request.

an affected person, or for the sterilization of

A person with hereditary disease, or an the children of two affected parents. Like

alcoholic, who is in a " closed institution," Riidin, however, he looks forward to the

may be discharged for special reasons from time when, with further research, many more

the institution with the consent of the local conditions will have been recognized as

Amtsarzt, even though his sterilization has calling for sterilization because of their here-

not yet been applied for or ordered.

ditary nature. He calls attention to the

A circular letter was sent round about exclusive nature of the Law: no person not

the same time. (" Rundschreiben des Reichs- decreed by the Eugenic Court to be suffering

ministers des Innern," on May igth, I934.) from one of the diseases named in the Law

Among other matters, it states that the may be sterilized, even at his own request,

doctors in official employment are to visit or though his disorder be undoubtedly

non-state institutions in their area, and hereditary. Voluntary sterilization is thus

with the director thereof to determine which precluded, except for the diseases for which

patients come under the law. A patient may sterilization is compulsory. Carriers may not

evade sterilization by betaking himself into be sterilized voluntarily. It must be borne

a " closed institution." He must then be in mind that a person must be reported for

reported as such. The Eugenic Courts, it is sterilization, even though his illness is past

stated, will find it an advantage to hold and he has for many years been quite healthy.

sittings also in the institutions where the Similarly, where an inherited malformation

patients are, or even in an institution, has been corrected surgically.

though the patient has been living outside. Diagnosis is sufficient to constitute neces-

GERMAN COMMENTARIES ON THE LAW

sity for reporting the case, irrespective of whether the disorder is known to have

There has recently been published a Com- occurred in other members of the family.

mentary which can be regarded as having Doubtful cases must be reported as such.

official sanction. Though it has presumably The actual application for sterilization will

no direct juridical validity, it is an authorita- usually be made by the official doctor, or

tive and detailed exposition by three men Medical Officerof Health (Amtsarzt), to whom

who have played a foremost part in the the practitioner will report it. Since, how-

development of this law. These are Rudin, ever, many of the cases will present difficulties

the Director of the Genetics Department of of psychiatric diagnosis which the Amtsarzt's

GERMAN EUGENIC LEGISLATION

I85

experience does not qualify him to settle, he sterilization or not has disposed of the matter.

may send the patient, who will in many All cases of congenital or early mental

instances not be in an institution, but living deficiency must be reported, irrespective of

at home and possibly earning his living, into whether they are hereditary or dependent

a mental hospital or clinic for the purpose of on birth trauma or other exogenous factors

diagnosis; this may be done before the case (cf. Jahrreiss on this point). Among the

is decided by the Eugenic Court. Luxen- psychiatric disorders specified, it is only in

burger advocates generous use of such the case of alcoholism that the severity of

referral by the Amtsarzt. Giitt, Riudin and the condition is of importance; indeed,

Ruttke speak of it as appropriate where the Luxenburger says that it is precisely the

person to be sterilized tries to evade the mild cases that must be considered especially

measure. Luxenburger emphasizes the im- dangerous as regards propagation, and,

portance of the Amtsarzt in the whole pro- therefore, as demanding especial thorough-

cedure, morally and administratively, and ness in reporting them. In a discussion, how-

adds: " The Genetic Courts are not every- ever, Bostroem asked for caution in the

where so constituted-nor will they be for a reporting of mild manic-depressive distur-

good time to come-that the fact that an bances.

application has been made could not play a Much attention is given to the numerous

part in some way in influencing the decision persons who, through the mode of mani-

of the Courts." From this multiplicity of festation of their mental disorder or their

negatives one gathers that he thinks an appli- complete recovery from it, are now at large

cation for sterilization will bias a Eugenic in the community. They may be referred to

Court in many instances in favour of steri- a mental hospital if preliminary examination

lization, and he says that to give way to is required, or if there is strong suspicion

any agreeable illusions on this point would be that they may try to evade the procedure.

doing a poor service to the law or the ends it Also, Luxenburger says, commitment is per-

serves. " Nicht iuberall sind die Erbgesund- mitted if they are likely to be sexually unre-

heitsgerichte so zusammengesetzt-und sie strained in the intervening period before the

werden es auch auf absehbare Zeit hinaus Court has given its decision. General social

nicht sein-dass die Tatsache der Antrag- and medical grounds would justify it in such

stellung nicht irgendwie auf die Entscheidung a case, in his opinion.

des Gerichts mit einwirken k6nnte. Auch

bei peinlichster Objektivitat und grosster RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PHYSICIAN

Gewissenhaftigkeit der Gerichte. Sich hier Luxenburger examines the question of

irgendwelchen angenehmen Tauschungen what is to be understood by the statement

hinzugeben, hiesse dem Gesetz und der that the physician must report all the

Sache, welcheres dienen will, einen schlechten relevant cases which he encounters in the

Dienst erweisen. Die Dinge liegen in der course of his professional work. In his view,

Praxis noch lange nicht so, wie unser no matter what the condition (sciatica, for

Wunschbild sie uns malt."

example) which the physician is called in to

A patient in a closed institution who treat, if he obtains any information or evi-

appears to come under the Law may not be dence of the present or past manifestation of

discharged, or given leave, until the applica- one of the conditions named in the Law, he

tion for sterilization has been made and must report it. Similarly, if a healthy man

decided. Luxenburger points out some dis- seeks eugenic advice of a doctor concerning

crepancies. The Commentary on this article his marriage and he discloses, with his

holds that if the appropriate persons have fianc6e's consent, that she has previously had

lodged an appeal against a sterilization order, one of the diseases named, then the physician

then the patient must be detained until the must report her. If her consent has not been

lapse of the appointed period, or the decision given he need not report her. If the physician

of the Upper Eugenic Court and consequent encounters a person with one of the specified

i86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

hereditary diseases in the course of research, the latter part of this article some other evi-

the matter is still more subtle. Luxenburger dence will be given bearing on the attitude of

deals with it somewhat casuistically, inclining patients and of doctors in actual practice

to the view that so long as the physician gets towards the new law. Professor Riidin has

to know of the condition only in the course referred to the difficulties attendant on the

of his research he is exempted from reporting dual part which practitioners must now play.

it. Thus the physicians of the Research Institute, of which Professor Riidin is Director, have authoritative assurance that they need not report cases that would otherwise

Derselbe Arzt, der als Therapeut, als Heilarzt, also die tiefe Dankbarkeit der wieder einigermassen brauchbar gemachten Erbkranken erntet, kommt als Rassenhygieniker, als Rassenarzt, in

fall under the provisions of the Law, and die hochste Gefahr, mit seiner Forderung auf

Professor Rudin has said that it was intended by the Legislature that all scientific work in genetics should be thus exempted. Luxen-

Fortflanzungsverzicht gegenuber demselben Menschen, dem er geholfen hat, auf das grosste Unverstandnis zu stossen. Hier gilt es, geduldig aufzuklaren und immer wieder zu betonen:

burger adds significantly that it would be Unser Kampf gilt nicht der einzelnen Erkrankheit

ruinous for genetic research if the cases that came to the physician's knowledge in this way had to be reported by him. All investiga-

selbst, sondern dem, was hinter der Krankheit steckt, der krankhaften Anlage." Archiv fur Rassen u. Gesellschaftsbiologie, Bd. 38, Heft 2,
p. 230. I934.

tion of families stands or falls by the " un-

conditional confidence of the public in the Both the Commentary of Giitt, Riidin,

absolute discretion of the research physician." Ruttke, and the article by Luxenburger,

There is not the slightest doubt, he says, that contain further valuable expositions of the

there is already considerable mistrust: such administrative aspects of the Law: for

mistrust, if in any way justified, would mean example, who is to bear the cost of detention

the end of truthful information and conse- and operation; how the Courts are to be

quently of reliable research and of the constituted; how the police are to be in-

prestige of German genetics: so, says Luxen- voked if necessary, to apprehend the patient,

burger, it would do away with the possibility and apply force before and during the opera-

of giving the Legislature any further useful tion, if the patient refuses to submit.

foundation for eugenic measures. The follow- Of particular interest are the sections in

ing is the actual text of his remarks:

the Commentary which deal with the actual

Denn es ware fur die Erbforschung geradezu verhangnisvoll, wenn die Falle, die aus Anlass der Forschung dem Arzte zur Kenntnis kom-

diseases specified in the Law. No support is given to the view that the valuable qualities, even genius, which may accompany manic-

men, gemeldet werden mussten. Die Folgen depressive psychosis, should be set off against

waren gar nicht abzusehen. Alle Familienforschung steht und fallt mit dem unbedingten Vertrauen der Bevolkerung auf die absolute
Diskretion des Forschers. Ein nicht unerhe-

the disease when the decision as to sterilization must be taken in an individual case; an application should be lodged in all manic-

bliches Misstrauen ist ganz zweifellos heute depressive cases, irrespective of the com-

schon festzustellen. Sollte dieses Misstrauen pleteness of recovery, duration of good

irgendwie berechtigt werden, so ware es mit der Aufrichtigkeit der Auskunftgeber und damit
zwangslaufig mit der Zuverla.ssigkeit der

health subsequently, or other endowment in valuable qualities. Also, it is explicitly

Familienforschung, dem Ansehen der deutschen asserted in the Commentary that, in view

Erblichkeitsforschung und der Moglichkeit vor- of the varying terminology in medicine, and

bei, dem Gesetzgeber auch weiterhin brauchbare Grundlagen fur rassenhygienische Massnahmen
zu liefern.

especially in psychiatry, a number of other diagnoses than those specified in the Law will call for notification. Among them are melan-

The importance of the above admission cholia, depression, paranoia, confusional

on the part of the foremost active worker states, delusions of persecution, religious

in genetic research in psychiatry nowadays in mania, delirium, paraphrenia, convulsions

Germany can hardly be over-estimated. In and states of excitement. In the section

GERMAN EUGENIC LEGISLATION

I87

dealing with bodily malformation, a wide adds that the public are still very ignorant of

range of conditions is dealt with: it is stated the nature of sterilization, and it is extra-

that such a disorder as severe myopia must ordinarily difficult to make clear to the

be reported (cf. also Max Lange on club relatives in a convincing way the social and

foot, etc.).

individual meaning of the measure. It is

In the foregoing, therefore, there is a rarely possible, he says, so far to get the

descending order of authority: the Law, the patient to make the application himself.

Ordinances, the quasi-official Commentary, Catholic institutions are faced with the

and the personal but very well-informed ex- necessity for much larger accommodation,

position by Luxenburger (who emphasizes as it is proposed that the scruples of Catholics

that he is giving his private interpretation should be met by the opportunity of evading

and pleads for latitude to offer helpful sterilization by their permanent incarcera-

criticism).

tion. Thus, St. Josef's Anstalt quotes in its

Annual Report the text of Matthew xviii, IO,

VIEWS OF INSTITUTION

and assumes that most children there will

SUPERINTENDENTS

remain for the rest of their lives. It is re-

Besides these there are scattered references, ported that Catholic judges and surgeons are

of varying weight and testimony, as to how to be exempted from taking part in the

the Law is working or how it is regarded. To administration of the Sterilization Law. In

collect all these would be difficult: the reply to an inquirer, Riidin is reported as

following are mostly taken from a journal stating that Catholic priests and nuns will

which has been for many years the organ of have the provisions of the Law applied to

the Reich Association of German Institu- them since, in so far as they are mentally

tional Psychiatrists. This journal asked for affected, they are no longer under their vow.

information from superintendents of institu- Another superintendent, who says he is in

tions about the way the Law is working. the far from agreeable position (wenig erfreu-

Some, in reply, complain of administrative liche Lage) of having to apply for the steriliza-

delay and of the overcrowding of their mental tion of II3 people who are living in families

hospital. The overcrowding is due to this or in hostels, expresses much concern at the

delay and the impossibility of discharging enormous demand the notifications make on

patients who have recovered or would the doctor's time and work; his wards are

ordinarily be allowed out under supervision, grossly overfilled owing to the recall into the

and the necessity for taking back into the asylum of so many patients living outside.

institution patients who had been living in Attention was drawn in the EUGENICS

the outside world but who had been diag- REVIEW (October I933, page I57) to the

nosed as having one of the specified illnesses. ambiguity of the word " cans" in the Law.

One superintendent is alone in stating that This has been partly elucidated: the Giitt,

he now gets more thorough and willing infor- Riidin, Ruttke Commentary states that the

mation about heredity from the relatives of " can " is permissive, in that formerly all

patients than ever before. Elsewhere, super- eugenic sterilization was generally assumed

intendents say that since the new Law more to be prohibited, and now, in these specified

applications for discharge or parole are pre- instances, it is permitted. Where, however,

ferred than formerly, but permission is now the diagnosis is certain and none of the

rarely granted. Various reasons are given for stated grounds of exception obtain (i.e.

the smaller number of admissions this year to where age or health or permanent segrega-

some hospitals. It is pointed out by the tion preclude any further begetting or bear-

director of a private sanatorium for nervous ing of children), then it is a question of

conditions that some of the patients, when " must." Some obscure remarks about

Teady to go home, have to be transferred to Beweiswiirdigung follow in the Commentary.

a public mental hospital under the new con- A published decision by the Eugenic Court

ditions because of the financial burden. He in Stettin confirms the "compulsive"

i88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

interpretation-i.e. " kann " equals " muss." next standard at school and had failed in life

This is also the interpretation stated em- must be regarded as defective. Professor

phatically by Professor Kehrer, of Munster. Bostroem said that whereas the diagnosis of

schizophrenia was sufficient for sterilization,

THE STATISTICAL ASPECT

cases of manic-depressive psychosis ought to

A valuable contribution to the statistical be considered on their individual merits.

aspect of this problem is supplied by Dr. Riudin said the Law applied to foreigners,

Dornedden, an official of the Reich Depart- provided they had the opportunity of leaving

ment of Health. Writing in the Reichsgesund- the country offered them.

heitsblatt, he gives the figures obtained Professor Kretschmer expressed concern

from twenty-one selected institutions with lest clinics, which were mostly developed on

over 24,000 inmates at the end of I933. a voluntary basis, should suffer, seeing that it

Of these, over 8o per cent. had one or other would be necessary to use direct physical

of the hereditary mental affections specified force to sterilize some patients; he there-

in the Sterilization Law; 67 per cent. of all fore suggested central stations for such

the inmates would have to remain in the sterilization. In supporting this suggestion,

institution till they die; of the remainder, Bresler speaks of " odium " as likely to

more than two-thirds would have to be attach to all hospitals where forcible steriliza-

sterilized before they could be discharged- tion may have to be carried out. As to

i.e. 5,348, of whom 2,593 would be schizo- abortion for eugenic reasons, there was some

phrenics, I,503 defectives, I69 manic-depres- difference of opinion. Riidin pointed out

sives, and 745 epileptic. Taking the total that it was at present forbidden but would

population of German mental hospitals and come, with concomitant sterilization. Pro-

institutions at i6o,ooo, Dr. Dornedden fessor Hoffman said that there were certain

reckons on 36,ooo sterilizations, excluding kinds of neurotics that would have to be

the annual influx of patients and those living brought under the operation of the Law.

outside institutions. He thinks his figure Professor Weygandt, of Hamburg, pro-

probably too low, however.

posed the experiment of castrating chronic

turbulent schizophrenics; it was good for

COMMENTS BY PSYCHIATRISTS

them, he considered, and resulted in less

The attitude of doctors in practice is, of noise, etc., in the institution. It is noteworthy

course, difficult to discover. At the lecture in this connection that books are now appear-

course given by the German Mental and ing in which sterilization and castration are

Racial Hygiene Union, of which Professor dealt with as related topics. Thus, the Giitt,

Riidin is the Reichskommissar, and later at Rudin, Ruttke Commentary contains also

the annual Congress of the German Psychia- the law about castration of certain moral

tric Society, the views of psychiatrists were offenders, with comments upon it. Surgeons

partly made evident. Thus Roemer of naturally are also being provided with appro-

Illenau, an influential and respected figure in priate literature.

German psychiatric institutional circles, said Many psychiatrists were anxious about the

that among the 400,000 people in the Reich cost of all the work involved in reporting

who are envisaged for sterilization, 360,ooo cases, collecting data, and furthering re-

are psychiatric cases; and that mistaken search. Riidin promised to put in a word for

propaganda was causing much unnecessary them with the authorities, to get further

worry in the general population. Other financial support. But it is doubtful if

speakers did not see how space could easily this could mean much, for Riudin himself,

be found for all the detained or recalled in the annual report of his Research Institute

patients in mental hospitals. Some were not in Munich, remarks plaintively on the small

sure what must be held to justify a diagnosis and even diminishing financial support given

of deficiency. Luxenburger said that a by the various State authorities to his de-

person who had twice failed to pass into the partment. Most ironically, this follows an

GERMAN EUGENIC LEGISLATION

I89

acknowledgment of the indebtedness of his Without laying undue weight on such verbal

Forschungsanstalt in Munich to a public- usage as the word "condemned," it is

spirited Jew for its foundation and main- possible that a general attitude is better to

tenance at a critical period.

be recognized in such casual passages than in

Doctors have also expressed their concern more deliberate pronouncements on what is

at the general effect of the Law upon the to be encouraged and aimed at.

relations between the public and the doctor. Professor Bumke, of Munich, has said

Thus, Bonhoeffer, at the Annual Congress of that he doubted whether schizophrenia was

the German Psychiatric Society, said that actually a single disease, but he thought that

there was danger of psychiatry getting into that was of no consequence; one could

discredit through an exaggerated picture- cheerfully put up with it or take it into the

propaganda for eugenics. Doctors, it is often bargain if once in a way some insane person,

pointed out, have, in regard to the authori- who was not schizophrenic, got sterilized as

ties, no obligation to professional secrecy such. In a somewhat similar spirit, Professor

where these hereditary diseases are in ques- Rucdin said that in these matters of steriliza-

tion. There is evidently alarm on this score tion and hereditary disease there could be no

which hinders eugenic inquiries, for the compromise. Defects in the Law and doubts

Fiihrer of the Union of Hospital Doctors must not cripple activity; critics would do

(Verbandsfiihrer Schlayer) has issued a state- better to join in the work themselves. In

ment urging his colleagues to lay aside their many articles one finds an implicit or explicit

fears in answering a questionnaire sent out indication that a large number of doctors and

by Professor Riidin from the Kaiser Wilhelm medical teachers now regard eugenic work as

Institute to hospitals and sanatoria. He more important than therapeutics. RUdin,

says: " The Kaiser Wilhelm Institute is a however, discountenances this.

pure research institution and, therefore, is

not obliged to report or justified in making EUGEN FISCHER ON THE STATE

application [for sterilization] in certain here- A final word may be given to the general

ditary diseases. Furthermore, data com- conception of the State of which this law is

municated do not come to the knowledge of one of the plainest expressions. No more

the relatives or the patients; the method of weighty expositor could be found than the

the Research Institution is expressly to avoid biologist Eugen Fischer, now Rector of the

telling how it has got the information, and Berlin University. In a commemorative

only to concern itself with carrying out the address to the University, he first deplores

investigations of the German people desired the lack of racial pride in the former liberal

by the Government."

national State, where it was forced into the

It is perhaps not insignificant that in background by economic questions, falsely

regard to sterilization one finds the word applied " humanity," and the idea of

" condemned " (verurteilt) used occasionally equality. The national socialist conception,

in medical reports. Thus Dr. Gloz, reporting however, is of a Folk State (v6lkischer

on a case of epilepsy from the University Staat) with a passionate longing for the old

Clinic in Hamburg, says that the patient, " common folkness" (Volkstum), rejection

because of his seizures, was condemned by of an international intellectualism, and ad-

the Eugenic Court to be sterilized; but it hesion to a conscious ideal of the Nordic race

was more or less fortuitously discovered that of " our German forefathers." War and

he had a cerebral tumour which was the hunger and loss, inflation, contempt and lies

cause of these attacks. " This patient from without, an unsuitable type of Govern-

escaped his doom only by the skin of his ment and moral degeneration led to this

teeth." The effect of such a miscarriage of attitude of the whole people. Technical

eugenic justice, it is pointed out, would be developments in the way of contraceptives

to damage public confidence in the eugenic made it possible to split sexual impulses and

courts and in the medical profession. procreation which Nature had so firmly fused.

B

I90 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

But in Germany, which seemed to be becom- whole environment upon the individual, and

ingraciallymoribund, the views of a Gobineau a handing on of such so as to raise a better

as to the inequality of different races were generation, are false. The significance of this

readily exposed as to their mistakes in his- may be seen in the history of nations, and on

torical, linguistic and anthropological fact, it is founded the Folk State. The racial and

while his brilliant fundamental idea (" glan- eugenic point of view must, and will, direct

zende Grundidee) was overlooked. This all internal political activity. The willing-

" brilliant fundamental idea " is, one gathers, ness to obey a Leader is biologically well-

that heredity is very important.

founded; there shall be a nobility of blood

Fischer asserts that " we know to-day the and soil, together with an equality in service

genetic differences of the individual races, we in the station in which fate has placed us;

have full knowledge of the racial crossings the identity of blood in the people must

and the rules and laws which after such cross- speak with a louder voice than any differences

ing determine the reappearance of individual of knowledge and position. The old worship

qualities." Racial identity is defined rather of culture and progress is past.

obscurely as consisting in " homozygous In a fervently patriotic peroration Pro-

predispositions of definite qualities of great fessor Fischer thanks God that the rich

propagatory communities " (" gleicherbige springs of German Folkness are still welling

Anlagen bestimmter Eigenschaften grosser up to save the people from racial decay,

Fortpflanzungsgemeinschaften bedeuten applied as they are according to the pro-

Rassegleichheit "). No qualification is offered gramme of the National Socialist Govern-

of the assertion that we know now what race ment.

is in men, and know, moreover, about the

mode of transmission of the different psychi- CONCLUSION

cal qualities said to be its most important No attempt has been made in this article

characteristics. We are said to be beginning to examine the German claims or arguments,

to see the endless significance of hereditary however obviously some of them called for

mental qualities for the course of cultural criticism, nor to comment on the working of

history. Now, it is somewhat hardily asserted, the Law and on its by-products. It is scarcely

we know the nature of the hereditary dis- possible to give any adequate summary of all

eases, " how they are transmitted, their that is being done and said, even so far as

immutability and obligatory appearance in it is available in print. Selection cannot do

definite generations. Hence comes a new justice to all that is remarkable in German

aspect of the hereditary and racial problem " eugenics." A factual account has been

as it concerns the State. The great Fiihrer the object of the foregoing; those further

of the national socialist State has not only on interested are referred particularly to the

theoretical grounds but also intuitively by Giitt-Riidin-Ruttke volume, and still more

his healthy instinct turned to the old roots profitably, if less " publishably," to the

of ' Folkness'."

observations of English doctors who have

And so, " the aim of the State is not to be had opportunities of seeing the Law in

found in a merging in the total human culture action in German clinics.

but in the collecting and fostering of its own

people, and only its own people, those who

are of one blood and one stock. The develop-

REFERENCES.

ment of the so-called minority rights which Gutt-Rudin-Ruttke: Gesetz zur Verhutung erbkranken played a part in the Peace conferences, and Nachwuchses. Munchen: Lehmann, 1934.

afterwards on paper, but only there, is thus consequentially brought to an end." Our once defective ideas of race and heredity are now correctly and unassailably established. The notions as to a powerful influence of the

Luxenburger: " Einige Bestimmungen," etc. Der Nervenarzt, Jg. 7, Heft 9, p. 437, Sept. 1934.
Der Krankenhausarzt, Nr. 9, p. 46, 1934. Lange, Max: Fortschritte der Neurologie, etc., Jg. 6, Heft 9, pp. 363, 368, Sept. 1934. Jahrreiss: Fortschritte der Neurologie, etc., Jg. 6, Heft 9, p. 380, Sept. I934.

GERMAN EUGENIC LEGISLATION

Fischer, Eugen: Der Begriff des volkischen Staates,
biologisch betrachtet, Berlin, I933.
Psychiatrisch - Neurologische Wochenschrift, I934,
Nrs. 2, 3, 9, 10, 20, 21, 23, 24, 26, 28, 32. Naujoks and Boeninghaus: Technik der Sterilisierung
und Kastration, Enke, Stuttgart, I934.

Gloz: " Zur Differentialdiagnostik der Epilepsie," Der Nervenarzt, Jg. 7, p. 460, Sept. I934.
Riidin: Archiv fur Rasse, etc., Bd. 28, Heft 2, p. 230, 1934.
Rtidin: " Bericht uber die genealogische Abteilung," etc., Zt. f. d. ges. Neur und Psychiat., Aug. I934.

Statistical Studies in Genetics and Human Inheritance

ANNALS OF EUGENICS

Edited by R. A. FISHER
(Founded by K. PEARSON)

The forthcoming issue, Volume VI, Part 1, will contain articles by

R. A. FISHER J. A. FRASER ROBERTS M. N. KARN

J. B. S. HALDANE L. S. PENROSE "STUDENT"

Subscription, in advance, 50/- per volume. Four quarterly parts obtainable separately at 1 5/- each from Galton Laboratory, Gower
Street, London, W.C. 1.

zugenios Review, Vol. XVI, No.8.

