INTELLIGENCE AND SIZE OF FAMILY*
Their Relationship in an Adult Group of High Educational Standard
By H. T. HIMMELWEIT, M.A., Ph.D.

IN recent papers Fraser Roberts (4), Burt tion, while reduced in size because of the

(2) and Thomson (8) have reviewed the homogeneity of the groups, was still sig-

problem of the relationship between size nificantly negative.

of family and intelligence. A considerable The present paper extends the field of body of experimental data on the subject has investigation to the study of the relationship accumulated over the last twenty years. between size of family and intelligence of

These investigations indicate that a correla- adults. In this study, unlike many others

tion of -' 20 to -' 25 represents, at our reported on children, the group was in no way

present state of knowledge, the relationship representative of the general population,

of intelligence to size of family. There is, being highly selected with regard to in-

therefore, a slight tendency for the less telligence and to a lesser extent with regard

intelligent to be found more frequently in to socio-economic status.

larger than in smaller families.

The study of this selected group was con-

Most of the investigations on which these sidered of value, since it would provide an

findings were based were carried out on experimental answer to the hypothesis,

English and Scottish school children between recently put forward, that the negative

the ages of IO and I3, the most complete correlation between family size and intelli-

being the inquiry by Fraser Roberts (4) and gence could be explained on environmental

his collaborators at Bath. Much care has grounds. In a review of Burt's pamphlet (2),

been taken in some investigations to study Blackburn (i) argued that the relatively Jow

the effect on the correlation of making the scores obtained by children of larger families

groups relatively homogeneous with regard might be due to the unfavourable circum-

to certain variables. Thus in Sutherland's stances of poverty, overcrowding, etc., which

inquiry (7) the socio-economic level of the prevented these children from developing, to

families from which the children were re- the same extent as others, the ability neces-

cruited was held constant by including chil- sary to pass intelligence tests. The distincdren of one occupational group only, namely tion was thus made between innate intelli-

coal miners " at the face "; in Thomson's gence and ability to pass intelligence tests.

study (8) the size of the family was rendered If this view be accepted, then clearly these

artificially more homogeneous by restricting deleterious effects would be seen more in

the sample to children whose fathers had families with many children than in families

fallen in war within one year of the child's with fewer children living on the same

birth. In both these inquiries, the correla- income. Blackburn suggested that this

hypothesis could be put to the test by

* This investigation, which formed part of a large inquiry into the selection of students, was made possible

complementing Sutherland's study of a homogeneous group at or below the poverty-

through a grant from the Social Science Research Division of the London School of Economics. The writer is greatly indebted to Sir Alexander Carr-

line with a study of a group coming from families of relatively higher socio-economic

Saunders, Director of the London School of Economics, status.

for permission to carry out the project, to Professor T. Marshall, Chairman of the Social Science Research Division for his active support, to Dr. J. Blackburn,

The population of the present investigation would appear to constitute a group of the

Lecturer in Psychology, for his interest and stimulating kind suggested, the majority of students

criticism, and to Mr. C. Wrigley, Research Assistant, for ably carrying out the considerable task of testing the students.

coming from families of the professional, managerial or clerical classes.

77

78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I. The Subjects
The experimental group consisted of 450 British-born men and women students of a college of the University of London,* who were tested in the course of a larger inquiry into the selection of students. The students completed a questionnaire, the relevant items of which were:
i. How old are you ? 2. Describe as precisely as possible your father's
occupation, giving as many details as are indicated in the following examples: (a) Teacher of mathematics at an L.C.C.
secondary school; (b) Proprietor of a bookshop in S.W. London
employing three assistants; (c) Foreman in a leather factory with ten
men working under him; (d) Accountant at Messrs. Dorman, Long &
Co., civil engineers. If your father is not an employer or an independent worker, state name of the organization where he is employed, and the nature of the business. If your father is retired or deceased, give details of the last occupation and put in brackets after it (Ret.) if retired, and (D) if deceased.t 3. Give the names of the last two schools you attended and indicate the number of years you spent at each, and the ages during which you were there ?
Name of Type of No. of Boarder or Ages at School School years spent Day which you
there Scholar entered and left
Example: High Secondary I938-40 Day II-I3
School, Paddington
I.
2.
4. Including yourself, how many live born children did your mother have ? . . .
5. If you have any half-brothers and sisters, how many have you on your mother's side? ... How many on your father's side ? ...
The students were also asked to state the size of their father's and mother's sibships.
* They had been admitted to the college on the basis
of having passed matriculation. Those admitted in I946 had in addition taken an entrance examination and had been interviewed. The decision of the board to accept or reject candidates was not influenced by the numbers in their families.
t The author is very grateful to Dr. D. V. Glass, Reader in Demography, for advice on the wording of this question.

II. (a) Age of the Subjects
The average age of the students was 23 *85 ±4 22. The mean age was relatively high because the majority of students in I947 were ex-Service men and women.
Two advantages resulted from using an adult group for an inquiry of this type. First the students were able to give fuller information than children. In addition to stating the number of brothers and sisters they had, they were able to state the number of live births of the mother, thus enabling us to include in the inquiry children who might have died soon after birth. Secondly, the likelihood that their sibships were complete was greater

TABLE I
CLASSIFICATION OF THE OCCUPATIONS OF THE FATHERS OF 443 STUDENTS
(the occupations of seven could not be classified)

Total

I. Professional

...

Medical ... ...

Legal

... ...

Politics ... ...

Armed Services

(Officers)

...

Church ... ...

Journalism

...

Public Administra-

tion ... ...

Arts

... ...

Applied Scientific

Work ...

...

Accounting (higher

grades) ... ...

University/Research

Teaching ... ...

Librarian, ... ...

II. Managerial Industrial ... Commercial
Financial ...

...
... .
...

III. Clerical and Retail Distribution ...
Public ... ...
Private ... ... Personal Service ...
Retail Distribution

I V. Skilled Workmen and Farmers ...
Skilled manual workers ... ...
Farmers ... ...

V. Unskilled Workmen and other Ranks of Armed Services
Other Ranks ...
Unskilled Workmen

142
24
I2 I
i8
IO
2
27
3
I5
10
8 II
I 120
15
92
13
82 26 3I 3 22
71
58 I3
28 9 Ig

Men Women
57 85 6 I8
57
OI
IO 8 55 02
8 I9
2I
78
46 35 74 OI 39 8I 96
25 67
58
56 26 5 II 24 7 30 14 8
45 26
38 20 76
21 7 72
14 5

INTELLIGENCE AND SIZE OF FAMILY

79

than it would be for IO- to I3-year-old children.

II. (b) Socio-Economic Status of the Subjects
This was inferred from the occupation of the students' fathers, which were classified into five broad categories:
Professional Managerial Clerical Skilled Workmen Unskilled Workmen
Table I gives the distribution of the students falling within these categories and a more detailed enumeration of the occupations which have been linked in each broad category.
The distributions were plotted separately for men andwomen since it was found that the women students belonged to the professional and managerial class to a significantly larger extent than the men. Table II gives the percentages of men and women belonging to the different occupational groups and the critical ratios of the difference between them.
TABLE II
PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF THE FATHERS OF STUDENTS IN THE DIFFERENT OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS

Pro Mana- Cleri- Skilled Un- Total

fes- gerial cal

skilled

sional

Men ... 26 2 17.9 25 7 206 9.6
Women ... 37 7 36o0 ii-6 ii*6 3.I
Combined 32-1 27.I I8-5 i6-o 6.3 Critical
Ratio... 2-62 4-39, 3-861 2-59 2-82

i00.0
I00-0
I00.0

This difference became more pronounced when the professional and managerial groups were combined and contrasted with the remaining occupational groups, clerical, skilled and unskilled. A X2 was calculated and was found to be significant at the *ooi level.
This difference between men and women
students with regard to their socio-economic background may be due to the fact that, in our sample, there was a significantly higher percentage of ex-Service men as compared to
ex-Service women. Ex-Service men and
women are entitled to a grant which covers their fees and living expenses during their university training. In the case of students

who were not ex-Servicemen or women, the university education would have to be financed by the parents, scholarships, or,
what is frequently the case, by a combination of these two; the scholarship not being sufficient to cover all expenses. These students are, therefore, to some extent, at least, dependent upon their parents for financing their university education.*
A study of Table I indicates that our population comes from various socio-economic groups, yet on three main grounds there is reason to believe that it is less heterogeneous than would appear at first sight. Although, first, 22 * 3 per cent of the students came from families of the skilled and unskilled occupational groups, these were in no way representative of the large groups of unskilled and skilled workers that form the bulk of the population. They were atypical with regard to intelligence, number of sibs, and educational background. In view of known correlations between the intelligence
of parents and children, it is very probable that our sample formed the more intelligent section of these occupational groups.
Secondly, the differences in standard of living between the five groups were less than in the general population because the families in the lower groups were significantly smaller than in the working population as a whole. From Hajnal's report (6) it would be expected that students from the lower occupational groups would come from significantly larger families than those from the professional,
managerial and clerical groups. The figures are presented in Table III, and have been studied by analysis of variance both for the whole group and for men and women separately. No significant differences were found, showing that in our sample there is no association between occupational class and size of family.
Table IV gives the mean number of siblings for the various occupational groups.
* A member of the staff of the college pointed out that
this difference in the socio-economic background of men, an,d women students had already been observed before the war and could be accounted for in part by a tendency of parents of the professional and man,agerial groups to send a higher percentage of their sons than daughters to Oxford or Cambridge.

8o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(None of the differences is statistically
significant.) Since, therefore, the families of the skilled
and unskilled workmen were on the whole small, the children might well have been brought up in homes less poor and overcrowded than those of families with more children managing on the same income.
Thirdly, it is worth recalling that education must have had a compensating effect
upon any adverse home influences of an economic nature. All students, in order to be admitted to the university, have to pass through a series of educational sieves, finally taking the Matriculation examination or its
equivalent. It is therefore unlikely that any of our

TABLE IV
MEAN NUMBER OF SIBLINGS OF 408 STUDENTS IN FIVE OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS

Profes- Mana- Clerical Sk5lled Un-

sional gerial

skilled

Mean

I*83I i*68I I 569 I*7I4 I *636

Standard

Deviation I *499 I-445 I*47I 1578 2*035

Number I30 91 I02 63 22

Board of Education-namely public schools, grant-aided schools, secondary schools and miscellaneous. In the questionnaire the
students were asked to record the last two schools they had attended to avoid the fallacy of treating as representative of a student's education a school at which he might have

TABLE III
PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SIZES OF THE SIBSHIPS (INCLUSIVE OF THE STUDENTS) IN THE DIFFERENT
OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS*

No. of Children Professional

Managerial

Clerical

Skilled

Unskilled

8 and above 7
6 5 4
3
2 T

...
... ... ... ... ... ...
...

o8 (i) 3 8 (5)
o-8 (I) 8 5 (II) 8 .5 (II) 30 8 (40)
30 0 (39) i6*8 (22)

Total

... IOO'O (I30)

II (I) I* (I) 2 2 (2) 5 5 (5) I43 (I3) 24.2 (22) 29-6 (27) 22*0 (20)
|IOOO (9I)

2'0 (2) Io (I) 0o0 (o) 7 .8 (8) 8 *8 (9) 23 5 (24) 32-4 (33) 24*5 (25)
IOO-O (IO2)

i-6 (i) 'o (o)
7 9 (5)
i*6 (I) 15.9 (IO) I5.9 (IO) 34-9 (22) 22 *2 (I4)
IOO*O (63)

4-5 (I) 0.0 (o) 4 5 (I) 0O0 (o) 9*I (2)
22 7 (5)
27-4 (6)
3I*8 (7)
| IOO (22)

The figures in brackets give the actual numbers in each category from which the percentages were calculated.

students were brought up in home conditions which handicapped them in doing intelligence tests. This point is clearly of the greatest importance in view of Dr. Blackburn's hypothesis of the effect of adverse home influences on ability to do intelligence tests-a theory for which evidence is obtained mainly from cases of extreme environmental privation where adverse home influences have been reinforced by irregular school attendance.
II. (c) Educational Background of the
Subjects
The schools of the students were classified into four groups set out in a circular by the

spent only a few months. A school was considered as characteristic for a student if he underwent there the major part of his education between the years I3-I6. Table V gives the percentage of students who had attended these four types of schools.
TABLE V PERCENTAGE OF STUDENTS WHO HAD ATTENDED THE
FOLLOWING TYPES OF SCHOOLS. N==449
Public Grant- Secondary Miscellane- All Schools aided Central ous Schools Schools
Schools Schools
13.8 5 8 63 7 I6.7 IOO-O

* Based on a sample of 408. The information of 42
students was incomplete with regard to occupational

Men and women were grouped together,

status and No. of siblings of parents.

since they did not differ significantly with

INTELLIGENCE AND SIZE OF FAMILY

8i

regard to the type of schools they attended. It will be seen that by far the greater pro-
portion of students attended a secondary
school (63 * 7 per cent as compared to I9- 6 per cent for public and grant-aided schools combined). Table VI gives the distribution of the size of the student's family for each type of education.
Table VII gives the mean number of siblings of the students attending the different types of school.

In spite of these differences the students can be regarded as a group reasonably homogeneous in educational background.
II. (d) The Intelligence of the Subjects There can be no doubt that the group was
far more uniform with regard to intelligence than were the groups of children studied by Burt, Thomson and Fraser Roberts.
It is not possible to give exact I.Q. equivalents for the scores obtained on the

TABLE VI PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF FAMILY SIZE FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF SCHOOLS (N = 449)

|OI

No. of Siblings

-

2345

Total 6&over

Public School ... I7.8

24.2

30.7

z6 I

4.8

3.2

3.2

0OO

Grant-aided

(I I) (I5) (I9) (IO) (3) (2) (2) (62) 34v6 26v9 26v9 7-7 3.9 0 0 0 0 zOO

School

(9) (7) (7) (2) (I) (o) (o) (26)

Secondary School 20*3 36*o 2I 0 io 8 4-9 2 8 4.2

0OO

(58) (IO3) (60) (31) (I4) (8) (I2) (286)

Miscellaneous ... 20*O 34*7 24-01O2*O

8'o

I-3

O* O

OO

| (I5) I (26 (I 8) I (9) (6) (I I (°) I (75)

The figures in brackets give the actual numbers in each category from which the percentage distribution was calculated.

TABLE VII MEAN No. OF SIBLINGS OF STUDENTS WHO HAD ATTENDED THE FOLLOWING TYPES OF SCHOOLS

Mean

. ...

Standard Deviation

Number ... ...

Public Schools
... I*887 ... I*449 ... 62

Grant-aided Miscellaneous Secondary Schools Schools Schools

1192 I*IIO
26

1573
1236 75

I734
i*658
286

All Schools other than Secondary
Schools
I*632 1325 I63

All Schools Total
I-697 1I546 449

The following significant differences emerged:
i. The No. of sibs of students attending the grant-aided schools is slightly smaller than that of either the public school or secondary school groups (C.R. 2-44 and 2*27 respectively). It is difficult to account for this fact.
2. The secondary school group does not differ from the students of all other types of schools as regards size of family. It does differ from the others, however, in the range of size of family as indicated by the standard deviations (C.R.=3-53). This group is therefore more heterogeneous with regard to number of siblings than are the other groups.

intelligence tests used in the present inquiry.
However, data from other investigations giving I.Q. averages for student populations
as compared to the general population, suggest that the average I.Q. level of students falls somewhere around I26. This indicates
that the students would find themselves at the upper end of the distribution curve of intelligence for the general population, i.e.
about Ij standard deviations above the
mean. Not only is the average level of the stu-
dents' irtelligence higher than that of the

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

general population, but its range expressed in terms of its standard deviation is smaller.*
HI. (e) Number of Siblings of the Subjects
The size of each student's sibship was arrived at by deducting any half-siblings from the number given in answer to question 5. The average number of siblings was found to be I 7I6±+I * 559.
This contrasts sharply with the corresponding figures for the 3,305 cases studied by Fraser Roberts (4) who found an average sib number of 2- 583 ±+2 -I85. It is, therefore, clear that in the present sample there are fewer sibs per family. The fact that the sibships are of mote uniform size than those found in Fraser Roberts's inquiry must decrease the correlation found to exist between number of sibs and intelligence.

Thurstone's battery of tests of primary ability, the six tests enumerated above were chosen as being relatively highly saturated both with the general factor and with the group factors they were measuring. All scores were transformed into standard scores to allow for a combination of the verbal and the non-verbal scores into one composite score.
IV. Results
The following three correlations were calculated:
i. Between size of family and the total verbal score.
2. Between size of family and the total nonverbal score.
3. Between size of family and the combined score of all eight tests. Table VIII gives the size of the Pearson product-moment coefficients.

m. The Tests
The students were given tests of general intelligence and tests which in addition to " g " measured group factors such as verbal, arithmetical and spatial factors. Tests had to be found which differentiated sufficiently between persons of high intelligence. Thurstone's tests of primary ability and Thorn-

It will be seen that the first two correla-
tions of - -o98 and -*o96 would arise by chance in one trial out of 20 (P. * 05) and the
third of - 133, based on the combined results of both verbal and non-verbal tests,
would occur by chance in only one trial out
of ioo (P. *oi). The correlations are there-
fore significant.*

dike's test battery C.A.V.D. were found suitable, as they had been devised especially for students. Since the students in our inquiry were preparing for honours degrees in economics and sociology or for diplomas in social sciences and not for science degrees, relatively more tests measuring verbal rather than non-verbal factors were included. Each student was given eight tests. Three of the four verbal tests were adaptations of Thurstone's vocabulary, verbal classification and verbal analogies tests, the fourth an adaptation of the " C " or sentence completion test of Thorndike's C.A.V.D. battery. Three of the four non-verbal tests were adapted from Thurstone's battery; the arithmetical test, the formboard test, and the code test measuring intelligence in a non-verbal medium. As a fourth non-verbal test, N.I.I.P. Test 70/I was added. Out of the 59 tests comprising
* The increased homogeneity of the student population as compared to the general population must be borne in mind in interpreting the correlations calculated in the present investigation.

TABLE VIII
PRODUCT MOMENT COEFFICIENTS BETWEEN SIZE OF FAMILY AND
(a) composite score on four verbal intelligence tests. - o98± 047 S.E.
(b) composite score on four non,-verbal intelligence tests. -o96± '047 S.E.
(c) composite score on four verbal and four non-
verbal intelligence tests. -*'33i-046 S.E.
N = 450.
In view of the homogeneity of the group and the considerations in Section I, the negative correlation found between intelligence and fertility is particularly interesting. Compared with the figures of - '20 and - '25 quoted by Burt and Thomson, the sizes of the correlations reported here are significantly smaller. This is explained in terms of the greater homogeneity of the group with regard to the two correlated variables.
* Correlations were calculated separately for students coming from professional, managerial, clerical, and working-class families. No significant difference in the size of the negative correlations were found. This suggests that, in the present sample, the negative
tendency operates equally in the different socio-
economic classes.

INTELLIGENCE AND SIZE OF FAMILY

83

It seems interesting to compare these highly selected sample to contain a higher

findings with those of Fraser Roberts (4) who percentage of persons of somewhat lower

analysed his data in relation to educational intelligence than is found in groups recruited

background. He split his sample of 3,305 into from smaller families. Although the ten-

four groups in accordance with the type of dency is but slight, Thomson (8) and Burt (2)

school the child attended. He found dif- amongst others have pointed out that its

ferences in the average number of siblings effect would be cumulative and would lead

for the various types of schools and also to a considerable lowering of the mean in-

differences in the magnitude of the correla- telligence level of the population within a

tions between size of family and intelligence. few generations. The reasons for this ten-

The correlations remained, however, con- dency can, at present, be only conjectured.

sistently negative.

One very tentative explanation-that the

Table IX gives the correlations obtained less intelligent had not the intellectual

for special place secondary school children ability or foresight to plan their families-

and for private school children, the two can be dismissed as being only applicable to

groups whose average sib number corre- groups much lower in intelligence than those

sponds most nearly with that of our sample. studied here.

TABLE IX
CORRELATIONS OBTAINED BY FRASER ROBERTS IN IO-13-YEAR-OLD CHILDREN BETWEEN SIZE OF FAMILY AND INTELLIGENCE IN RELATION TO TYPE OF SCHOOL
ATTENDED

Other suggestions regarding the cause of the negative trend must be highly speculative, especially since we lack such essential information as the intelligence level of the
mothers or the age of the parents at marriage.

Type of School

Mean Number Correlation Number of Tested Obtained

The following are some factors which might play a part, and it is hoped that future re-

Sibs searches will investigate them:

Special Place Secondary School I*8I6±I*824
Private
School I*432±I*379

369
292

- *o69
- -og6

i. Differences in ease of conception operating in favour of the less intelligent-an unlikely
hypothesis; 2. Delayed marriage of the more intelligent; 3. A longer period between marriage and first

conception among the more intelligent;

It will be seen that the correlations
obtained by Fraser Roberts in a child population were similar, although somewhat smaller than the ones obtained in our adult
sample. Allowing for a reduction in size of correlation due to the relative homogeneity of the two correlated variables, size of family and intelligence, it seems justified to argue

4. Differences in desire for larger families. These
might be due to the wider outside interests of more intelligent wives. Alternatively, the more intelligent parents may limit their families more rigidly in order to ensure a higher standard of educational and other
opportunities for their children. It is worth noting that the majority of students in our sample or their older siblings were born shortly after the 1914-I8 war, and it may be

that relative homogeneity of educational
background and of socio-economic status does not materially affect the negative relationship observed by other investigators
between intelligence and size of family. This investigation therefore lends no sup-
port to the thesis that the negative correlations obtained in previous inquiries can be
explained in terms of differences in opportunity for acquiring the ability necessary to do intelligence tests. It suggests rather that

that the more intelligent parents, feeling less secure and optimistic about the future, decided to limit the size of their families.
These are all tentative hypotheses and very probably different families will have been affected by different factors to varying extents. Further research, with more social and psychological data about the parents, will be needed to account for the negative relationship between fertility and intelligence found in the present inquiry.

there is a slight tendency for a group com- A Note on Family Size

prised of members of large families even in a By asking the students to record the size

84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of their mothers' and fathers' sibships, comparison between these and the size of the students' sibships could be drawn. The average number of siblings of the students
was Ii76±+I559, that of the father 3-6i6+2-362, and that of the mother
3 * 558 + 2 - 352. These figures indicate clearly the decline within two generations of the average size of the family. The difference in size between the student's sibships and that of his parents is very significant (P < -ooi). There is no significant difference in the size of the fathers' sibships as compared to that of the mothers'. Correlations between the number of the student's sibs and those of his parents were insignificant (+ oi8 + -047 for the maternal and + * I5 ± * 047 for the paternal side). These low correlations suggest that factors other than imitation of or reaction to the patterns of childhood were operative.
Summary
The intelligences of 450 British-born men and women students of a college of the University of London (average age nearly 24) were tested by means of eight verbal and non-verbal tests (four each) standardized on
people of high intelligence. By means of a questionnaire filled in by
each student, information was obtained about the number of full sibs, father's occupation, and the schools where he/she had been educated.
No association was found between the number of a student's sibs and his/her social class (as judged by the father's occupation).
Nevertheless, it was found that in the

group as a whole there was a tendency for the more intelligent student to have fewer siblings. A negative correlation of - * I33 ± 0o46 is significant to the extent that the finding was likely to have occurred by chance once only in a hundred trials.
It has been argued by some writers that an unfavourable early environment of poverty and overcrowding handicaps a child in doing intelligence tests. But in this selected group the differences in home and school background were less than would be found between unselected samples from the same social classes. It is not likely that the differences in our sample's backgrounds were large enough to handicap the students in doing the tests. Yet the students of all classes who did best in the tests had the lowest number of sibs. The cause of the negative correlation is unknown.
REFERENCES
I. Blackburn, J. (I947). " Family Size, Intelligence Score and Social Class," Population Studies, 1, I65-76.
2. Burt, C. (1946). Intelligence azd Fertility. Occasional Papers on Eugenics. The Eugenics Society and Hamish Hamilton, London, pp. 43.
3. Burt, C. (1947). " Family Size, Intelligence and Social Class," Population Studies, 1, 177-86.
4. Fraser Roberts, J. A., and others (1938). " Studies on a Child Population. III. Intelligence and Family Size." Ann. Eugen., 8, 178-2I5.
5. Guilford, J. P. (I939). Psychometric Methods,
McGraw-Hill, pp. 566.
6. Hajual, J. (I947). " The Estimation of Total
Family Size of Occupation Groups from the Distribution of Birth by Order and Duration of Marriage." Population Studies (in press).
7. Sutherland, H. E. G. (1929). " The Relationship between I.Q. and Size of Family." J. Educ. Psychol., 20, 8-90o.
8. Thomson, G. (1947). " The Trend of National Intelligence, " EUGENICS REVIEW, 88, 9-I8.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
Edited by Warder C. Allee, the University of Chicago. In the October 1947 number: THE EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON THE INTERSEX CHARACTER OF DAPHNIA LONGISPINA. By KATHERINE K.
SANFORD. THE EFFECT OF CERTAIN DEPRESSING AGENTS ON INTRACELLULAR OXIDATION OF INDICATORS IN HYDRA.
By C. M. CHILD. RESPONSES OF FISH MELANOPHORES TO CHEMICAL WARFARE AGENTS. By C. LADD PROSSER, BRUNO VON LIMBAcH
and GEORGE W. BENNETT, with Technical Assistance of MARIAN F. JAMES. EFFECTS OF TESTOSTERONE PROPIONATE ON SEX DEVELOPMENT IN FEMALE AMBYSTOMA LARVAE. By
BEATRICE MINTZ. THE EFFECT OF MALE HORMONE ON AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR IN MICE. By ELIZABETH A. BEEMAN.
PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July. and October
Subscription SIo a year Canadian postage 20C. Single copies $3 Foreign postage 48c.
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO
Egenics ReView, VoL XL, No. 2

