SIR F. MACFARLANE BURNET
O.M., F.R.S., F.R.C.P., M.D., Ph.D., D.Sc.
000 A.D.- A Biologist's Thoughts
on the Next Forty Years*

TBEN YEARS AGO I spoke at a public meeting in Hobart held as one of the functions of A.N.Z.A.A.S., with Sir John
Morris in the chair. My choice of topic to-day is influenced in part
by the memory of the discussion at that meeting and in part by my feeling that in the next forty years major changes in the human situation must occur. You will remember from your history books how the year 1000 was looked forward to by Christendom as the end of the world. Perhaps A.D. 2000 is developing something of the same apocalyptic flavour. This year, 1959, I was asked to address freshmen at the University of Melbourne during Orientation Week and realized with something of a shock that in the year 2000 their average age would be just what mine is now; and that their generation was the one which would carry the responsibility for major decisions at the turn of the new millennium. To-day's freshmen at the university are to be educated so that they are best fitted to guide our destinies in A.D. 2000. It underlines one of the greatest problems of education to-day to consider how little we can guess even as to what will be the sort of responsibilities that our current undergraduates will have to shoulder in their years of full maturity.
I am going to be rash enough to make some suggestions about the problems that will confront them in 2000 and to look at some of the implications for action in the meantime that those suggestions will call for. Before I start, however, I think I should insert a word or two
* A shortened form of the Sir John Morris Memorial Lecture, 1959. Delivered in Hobart under the auspices of
The Adult Education Board of Tasmania. The Lecture was originally published by the Melboume University Press (London agents, Cambridge University Press). Price 2s. 6d.

of personal explanation. When I am called upon to talk on a subject other than those on which I am professionally competent, I invariably find myself trying to twist my topic into the same sort of form that I would use in dealing with some theme in experimental biology or medicine. This has its difficulties. It may be mildly amusing
to be told that orders of precedence are visible
amongst any group of barnyard fowls, that there are breeds of mice as aggressive as a Communist union, and others as meek as middle-class taxpayers, or that human population problems are not basically very different from those of rabbits. But if we press the biological resemblances too earnestly, most people will consider the picture that emerges as unnatural, academic
and rather naive.
Nevertheless I feel sure that if I am to say anything worth saying I must be true to my basic credo as a biologist that man is a mammal evolved from lower mammals and subject to the same imperatives as any other living form. I am driven, as it were, to look at politics as a form of applied biology and to do so from the same external attitude as one uses in considering viruses or bacteria. I know perfectly well that, like everyone else, I cannot get outside of my human limitations and that there are almost as many pitfalls in looking at human problems simply from the biological angle as to look at them without any consideration of that angle.
There are, perhaps, fortunately, strict limitations on what we can see of the future. To-day one must preface any forecast of even short term possibilities with the assumption that civilization will not be destroyed by the outbreak of a major war fought with nuclear weapons. If we eliminate this possibility of utter catastrophe we can, I think, make some useful

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1961, 53, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

calculations about conditions in the year 2000. animals are liable to be strained and meaningless.

My thoughts will be based only on the logical But there is something about the evolution of

development of two facets of the present human living beings that must never be forgotten

situation, population growth and the demand for because we ourselves have evolved as part of that

a higher standard of living. In doing this I am process. Evolution has depended on the interplay

following a precedent of Sir Charles Darwin of two characteristics of living matter, the first

when he wrote about the next million years. It that life has found a general methodforreproduc-

is obviously and completely futile to attempt to ing all its essential attributes, which is basically

forecast the future of any individual, of any city the same whether a virus generates a new brood

or of any specific human activity, but short of the of virus in the cell it invades, or a cell duplicates

ultimate catastrophe, it is legitimate to follow its chromosomes and divides into two cells or a

the implications of universal human qualities. baby is born. And the second that whenever

this process of reproduction or replication takes

Population Growth

place, there is always the possibility of error,

I am going to concentrate on the matter of human population because in any biological consideration of our human problem it is the central theme. It always has been-back to the first man and before that to the very beginnings of life. It is a basic characteristic of life that every living form will multiply to the limit allowed by
its environment. Sometimes the conditions are so
simple that food is the only limit-and we have swarms of locusts or plagues of mice. But in general we find that any environment we like to choose that is not subject to gross change from outside, there will be a characteristic distribution of the various animals, plants and
micro-organisms that inhabit it. In one way or another almost every type of animal will have some influence on every other type. If carnivorous animals increase too rapidly they will destroy
too many of the plant eaters that they prey on. In all sorts of more subtle ways these interactions
between species result in the development of an uneasy equilibrium at which each species persists at a characteristic level of numbers. Birth rates and death rates will, in general, adjust themselves

the duplicate may not be an exact copy of the original, and any error will be perpetuated in turn when further duplication takes place. The process of evolution is based on those inheritable changes that we call mutations and in the last analysis mutation means only that at some point the process of duplication has made an error. Mutation, like all mistakes, is a random accidental process and hardly ever will it benefit a plant or animal to undergo mutation. All but a
few rare mutations are harmful but from the point of view of evolution as long as mutation is a reasonably rare occurrence, harmful mutations do not matter. Those individuals that carry them will perish while the very rare beneficial mutation will find an opportunity to flourish and, subject to minor qualifications that I need not go into, will eventually become the standard form of the species. The fact that all higher organisms derive their inheritance from two parents and that a mutation may as a result not be expressed for many generations, complicates the logic but does not modify the
essential conclusion.

to maintain the standard population-this, of I know of nothing to invalidate Darwin's

course, is only one way of saying that in all central doctrine that progress and even the simple

natural situations there is a tendency for a low maintenance of biological efficiency is only

density of population to favour survival and possible to a species when a large proportion

reproduction and for a rise above the optimal of the individuals born are eliminated by the

to increase death rates from disease and the selective winnowing of the environment before

attack of beasts of prey. There is an inbuilt self- they find opportunity to reproduce. As every

righting tendency therefore to maintain standard animal breeder knows, the only way to maintain

population levels in any stable environment. a stock in its desired configuration is to cull

Human life has developed so many complica- ruthlessly and to select for breeding at each

tions and has dodged so many of the normal generation those individuals conforming most

biological limitations that analogies with lower closely to his ideal.

26

2000 A.D.-A BIOLOGIST'S THOUGHTS ON THE NEXT FORTY YEARS

The human species was subject to almost the same processes of selective survival till about a hundred years ago but even from the earliest days of prehistory man has always used his intelligence and accumulated knowledge and
tradition to favour his survival as an individual. To-day's human population of the world is the
product of evolution and selective survival but
the process has been a far more complex one
than anything amongst the lower animals, and sometimes there has been survival value in qualities which would have been positively harmful in the simpler stages of our evolution.
But I want to concentrate rather closely on
population. We don't know much in detail about the growth of world population before a few hundred years ago but we can be reasonably confident that overall there was a slow steady growth throughout history with forward moves and checks depending mainly on the variable impact of famine and disease. It seems likely that population doubled about every three centuries. This means that on the average birth and death rates balanced to give a stable population-a population with quite a different age structure from a modem one. Nowadays in Australia we have a birth rate of around 20 per 1,000 per annum and a death rate just below 10.
In the Middle Ages the birth rate and death rate probably both oscillated irregularly around 40 per 1,000. This translated into human terms means that the average family produced about five children born alive with probably several other pregnancies terminated by miscarriage or stillbirth, and that more than half the children died, mostly from infectious disease, before they were adult. Until quite recently this held also for most of the backward areas of the world. Let us remember, too, that this is the "natural" state of affairs for every species of animal in the wild.
Premature death in childhood has always been regarded by human beings as an intolerable burden-and everywhere in the world the achievement of medical science in preventing death in childhood is regarded as the most worthy of all human achievements. Those of us who have had something to do with the prevention of infectious disease take a special pride in that success. Only a hundred years ago

the infantile mortality in London was 300 per 1,000. The best figures now are 20 per 1,000
live births. Those 280 lives saved can be
accounted for in all sorts of ways-education of women in mothercraft, public sanitation, pasteurization of milk, vaccination, modem surgery, antibiotic drugs, decent housing. Everything we cherish in a rising standard of living helps to reduce child mortality-but we must also remember that modern medical science can do a tremendous amount to save life in
infancy and childhood without significantly
raising general living standards.

POPULA UN
600

WEN a 0
s5o0

*, X 40

Woo 20 co

50 A 0
so
FIGURE 1 THE INFLUENCE OF ERADICATION OF MALAIA FROM MAURITIUS IN THE PERIOD 1946-8 ON THE RATES
FOR BIRTHS, DEATHS AND INFANT MORTALITY, AND ON THE GROWTH OF POPULATION.
Population figures in thousands. Birth and death rates per 1,000 per annum. Infant mortality: Deaths per 1,000 live-born infants in
first year of life.
Figure 1 shows a graph of what happened in Mauritius when malaria was eliminated around 194648. Before World War II there had been a slow rise of population with high birth and death rates. With the disappearance of malaria -and with DDT and modem techniques, it is quite easy to remove malaria from a rather small subtropical island-there was a spectacular divergence of birth and death rates and the population started to climb and has gone on climbing. Mauritius is now a relatively healthy country but malnutrition and iron deficiency anaemia in children is apparently becoming increasingly important.
On a bigger scale, the world is rather like Mauritius. It will not be as easy to eliminate malaria from continental areas like India or

27

ER-E

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tropical Africa as it was from Mauritius but bore virtually the maximum number of children

the World Health Organization is already that was physiologically possible. This could

proclaiming as a practicable objective its mean about twelve to fifteen completed

eradication from the world. I have no doubt that pregnancies during the reproductive period. In

it will be done before 2000. There are other fact it would usually be fewer as a result of

causes of unnecessary death from infectious malnutrition, fever, and gynaecological injury

disease in underdeveloped regions but for these, or infection. With a very heavy infantile mortal-

too, methods of prevention are known. In brief, ity nothing less than the physiological maximum

every country can look forward to the day when allowed continuing survival of a human group.

life expectation at birth is sixty to seventy years. Even when with the coming of civilization some

As a biologist, I must say here that the posi- of the dangers, famine and wild beasts, for

tion we find ourselves in-that we can expect that instance, were reduced or eliminated, the in-

every child born, with only rare and unlucky creased toll of infectious disease associated with

exceptions, will survive to maturity and repro- crowding, demanded that the birth rate remained

duce-is something which has never happened high. So we have developed in the course of

before in the whole history of life. And it needs human evolution, both physical and cultural,

very little thought to realize that it is something the necessary patterns of sexual behaviour, high

which cannot go on indefinitely. Man is a mam- fertility and strong instinctive love of children

mal and his body, his reproductive pattern and to ensure a high natural birth rate.

his instincts were evolved along with the rest of The complex adjustments that go with a high

life. This evolution of our bodily form and of our and rising standard of living, have removed the

patterns of behaviour was dependent on the fact biological need for the large families of earlier

that over tens of thousands of generations there centuries. Under to-day's conditions of hygiene,

was a high enough mortality in the face of a an unsophisticated people will have a birth rate

strenuous environment to allow selection of the around fifty and a death rate that may be as low

fittest to occur and to maintain a more or less as 7 to 8 per 1,000. Such a country will show a

stable population in full genetic integrity. doubling of population every twenty years.

If we eliminate selective survival we cannot hope Birth rates, in fact, are mostly far below fifty

to maintain our physical inheritance intact- for the reason that most people in most countries

genetic deterioration will be inevitable.

have found one way or another of reducing

Preventive medicine has been remarkably the number of unwanted births.

successful in almost eliminating death from Even so the rate of growth ofworld population

infectious disease and malnutrition from ad- is fast enough to be terrifying. In 1940 it was

vanced countries. Yet in a sense that very success 2,246 million, in 1950, 2,495, in 1960 it will be

has created two major biological difficulties, 2,950, and if the rate of the 50s is maintained,

overpopulation and genetic deterioration, that we shall have a world population of 6,700

are going to tax all our powers to deal with in million in A.D.2000 and 13,000 million in 2033-+

the future.

and that is within the lifetime of our small child-

ren to-day. I should add that, short of major

Overpopulation

war or some fantastically unlikely plague, no-

Let us look first at the problem of overpopulation. For most large mammals the general rule is one young per annum which is sufficient to replace the population that is constantly being
depleted by accident, disease and the attacks of predators. Primitive man undoubtedly had a

thing that can now be done seems likely to make the A.D. 2000 figure- much smaller than 6,700 million. But we can be sure that from then onward there will be a swing of all the major policy-making organizations into an attempt to check the process in one way or another.

hard life with many deaths in childhood and early adult life. To replenish and increase his

World Resources

numbers required apattern of instincts and repro- There is one obvious question. Why shouldn't

ductive behaviour which ensured that women the world go on with a human population

28

2000 A.D.-A BIOLOGIST'S THOUGHTS ON THE NEXT FORTY YEARS
doubling every thirty'odd years? Hasn't the attempt to control the position before it is:'too progress of science and technology done far late, by spreading a sane understanding of the more than keep in pace with population growth position and by-supporting a steady extens'ion since the beginning of this century? And what of research and action to find the most humanly about atomic energy? The simplest answer is to acceptable forms of birth control. look at the second factor that I have mentioned, There is so much research needed into matters the desire for a higher standard of living. It is a relevant to birth control,' that one can fairly fair statement that most people in the world who say that it is the most humanly important of all know of the existence of America hope to enjoy the problems that science and scientists can be a living standard equivalent to that of the United called upon to solve. States. To a rough approximation the United Merely to state it is to indicate how difficult States consumes approximately one-third of the it will be to obtain the concentration of effort world's production of fossil fuels and of its on to the problems of human reproduction and other irreplaceable mineral resources, including survival that is needed. uranium. America has* 180 million people, At this po'int I feel' I must make a short digresabout one-sixteenth of the present world sion to emphasize my conviction of the importpopulation and one-fortieth of what it will be in ance of bringing all'the help science can offer, 2000. In other words, to give the world as a whole to the'solution of such major human problems a 1959 American standard ofliving in 2000would and to voice. some doubts about the present require about thirteen times the present annual structure of scientific activity. Are we' really production of oil, coal, steel, copper and the rest. making the best use of our scientists? It is known that the 'easily accessible and high Perhaps it is both ungrateful and unwise for grade sources of- tin, lead and zinc are already me, as a research man, to voice such a question running-low and not even iron and copper ores and I doubt whether. it is possible to do more could stand such a drain for many years. I know than attempt a few general remarks and note a that many competent American scientists believe few paradoxes. At one level we tend to assume that by a com-bination of the use of atomic that research is an attempt to find ways of doing energy, the development of methods for exploit- something that the community desires, of curing ing low grade ores and making full use of scrap the common cold perhaps, or providing an metal, use of the "inexhaustible" metals alu- inexhaustible source of energy for industry. minium and magnesium to the fu}l, and increas- Most of the money provided for science by the ing use of synthetic processes, the maintenance community is- provided on this basis. Weapons of a world population of 10,000 million at a high research is still the greatest user of research level of comfort could be assured. Similarly, funds and medical research is largely financed if every food-raising region of the earth was by funds raised to conquer specific diseases, cultivated with the efficiency of a farm in Iowa cancer, heart disease, rheumatic disease, polioor our own Wimmera, food for that number myelitis, and ;so on. Those who administer could be managed. But no form of sophistry research funds are, however, well aware that can imagine that the irreplaceable resources of a the indirect approach is often more fruitful than small planet can continue to supply a population the direct. A great deal of space research, of increasing in geometrical progression, 6,500 physical research on high energy particles,.and of million in 2000, 52,000 million in 2100, 420,000 geophysical research, is supported by defence million in 2200. What I want to stress is that funds, just as much ofthe best biological research this is what must happen if the current human to-day can legitimately be supported by any sort situation persists. Clearly it cannot go on and we of medical research fund. have virtually only two ways to bring the situation into line with reality. Either we can wait for Facilities for Research
population reduction by the catastrophe of Something must be said about the factors famine, nuclear war, and the overthrow of which determine men's choice of a subject for civilization, or we can make a wholehearted research and the facilities that they'can com-
29

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mand for its pursuit. Where research is the part- gence and happiness not inferior to those we

time activity of a university teacher, there is enjoy here and now?

fortunately virtually no limitation to his choice A little thought will make it clear that many

oftopic. For full-time research workers, particu- of our present activities are incompatible with

larly for those whose work needs expensive such a criterion and that some of the most

equipment and a team of associates, there are important ways of achieving such an objective

much more severe limitations. Except under are almost completely neglected. I believe that

exceptionally favourable conditions, elaborate four things chiefly are needed.

research of this type will be possible only when Population control is the first necessity but an

it has a rather direct bearing on some practical absolutely necessary corollary is conservation

matter which governments and the community of the world's resources, both the irreplaceable

generally feel is important enough to justify minerals and fossil fuels and the recurring ones

the financial support that is involved. I do not dependent on the fertility of land and ocean.

think that there is any serious resentment by Once population control has been established for

scientists at this considerable limitation to their the world as it is now virtually established in

potential range of activity. Irrespective of the Sweden and England, we can begin to think

topic or its bearing on human affairs, scientific about the equally difficult and important,

work with adequate facilities and a real problem but rather less urgent task, of maintaining the

will always be fascinating. It is probably just genetic integrity of a population without the aid

as gratifying to create a hydrogen bomb as a of natural selection. I believe that it is immedi-

new antibiotic or a new theory of immunity. ately self-evident that all these are necessary if

If for any reason the general direction of applied the world is to be tolerable to human beings

research should be radically changed in the like ourselves in a hundred years' time. It is

future, I have no doubt that we would find large perhaps even more evident that until the possi-

numbers of people trained in the scientific bility of war is eliminated, nothing effective can

approach willing to move into the new fields. be done. The elimination of war may be impos-

And as I shall mention later, one of the most sible but if there is any way in which science

important needs of technical and scientific or the scientific method can assist social, political

education to-day is that we should strive to and ethical efforts in that direction, it must be

produce graduates with a training that will fit given the highest priority. I believe that to under-

them to handle the new problems and techniques stand and prevent war we need to study with all

which will emerge during their years of active the resources of science the models of conflict

professional work.

that nature presents us amongst mammals

and birds in the wild or under domestication.

Population and Conservation

The social scientists must, of course, make the

I have talked about the menace of overpopulation as the most obvious of the major problems of the future, the most urgently necessary one for us to tackle immediately. There are several others almost as important and I believe there is one way in which we can recognize them.
We have passed the day when poets or philosophers could "grasp this sorry scheme of things
entire .., and mould it nearer to their heart's

major contribution and one can hope that their steady but unspectacular process of understanding and resolving conflict in industry will eventually influence the technique of statesmanship and make possible the enforcement and maintenance of peace. If we could divert the urgency, the money and the human ability that we now use on defence research into these fields,
we might even have "One World" by the year
2000.

desire". Utopias are out of date. But can I suggest that we use as a touchstone of the good Need for Wider Research

and the necessary action this question: What is This brings me to my final point. I believe that

necessary to ensure that future human beings on throughout the world there is now a larger

this planet shall continue to have health, intelli- population of men and women of trained

30

2000 A.D.-A BIOLOGIST'S THOUGHTS ON THE NEXT FORTY YEARS

intelligence than ever before in history. Their and enthusiasm has been channelled, forinstance,

minds are being used for those activities which, into cancer research and in the long run this

on the whole, conform most closely to the felt work will influence not only the treatment of

short term need of their communities. If an cancer but also our understanding of some of the

increasing proportion of such first rate minds most subtle aspects of biology. Its indirect results

could move from defence research and from the for human well-being may well be much more

humanly insignificant fields which contain so important than any effects it will have on the

much ofacademic research, to work with a more mortality from cancer.

direct bearing on the realities that I have been In a broader field, are we making the best use

discussing, we might hope for much. There are just as many good brains waiting to be called

of our best brains in medicine by concentrating them within the three fields of practice, teaching

on to help in the world situation between now and 2000 as there were to do the planning, the operational research and the infinite number of scientific chores called for by our countries in World War II.
There is an old idea of H. G. Wells that seems to me to be worth restating. He called for a continuing assessment of the future in all those aspects that could or should influence, present policy at both national and world levels. Such assessments, particularly long term ones, can never be scientific in the full sense but they would be subject continuously to modification and refinement and could be expected to become increasingly more accurate and far reaching. Much of this is being done already by individuals or interested groups; mineral and oil reserves have been mapped out, the potential water

and laboratory research, with a relative neglect of some of the most important social aspects ofmedicine. We could well use many more of our best medical graduates in the three fields of:
1. Postgraduate training ofdoctors; 2. A continuing assessment of the actual
results of medical treatment; 3. Sane and authoritative health education
for the public.
Turning from specifically medical science to the sciences as a whole, I feel that we academics must attempt to convey something of our vision of science to a wider audience and equally to widen our own vision of science to cover all disciplined application of intelligence to the preservation of human health and integrity for all time to come.

supplies for an increasing population, even the number of thoracic surgeons who will be needed to deal with our mounting incidence of lung cancer. There are figures available for these and
many other aspects of the future. What is lacking is any way to make the information and its implications available to those who should be

I am sorry that I shall not live to see A.D. 2000. I do not think 2000 will be as happy as 1959 but what I do know is that then and for the rest of human history, there will be an overriding need to find and apply all the resources of human intelligence to the progressively increasing difficulties of the human situation.

aware of it. If we are going to provide a tolerable

future for our children and grandchildren, we The Importance of Education

must somehow learn to believe that it is realistic One of the late Sir John Morris's major

and necessary to look further ahead than the interests was university education and I am sure

year or two that is all that interests the politician or business man to-day.

that he would be at one with me in finishing on this note of the importance of education.

In the universities, I believe we shall have to Everything that we can do to extend secondary

think more and more seriously about the need and tertiary education in the next forty years

to shift the emphasis of research towards more will be needed. It will be very difficult to find

direct social usefulness. I see a lot of research sufficient good teachers to do that as well as it

in the medical sciences and I. worry sometimes should be done. But perhaps it does not matter

about the small proportion that is likely to have so much how they are taught as long as we can

any reasonably direct impact on human well- ensure that all who can benefit will have the

being. An immense amount of intelligence, skill opportunity for some general training of intel-

3I

THE. EUGENICS REVIEW

lectual skills. The, world of. science and technology moves so fast that life for those. of us in it
is a never-ending postgraduate course. What
we need our universities and institutes of technology to do is to provide.the best possible background for that continuous. postgraduate training. Ifin the process we can keep people thinking
and alert about the biological and social implications of the changing human situation,

we are going to be just so much more successful in providing that background.
If we can do this, and keep on 'doing it till A.D. 2000 and beyond, we shall have some hope
of achieving what I suggested earlier was the best objective towards which we can aim-that future generations of human beings..shall continue to have health, intelligence and happiness not inferior to. those we now enjoy..

32

