THE TREATMENT OF ANCESTRY IN EARLIER BIOGRAPHIES

By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.HIST.S.

N the last paragraph of my article on

The Maternal Grandfather

" The Treatment of Ancestry in Modem
Biographies" (EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1934, page 29), I referred to a proposed further study which would cover biographies published in the period preceding the appearance of Galton's Hereditary Genius. I have

Full account Mentioned Ignored

Earlier Biographies
2 9 2I

Later Biographies
7 II
I4

now consulted thirty-two biographies which came out between I830 and I870-the same number as those consulted for recent times.
The subjects are the following: Thomas Arnold, James Bruce, M. I. Brunel, Byron,

The Maternal Grandmother

Full account Mentioned Ignored

3 29

3 5 24

George Canning, Castlereagh, Cobden, S. J.

Coleridge, John Constable, Dundonald, 8th

The Father

Earl of Elgin, Elizabeth Fry, ist Earl Grey, Good account

7

I5

Havelock, Edmund Kean, Keats, Charles Fair account

I4

I2

Lamb, Thomas Lawrence, Macaulay, James Mentioned

II

4

Mill, Nelson, O'Connell, Palmerston, Peel, Ignored

I

Walter Scott, Shelley, George Stephenson,

Thackeray, J. M. W. Turner, Wellesley, Wellington, William Wordsworth. A comparison between these and the later biographies certainly shows some progress in the treatment of ancestry. This can best be
indicated in tabular form.

Good account Fair account
Mentioned Ignored

The Mother
7 8
I3
4

9
IO
I2 I

REMOTER ANCESTRY IN MALE LINE

It will be seen that in respect of every relationship the earlier biographies, taken as

Earlier

Later a whole, are weaker, the only exception being

Biographies Biographies the consideration of remoter ancestry other

Full account

2

II than in the direct male line, some notice of

Mentioned

IO

12 which occurs in eight out of the thirty-two

Ignored

20

9 earlier biographies, exactly the same number

as in the later thirty-two.

The Paternal Grandfather

It does not seem necessary in this supple-

Full account
Mentioned Ignored

3
II
i8

9
13
IO

mentary note to attempt any detailed examination of the earlier biographies. It may, however, be stated that the figures given above do not sufficiently convey the

The Paternal Grandmother

general change of attitude, for these earlier biographies, almost without exception, indi-

Full account

-

5 cate an entire absence of interest in heredity

Mentioned

5

7 as such, though by no means an entire

Ignored 27 2I absence of interest in genealogy. The most

205
C

206 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

notable exception is significant, occurring as Life of Thomas Lawrence proves to his own

it does in Sir George Trevelyan's Life of satisfaction that genius and ancestry are not

Macaulay, which came out a short time after connected (incidentally, he does mention

the publication of Hereditary Genius, but is some quite interesting relatives of the

included in the earlier list for purposes of painter); while the author of the Life of

comparison. It appeared, of course, long J. M. W. Turner exclaims: " Pedigree and

before the publication of any in the later genealogy, both are vanity, and I put them

list. Sir George remarks: " The most behind me as dead and gone." T. J. Hogg, in

devout believers in the doctrine of the trans- his Life of Shelley, is less uncompromising,

mission of family qualities will be content but remarks: " It would be foreign to the

with tracing back descent through four true purpose of the present narrative to com-

generations, and all favourable influences, pose a genealogical history of an ancient and

both intellectual and moral, are assured by honourable house."

a genealogy which derives from a Scottish In the great majority of these biographies,

Manse."

however, heredity as such is simply ignored.

Almost the only other direct and favour- As will be seen from the tabular statement,

able reference to heredity occurs in Thomas character sketches of the parents at least are

Moore's Li/e of Byron, wherein the author by no means altogether lacking, but they are

states: " In reviewing thus cursorily the treated, as it were, in isolation and with little

ancestors, both near and remote, of Lord or no appreciation of the effect on the sub-

Byron, it cannot fail to be remarked how ject of the biography.

strikingly he combined in his own nature It appears, therefore, that there has been a

some of the best and perhaps some of the distinct advance in the proper treatment of

worst qualities that lie scattered through the ancestry since the publication of Hereditary

various characters of his predecessors." It Genius, and it remains indubitable that

may also be remarked that only the direct Galton has exercised a certain influence;

male line was thus cursorily reviewed.

even though, as remarked in the previous

On the other hand, there are one or two article, such influence has seldom or never

deprecatory remarks. The author of the been directly acknowledged.

New (3rd) edition completely revised and enlarged
PARENTHOOD:

DESIGN OR ACCIDENT?
A MANUAL OF BIRTH CONTROL
By MICHAEL FIELDING

BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL: Not only the most popular but the best presentation and exposition

of the subject,

LANCET: One of the most impartial and balanced discussions of the practical and technical aspects of

birth control.

MEDICAL TIMES: The very best treatise on the subject. It has our unqualified approval.

INTERNATIONAL MEDICAL GROUP: The best practical handbook that has yet appeared.

Pp. 208 with 8 illustrations.

2s. paper 3s. 6d. cloth

WILLIAMS & NORGATE LTD., London, W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 8.

