170 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Drysdale, C. V., D.Sc. The Small Family System: Is it Injurious or
Immoral? London. A. C. Fifield; I9!3; price is. net; pp. I19.

WITH such an untiring advocate of neo-MIalthusianism as Dr. Drysdale

for author no one can entertain a moment's doubt as to the answer which

it is the purpose of this book to give to the question contained in its title.

In fact, Dr. Drysdale's enthusiasm for the artificial limitation of the

family leads him to attempt much more than the supplying of a negative

answer to what is a very pertinent, a very important, and a highly prac-

tical question-one, moreover, which eugenics cannot and should not

avoid. And this enthusiasm is the cause of the weakness of the book. It

is just another case of preoccupation with a single idea leading its

possessor to argue in effect that its practice will provide the surest

short-cut to the millenium; whereas one of the most hopeful signs of to-

day is our realization of the truth, that there are no short-cuts to the perfection of individual and social life, but that progress lies along a

hundred different, though converging, paths. Accordingly, while we are

quite ready to agree with Dr. Drysdale that the artificial limitation of

the family may not be injurious and is not immoral, we do not look for

the same wide and wonderful benefits from its practice. Indeed, it is

impossible to escape the conviction that Dr. Drysdale's case is not only

weakened, but sometimes rendered positively ridiculous by the lengths to which his over-zealous advocacy carries him. For instance, he would

have us believe that that complex of problems generally lumped together

for convenience under the title of the housing problem is to be solved

by neo-Malthusianism, because " we feel that even as things are, a man

and his wife and one or two children can have two rooms and live in

some appiroach to decency. With a greater number of children this

position is hopeless . . . . However much we may urge the necessity

for better and cheaper accommodation, we cannot get over the fact that

while this is being settled-and it will only be settled slowly-the most

acute phases of the housing problem would be solved in a year or two

by the adoption of family limitation by the poor." Can we seriously

regard the adjusting of the size of the working-man's family to the numbeir

of rooms available as a solution of the housing problem ? Such a sug-

gestion if carried into effect would rather appear to us to be a highly

unsatisfactory way of escaping the problem altogether.

The sociologists, whose duty it is to lead us in a scientific study of

social phenomena, have taught us, having regard to the complexity of

all social problems, to look with suspicion upon the too extreme claims

of those who maintain that amazing and unprecedented benefits must of

necessity flow from the particular single line of action which they elect

to advocate. What, then, are we to think of the assertions contained in

Dr. Dunlop's preface, that, following upon the general adoption of neo-

Malthusian practices, " Poverty would, in twvo or three years time, be

banished from this country, and, in a generation or so, from the whole

world; there would be a rapid improvement in the quality of the race; and the day of the abolition oif war would be actuallv in sight" ?

Dr. Drysdale's consideration of the moral aspects of the question is, we feel, particulairly unsatisfactory. Not at all on account of the con-

clusion at which he arrives; but because some of the most vital con-

siderations leading to a similar conclusion find no place in his argument.

We await a more convincing answer.

R. DIXON KINGHAM.

Webb, HELEN. Life and Its Begininings. London. Cassell and Co.; 1913; price 2S. 6d.; pp. 137.
DR. HELEN WEBB treats the subject entirely from a biological standpoint, but the book, though written for girls under 12, should be read by them with the assistance of an older person with a sound elementary knowv-

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

171

ledge of biology and physiology, who would be able to supply them with

the fuller particulars which would certainly be required by a child who

had read the book with intelligence. It is an excellent handbook for

parents.

G. M. CHAMBERS.

Chesser, E. SLOAN. From Girlhood to Womanhood. London. Cassell and Co.; 1913; price 2S. 6d.; pp. 142.
THIS book can be given to any girl abo-ve I2; it explains simply the stage of development from girlhood to womanhood and gives her sensible and practical advice as to the best means of becoming a happy, healthy, and attractive woman. Dr. Sloan Chesser puts forward a high ideal of life.
G. M. CTHAMBRS.Q

Chesser, E. SLOAN. Woman, Marriage and AMothierhood. London. Cassell; 1913; price 6s. net; pp. 287.
WE have here another of the popular books of the day dealing with social questions affecting marriage and motherhood, written chiefly from the point of view of women. There is much good work in it. The earlier chapters are historical and treat briefly of the evolution of motherhood, of marriage laws and customs, and of the legal position of the wife and mother at various times and places. The results of sweated labour, the social effects of factory work on the homes and of our prison system are clearly stated. There is an account of the attempts, both on the Continent and in England, to provide pure milk for infants, to feed nursing mothers, and to establish schools for training in the art of home making and baby rearing.
The most obvious omission is the absence of any reference to religious
ideals and sanctions as influencing matters connected wvith sex and social
reform. There is also no attempt to deal with the extremely important variations in outlook upon all these questions which result from the physiological and psychological differences of sex. It is the necessity for the constant readjustment of these two points of view-a readjustment required by the ever varying pressure on one or the other of a changing civilisation-that constitutes the extreme difficulty of handling these problems.

It is to be feared that more better organisation of society, with increased inspection and training and more humane treatment on all sides, although it might achieve considerable temporary improvement and is
therefore worth working for, would not really help mnuch to a more
permanent solution of the eternal problem which confronts humanity. r. n xv

Sandeman, GEORGE. Social Renewal. London. price 2S. 6d.; pp. I50.

WV. Heinemann; 1913;

pwdtifMibwMro"."ttorooeaerrrnTssTl.irnf.n.eehrneuHolterk.cefilnrsSdeeE"Stiacmraus"iaa(pabieslw;pnbplno.ranopeg.our"cdstrdnosa"oanwiekaesltndontem3laiemodanu3reAa(nnfa)rsnscpfg.dnae.tn,tcatc,iioh"eentvcfeptprsde1orrhahoh9tTueeeoifn)ohenhpasln:tedwotoiceaollr,nsishoninymo.nfiebttaecsotsasshs!wigiteig;draitnrhrngoehlhhdtTeivigrptiiierhfahenaishsvrtpnisgsveieor,sataoadyfuhossttutnowtiobhaehmrdw"ygncla,loe.eaibaihtiteusahnn-osdyefilgm.ttwtidlaacgheaslynran.tnbcttsemtdnooedetefodo.vhreioeoresger-evscftrbrexioareeomymarelrrsno.Sieaeclyuteoworptrespbe.wcelrdtvknpiuryeooiotoe"paspfoiwtrtRloeo;trHenhtylcfteuhen.e,eyiesuleasted.yaoe.letrtcixeraysc.es.ieorabasouergn.lyiorinpatlogisetncteiypnrisethfirbsosdtseoer"eausoo'atir.ketfmcsottyopyethdh¢offi".o;daueeos"r,tiowb.nsohiiiienrhetsttettelfaasyahyshoraode.t"fseergnsir"eroirhoedoreeoofiwuaiaeup!nnnr.tplmisa;oas,reyadTtftogooteanhecepgthanTeiiaaBltahciehrtnnuehenentt5ieey,ddte,ytg.syo

