C. P. BLACKER
Contraception and the Catholic Theologians*

A REVIEW

TO MANY NON-CATHOLICS Rome's prohibition
of contraception seems obscure and arbitrary. How far, they increasingly ask, is the prohibition
modifiable? Professor Noonan gives weighty
reasons for supposing that it is modifiable,
though he most scrupulously refrains from predicting how or when it will be modified.
This conclusion emerges from a comprehensive, exceptionally well-written and abundantly
documented review of what happened over the 1,915 years intervening between A.D. 50 and
1965. Professor Noonan's authority is enhanced by
his position within the curtilage of the Church. We are told on the dust-jacket of his book that he is Professor of Law at Notre Dame Law
School (St. Louis, U.S.A.) Director of the Natural Law Institute, and editor of the Natural Law Forum. (We are not told what "natural law" means in these titles. The slant might be towards theology or towards science; or the Institute and the Forum may aspire to linking the two.) An earlier book by Professor Noonan is The Scholastic Analysis of Usury, 1957.
In the book here reviewed the approach is historical. Are historians better prophets than other people? Or better guides through the labyrinths of the future? The answer partly depends on the acumen of the historian, on his wisdom in separating durable from ephemeral trends, and on his caution in making due allowance for the irruption of totally unpredictable occurrences. The answer also depends on the historian's sphere.
Professor Noonan's sphere is the thought of theologians and canonists. The author claims (and in this reviewer's opinion convincingly shows) that the successive formulations throughout the centuries of the unchanging prohibition

of contraception were the products of understandable human reactions and choices, shaped by historical events:
The key terms in my history are tension, reaction, option and development.... These ... imply that a human process is going on, that what is happening is not the unilateral action of God making His Will increasingly evident (p. 5).
But a providential pattern is not excluded:
. . .nothing in my description precludes such a view; but such a task of theological interpretation is not my purpose (p. 5).
The standpoint is that, at each historical period, "human choices had to be made"; and the purpose is to record adjustments of doctrine to external changes. Or, if the reader happens to be in sympathy with Professor Arnold Toynbee, he can think of the history of contraception in terms of challenges and responses.
***
The volume is divided into four Parts which vary in length and in the periods of time covered. The first three parts covering 1,700 years (A.D. 50-1750) are largely concerned with theological issues. These are difficult to summarize and to present to readers unversed (as I am) in theology, to whom they may seem far removed from the recognizable issues of to-day.
There was a strong tradition in the early Church favouring continence and commending virginity. Sexuality was connected with the original sin of Adam from which Jesus was exempt through his immaculate conception and
* Noonan, John T. Jr. Contraception: A history of its treatment by the Catholic theologians and canonists. Cambridge, Mass., 1965. Harvard University Press. (London, Oxford University Press.) Pp. x+561. Price 64s.

85

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, June 1966, 58, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

virgin birth; and "concupiscence" was sinful. challenges. These came later. The first was

This position was carried to extreme lengths by Gnosticism (a syncretistic movement drawing on

certain non-Christian or else heretical sects-the Iranian myths and Jewish mysticism) from which

Gnostics and Manichees and later the Cathars- sprouted many sects. These Gnostic sects shared

whose adherents turned away from the world to with early Christianity a belief in salvation and

the point of condemning procreation. These redemption; but they further held that marriage

anti-procreative doctrines were partly derived and propagation of children were both evil or at

from a belief in the imminence of the resurrection best worthless. The second challenge came from

and the end of the world.

Manicheanism, a later Iranian cult whose

The Church was obliged to find a middle way founder, Mani, was born at Ecbatana in 216 and

between, on the one hand, teachings which could died by martyrdom, aged sixty-one, in 277.

logically result in the decimation of humanity and, on the other, practices which, by condoning "concupiscence" and the pursuit of "pleasure",

Many Manichean statements on sexual behavior which have survived, like many Gnostic statements, are apparently close to Christian teaching on

threatened the sanctity of marriage. Hence rules virginity and continence.

were devised-they were debated with a

vehemence sometimes amounting to acrimony- In his Fundamental Epistle, which is both a

which encouraged procreation but condemned theological explanation of the world and a plan

sexual hedonism both outside and inside of conduct for salvation, Mani declared: "We

marriage.

see the nature of evil become the framer of

In what follows I will briefly survey these four bodies, deriving from bodies the generative

Parts. Because it is dangerous to paraphrase forces to fashion them." Hence, in Professor

theological arguments, which are sometimes Noonan's words, "procreation is the evil act of

obscurely expressed in veiled language, I will evil".

freely quote from Professor Noonan's clearly In terms of to-day's psychology it is not easy

written text.

to account for the proselytizing vigour of such

***

seemingly perverse and ultimately suicidal

Part I of this long book covers the 400 years movements as Gnosticism and Manicheanism. A.D. 50-450 and occupies 130 pages. Its title is But spread they certainly did-and challenge.

THE SHAPING OF THE DOCTRINE. Here are The most authoritative response to these

considered the pre-Christian teachings-austere challenges came from St. Augustine (A.D. 353-

and severe-of the stoic philosophers whose 430) who, for eleven years of his early life, had

guiding principles were nature, virtue, decorum actually been a Manichean. After conversion to

and freedom from excess. (According to Seneca, Christianity, he turned against his former faith.

Nero's tutor, it was shameful to show too much love for your own wife.) The doctrine was also

The Manichees are for Augustine the archetypal advocates of contraception, and his judgments

shaped by the Jewish heritage containing the against contraception must be read against the

much quoted text (Genesis 38: 8-10) about background of his judgments of the Manichees Onan; also by the New Testament where Paul (p. 122).

("It is good for a man not to touch a woman" 1 Corinthians 7: 1) supplements the gospels. Professor Noonan writes:
Jesus himself is presented by the evangelists as endowed with a holiness that excludes not only sin but even any consideration of marriage. . . . As

Augustine engaged in vigorous controversies. Among many works which have been preserved is one entitled Marriage and Concupiscence wherein, in effect, he argued against one set of opponents (Manichees) that procreation was

Christian meditation has focussed on the person of good, and against another set (Pelagians) that

Jesus as the person to imitate, this example has been a powerful teaching on virginity (p. 39).

concupiscence was not good. (Pelagians were followers of Pelagius (370-440), a seemingly

These were formative influences in the con- amiable and sensible British or Irish heretic, who

demnation of contraception. But they were not played down original sin.) In Augustine's

86

CONTRACEPTION AND THE CATHOLIC THEOLOGIANS

Marriage and Concupiscence appears a "vehement passage" known to the theological world as the aliquando text, which, by condemning "poisons of sterility" (sterilitatis venena), has been held to imply a condemnation of contraception. This text resounded through the ensuing millenium. In Professor Noonan's words, the upshot of the dissertations and polemics was that St. Augustine-
Achieved a balance which saved Christian marriage, explained the effect of original sin, rejected Manicheanism. This balance, centering on the procreative requirement, was to be preserved for a thousand years in the Christian West. By its terms, it necessarily excluded and condemned contraception (p. 138).
***
Part II, THE CONDEMNATION INGRAINED (157 pages) covers the ensuing millenium (A.D. 450-1450). Again was a challenge presentedsurprisingly similar to the earlier challengethis time by the Bogomils and Cathars. These, like the earlier Gnostics and Manicheans, were hostile to procreation. The Church's response was a most ferocious persecution. Indeed, in 1215, Pope Innocent III launched a crusade, in the course of which 200 Cathars were burned alive in the heretical citadel of Monsegur (year 1245). Professor Noonan describes the crusade:
Catholics undertaking a crusade to exterminate the heretics would enjoy the privileges of crusaders in the Holy Land.... In 1231 Pope Gregory IX set death by fire as the penalty for Cathars in the states of the Church. In 1233 he invoked against them his new weapon, the Inquisition.
The respect paid by the Church to virginity had to be adapted to the Church's opposition to the Catharist condemnation of procreation. Before the twelfth century the Ave Maria "did not have the status of the Creed or the Pater Noster. But in the twelfth century the Ave Maria emerged as a popular Catholic prayer." The menace of Catharist doctrine was responsible for the change.
In 1254, when the Cathars had been destroyed in southern France ... the three prayers prescribed to be taught to every child over seven were the Creed, the Pater Noster and the Ave Maria. The central
Cathar tenet (opposing procreation] was indirectly
denied by the prayer, "Hail Mary, full of Grace. The Lord is with you. Blessed are you among

women, and blessed is the fruit ofyour womb". The
canons may be understood, then, as an indirect ideological response to an ideological challenge.... The orthodox relived the experience of the Fathers facing the Gnostics, the Fathers facing the Manichees. The orthodox commitment to marriage was reaffirmed by the assertion that procreation was an absolute value in intercourse; contraception was once more condemned without exception (p. 193).
After the Cathars had been exterminated, Augustine's condemnation of contraception became a "controlling text". Contraception was condemned for three main reasons: "because it was homicide, because it was against nature, and because it destroyed the marital relation" (p. 232).
Aquinas (1226-74) was much concerned with the second of these arguments-that contraception was unnatural.
The basic assumptions of Aquinas are that natural coitus was instituted by God; that the order of nature is here distinguished from the rational order; that natural coitus as instituted by God should not be altered by man (p. 239).
There were fit and unfit ways of performing coitus:
The "fit way" was with the woman beneath the man. Theologians following Aquinas attacked deviation from this position as unnatural and as mortal sin (p. 238).
St. Thomas himself chooses the word "bestiality" to characterize modes of copulation that depart from the rational norm of position (p. 241).
Aquinas, who quoted and invoked Aristotle, held that Reason condemned contraception. Professor Noonan ends his review of the millenium A.D. 450-1450 with these words:
Reason now showed that authority was right, that the Cathars were wrong, and that contraception was behavior contrary to the good of man (p. 257).
***
Part III, entitled INNOVATION AND PRESERVATION, covers three centuries and, of the four Parts, receives the shortest treatment (80 pages). It contains but two chapters of which the titles express what happened during the 300
years: New Attitudes and Analysis, and The Rule Preserved. Innovations but no essential change.
The new attitudes and analyses were evoked by the Renaissance ("Sexual ethics was among the

87

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

subjects freshly examined"), by the Catholic reaction against Calvin and Luther, and by "the perceptible growth of an educated lay class". There emerged a "new theory" opposed to
"Augustinian rigorism" which had proclaimed that procreation was the sole legitimate purpose of marital coitus. The "new theory" departed from Augustine's tradition not by condoning
contraception but by recognizing the permissibility of "non-procreative purposes"9 of coitus within marriage: marital coitus could, for example, conduce to the avoidance of fornication, and it could bring to married partners the benefits of pleasure, health and love. There also emerged a new view of the right (exercised by one partner over the other) to intercourse which had earlier been asserted. In the author's words, there resulted-

different outcomes. The most important are perhaps that the Church was less involved with problems of contraception than of usury ("in the matter of usury the ecclesiastical organizations were very much involved in the use of credit"); and that there was no public representation in favour of contraception ("the married laiety were a silent group. They did not write on birth control. Women, who might have had the most to say, were not heard from. If Madame de Sevigne wrote to her daughter on contraception, she did not write to Bishop Bossuet") (p. 346).
Between the attention bestowed by the Church on usury and on contraception-
the disparity is roughly that of elephant to mouse
(p. 358).
The ban was preserved.

a new synthesis distinguishable from the mediaeval balance. The Augustinian theory of intercourse was seriously impaired. The idea of limiting intercourse in order to avoid excessive births was introduced and given theological approval. Amplexus reservatus was increasingly discussed as a lawful alternative to contraception (p. 303).
And there came into existence-
theological opinion recognizing that economic and educational reasons were valid moral reasons for not wanting more children and for suspending the basic marital right of intercourse (p. 336).
Amplexus (coitus) Reservatus (penetration without orgasm and emission) was countenanced by some authorities but condemned by others on the ground that it might provoke the woman to emit "female seed"-a supposition put forward by Galen (A.D. 130-201), whose authority was accepted in the sixteenth century.
The theologians thus have a double confusion. They speak of "an emission of female seed" which does not correspond to any identifiable process, and they make this emission the equivalent of orgasm (p. 338).
But-
Despite these innovations and developments, the prohibition against contraception was maintained (p. 340).
Why? Professor Noonan compares contraception
with usury. The ban on the first held fast; the ban on the other yielded. He gives six reasons for the

***
Part IV, entitled DEVELOPMENT AND CONTROVERSY (146 pages), covers the 215 years from 1750 to 1965. It brings the reader completely up to date. Indeed, there are references to documents produced in 1965-a tribute to author, publishers and printers. There are three chapters, of which the last, entitled The Doctrine and the Context, brings home to the reader the novelty and the complexity of the factors which to-day confront the Roman hierarchy.
Two phenomena, Professor Noonan tells us, ushered in the new or modern period of contraception in the second half of the eighteenth century, though other factors were to be added later. The two were the decline of the birth rate in France which began about 1750 (between 1771 and 1800 it fell from 38-8 to 32); and "the open advocacy, especially in England and the United States of birth control as a socially desirable practice. Of these two phenomena the first had the greater immediate impact on Catholic teaching" (p. 387).
The birth rate in France began to fall about a hundred years earlier than elsewhere. The movement was doubtless expedited by the French Revolution and its aftermath; and other factors contributed. The fall was brought about by the widespread adoption of coitus interruptus-a practice then designated as onanism. This historically accurate usage was validated by the

88

CONTRACEPTION AND THE CATHOLIC THEOLOGIANS

drama described in the book of Genesis (38: not then forthcoming; and this nascent move-

1-10). Professor Noonan says:

ment, unlike the declining birth rate of France,

"The first use of either term [onanism and onanists] scarcely impinged on Rome.

I have encountered in an ecclesiastical document is in a question addressed by Thomas Gousset to the Penitentiary in 1822." The Roman tribunal . . . "took the word to refer to one who 'instead of consummating, withdraws and ejaculates outside the

What the Church encountered and judged in the first half of the nineteenth century was the wide-
spread individual decision to limit births, chiefly by coitus interruptus and chiefly in France (p. 394).

vessel (vagina)'" (p. 397).

What were Rome's responses?

The first of the three chapters of Part IV has During the period 1816-76 "moral theology

the long title The Spread of Birth Control: the was at its nadir". There prevailed a condition of

Responses of the Bishops and the Pope. The "intellectual torpor". But there was disquiet

spread and the responses are treated separately. among the French clergy about the spread of

The mode of spread in France is contrasted with coitus interruptus; some of them turned askance

the mode in the English-speaking world- to Rome. "Rome slowly, even sluggishly, replied

England and the United States.

to their request for guidance." These requests

The roots of the spread in France-

were mainly concerned with two problems: the

may be found in the spiritual malaise that affected France as profoundly as the rationalistic spirit. The Church in mid-eighteenth century France was

sinfulness of a wife's co-operation in the initiative (coitus interruptus) of her husband, and how far the clergy should, in the confessional,

officially supported, but rejected in many hearts . . . inquire about contraceptive practices.

When the Revolution occurred and the Church was rejected openly, there was not merely a repudiation of an official ecclesiastical establishment. There spread at the same time a pervasive and destructive cynicism towards all efforts to regulate conduct by intangible ideals. If the Church was a lie, then it was each man for himself-this is the kind of radical individualism much more characteristic of bourgeois

In France, and in many Latin countries, the Church had lost its hold on the allegiance of the majority of the men while it retained the allegiance of the majority of the women. The answers on co-operation were concerned with the moral status of the sex likely to respond to directions from the confessional
(p. 398).

Latin anti-clericals than of less disillusioned Anglo-

American agnostics (pp. 389, 390).

The Church's replies were equivocal; the

In England, on the other hand, there began in
the early nineteenth century a "movement" which, at first, was "scarcely more than a few voices". In 1798 there had been published Malthus's Essay on the Principle ofPopulationa work which was to become "the foundation of

arguments adduced were "perfunctory and undeveloped". The response (in the form of condemnation of current practices) became more articulate after the Franco-Prussian war and "reached its climax in the encyclical Casti Connubii" (1930). In the meanwhile,

respectable advocacy of birth control in the Outside of the Church, birth control became a

nineteenth century". Place and Owen followed. Malthus advocated moral restraint and postponement of marriage. He did not suggest

cause, a movement enlisting first social reformers, then medical, scientific and religious authorities (p. 406).

contraception. Place did-not in his book but in The author then surveys this movement outside

anonymous handbills.

the Church. It is held to have begun when, in

The social and moral restraints on discussion of the subject were still such that neither Bentham, Mill nor Place in his own name actually recommended particular contraceptive devices: Bentham spoke ambiguously, Mill in generalities and Place anonymously (p. 393).

1860, the British Malthusian League was founded by George Drysdale. (Malthus had died in 1834; he disapproved of contraception and might therefore have disapproved of the League's title.) The "mass spread of contraception" began. The widely publicized trial of Mrs.

In America were Owen and Knowlton. But Besant and Charles Bradlaugh had been con-

medical, scientific and sociological backing were cerned with the sale of Knowlton's Fruits of

ER-G

89

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Philosophy, wherein the Americans both ad- became "the strongest papal statement on

vocated contraception and taught how to contraception since the bull Effraenatam of

practise it. The trial raised the sale of this book Sixtus V" (1588). In it "the Pope made clear

from 1,000 a year to 200,000 during the four that, for the common good, the sinfulness of

years after the trial. Between 1889 and 1913 contraception must be made known to all(p. 431).

Malthusian Leagues sprang up in nine countries ... It [the encyclical] guided action for the next

including Catholic Spain (1904), Cuba (1907) thirty-four years. It remained the most solemn,

and Italy (1908). An international birth control complete and authoritative presentation of

movement started; medical opinion became Catholic doctrine on contraception" (p. 432).

generally favourable; the Anglican Church At this period (some thirty-six years ago), the

shifted its ground; Marie Stopes and Margaret birth control movement and the Church starkly

.Sanger arose. The spread was rapid and wide. confronted each other. The respective positions

Reactions against birth control, legislative and are described and assessed in the following vivid

ecclesiastical, set in. Among the legislative sentences:

reactions that of France was noteworthy. In 1920 a law, still enforceable, was passed forbidding

To the idealistic advocates of birth control as an urgently necessary solution of social problems, the

contraceptive propaganda; and there were Church appeared to reiterate, in obscurantist

similar enactments in Italy and Germany under fashion, an incomprehensible and irrelevant doctrine

their respective dictators. Also in Belgium (1923), Spain (1928) and Ireland (1929). In the United
States the (Federal) Comstock Law had been

on nature. To the Pope, the bishops and the theologians, the birth control movement appeared to rationalize and foster hedonistic irresponsibility and to challenge the wisdom handed down from Christian

enacted as early as 1873: and it influenced many antiquity.

State laws passed since. "The New York State

law was enforced against Margaret Sanger in The author's assessment is as follows:

1918." But, says Professor Noonan, "the legal measures taken to check contraception were

Yet there were other factors at work in the consciousness of the Church and in the social environment

neither numerous nor many. . . . By 1930 the which might have made an impartial observer suspect

birth control movement had, in most countries, overcome most restraints upon its freedom"

that the enmity was not, in all respects, eternal (p. 437).

(p. 214).
Ecclesiastical reactions were in line with the legislative.

Among the considerations which might be noted by this impartial observer (whom we might picture as well-disposed to both sides and hope-

Faced with an international movement promoting ful ofan accommodation) would be the Permitted

contraception to control the size of individual families and of national populations, and faced by falling birth rates in countries with substantial numbers of Catholic believers, the hierarchy of the

and Disputed Means of Controlling Conceptionthe title of an erudite chapter of thirty-seven
pages.

Church reacted (p. 414).

At first vigorously disputed and later permitted

The reactions between 1909 and 1930 are reviewed in some detail. They culminated in Pope Pius XI's Casti Connubii issued on the last day of the year 1930.
As vicar of Christ, as supreme pastor, as teacher, the Pope spoke "to turn sheep from poisoned pastures" (p. 426).

has been the use of the sterile period (rhythm). The decisive pronouncement was delivered by Pius XII on 29th October 1951 in his now celebrated address to midwives.
Medical doubts, pastoral caution, general suspicion, still surrounded the practice of rhythm two decades after it had been popularized [by Knaus and Ogino in the early thirties] (p. 445).

This pronouncement which is considered at some length, is a "synthesis" of themes. "As a distillation of past doctrinal statements, the encyclical was a masterpiece" (p. 427). It
90

Pope Pius XII opened a new view:
In his address a new spirit was visible. For the first time rhythm was referred to by Roman authority
not as an alternative to be cautiously proferred to

CONTRACEPTION AND THE CATHOLIC THEOLOGIANS

onanists (couples who used coitus interruptus) but The book's final chapter The Doctrine and the

as a method open to all Christian couples (p. 446). . . . Use of the sterile period, once attacked by Augustine when used to avoid all procreation, approved in 1880 for cautious suggestion to onanists,

Context will probably be of most interest to readers of this Journal, for it deals with the period through which they have lived and

guardedly popularized between 1930 and 1951, was discusses issues which are contemporary.

now fully sanctioned (pp. 446 and 447).

The chapter's title perfectly summarizes its

Likewise debated were the practices of amplexus reservatus and of copula dimidiata (by which is meant "partial penetration of the vaginawith insemination"); also dieteticmeasures which might reduce fertility, and the use of anaphrodisiacs which was held by an American redemptorist to be lawful in certain conditions:
Assuming, (declared Francis Connell in 1957) that there was no unjust denial of marital rights, their use "merely to lessen sexual inclinations" would be lawful (p. 451).

theme. Circumstances (the context) are changing
and the doctrine (on contraception) has adjusted itself to these changes. Tensions within the
Church have been generated; never has controversy been more widespread; and never before has the outside world followed more closely the course of events within the Church. The context (the cultural conditions which have evolved from 1880 till to-day) is examined before the doctrine. Professor Noonan draws our attention to six
developments:

Population. The upsurge is outlined: "The

The defensibility of sterilizing operations is real bite of the population increase was its effect

discussed in nine interesting pages (451-9). The issue is considered in the wide context of general operations on the reproductive organs and of operations (such as blood transfusions and organ transplantations) performed for the benefit of others. Subtle distinctions here discussed call for "a highly arbitrary form of line-drawing" (p. 458). Commenting on "the casuistry of

on the countries characterized as underdeveloped.
... In specific underdeveloped countries "over-
population" acquired a meaning and became a
menacing reality" (p. 478). The Status of Women. Women are becoming
emancipated; they earn;.they have legal control of their property; they vote; divorce is easier.
Methods of Education. In technical societies

sterilization", the author sensibly points out prolonged education detaches children from

(p. 459) that-

their homes; formal education may soon last

Line-drawing for no reason at all is insupportable. sixteen years; influences other than the parents'

But if there is a reason for drawing a line at some are brought to bear.

point, the precise point chosen may seem arbitrary and yet be reasonable. In their judgments on sterilization, the moralists had to draw the line somewhere if they were to preserve their general case against

Scientific Knowledge andPhilosophy. The ovum was discovered in 1827 and fertilization was first properly understood in 1875. Earlier misconcep-

contraception.

tions (on the basis of which intercourse during

This second chapter on Disputed Means ends with a section of fifteen pages on Pills. Dr. John Rock's important book The Time Has Come * is held to have brought about a change from a period of apparently unanimous condemnation by the Church to one of open controversy wherein both theologians and bishops are
divided. At the beginning of 1964, "the pill became the

menstruation or in pregnancy were made mortal sins) were removed. Psychology and sociology made new contributions; so did the study of history and the development of ecclesiastical philosophy:
All of this intellectual development-biological, medical, psychological, sociological, historical and philosophical-created a world of data and of
mental attitudes very different from the world in
which contraception had been analysed since the

center and symbol of effort to modify the Catholic position on birth control" (p. 472); and

second century after Christ. Both the facts and the methods of analysing them were fresh (p. 483).

so it remains to-day.

The Internal Structure of the Church. Catholic

* London, 1963. Longmans Green. See THE EUGENICS REVIEw, 1964, 55, 237.

universities were established where the expression of critical but loyal opinion became freer. (The

91

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

reader will have noted that the author is Professor of Law at Notre Dame.) The Austrian Jesuit Karl Rahner distinguished in 1953 between "supernaturally protected opinion" and opinion which was "not necessarily the effect of the

Cook gave full notice of these four men in the February 1965 number of his Population Bulletin).
Of the pre-circulated Schema 13, Dr. Noonan writes:

guidance of the Holy Spirit" (p. 427). The opinions of the laity, including, latterly, of lay women, were given greater prominence and acquired more weight.
In declaring evil an act of contraception performed by lawfully wedded persons, the theologians had condemned an act which was literally beyond their experience.... There was testimony now not only from the experience of the married, but of those who bore children (pp. 488, 489).
Testimony of Other Christian Churches. Fourteen bodies which had changed their stand about birth control between 1931 and 1959 are enumerated, the last being the World Council of Churches (1959). The author concludes his review of the changing Context with the following paragraph:

In its frank admission of conflicts, in its insistence on inquiry, in its deliberate avoidance of any specific statement on contraception, Schema 13 marked a new era in the history of the Church's thought on the subject (p. 503).
***
With remarkable speed the discussion of Schema 13 was followed by a salvo of publications by "advocates of modification" (modification of the ban on contraception). The Vatican Council (to which Schema 13 was submitted) was held in the spring of 1964. In the autumn of the same year were published four books in the form of symposia edited respectively by Archbishop T. D. Roberts, Louis Dupre, William Birmingham and Michael Novak. In effect these four books-

The consciousness of the Church itself could not but be affected by the new institutional forms, the new voices, the new freedom within it, and the Christian testimony outside it. These developments produced new data on the question of contraception; they brought into being new attitudes; they created a demand for greater clarity and rationality in the rules against contraception (p. 491).

urged the Church not to condemn all forms of
contraception.
By the autumn of 1964 "battle had been joined". Against these vocal "advocates of modification" certain argument had traditionally been levelled by their opponents. These are re-stated and critically considered by the author:

***
Professor Noonan then turns to Doctrine. The discussion is long (seventeen pages), intricate and, in places, difficult to follow. The point, he writes, has now been reached when two questions are being asked: Is contraception sometimes permissible; and when is sterilization permissible ? (p. 491).
No conclusive answer has emerged from the recent controversies (in which took part such authorities as Vermeersch, von Hildebrand, Haring, Fuchs and Doms), though differences of opinion were freely expressed. In April 1964 the Vatican Council debated a previously circulated document entitled The Church in the Modern World and known as Schema 13. In his account of this important occasion, Professor Noonan summarizes, among others, the "liberal" speeches of Cardinals Leger, Alfrink and Suenens and of Maximos IV, Patriarch of Antioch (Dr. Robert

The arguments (against contraception) purported to show that contraception was injurious to society, family and self, and against the will of God. Did they [asked Professor Noonan] still hold?
The author devotes twenty pages (513-33) to examining these injuries and offences. He concludes that, in the context of to-day, the arguments have lost some of their power. They no longer wholly convince the "new critics" within the Church.
***
This long volume concludes by suggesting that the possible use of anovulants presents the Church with an option. That Pope Paul VI is not unaware of such an option is suggested (p. 531) by an address delivered by him to the Cardinals on 23rd June 1964. The Church, he said, was examining the problem. There had been set up to advise the Holy See a Commission on problems of population, the family and natality. In

92

CONTRACEPTION AND THE CATHOLIC THEOLOGIANS

the book's last footnote (p. 531) we are told that this international commission was established by Pope John XXIII with a membership of six. By May 1964 it was expanded to fifteen; and by March 1965 to fifty-two. Among the fifty-two were representatives of the married laity; and there were five women.
The first plenary session of the commission was held March 25-28, 1965, in Rome. Addressing this group, Pope Paul VI pointed to the Church's guardianship of life and of love, and said, "In the present case the problem may be summarized as follows: in what form and according to what norms ought spouses to accomplish in the exercise of their mutual love that service of life to which their vocation calls them?"
Options are thus presented to the hierarchy and to the spouses they address.
The last two pages of the volume succinctly epitomize its varied contents. New readers of the book might be helped by perusing them first. They are too long to quote here in full. But in the last two paragraphs will be found an indirect answer (implied rather than explicitly stated) to the question raised in the first paragraph of this review: Is the Church's ban on contraception immutable or is it modifiable?
That intercourse must only be for a procreative purpose, that intercourse in menstruation is mortal sin, that intercourse in pregnancy is forbidden, that intercourse has a natural position-all these were once common opinion of the theologians and are so no more. Was the commitment to an absolute prohibition of contraception more conscious, more universal, more complete, than to these now obsolete rules? These opinions, now superseded, could be regarded as attempts to preserve basic values in the light of the biological data then available and in the context of the challenges then made to the Christian view of man. At the core of the existing commitment might be found values other than the absolute, sacral value of coitus. Through a variety of formulas, five propositions had been asserted by the Church. Procreation is good. Procreation of offspring reaches its completion only in their education. Innocent life is sacred. The personal dignity of a spouse is to be respected. Marital love is holy. In these propositions the values of procreation, education, life, personality and love were set forth. About these values a wall had been built; the wall could be removed when it became a prison rather than a bulwark.
***
To this reviewer the difficulties now confronting the Church appear formidable. The ban

on contraception, pronounced by Pope Pius XI in his Casti Connubii, places this issue in a different context from the ban on intercourse during menstruation and pregnancy and the ban on unnatural coital positions which belong to different historical contexts. These earlier bans have not been confirmed so decisively or so recently as has Pope Pius XI's ban. Casti
Connubii was promulgated on 31st December 1930 when the depopulation scare in France matched the present over-population scare
elsewhere. Though the context of the ban has indubitably
changed in the last thirty-six years, conservative opinion within the Church, based on what is held to be unambiguous divine revelation, has changed more slowly. Time is needed for the relevance of changes in context to be recognized, and for it to percolate that a policy which is salutary in one context may be disastrous in another. (The contrast between policies appropriate to war and peace comes to mind.)
How long it will take for ecclesiastical opinion to approve of a modification of the ban, no one can lightly predict. The "context" has changed much during the year that has elapsed since Professor Noonan's volume went to press early in 1965. Indeed the rate of "contextual" change is accelerating. As the American Population Council puts it: "No single year has seen as
many forward steps in population control as 1965 . . . there has been a minor explosion of developments" (Studies in Family Planning. No. 9, January 1966). Events in Central and South America (almost wholly Catholic) have been especially noteworthy.
As suggested by Professor Noonan, the pill might provide a possible opening. But the weight of tradition and of contemporary opposition to "modification" is such that an unfastening rather than an opening of the door is all that will be feasible. The pill, for example, might be designated as a lesser evil in exceptional cases than genital methods of contraception and abortion-much as the rhythm method was once designated as a lesser evil than onanism (coitus
interruptus). I do not know if the Pope's advisory com-
mittee now exceeds fifty-two. The Church will be fortunate indeed if this large and heterogenous
93

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

commission can unanimously produce helpful recommendations. His Holiness may be surfeited with contradictory advice and may ultimately feel constrained to decide the matter himself.
Even the most conservative of traditionalists will surely recognize that, among the salutary effects of Professor Noonan's historical study, may be counted the merit that it will enable
non-Catholics to understand how, throughout
the last two millenia, successive historical events
-ranging from the condemnation by Gnostics
of human parenthood during the first century to
the threatened depopulation of France in the twentieth-provided justification for the ban;
and to understand, further, how delicate is the
Church's present problem as to what course will
best preserve unity within the Church and

promote the well-being of Catholics throughout the world.
***
I add that the volume, which includes four pleasing woodcuts at the beginning of each "Part", has been beautifully produced by the Harvard University Press; that, according to to-day's standards, it is cheap at 64s.; that abundant footnotes, fully relevant to the main text, provide accurate documentation; and that the index (of twenty-six pages) is excellent.
The historian of the future may well bracket this book with Dr. John Rock's The Time Has Come as providing important twentieth-century landmarks in the history of world population; and British readers will readily concede that Professor Noonan's panoramic survey provides a noteworthy example of American scholarship at its best.

94

