EUGENICS IN THE LIGHT OF POPULATION TRENDS *

By A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, M.A.

O NE day someone will write a history of the eugenic movement. The historian will have some puzzles to solve.
How did it come about that the subject was ventilated as early as the 'sixties of the last century though no real knowledge of the mechanism of inheritance was available until the early years of the present century ? That we may attribute mainly to the genius of one man. Sir Francis Galton foresaw the importance of applying our knowledge of heredity to social problems; at the same time he did not fail to realize that the knowledge available in his day was very limited. Indeed he devoted much of his time and energy to the building up of a science of inheritance. But it is not the case that his followers have always been equally impressed with the necessity of postponing the formulation of policy until the relevant facts are certainly known, and of this opportunity for criticism the opponents of the movement have not been slow to take advantage.
THE QUESTION OF NUMBERS
Our historian will also note and feel called upon to explain the lack of interest shown by eugenists in the quantity aspect of the population problem. For it is a fact that eugenists have been little concerned with numbers. It is not difficult to understand why this should have been so in the first decades of the movement. The widespread interest in numbers, which the work of Malthus had aroused, began to flag after the middle of the century. When Sir Francis Galton wrote it had withered away. In their neglect of this matter, therefore, eugenists were like others of their day. But it may be urged that there is an aspect of the question of numbers that is of permanent interest to eugenists, though it may not appear to touch any immediate
* The Galton Lecture, delivered before the Eugenics Society on February i6th, I935.

or urgent problem. As Sir Josiah Stamp pointed out in his Galton lecture of last year, it is by no means certain that the economic optimum density coincides with the eugenic optimum density; and this point deserves more attention by eugenists than it has received. Again it may be urged that, unless there is an interest in the quantity problem, it may be difficult to understand some aspects of the quality problem. For an investigation of the former involves a review of all the forces bearing upon a population, and in the absence of such a review it may be difficult to interpret correctly the forces lying behind those particular phenomena which attract the attention of eugenists, for example, the forces producing differential fertility. But however that may be, I hope presently to show that there are now other and more pressing reasons why eugenists should no longer neglect the question of numbers.
NEED FOR POSITIVE EUGENICS
The concentration upon what is usually called negative eugenics is another fact which our historian will note. To some extent this is connected with the lack of interest in quantity. No one ever thinks of negative eugenics as likely to have any noteworthy effect upon numbers, whereas the question of numbers is at once brought to the fore by any programme for positive eugenics. But the concentration upon negative eugenics is mostly due to the fact that it has seemed hitherto to be both more urgent and more practicable to restrain the unpromising than to encourage the promising. And so far as,
urgency is concerned, this was true during the
earlier decades of the eugenic movement. But it has always seemed to me premature to hold any view about the possibilities of positive eugenics; and throughout this paper I mean by positive eugenics, not an

II

12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

attempt to breed a race of supermen, but to THE PREVALENCE OF SMALL FAMILIES

raise the fertility of those who are not The changes to which I have referred origi-

definitely subnormal until at least they nated neither in a decline of the frequency

replace themselves.

of marriage nor in a diminution of the propor-

No such effort has yet been made, and in tion of women of child-bearing age in the

the absence of evidence we can only specu- population, but in a decline in the size of the

late; and I shall presently point out that family. In order to draw out the significance

those speculations which lead to pessimistic of this fact we must probe a little way into

conclusions omit some very important con- its causes. The smaller family is due in the

siderations. Leaving that aside for the main to a decrease in the fertility of married

present, it is, I think, a fact worthy of note women in each age group. In other words the

that the concentration upon negative eugenics only factor of major importance in producing

has had unfortunate consequences. The out- these changes is that the chance has greatly

look and activities of eugenists have seemed diminished that a married woman of given

to be repressive rather than creative. There age, say thirty, will bear a child within a

has been little place for generous constructive year. Thus far there is no difference of

enthusiasm within the movement. Eugenists opinion. But when we ask why the fertility

have appeared to find much to censor but of married women has decreased, somewhat

little to praise. In consequence the public divergent views are expressed. While some

has come to attribute to eugenists a disposi- consider that birth-control is the only factor,

tion to scold and to prophesy disaster. There others believe that additional influences are

is a well-known charitable society with a long at work. But no one has proved that any

record of most useful achievement to its factor other than birth-control is in operation,

credit. It has, however, made a strong point and there does not seem to be any aspect of

of the importance of discriminating between the decline in fertility which indicates that

applicants for help. This has aroused critic- such a factor exists though it has not been

ism; a critic once called it The Society for identified. If, for instance, it had been proved

the Detection of the Undeserving Poor. that involuntary sterile marriages were on the

Would not one of the numerous critics of our increase, the presence of some additional

Society have summed up the impression factor would clearly be indicated. But this

which concentration upon negative eugenics has not been demonstrated. Further in my

inevitably makes upon the public mind, if he opinion there is no aspect of the decline of

had adapted the jibe, and called our Society fertility that cannot be interpreted with

The Society for the Detection of Persons comparative ease as due to birth-control.

Undeserving of Posterity?

Thus I accept the view that birth-control is

My thesis to-night is that in the field of the only important cause, if not the only

population changes are in progress which will cause, of the decline in the fertility of married

require eugenists to take an interest in women of given age, and therefore also the

numbers, and which will offer an opportunity chief cause of the decline in the size of the

for a policy of positive eugenics, thereby family.

opening the way for a more creative kind of The decline in the size of the family has

activity and a more generally attractive reached a point that is not apparent at first

programme. These changes are no doubt sight. This can be illustrated in various ways.

fairly familiar to you. But I must go over the We may use the method evolved by Mr.

matter, though in very brief outline, because Kuczynski which consists essentially in

it is only by so doing that I can place before assessing the present forces of birth and

you the reasons for my belief that positive death. If that is done for this country, it is

eugenics will be urgently demanded by the found that we are not only not replacing our-

new situation, whereas the need for pursuing selves, but are between 25 and 30 per cent.

a policy of negative eugenics will become less below replacement rate. In other words, if

pressing.

the forces of birth and death, as they now are

EUGENICS IN THE LIGHT OF POPULATION TRENDS

13

ty, were to play upon a popula- that the recent decline in fertility will con-

bilized age grouping, the popula- tinue at least for a time, and to estimate

d decrease by between 25 and 30 future births upon that basis. Then we may

in thirty years.

examine the implications of this assumption

may illustrate the position by with the object of throwing some light on its

figures for the population at some probability. Thus, for example, if we project

* When doing so, there are roughly the present downward trend of fertility into

of procedure that can be adopted. the future, in such manner that fertility

present figures of purely theoretical stabilizes in I944, it can be shown that the

,uch as Sauvy gave for France when population of Great Britain will be rather

what the future population of over 4I millions in I956 and about 32j

would amount to if the birth-rate for millions in I976, that is a decline of 34 mil-

of France was at once reduced to lions by the former and of I2 millions by the

now prevailing in Paris. The other latter date, migration movements being left

pt to discern the most probable out of account.

irths and deaths and to give figures Let us examine the implication contained

the assumptions so arrived at. in this assumption that there will be some

most useful method of illustrating further decline in the average size of the

t position of this country so far as family. The average family is much larger

te purpose is concerned. I may among the poorer than the richer classes in

select this course.

this country. We know the exact position in

TING FUTURE POPULATION

I9II, but owing to the deplorable failure to keep the information up to date on com-

-tistical procedure involved is simple parable lines we do not know how far there

Iborious. We begin with the present has been, during the last twenty years, a

divided into age and sex groups. tendency towards equality between the

add the births and subtract the classes in this respect. But from inquiries

t we estimate as likely to occur that have been made in Sweden, Germany

now and the future date for which a and Holland, it emerges that there is move-

equired. It is in connection with ment towards a reduction in the fertility of

the number of future births and the poorer classes to the level reached by the

ths that difficulties occur. But in wealthier classes. An approximation to

.tofuture deaths the difficulties are equality seems to have been reached in

We can take it that everyone will Stockholm. It cannot well be doubted that

-.to live as long as they can; we things are moving or will move in this direc-

y what scope there is for a tion in all Westem countries. If equality

m the death-rate during the child- comes about in this country at the present

, od, the only period during which level of the more prosperous classes, the

in the death-rate will affect the decline in the fertility of the whole popula-

population; and we know a good tion will be greater than was assumed in the

the chances of decreasing the calculation quoted above.

in this period. Thus there are no But existing methods of contraception are

'differences of opinion about the not very effective; if they were improved,

of deaths that are likely to occur at the decline would be more rapid and prob-

A&e near future.

ably, though not necessarily, ultimately

en we pass to the question of future greater. With these considerations in mind it

is different. We do not know how would seem probable that the figures sug-

come to regard marriage and size gested for I956 and I976 wil not be reached

we do not know what their atti- unless there is an increase in the size of

birth-control will be. The most family in sections of the population where it

procedure is perhaps to assume is already low. In other words, in order to

14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

avoid a greater decline than this, the size of family among the less fertile must move up, as that of the more fertile moves down. It follows that the increase of size of family among the former must be still greater if the population is not to sink to the figures given. That there will be a movement downwards among the more fertile is almost certain; it is impossible to estimate the chances of an upward movement among the less fertile, but in my opinion it is not likely to come about in the absence of a policy directed to that end.
POPULATION TREND AND NEGATIVE EUGENICS
It is in the light of these considerations that I wish to discuss the eugenic movement, and in particular the policy of this Society. Let me first take negative eugenics, which at present occupies most of the attention of the movement. The situation for which a remedy is sought is the existence of persons with inadequate or unpromising mental or physical endowment. It is sometimes forgotten that a problem is created by the mere existence of such persons. The problem is aggravated, but not created, by the fact that in general such persons have families whose size is greater than the average for the whole population. The view is prevalent that this type of differential fertility is bound up with the differential class fertility of which I have spoken. Those who hold this view will therefore derive comfort from the changes which I have just described. For differential class fertility is likely to pass away, and, to the extent to which the two matters are in reality one, the difficulty will solve itself.
I cannot share this optimism. The view that there are innate differences between the classes rests upon two arguments. It is inferred that social mobility must result in the sorting out of innate characters and in the concentration of the more valuable characters in the prosperous classes. It is held that the result of applying intelligence tests shows that there is in fact a higher level of ability in these classes. It is impossible to enter upon any adequate discussion of the matter here. It must suffice to point out that,

even if the evidence of intelligence tests taken at its face value, it points to ences between the classes which are s compared with the very large differen which are known to exist within the c Within each class at one end of the there is material of the highest value and the other end of the scale material which poor to worthless. There is evidence families are largest within the classes at wrong end of the scale, and there is no re to suppose, so far as I can see, that att ment of equality in respect of fertility tween the classes, which is being broug about by the forces now at work, will invol equality within the classes. If that is so, main problem of negative eugenics re untouched by the population movemen now in progress.
PRESENT-DAY EUGENICS POLICY What are the prospects of solving it by t
methods advocated by the Society? T Society relies upon three methods. In t first place it attempts to build up a euge conscience in the sense that it tries to spr more widely a feeling of responsibility co cerning the bringing into the world of th who are inadequately endowed. But it fully realized that this can achieve very lit where most needs to be done. There are al certain dangers inherent in this propagan to which I shall refer later. Secondly, th
Society desires to see sterilization legalized
and though the case for this step is ove whelming, the quantitative results, whi may be expected, can be and frequently ar very much exaggerated. Quite clearly Society must rely in the main upon the thi method-the spread of birth-control.
If what I said above is true it would see at first sight that the prospects of achie the desired end in this manner are unpromi ing. Birth-control is going to equalize th birth-rate between but not within the classe But when speaking of birth-control I ha had in mind existing methods; they are no very effective, and relative to the situatio of many not very easy to employ, and rela tive to the resources of many not inexpensive
If they were improved, especially in th

EUGENICS IN THE LIGHT OF POPULATION TRENDS

on of greater simplicity, the situation are considerations of a social and economic

change. The reason why the birth- nature which make a decline not unwelcome.

is highest at the wrong end within the But this is not so. Excessive numbers, for

classes is not so much absence of instance, are not a cause of unemployment.

wiedge that the family can be limited or To a sociologist there is something radically

y aversion to doing so, but the fact that to unhealthy about a situation where people are

pie of little or no foresight the care and failing by so large a margin to replace them-

ble immediately involved by present selves. And within the field of eugenics the

hods of limitation weigh more than the situation is surely deplorable if the essence

t possibility of unwanted children. of eugenics is the perpetuation of the com-

its required is not so much propaganda munity from its more promising elements.

favour of existing methods of birth-control The fertility of this section, and I am speak-

indeed propaganda at all, but improved ing not in terms of social classes but of

"ods, coupled with better economic and endowment wherever found, is 50 per cent.

surroundings.

below replacement rate.

I do not wish to minimize the possible It would be interesting to speculate, if

te importance of voluntary steriliza- there was time, on the reasons for this

Dr. Blacker has recently given reasons amazing complacency. It is due in part no

supposing that, if it was legalized, many doubt to the fact that the measures which are

hose qualifications to be numbered among proposed for raising the birth-rate are

e parents of the future are doubtful might thought to be incompatible with the policy to

time submit to it. If these reasons are which the Society is already committed in its

d, as I am inclined to believe, it seems efforts to reduce the fertility of certain sec-

me to follow that, given improved tions of the population. In my opinion it is a

thods of contraception, these same people mistake to believe that this incompatibility

uld limit their families readily in the near exists; to this point I shall return later.

e; that is to say that, as between Another fact impresses me. Eugenists are

luntary sterilization and improved contra- mostly drawn from the prosperous classes,

tive methods, there is much more to be and they want their children to find a secure

ticipated from the latter than from the place in these classes. But small though their

er. Therefore I welcome the recent families are, they find this increasingly diffi-

ion of the Society to subsidize research cult to bring about, and they attribute the

o contraception as the most hopeful, trouble to excessive numbers. This is an

d the only hopeful, way of dealing erroneous diagnosis; the increased competi-

ively in the near future with the situa- tion for the eligible posts is due to the exten-

which I have described and which sion of education and to the breakdown of the

itutes the core of the problem of nega- barriers which formerly reserved many elig-

e eugenics.

ible occupations to the more fortunately

situated. Under modern conditions the

GENIC CONSEQUENCES OF POPULA- difficulty cannot be escaped and has nothing

ON DECLINE

at all to do with numbers.

The Society is thus driven to rely in the The coming decline is as yet hidden from

of negative eugenics upon a course of the people at large. Prophecy is dangerous;

on which will improve and spread the but it needs no courage to foretell that, once

tice which, even in its present form and the decline in numbers becomes apparent,

esion, is going to bring about a heavy universal interest and concern will be

e in population. I fail altogether to aroused in the population problem. This

erstand the complacency with which the problem may well assume first place among

tion is regarded by eugenists. There public questions, and put in the shade these

to be an idea among them that within economic and social matters which now

outside their immediate purview there occupy attention. Discussion will lead

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ultimately to action, and this is the point to which I wish to draw special attention tonight. If eugenists set to work now and formulate a policy designed to lift the birthrate, they will be first in the field. Under
such circumstances their proposals will at least obtain sympathetic attention, and may well be adopted in whole or in part. Such proposals will possess the great merit of having been formulated with the problem of quality as well as the problem of quantity in mind. But if they delay, measures will be proposed by others who have quantity alone in mind, and the nation will get committed to a population policy in which eugenic considerations find no place. I would urge with all the force at my command that the Society has an opportunity which is never likely to recur. Everyone will soon be asking what can be done. A population policy will certainly be constructed; now is the time to ensure that it will be a policy in which eugenic considerations are not omitted.
THE ALLEGED RETREAT FROM PARENTHOOD
Before discussing what would be the content of a policy designed to raise the birthrate eugenically, we must pick up the threads of the discussion of the origin of the present situation. I got as far as giving reasons for supposing that the immediate cause of the present situation is the increasing prevalence of contraception. But why do people employ contraception? The essence of the matter is simple. There has long been a latent desire for a smaller family. Queen Victoria, writing to the King of the Belgians in I84I, said: " I think, dearest Uncle, you cannot really wish me to be the 'Mamma d'une nombreuse famille,' for I think you will see with me the great inconvenience a large family would be to us all, and particularly to the country, independent of the hardship and inconvenience to myself; men, never think, at least seldom think, what a hard task it is for us women to go through this very often." The great place which the Queen held in the esteem of her people was due to the fact that she shared in so many ways the views of the mass of her subjects.

And in respect to size of family she was n
exception. The desire for a small family w present. Early in the last century the mean to limit the family were made known. Som
decades passed before people in gene became wifling to employ these means, an
it was not until the 'seventies that the
became extensively used in this country. The story is of course full of complexi
which I do not wish to minimize. But iti not necessary for my purpose to prob further; I need only draw out two infer
ences from the chapter in the story which w have reached. Children were fornerly th inevitable accompaniment of married com panionship and home life. There was n
question of any attitude to size of family that settled itself. There was no thought o
replacing the present generation; replace
ment was automatic. Children were a force levy; they are now voluntary contributions But though size of family is now a matter o deliberation, replacement as yet plays no pa in those deliberations. To how many peopil does it ever occur to connect the size of their family with the future of their country? No such notion ever enters the head of the man in the street.
Voluntary contributions have, as we all know, to be earnestly solicited; but for these essential contributions there is as yet no solicitation on behalf of society. It is therefore a mistake to speak of a retreat fromni parenthood if by that is meant a deliberate" refusal to replace the present generation.
Replacement is not and never has been a
conscious matter. But with a system of voluntary parenthood it must become so if society is to survive. That is the first inference. I may now pass to the second.
When children were a tax which could not be escaped by those who desired home life, the community, which relied on this revenuel for its perpetuation, was under no pressure to smooth the path for those who had to pay it. Whether the path was rough or smooth, children found their way in. Unrder a system of voluntary parenthood, however, the situation undergoes a profound change; the community now relies for its revenue upon voluntary contributions, and it must see, not

EUGENICS IN THE LIGHT OF POPULATION TRENDS

that obstacles do not stand in the path family. This is a positive and serious

-ntributors, but that all the resources ol obstacle to parenthood.

knowledge and skill are employed in Though a striking example, this is only one

to assist those who take their share in of the many which could be given. If we

essential task of replacement.

examine the circumstances surrounding the

this metaphor of taxation and setting up and equipment of homes, the

ue does indicate one aspect of the construction of houses, the lay-out of towns,

er, it may perhaps obscure another and our transport facilities, the innumerable

important aspect. Children are a pride duties which face the mother with young

a pleasure and a necessary fulfilment of children, how much evidence shall we find of

normal life. But again, now that children thought and planning for the family? In

voluntary, the greater the pride in them addition to social and economic, there are

the higher the anticipations for them, the medical and psychological situations and

e hesitation there will be in producing problems requiring attention. There has

if conditions are such that these very been research into birth-control, both medi-

emotions are unlikely to find satisfac- cal and psychological, but next to none into

and these very reasonable expectations birth promotion. There are birth-control

ely to be realized. This implies that all clinics, but what help or advice, based upon

relevant conditions must be carefully adequate scientific foundation, is available

ed and purposely modified where they for those who want to have children? The

found to be antagonistic to the founding need for research and planning in all these

building of families.

directions is rendered more urgent by the

fact that it is the unmarried and the childless

NEED FOR A SCIENTIFIC POPULAPOLICY

who have money to spare. In consequence the ingenuity of inventors and the activity of
entrepreneurs are largely exercised to fulfil

y positive population policy must there- the wants of such people. How much of the

have two objects: first, to make it talents and enterprise of the commercial

y understood that, with a system world is directed to them, and how little of

roluntary parenthood, a community can modem knowledge and skill is called into the

survive if participation in the task of service of those who are seeking the best

cement is undertaken as a normal social environment for children. We all know the

and secondly, to remove obstacles to, attractive model flats, fitted out with every

to create facilities for, the fulfilment of modem device, which appear at every hous-

duty. ing exhibition, and in which no child could

t is perhaps less easy to understand the ever find a place; how often do we see in any

for the second than for the first of these such exhibition similar model day and night

points in the programme. It arises in nurseries ? Perhaps the organizers of such

way. The circumstances surrounding exhibitions know their public and realize that

age, the procreation and upbringing of the inhabitants of the West End who flock

en, raise medical, psychological, social to them would smile at the suggestion that

economic problems of the utmost com- anyone could so inconvenience themselves as

ty. As yet we have made hardly any to require to use rooms for such a purpose.

pt to examine and far less to solve Upon reflection it becomes plain that the

because, under the conditions formerly new situation demands a complete re-

g, there was no pressure to do so. orientation of outlook, a thorough examinagive one example of what is meant, go per tion of all circumstances which bear upon

of the population is remunerated by parenthood and the formulation of carefully

or salary. But neither wage nor salary constructed proposals designed to assist

any relation to size of family, and every parenthood. In many spheres it will be

diminishes the income per head of the necessary to call upon expert knowledge and

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

specialized experience. No one society could direction. But in general it is clear that i

undertake so huge a task.

would find points of contact with man

organizations, the objects of which hay

TASK OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

hitherto seemed remote from eugenics. I

How then could this Society proceed if it developing these contacts it would mak

decided to construct a positive population these organizations aware that a bon

policy ? When we look round and take note exists between them, and that the bond is an

of some contemporary activities, we find interest in the family and in family relation-

reason for thinking that the task is not so ships. The task of the Society would be, in

overwhelming as appears at first sight. the first place, by dwelling on this fact, t

Already many of the difficulties confronting co-ordinate their efforts, and in the secon

parents, or those who would like to become place, by bringing the population situatio

parents, have been made the subjects of study into view, to direct them to a common purpose.

by groups of people who are often organized Though I have selected this aspect of any

into societies. Those who initiate or engage population programme for some discussio

in these efforts have as yet seldom or never before saying anything about the other, it is

any views about the population situation. of the greatest importance to realize that it is

They have become aware of some aspect of subordinate and accessory to the other. The

our social organization which, whether it removal of obstacles to parenthood alone can

takes the shape of a positive obstacle or of a never achieve the desired end; it is imposs-

lack of facilities, creates a difficulty for ible to bribe people into parenthood, for it is

parents. Thus we find a society engaged in impossible to throw the weight of material

the study of family endowment, and we find advantage into the scale of parenthood. And

organizations devoted to the study of day it is not merely that the removal of obstacles

nurseries, nursery schools, parent and teacher is insufficient by itself; it is that this objec-

co-operation, child and vocational guidance, tive and the promotion of the idea of parent-

the position 6f married women in industry hood as a social duty do not march in har-

and the professions, the planning of houses mony. No method can be successful whic

and towns and other matters too numerous to couples an appeal to responsibility with

mention. Any attempt to construct a posi- material considerations. The appeal must b

tive population policy must draw upon the made first and independently; the smooth

results of all these activities. What is re- ing of the path to parenthood should b

quired is that some organization, which has undertaken merely to ensure that those who

the whole population situation under review are already disposed to shoulder their respon-

and desires to construct an adequate pro- sibilities shall not be hampered by over-

gramme, should examine all the proposals whelming and quite unnecessary difficulties.-

made to deal with these difficulties, and But this appeal is not to the performance of

weave them into a coherent population policy. some harsh and stem duty; it merely

What organization is better fitted to endeavours to bring men to realize that the

undertake this work than the Eugenics fulfilment of any normal life involves parent-

Society ? Its special interests are biological, hood, and that it is only communities whose

and that means that it is primarily concerned members so fulfil their lives which will sur-

with matters which are fundamental to the vive-though this fulfilment does involve for

special interests of all these other organiza- the individual a sacrifice of short to long-run

tions. Further, I have argued that the satisfactions, as do in fact all other achieve-

special interests of our Society, unlike those ments that are finally worth while.

of these other societies, require it to give

some attention to the whole population PROSPECTS OF A SUCCESSFUL " APPEAL

problem. It would take me too far afield to TO RESPONSIBILITY "

inquire in detail what form the activities of It would be possible to quote recent say-

the Society might assume if it set out in this ings which indicate the most profound

EUGENICS IN THE LIGHT OF POPULATION TRENDS

lmi-' about the likelihood of the success any such appeal. It has been said that present trend of population shows that
e of children and sense of responsibility
the future are not strong enough to e the perpetuation of the race. But ore we can say that these or any other otions and sentiments are too weak to eve any particular purpose, they must
given due opportunity to express themes. Anyone surveying this country a few
es ago might well have concluded that native senses of decency and self-respect
e too weak to induce the mass of the
pleto wash. But that was at a time when
or no attempt had been made to concleanliness with self-respect, and when t people lacked the facilities for achieving
ess even if they desired it. The change
attitude to personal cleanliness, brought ut by propaganda in the schools and elsee, coupled with greatly extended facilifor washing, have wrought a transforma-
in the habits of our people in the present tury. A similar change of attitude and
cemay well be achieved in the sphere under discussion. On the other hand it would be foolish to tilge in any facile optimism. Voluntary enthood is the greatest innovation that race has ever made. It may well be
for a time; a few centuries are as g in the history of the race, and the few generations may perhaps see a tic decline in numbers. For many ns such a decline is not to be desired; qual rates of population growth, and n more so diverse directions of population ge, introduce an unsettling factor into enational relations. Again it is by no certain that declining populations uld be left in peace and free to build themyes up once more. But, given the chance,
population would no doubt be built up
out of those with more than average iderations for others and endowed with virtues which find their expression in the y circle and unpretentious lives. This would be a gigantic eugenic purge of a
hind for which there is something to be said, ince in my opinion eugenists have always

over-rated the importance of mere intelligence. In gatherings of persons busily devoted to plans for the radical transformation of
society I have sometimes been surprised to observe how slender the chance is that any of them will be represented in the society for which they plan. It may be that westenders and left-wingers alike are destined to disappear; but further reflection does not suggest to me that their disappearance will be any great loss. A very eminent member of this Society once remarked that the Romans prided themselves upon being the degenerate descendants of gods, but that we pride ourselves upon being the very creditable descendants of apes. There may be truth in both views, and it may be that we retain an uncomfortable number of persons, some innately disposed to lordly dissipation, and others to the tiresome chatterings of busybodies.
A NEW POLICY FOR THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
Whether we take long or short views, voluntary parenthood occupies the centre of the field. So far as negative eugenics is concerned the inference that I have drawn from this fact is that parenthood must be made truly voluntary throughout society in the sense that all births must become wanted births, and I have argued that the only promising method of bringing this about in the near future is through research into contraception. It is to this, I suggest, that the energies of the Society should now be directed rather than to the movement for sterilization which is going forward by its own momentum, or to the arousing of a negative eugenic conscience. The latter may do more harm than good. Cases have come to my notice in which people, who would make the most desirable parents, have been frightened out of parenthood by some baseless apprehension that a defect is lurking in their strain. An appeal to the degrading sentiment of fear, whatever its immediate results, seldom or never produces desirable results in the end; such appeals are only too common to-day, as for instance those made by well-meaning persons who would save us

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

from war or revolution. The cumulative well fitted for parenthood. The answer is

effect which they produce upon current out- that, if parenthood is truly voluntary and the

look tends to smother the natural buoyancy appeal is made to unselfish motives, the

and resilience of men upon which alone we response will come from just those people

can rely to get us out of our present troubles. who are the most desirable as parents of the

It is precisely this mood of apprehension future. Effective voluntary parenthood is in

that a policy of positive eugenics would seek fact the most promising condition upon

to dispel. Sir William Beveridge ended a which eugenic effort can be founded. They

recent broadcast talk by saying that the may also ask whether, if obstacles are

governments of the world may well find " that removed from the path of parenthood, the

the possibility of preventing ultimate disap- less desirable section of the population may

pearance of their peoples depends upon the not be thereby encouraged to reproduce.

kind of world that they can make for people The answer is that material inducements will

to live in."* If Sir William is thinking of such achieve little or nothing by themselves;

measures as I have suggested, I would of they will never be more than encouragements

course agree. But some of his hearers may to those who are already disposed to parent-

have concluded that the world must first be hood. The two apparently opposed policies

made safe and comfortable before men can of promoting birth-control and of encourag-

be expected to continue to people it. I ing parenthood are therefore not incom-

suggest that there is a circle here since con- patible. They can be pursued together, and

fidence among the people at large alone can unless they are pursued together the goal of

make the world peaceful and prosperous. eugenics cannot be reached.

It is not necessary to believe in progress or to What will the historian of the eugenic

nurse anticipations of a millenium in order to movement have to say when he comes to

feel confidence in life and to experience joy record this phase of its history ? Will it be

in it. It is necessary only to return to a that early concentration upon negative policy

simpler and clearer conception than now had developed so myopic a vision that

prevails of the abiding human task.

eugenists failed to observe the threat to

Doubts, however, may arise in the mind of normal people, and that when generous con-

eugenists about the methods which in my structive enthusiasm was aroused to counter

opinion are alone likely to be effective in the that threat, they failed to associate them-

field of positive eugenics. They may ask selves with it, and passed out of sight with

how, if a call to parenthood is made, they the gloomy sects of the time whose faces were

can be assured that it will not be heard by turned more to death than to life ? Or will it

that section of the population which is least be that they seized their great opportunity,

came forward, and gathered and directed the

* The Listener, February 6th, 1935, p. 226.

forces making for preservation ?

Egei Review, VoL flNIlNo. L

