DOGS AND EUGENICS

By HANS GRUNEBERG, M.D., Ph.D.
(Department of Biometry, University College, London)

T HE untimely death, in I939, of Dr. based on manuscripts of Dr. Stockard which,

Charles Stockard has cut short an undertaking seemingly too vast for a single man, and almost too ambitious for a whole department. In I926, the Rockefeller

it seems probable, had not yet been cast in their final form. This unfortunate circum-
stance is no doubt partly responsible for some shortcomings of this publication.

Foundation generously provided the means It might seem ungrateful to pick holes into

for the establishment of a dog farm at Shrub a work of this magnitude; for it is a work of

Oak, near Peekskill, N.Y., to enable Dr. great merits and the material accumulated

Stockard and his team to study the relation- is of very considerable value. But the whole

ships between inherited constitution and investigation *has an eminently eugenic

endocrines in various pure breeds of dogs background, and numerous remarks in the

and their hybrids. There was scarcely any text show that Dr. Stockard was fully alive

groundwork laid when this scheme was to these implications. It thus requires no

initiated, and the difficulties were enormous. particular prophetic gifts to foresee that the

Consider only the task of breeding and main- authority of this volume will often be quoted

taining in good health dogs on a really large in eugenical discussions of the future. For

scale; of studying the gross anatomy of this reason it seems important to question

skeleton, dentition, skin, endocrines in certain conclusions which, if unchallenged,

numerous breeds in their relation to age and might become harmful in the hands of un-

sex; of developing a set of craniometric critical or unscrupulous people.

measurements and indices appropriate to the Before proceeding to this discussion, a few

dog skull; of studying the microscopic words should be said about the general way

structure of all the endocrines from puppy- of presentation of the data in Dr. Stockard's

-hood to old age, in health and disease; and work. In the first place, high praise is due

of developing and applying intricate tests to the excellent, not to say lavish, illustra-

for dog psychology and behaviour, to mention tion of the volume with II3 beautiful

only a small selection of the obstacles to be photographic plates. On the other hand the

overcome. The immensity of the undertak- text is very verbose and contains extensive

ing would no doubt have deterred many a repetitions which make its study somewhat

good investigator, and we have to be grateful tedious. It could easily, and with great

for the vision and energy which have enabled advantage, have been condensed to one-half

Dr. Stockard to accumulate a great and its present length without omitting a single

valuable material; nor can we be surprised relevant fact. Works of this kind are often

that a span of thirteen years has proved too called " mines of information." This figure

short for Dr. Stockard and his team to of speech could appropriately be applied

accomplish all they set out to do. For the here, not only because of the wealth of

work has remained a torso, and the monu- information the book contains, but also

mental memoir* now published is largely because of the amount of mining activities

* Stockard, Charles R., collaborators, and Anderson, 0. D., and James, W. T.: The genetic and endocrinic basis for differences in form and behavior, as elucidated

required to separate solid facts from redun-
dant verbiage. Many questions are treated by verbal argument, where quantitative

by studies of contrasted pure-lime dog breeds and their hybrids. The American Anatomical Memoirs, No. ig. Philadelphia, 1941. Wistar Press. Pp. xx+775; 128
text-figures and II3 plates. Price $7.50.

data would have been both shorter and more
convincing. In numerous instances the author states that " about " a quarter of a

62

DOGS AND EUGENICS

63

generation showed a given character, and muzzled breeds (8-I2) from those normally

the remainder its contrasted counterpart. It muzzled is complexly conditioned; there are

is a pity that we are not given the original a few single gene differences which can be

data, which would have enabled us to judge isolated; for instance, the concave surface

critically how well the observations fit the of the condylar process of the mandible

theory. Perhaps the author had intended to peculiar to the dachshund differs by a single

fill in the precise figures from his records at gene substitution from the convex surface

a later date; as published, we often have to as found in most other dog breeds. But the

be content with demonstrations of a principle bulk of the differences is conditioned by

from selected litters, where numerical proof numerous genes not analyzable in detail,

from the whole experiment would have been which segregate independently of each other.

necessary or at least desirable.

As a consequence many exceedingly in-

The breeds of dogs studied included the harmonic types are produced in F. and

following:

backcross generations. Some of these are

i. St. Bernard.
2. German shepherd (Alsatian). 3. Saluki (a large North African grey-
hound-like animal). 4. Great Dane. 5. Bassethound.
6. Foxhound.
7. Dachshund. 8. English bulldog. 9. French bulldog. IO. Boston terrier.
ii. Brussels griffon.
I2. Pekinese.

simply grotesque and mirth-provoking, like an Alsatian on dachshund legs; others are more seriously pathological; jaws may be so much undershot or overshot as to prevent the animal from feeding; other orthodontic
anomalies, from the slightest to the severest grades, are found in abundance (the work
should be of great interest for dental surgeons and orthodontists), and other dysharmonic and often semi-lethal types occur commonly; indeed some of the plates depicting F2 animals look like a bad nightmare following a visit to a dog show. If the body has regu-
lative powers, which tend to harmonize its

Of these widely differing breeds the Alsatian various organs, such powers have certainly

is rightly regarded as the most normal type, sadly failed to correct the pandemonium let

lacking obviously pathological stigmata and being closest to the wolf-like ancestors of our

loose by the reshuffling of dog genes.
Is it surprising that the startled author

dog breeds. Comparatively harmonic in of this nightmare dog show should utter general shape are also the Great Dane, the warning after warning against " mongreliza-

Saluki, and the foxhound. The giant St. tion" of human races ? And yet, most of

Bemards have signs of acromegaly; Basset- these monstrosities would have been predict-

hound and dachshund show marked achon- able from the ingredients contributed by the

droplasia of the legs, but not of skull or tail; parent breeds. These divergences are vastly

the two bulldogs, the Boston terrier and the greater than anything that could possibly

Brussels griffon have extremely shortened occur in human race crosses. And if you

muzzles, but normally shaped legs, while the cross breeds of dogs which are not predict-

Pekinese is highly achondroplasic both as ably incompatible, like a bulldog and a

regards skull and appendicular skeleton. dachshund, or a Saluki and a Pekingese,

We cannot describe in detail the numerous quite alluring animals may be produced. For

crosses carried out between these various instance, the hybrid between Great Dane

breeds; they led to the discovery of many and Alsatian is a strong and distinctly handinteresting genetic facts. For instance, the some dog, and a similar type could no doubt

achondroplasic leg skeleton of dachshund be made homozygous in a later generation.

and Bassethound is conditioned by a single But a good deal of the highly pathological,

gene.- On the other hand, the wide difference and unpredictable, monstrosities probably

in skull shape which differentiates the short- owe their origin not to the race cross per se.

64 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Dr. Stockard naturally started his experi- logical types recovered owe their appearance

ments with good specimens of pedigreed to a double reason; one is the reshuffling of

dogs of his various breeds. Now, in many genes, the other is the segregation of patho-

domesticated animals, the standard set up logical recessives which were hidden in

by the breeders does not represent a homo- heterozygous form in the " pure " breeds;

zygous type; the " ideal" type for a given The latter source of monstrosities has not

character is often a heterozygote. As a been recognized by Dr. Stockard, and for

consequence, breeds of domesticated animals this reason his argument about the undesira-

are usually very heterogeneous genetically. bility of human race crosses is considerably

This is very much the case in dogs, and the weakened. Critical evidence on the question

designation " pure-line " dogs used by Dr. would require experiments in which these

Stockard is grossly misleading. Indeed, close two sources of pathological types can be

inbreeding is anathema to the dog breeder, separated; experiments satisfying this re-

because he knows by experience that numer- quirement can easily be designed.

ous "undesirables " segregate out even in the "pure" breeds. I have studied (jointly with A. J. Lea*) a jaw anomaly in a " pure "
breed (long-haired dachshunds), which was due to a single recessive gene and in its effects comparable to certain types recovered
in F2 by Dr. Stockard; heterozygotes for this gene were common in the breed, but owing to an avoidance of close inbreeding it segregated out fairly rarely; the undesirables are usually destroyed as puppies, and the breeders certainly do not advertise their occurrence in their kennels; this is by no
means an exceptional case, and there is

Just to show that the argument advanced above is not a purely theoretical consideration, one example from a different field may
be given. If you study the large monographs on the genetics of Drosophila published by
the Carnegie Institution in I923 and i929, you will see that the majority of autosomal recessives were discovered in the course of linkage experiments. Of course nobody ever suggested that linkage experiments per se are dysgenic; but linkage experiments, as usually carried out, involve close inbreeding
and hence tend to make hidden recessives
homozygous.

every reason to believe that all breeds of dogs are soaked with harmful recessives; in an outbred population these remain largely under the surface, but inbreeding makes
them homozygous. Now Dr. Stockard's experiments involved not only race crosses, but also much closer inbreeding than is customary within breeds; for technical reasons most experiments started with a few specimens of the " pure " breed, and the production of an F2 or backcross generation
involved close inbreeding. Hence the patho-

We have dealt critically with the eugenical aspect of Dr. Stockard's dog breeding programme; this seems justifiable in a journal devoted primarily to the study of eugenics. But it would be entirely misleading to generalize this critical attitude. The book is of high importance and full of interesting information. Just for this reason, and because we are convinced that it should, and will, be studied widely throughout the world
of eugenics has it seemed necessary to point
out where the author's inferences should be

* Journal of Genetics. 1940. 89, 285-96.

treated with caution.

