SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE STATE
By T. H. MARSHALL, C.M.G., M.A.
Professor of Social Institutions in the University of London

T is a great honour, which I highly appre- it was better than I had expected. I think it

ciate, to be invited by the Eugenics
Society to deliver the Galton Lecture, and it is an honour which may, I think, appropriately be bestowed upon a sociologist. But
for a sociologist who, like myself, is ignorant of biology and genetics and unskilled in those statistical techniques, now so widely and expertly used in social surveys and psychological investigations, it is also an embarrassment. What subject should I choose? I pondered over this for some time before I felt sure I could accept the invitation. Social selection seemed to be the most promising

really does mean something, which is a great relief. But I shall have to spend a little time
explaining what it is that I think it means. There need be little ambiguity about
"social selection." I take it to refer to the processes by which individuals are sifted, sorted and distributed into the various positions in the social system which can be distinguished one from another by their function, status, or place in the social hierarchy. I shall be considering, in this lecture, social selection through the educational system.

general field, but I knew it was one in which I should have to walk warily. For I should find in it signposts pointing in directions in
which I must on no account allow myself to travel-signposts bearing such words as " Nature and Nurture," " Fertility and Intelligence," or perhaps the mystic letters " g, F and k " pointing the way to certain shady paths in and around the garden
commonly known as " I.Q."
So I devised a title, a rather elaborate one, which would keep me out of danger and also make it fairly clear what I intended to talk about. But it had two disadvantages. It was too long to get on to the cards and notices of the lecture, and it might have committed me in advance to a task which I should later find it impossible to execute. So I decided to seek refuge in brevity and obscurity, with the result that you have before you: " Social Selection in the Welfare State." This title gave me no pleasure, partly because " Welfare State " is a term for which I have developed a strong dislike, and partly because the subject indicated was obviously far too big for a lecture. But when I began to consider it more carefully, I found
* The Galton Lecture delivered at a meeting of the
Eugenics Society on February i8th, 1953.

The Principles of the Welfare State
The Welfare State is a tougher proposition,
because it would be difficult to find any definition acceptable both to its friends and to its enemies-or even to all its friends. Fortunately I needn't try to define it ; I have
only to explain what are the characteristics of the Welfare State which seem to me to provide a distinctive setting to the problem of social selection. I take the most relevant aspects of the Welfare State, in this context, to be the following.
First, its intense individualism. The claim of the individual to welfare is sacred and irrefutable and partakes of the character of a natural right. It would, no doubt, figure in the new Declaration of the Rights of Man if the supporters of the Welfare State were minded to issue anything so pithily dramatic. It would replace property in those early French and American testaments which speak of life, liberty and property; this trinity now becomes life, liberty and welfare. It is to be found among the Four Freedoms in the guise of " Freedom from Want "-but that is too negative a version. The welfare of the Welfare State is more positive and has more substance. It was lurking in the

8i

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Declaration of Independence, which listed the inalienable rights of man as " Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness."
Happiness is a positive concept closely related to welfare, but the citizen of the
Welfare State does not merely have the right
to pursue welfare ; he has the right to receive it, even if the pursuit has not been particularly hot. And so we promise to each child
an education suited to its individual quali-
ties, we try to make the punishment (or
treatment) fit the individual criminal rather than the crime, we hold that in all but the simplest of the social services individual
case study and family case work should precede and accompany the giving of advice or assistance, and we uphold the principle
of equal opportunity, which is perhaps the most completely individualistic of all.
But if we put individualism first, we must
put collectivism second. The Welfare State is the responsible promoter and guardian
of the welfare of the whole community, which is something more complex than the sum total of the welfare of all its individual members arrived at by simple addition. The
claims of the individual must always be
defined and limited so as to fit into the complex and balanced pattern of the welfare of the community, and that is why the right to welfare can never have the full stature of a natural right. The harmonizing of individual rights with the common good is a problem which faces all human societies.
In trying to solve it, the Welfare State
must choose means which are in harmony with its principles. It believes in planningnot of everything but over a wide area. It must therefore clearly formulate its object-
ives and carefully select its methods with a full sense of its power and its responsibility. It believes in equality, and its plans must therefore start from the assumption that
every person is potentially a candidate for every position in society. This complicates matters; it is easier to cope with things if
society is divided into a number of noncompeting social classes. It believes in personal liberty because, as I choose to define it, it is a democratic form of society. So although, of course, like all States, it uses

some compulsion, it must rely on individual choice and motivation for the fulfilment of its purposes in all their details.
How do these principles apply to selection through the educational system? The general social good, in this context, requires a bal-
anced supply of persons with different skills and aptitudes who have been so trained as
to maximize the contribution they can make
to the common welfare. We have, in recent years, seen the Welfare State estimating the need for natural scientists, social scientists
and technicians, for doctors, teachers and
nurses, and then trying to stimulate the
educational system to produce what is required. It must also be careful to see that the national resources are used economically and to the best advantage, that there is no waste of individual capacities, by denying them the chance of development and use, and no waste of money and effort, by giving education and training to those who cannot get enough out of them to justify the cost.
On the other side, the side of individualism, is the right of each child to receive an education suited to its character and abilities. It is peculiar, in that the child cannot exercise the right for itself, because it is not expected to know what its character and abilities are. Nor can its parents wholly represent its interests, because they cannot be certain of knowing either. But they have a rather ambiguous right at least to have their wishes considered, and in some circumstances to have them granted. The status of parental rights in the English educational system is somewhat obscure at the moment. There is no reason to assume that the independent operation of the two principles, of individual rights and general social needs, would lead to the same results. The State has the responsibility of harmonizing the one with the other.
So far I have merely been trying to explain the general meaning which I have discovered in the title of this lecture. As I have already said, I. shall first limit this broad field by concentrating on selection through the educational system. I shall then limit it further to the two following aspects of the problem. I shall look first at the selection

SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE STATE

-83

of children for secondary education and try little bit of everything. Finally we have the

to see what is involved in bringing it into two Interim Reports of the Committee of

harmony with the principles of the Welfare the National Foundation of Educational

State. I choose this particular point in the selection process partly because of its intrinsic and often decisive importance, and partly because so much has recently been written about it. I shall look in the second place
rather at the social structure and consider'

Research on The Allocation of Primary School Leavers to Courses of Secondary Education, published in I950 and I952. It is too soon to say exactly what position this new detachment will take up on the battlefield, but the

how far it is possible to achieve the aims of wording of its title is highly significant when

the Welfare State in this field-particularly compared with that of the Symposium.

the aim of equal opportunity-in a society in " Selection " has been replaced by " alloca-

which there still exists considerable inequality tion " and " types of secondary school " by

of wealth and social status. In doing this I " courses of secondary education."

shall be able to draw on some of the still The first point to note is that, in this

unpublished results of researches carried out matter of selection for secondary education,

at the London School of Economics over the the State is in full command of the whole

past four years, chiefly with the aid of a situation. It provides the primary schools

generous grant from the Nuffield Foundation. which prepare children for the examination,

it designs the secondary school system for

Selection for Secondary Schools

which they are being selected, and therefore

We are all, I expect, aware that for some determines the categories into which they

time past educationists (both teachers and are to be sorted, and it invents and adminis-

administrators), and psychologists and statis- ters the tests. Such power is dangerous. It

ticians (I sometimes find it hard to distin- is easy in these circumstances to make sure

guish the one from the other) have been that one will find what one is looking for,

hurling themselves at the problem of and it is, no doubt, gratifying to discover

selection for secondary schools with a deter- that one's artistic masterpiece has been

mination and a ferocity of purpose which faithfully copied by Nature. I find it unfor-

are positively terrifying. A good general tunate that, just as there are three main-

survey of the campaign can, I think, be types of secondary school, so there are three

extracted from four sources. There is first types of ability with which educational

the Report of the Scottish Council for psychologists juggle-g or general, F or

Research in Education on Selection for technical and k or spatial. I am afraid people

Secondary Education, presented by William may come to regard this as evidence of col-

McClelland in I942. This is an impressive lusion, when in fact, of course, the two

document which might be described as a trinities do not correspond.

bold and challenging advance by the forces The second point to note is that the

of pure science and exact measurement. It principles of the I944 Act, which I take to be

was met and held in check by a counter- the principles of the Welfare State, have not

attack delivered by the National Union of yet been put into effect. The Act, according to

Teachers in its Report on Transfer from the N.U.T. Report, " has given the problem

Primary to Secondary Schools, published in of transference from the primary to the

I949. Meanwhile there had opened, in June secondary school an entirely new form,"

I947, a friendly contest conducted under which necessitates a thorough reassessment

strict tournament rules in the British Journal of our old methods of selection (p. i6). The

of Educational Psychology, in the form of the profound change referred to is that from

"Symposium on the Selection of Pupils for competitive selection of a few for higher

Different Types of Secondary Schools," things to allocation of all to suitable schools,

which continued until February I950. It or, as Kenneth Lindsay phrased it nearly

was richly informative, and contained a twenty years before the Act, from " selection

84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by elimination " to " selection by differ-
entiation."* When allocation is working fully, says the N.U.T., " the situation ought not to arise in which it is impossible to send
a child to the school most suited to his needs because there is no place available for him in a school of this kind" (p. 20). We are still a long way from this, and " for the time being the sole certain indication for a modem school is unsuitability for a grammar or technical school" (p. i8).
I see danger lurking here too. If too long a time passes during which an ideal cannot be realized, it may become unrealizable-a myth, as it were, which has lost contact with the world of experience, and which has never been through the testing which must lie between the blueprint and the finished
machine. There is a danger, too, that we may imagine we are preparing the instruments for use in the new operation when in fact we are only perfecting those which are suited for use in the old. In the first Interim Report of the National Foundation there occurs the sentence: " It is the procedure of competitive entry to grammar schools that has been responsible for the undue importance which has been attached to objective tests and to external examinations" (p. 62). Note " external examinations," for there is something pretty fundamental there.
But the principle of allocation is not a new idea. It was implicit in the Act of I9I8, which stated that sufficient provision must be made to ensure that no children are " debarred from receiving the benefits of any form of education by which they are capable of profiting through inability to pay fees," and it has been steadily developing since
that date. And the importance attached to objective tests and external examinations is not an old phenomenon which happens to have survived into the new age. It has grown side by side with the growth of the idea of allocation, and continued to grow
after the passing of the I944 Act.
The movement in the field of ideas towards allocation instead of selection, and the movement in the field of practice towards uniform

general standardized testing have been con-
temporaneous. I think, too, that any reader of the Symposium must be struck by the intense interest shown in the possibility of
devising objective tests accurate enough to be used for allocation on the basis of special aptitudes, as well as for selection on the basis
of general ability. There are, of course, signs
of movement in other directions among
education authorities, such as the greater
use made of cumulative school records and
so on; and, as regards the Symposium, it must not be overlooked that Sir Cyril Burt opened boldly with the statement that the problem was " administrative rather than
psychological." * This sounded very much
like the old-fashioned rebuking the newfangled, and no doubt some psychologists
thought that he was letting the side down. In all this I seem to see evidence of a clash
between what I earlier referred to as the collectivist and individualist elements in the Welfare State. Allocation, interpreted along N.U.T. lines, represents unqualified individualism. The right of each child to receive the education best suited to its unique individual needs should not be inhibited by reference to the cost of providing the necessary schools and teachers nor to the demand in society at large for particular numbers of persons educated and trained in particular ways. But to the collectivist principle these limiting factors arise from rights of the community as a whole, which the Welfare State cannot ignore. And they may favour a provision of grammar school places which is less than the provision needed to accommodate all who could benefit from a grammar school education. As long as this happens, competitive selection will remain with us. How long that will be, I do not propose to guess. But, when selection is competitive, the authorities must reach a decision somehow, using the best means at their disposal. And they must'be able to enforce the decision negatively (that is to say, the decision not to admit) against the wishes of the parent. When faced with the necessity of filling the last five places in a grammar school from twenty applicants, all

*Social Progress and Educational Waste, p. 28.

* Loc. cit., June I947, p. 57.

SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE STATE

85

backed by ambitious and determined parents, mind is the one which says that all should be

you may feel that the best means of selection judged by the same procedure, as impartially

are either to follow the mark order or to toss and impersonally as possible, that favourit-

up. The public may prefer you to follow the ism and privilege must be eradicated, and

marks, even though you know that in this also the_ effects of differing social environ-
border zone the verdict of the marks has no ments on the critical turning-points in life.

real validity. So the use of imperfect selec- So far so good. The principle must be

tion methods can be justified by the inade- allowed to have full weight. There is one

quacy of the educational system, as judged obvious point at which it favours objective

by the ideal of allocation.

tests. Because children come to their

But in my view, if allocation replaced examination at ii+ from schools and

selection, then no amount of improvement neighbourhoods of very different quality,

would make the tests sufficiently exact to they cannot be judged by their attainments

carry the weight of decisions enforceable only; an attempt-must be made to discover

against parental wishes. For the question to natural abilities which may have been frus-

be answered in each case would not be: " Is trated by circumstances but may still be

this child better suited to a grammar school able to come to fruition if given a fair chance.

than the other applicants? If so, we must But latent capacities are concealed, and

tell the others we are full up." But: " What, something more scientific than a teacher's

as judged by absolute standards and without judgment or a school record is needed to

reference to competing claims, is the educa- reveal them.

tion best suited to this child's needs ? " I But the collectivist principle goes farther,

feel convinced that, in the majority of cases, and sometimes assumes shapes which are

"questions in this form will remain unanswer- more open to question. The doctrine of fair

able by tests and examinations-unanswer- shares and equal opportunity sounds admnir-

able, that is, with the degree of assurance able, but it may become so distorted as to

necessary before the answer can be made the merit the cynical comment that fair shares

basis of administrative action. So we should means " if we can't all have it, nobody shall,"

find, I think, that instead of allocation in the and that equal opportunity means " we must

sense of the definitive assignment of each all have an equal chance of showing that

child to an appropriate school or course, we we are all equally clever." And the present

should have something more like an advisory situation may encourage this type of distor-

service which left the responsibility of tion, if it leads us to regard competitive

decision to the parents. And that, I under- selection as a necessary evil. If the Welfare

stand, is what happens now in so far as the State is to bring its two principles into

principle of allocation already enters into our harmony, it must conceive of the basic

system. And in support of the view that it equality of all as human beings and fellow-

should be so, I can quote, from the Sym- citizens in a way which leaves room for the

posium, Mr. Dempster of Southampton, who recognition that all are not equally gifted

writes: " The wishes of the' parents are nor capable of rendering equally valuable

possibly the best guide at present available services to the community, that equal

to selectors in deciding between grammar opportunity means an equal chance to reveal

and technical school education." *

differences some of which are superiorities,

This sounds in many ways a very attractive and that these differences need for their

prospect, though we ought to know a little development different types of education,

more about how parental wishes work before some of which may legitimately be regarded

we acclaim it, and I shall have something to as higher than others. The notion, therefore,

say on that later. But I fancy it conflicts that selection, even competitive selection,

with another aspect of the collectivist element can be eliminated from our educational

in the Welfare State. The principle I have in system seems to me to be a pipe-dream and

* Loc. cit., November I948, p. I30.

not even a Utopian one.

86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Obstacles to Equal Opportunity

class section (the upper class is too small to

I will defer making any general comment appear in a sample of this size). Group 5,

until I have considered my second question, including routine non-manual and skilled

to which I now turn. This relates to another manual jobs, was a very large one comprising

dilemma or antithesis inherent in the 40 per cent, while groups 6 and 7, semi-

principles and structure of the Welfare skilled and unskilled manual, provided

State. It is the problem of establishing equal approximately another 30 per cent. Of the

opportunity without abolishing social and general picture I will say little; I would

economic inequality. I say this is inherent rather wait for the papers to be published

in the nature of the Welfare State because with full statistical tables. But one or two

it is my opinion-which I do not propose to points may be noted. We find that the

argue here-that the Welfare State, as we social forces holding a son to the occupa-

know it, must necessarily preserve a measure tional -group of his father are significantly

of economic inequality. This problem, there- strongest in groups i and 2 and weakest in

fore, is a permanent and not a transitory one. group 5. We can summarize crudely by say-

One of the most striking passages in ing that money and influence count for most

Kenneth Lindsay's well-known and far- at the top, and life's chances lie most widely

sighted study of this question in the inter- open, for good or ill, in the melting-pot in the

war period is the quotation from Lord middle of the scale. This is interesting,

Birkenhead which runs: " There is now a because it is at this middle point in the scale

complete ladder from the elementary school to that we might expect to find many families

the university, and the number of scholarships ambitious for their children's future and

from the elementary to the secondary school ready to forgo their earnings while they get

is not limited, awards being made to all secondary and further education, but not

children who show capacity to profit." * in a position to pay fees. It is precisely

This fantastic illusion was blown sky- among such families that the building of an

high by Lindsay's book, and later studies educational ladder is likely to have the

showed that equality of educational oppor- greatest effect.

tunity was still a distant ideal at the outbreak The second point of relevance in the

of World War II. The research carried out general picture is that the returns show what

at L.S.E. during the past four years, to which to many may be a surprising amount of

I have already referred, has drawn in more downward movement. There is a common

firmly the outlines of the picture and added saying, which in the United States has had

some details. We can see pretty clearly what the force of a political dogma, that " there is

the situation was when the Welfare State plenty of room at the top.." And one remem-

took over and what were the obstacles it had bers benevolent members of the upper layers

to overcome.

of society who have strongly advocated the

This research included a IO,OOO sample building of a social and educational ladder

survey of persons aged i8 and over in Great under the impression, apparently, that it

Britain in I949. Mobility was examined on could carry one-way traffic only, and that

the basis of the seven-point scale of occupa- the ascent of the deserving from below would

tional status, widely known as the Hall- not have to be accompanied by a descent on

Jones scale, which had been prepared for the part of any of their own children to make

this study. Groups I and 2 include the pro- room for the newcomers. But, if we take

fessional and managerial occupations, and all the male subjects in the sample, we find

groups 3 and 4 the supervisory and clerical- that 35.2 per cent had the same occupational

to give a rough idea of their character. status as their father, 29.3 per cent had risen

Together they comprised about 30 per cent. and 35.5 per cent had fallen. These figures

of the sample, which can be called the middle- probably exaggerate the falls because they

include the young men in the sample who

* Op. cit., p. 9.

had not yet reached their final occupational

SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE STATE

87

level, and, of course, they tell us nothing of groups who went to grammar schools rose
the distance risen or fallen, which is an from 38.4 to 45X7, and the corresponding
important factor. The believers in one-way figures for group 5 (the skilled manual and traffic thought that upper- and middle-class routine non-manual workers) are 4.I and
jobs were increasing faster than jobs in IO7. The percentage increase for the workgeneral, while upper- and middle-class families ing-class group is much greater than for the were producing fewer children than families middle-class group, but the inequality that in general. But it seems clear, and the I95I remains is enormous. And it is still greater
census sample confirms this, that this was if one includes boarding schools. The reason
true, as regards middle-class jobs in general, for this was not only that the total provision
only of women's employment. The propor- was insufficient, but also that a considerable tion of occupied men in such jobs showed no part of the benefit went to the middle classes.
significant increase from I9II to I95I, while It is true that the proportion of children in
the proportion of occupied women in such grammar schools who are occupying free
jobs rose approximately from 24-5 per cent places increases as you go down the social
to 45.5 per cent. There was some increase in scale. But the proportion of the whole comclerical jobs for men, but even here the pany of children of an occupational group spectacular advance was in the employment who hold free places in grammar schools is of women. In I947, to quote one illustrative highest at the top, I3.2 per cent in status
case, of those leaving secondary grammar groups I and 2 (upper middle class) and 5
schools at the age of i6 to go straight into per cent in group 5 (upper working class). jobs, just about 43 per cent of the boys went I have picked these pieces of information into the " clerical and professional " category from the analysis which Mrs. Floud has
and of the girls 68 per cent, or, if nursing is made of this part of the survey and which
included, nearly 77 per cent. Since there was contains many more points of equal interest. an expansion of grammar schools during this My point is this. It may look at first sight period, and since grammar schools were as if the bourgeoisie had, as usual, filched largely an avenue to middle-class jobs, these what should have gone to the workers. But, facts are interesting. There may have been in the circumstances, that was bound to many boys who hitched their wagon to a happen in a free democracy and is bound to white collar without realizing that their most go on happening in the Welfare State. For serious competitors were their own sisters. the Welfare State is not the dictatorship of
The educational data in the survey con- the proletariat and is not pledged to liquidate firm and extend the picture presented in the bourgeoisie. Of course more and more I926 by Kenneth Lindsay. The most inter- middle-class families made use of the pubjic esting general lesson to be drawn is that it elementary schools as the quality of these is harder than one might suppose to ensure improved, and of course more and more of that the new opportunities created go to the them competed for admission to secondary people for whom they are intended, provided schools through free and special places. the fundamental principles of a free democ- And since the children were backed by a racy are preserved. The survey covered the better educational tradition and stronger period of the introduction and expansion of parental support, because more of their the Free Place system in secondary schools, families could afford to forgo the earnings and its successor, the Special Place system, of the children, because they came from and it is possible to compare the experience more comfortable homes, where it was easier of the first wave of entrants following the to work, and from smaller families, they were Act of I902 (those born from I890 to I899) certain to be more successful. And when it with the last prewar wave (those born from came to deciding as to remission of fees for I920 to I929). In the period covered by this Special Places, many of the middle-class comparison the percentage of boys in families families had a genuine claim. Today, with belonging to the top three occupational the IOO per cent free place system in main-

88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tained schools, there can be no question of in their work and progress, and how ambi-

discriminating against middle-class families, tious they feel about their future. Here,

and the competitive advantages of social then, is a social factor causing what might be

and economic status can operate without called "unfairness " in social selection about

check. Other inquiries conducted at the which the Welfare State can do very little.

L;S.E., either within or in close relation to Positive action, by improving the physical

the main project, have begun to throw some conditions in poorer families and by stimulat-

light on the nature and extent of these com- ing greater interest and ambition among

petitive advantages.*

apathetic parents, can only be a very slow

That there is a greater preponderance of process. Family differences will continue to

working-class children in the modem schools have their influence as long as the family is

today and of middle-class children in the the basic cell in the social structure.

grammar schools is a fact which no one is

likely to dispute. In an article in the March Social Ambition and Educational

I953 issue of the British Journal of Sociology, Achievement

Messrs. Halsey and Gardner produce evidence The interest of parents may be shown by

to show that, in the London areas they their giving thought to the matter of second-

studied, this uneven distribution could not be ary schooling for their children. In one

attributed solely to the intelligence of the county area parents of children about to sit

children, but must be in large part the result for the examination for secondary schools

of social forces. When, for instance, com- were asked whether they had thought a

parison was made of two groups with the lot, a little, or not at all about the matter.

same mean I.Q., one of which had been The proportion claiming to have thought a

assigned to a grammar school and the other lot declined steadily as one moved down the

to a modem school, it was found that the social scale and was little over a third among

middle classes were heavily over-represented the unskilled workers. But the preference for

and the working classes, especially the un- a grammar school education, though it

skilled families, heavily under-represented showed the same trend, did not fall so low.

in the grammar school group. It is also The lowest proportion preferring the gram-

interesting that of working-class children in mar school was 43.4 per cent and the highest

grammar schools in the areas studied 63 per preferring the modern school 23.9 per cent-

cent came from small families with one or- these figures being those for unskilled

two children and 37 per cent from larger workers. But over tw6-thirds of the unskilled

families with three or more. Among working- worker parents preferring the grammar

class children in modem -schools the propor- school did not want their child to stay there

tions were almost exactly the reverse, and after the age of i6. Their ambitions were

among middle-class children there was no limited. And about half the professional and

significant relation between type of school a quarter of the clerical families said that if

and size of family. No known correlation their child did not get a grammar school

between fertility and intelligence could place they would not send it to a modern

possibly explain this, and it is clear that school.

powerful social influences are at work. And The picture is slightly distressing. It

they show themselves in other ways. A suggests that those who care about education,

similar, though less marked, correlation with and some who do not care much, almost

size of family appears when we ask how much automatically aspire to a grammar school

thought parents give to their children's for their children; but the aspiration may

school career, how much interest they show vary from the desire of a steady job, with

good prospects, to be entered at sixteen, to

* The work has been done by Dr. Hilde Himmelweit, the hope of admission to a university and a

Mr. Martin and their associates. Since the information has been collected in intensive local studies it cannot be used for generalization for any kind as yet.

professional career. There cannot be much homogeneity of purpose in a grammar

SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE STATE

89

school population. And, looking at the other son must choose for himself. In the middle-

side of the picture, we find a low opinion of the modem school which to many appears
as a catastrophe and a disgrace. Talk of " parity of esteem " is a little premature.
Now these likes and dislikes owe something, no doubt, to real or supposed differ-
ences in the quality of education received in the different types of school; But I doubt
whether most parents are following the

class section of the sample, clerical jobs were
even less popular, and the total vote for independent business was practically negligible. A similar dislike of the sound of clerical and office jobs was found by Dr. Jahoda among school leavers in Lancashire-that is to say, among the boys. The girls put office work at the top of the list. When boys were

advice of the N.U.T. to concentrate on the asked what jobs they most definitely re-

" present educational needs of the child " jected, office work was the one most often

and not to think too much " what these chosen, but half of those who named it did

needs may be at some later stage in his so because they did not think they were quali-

development." * 'They are thinking of what fied for it.* It would be very rash to jump

the school may lead to in the way of em- to conclusions from such fragmentary evi-

ployment or further education, and perhaps dence, but it does seem possible that office

of what it stands for in terms of social .work is losing its charm. It is often described

prestige. This last point is one on which as dull and monotonous, and perhaps the

it is extremely hard to get reliable inform- rise in wages for manual work and familiarity

ation, since much of the mental process with conditions of full employment are

involved may be only semi-conscious. If robbing it of some of its other former

social status is not offered by the ques- attractions.

tioner as a possible reason for aiming at a The second point of interest is the clear

particular school or job, it is not likely to evidence, at present confined to one area,

be put down spontaneously; if it is offered, that working-class boys who get into gram-

it may score a fair number of votes, but less mar schools have very high expectations that

than such job attributes as good prospects, they will rise in the world, while middle-class

security, and interesting work. Another boys in modern schools are inclined to expect

cause of difficulty is the lack of uniformity to fall below the position of their parents.

in the use of class names. People differ widely No less than 63 per cent of the boys of lower

in the way they classify themselves or typical working-class origin in grammar schools

occupations as middle or working class, and expected to rise at least two steps on a five-

it is clear that the term " lower middle class " point status scale above their fathers; only

is becoming abhorrent. But, in spite of this, I2 per cent of their comrades in the modem

there is fairly close agreement as to the schools were equally ambitious. But, if we

order in which jobs should be ranked, even measure the rise by the boys' own estimate

though there is disagreement as to the social of it and not by objective' standards, the

class to which they should be assigned. percentage falls from 63 to 2I. This inquiry

The material dealing with job ambitions was reported in Dr. Himmelweit's article in

is too complicated to be briefly surveyed in the British Journal of Sociology, June I952.

an intelligible form. So I shall confine myself It suggests that the boys themselves feel

to two points. In a sample of adults in two that selection for secondary schooling has a

urban areas who were asked what occupation decisive effect on future careers, and that

they would like their son to enter, more than boys from the humbler working-class families

a fifth of the working-class subjects chose a who get into grammar schools may overrate

profession and less than 8 per cent a clerical their chances without fully realizing how

job; the commonest choice (about 36 per ambitious their success has made them. So

cent) was for a skilled trade. The figures long as this is the case, " parity of esteem"

are not complete, as a good many said their is hardly possible.

* Op. cit., p. 20.

* Occupational Psychology, 26, pp. 132-4.

9o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Effects of Social Distance

Loeb (I946) is a revelation on this point.

My last point relates to the possible effects We hear a junior high-school principal say:

of social distance on life in a grammar school. " You generally find the children from the

Grammar schools, one might say, have a best families do the best work. The children

tradition, an educational atmosphere, and from the lower class seem to be not as capable

contacts with the world outside which have as the others," and on this the authors

for some time past belonged to the way of comment that "this correlation holds true.

life of the middle classes. And the middle There is a strong relationship between social

classes are over-represented in the school status and rank in school." A teacher then

population, even though the skilled working- says that there is a lot of class feeling in

class families may supply the largest absolute the school. " Sections [i.e. streams] are sup-

numbers. If, then, we introduce boys and posed to be made up just on the basis of

girls from outside this circle, can they fit in ? records in school but it isn't [sic] and every-

Can they become sufficiently assimilated to body knows it isn't. I know right in my own

enter into the life of the school and get out of A section I have children who ought to be in

it what it has to give, and yet retain enough B section, but they are little socialites and

of their identity to break down, in the course of so they stay in A," and there is much more

time, any class barriers which exist, and in the same strain (p. 73). But the problem

thus make the way easier for their successors, there is allocation between streams or

and for the Welfare State ? Much study is courses, rather than between schools.

needed before this question can be fully It was on this general question that Sir

answered. We have evidence to show that Cyril Burt made one of his most challenging

middle-class boys in grammar schools (in remarks. " A realistic policy," he wrote,

the area studied) do better on average in " must take frankly into consideration the

class examinations in pretty well all subjects fact that a child coming from this or that

than working-class boys, and that, when type of home may as a result be quite

teachers are asked to rank the boys in their unsuited for a type of education, occupation

class in terms of such things as industry, or profession, which lies at an *excessive

responsibility, interest in school affairs, good ' social distance ' from those of his parents

behaviour, and popularity, the middle-class and friends." * Whereupon Dr. Alexander

boys do definitely better than the rest. descended on him like a ton of bricks, saying

And working-class boys are inclined to care that no Authority could act on the view

less about their marks and to take less part " that the present social circumstances of a

in general school activities, and yet, as we child should be a criterion limiting his future

have seen, they expect great results from opportunity." t Undoubtedly he is right.

their grammar school status when the time No Authority can act on the principle that

comes for them to get a job. On the other social circumstances must limit educational

hand may not a school have an assimilating opportunity, but in fact they do, and the

influence and mould its members into a accepted methods of educational selection

more homogeneous group than they were to cannot wholly prevent this. The remedy lies

stait with, thus producing in reality the in the reduction of " social distance."

category of children which until then existed

only in the imagination of the seelctors ? Conclusions

That is a question which points the way to I must now try to sum up. The Welfare

a fascinating piece of research which has State, as I see it, is in danger of tying itself

hardly yet been begun.

in knots in an attempt to do things which

The Americans have similar problems are self-contradictory. One example, I sub-

today, and there is much evidence of status- mit, is the proposal to assign children to

consciousness in the high schools of the different schools, largely on the basis of

United States. The book Who -Shall Be * Loc. cit., June 1947, p. 67. Educated ? by Lloyd Warner, Havighiurst and t Ibid., November I947, p. I23.

SOCIAL SELECTION IN THE WELFARE STATE

9I

general ability, and then to pretend that the
-schools are all of equal status. If this means that we shall take equal trouble to make all schools as good as possible, treat all the
children with equal respect and try to make them all equally happy, I heartily endorse
the idea. But the notion of parity of esteem
does not always stop there; and I feel it
really is necessary to assert that some chil-
dren are more able than others, that some
forms of education are higher than others, and that some occupations demand qualities that are rarer than others and need longer and more skilled training to come to full maturity, and that they will therefore probably continue to enjoy higher social prestige.
I conclude that competitive selection through the educational system must remain with us to a considerable extent. The Welfare State is bound to pick the children of high ability for higher education and for higher jobs, and to do this.with the interests of the community as well as the rights of the children in mind. But the more use it can at the same time make of allocation to courses suited to special tastes and abilities the better. It further seems to me that, for the purpose of selection on grounds of general ability, the objective tests are already accurate enough to do all that we should ever ask them to do, while, so far as " allocation " is concerned, they will never be able to give a decisive verdict in more than a minority of cases, although they can be of great value in helping to decide what advice to give.
So I agree with Sir Cyril Burt that the problem which now faces us is more administrative than psychological. There is less to be gained by trying to perfect the tests and examinations than by thinking how to shape the structure of our educational and employment systems. It is better to minimize the effects of our decisions in doubtful cases than to imagine, that, if we only try hard enough, we can ensure that all our decisions in such cases are correct. The word " correct " has
no meaning in this context; it is a bureau-
cratic fiction borrowed from the office where there is a correct file for every document.
By " minimize the effects of our decisions

I mean refrain from adding unnecessary and
artificial consequences to acts whose real meaning and necessary consequences I have been urging that we should frankly recognize. A system of direction into distinct " types of secondary school " rather than " courses of
secondary education" (to use the titles I quoted earlier) must, I think, intensify rather
than minimize the consequences. I am aware
of the educational arguments on the other
side, but do not intend to enter into a con-
troversy for which I have no equipment.
The other point at which artificial conse-
quences may be added is the point of passage from education to employment. The snob-
bery of the educational label, certificate or degree when, as often, the prestige of the title bears little or no relation to the value
of the content, is a pernicious. thing against
which I should like to wage a major war. There is another matter on which the
Welfare State can easily try to follow
contradictory principles. It relates to occupational prestige, social class and the distribution of power in society. All I can do is to throw one or two raw ideas at your heads as
a parting gift. Although the Welfare State must, I
believe, recognize some measure of economic inequality as legitimate and acceptable, its principles are opposed to rigid class divisions,
and to anything which favours the preservation or formation of sharply distinguished culture patterns at different social levels. The segregation when at school of those, destined for different social levels is bound
to have some effect of this kind and is accept-
able only if there are irrefutable arguments on the other side. Further, a system which sorts children by general ability and then passes them through appropriate schools to appropriate grades of employment will inten-
sify the homogeneity within each occupational status group and the differences between groups. And, in so far as intelligence is hereditary and as educational chances are influenced by family background (and I have produced evidence to show that they are), the correlation between social class and type of school will become closer
among the children.

92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Finally, the Welfare State, more than most forms of democracy, cannot tolerate a governing class. Leadership and power are exercised from many stations in life, by politicians, judges, ecclesiastics, business men, trade unionists, intellectuals and others. If these were all selected in childhood and groomed in the same stable, we should have what Raymond Aron calls the characteristic feature of a totalitarian society-a unified elite. * These leaders must really belong to and represent in a distinctive way the
* British Journal of Sociology, March 1950, p. I0.

circles in and through which their power
is exercised. We need politicians.from all
classes and occupational levels, and it is good that some captains of industry should have started life at the bench, and that trade unions should be led by genuine members, men of outstanding general ability who have climbed a ladder other than the educational one. It is important to preserve these other ladders, and it is fortunate that the selection
net has some pretty big holes in it. It is fortunate too, perhaps, that human affairs cannot be handled with perfect mechanical precision, even in the Welfare State.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 2

