JOHN HURRELL CROOK
Department of Psychology, University of Bristol
Co-operation in Primates

Problems of Definition and Approach

considered the fundamental opposition of

THE SEARCH FOR animal origins of human "co-operation" or "proto-co-operation" ("help-

attributes, and hence for an explanation of man's ful interactions between organisms") and

behavioural evolution, has found renewed expression in recent inter-disciplinary symposia.

"disoperation" ("harmful interactions"). Competition may itself, for example, be said to

On each occasion zoologists, psychologists, be co-operative when the presence together of

anthropologists and sometimes historians have attempted to find common themes. The result

numerous individuals sustains a high growth rate, and disoperative when crowded individuals

has usually been a disappointing semantic compete for limited food supplies. These terms

muddle in which terms used by one speaker have may be applied equally well to either intra- or

not had the same meaning when used by the inter-specific conditions. Many of the effects

next. This is not to say that such discussions are treated by these authors can, however, only be valueless, but it suggests that the presence of a considered "co-operative" in the loosest sense.

linguistically oriented philosopher, who could An allocation of problems to their appropriate

provide a precise analysis of terminological fields would do much to clarify the haze

usage, might be a valuable means of stimulating more productive discussion between participants. In the absence of help of this kind, care is needed

surrounding the subject. Briefly we may attempt some solutions.
(i) Many examples of "helpful" interactions

in the choice of words.
The biological use of the term "co-operation" is far from satisfactory. It lacks the respectability

between organisms (whether intra- or interspecific) result quite simply from the synergistic effects of processes best analysed at the

of its main antithesis, "competition", which even
the most elementary Darwinist can employ with
some felicity. The whole superstructure of evolutionary thinking is built primarily on the basis of inter-individual competition. Cases in which it seems even relevant to discuss interindividual co-operation are distinctly rare. Nevertheless in two fields-the ecology of animal communities and the analysis of social processes in groups-the term has come into a kind of soft-thought vogue. As long ago as 1911 Geddes
and Thompson 11 wrote: "Huxley's tragic vision
of nature as a gladiatorial show and consequently

physiological or physico-chemical level and in
terms appropriate to these fields. This applies particularly to the effects of contrasting population conditions on the behaviour and fecundity of lower organisms.
(ii) The complex control and maintenance of
social organizations results from the evolutionary co-adaptation of many morphological features and physiological and behavioural processes in relation to multifactorial selection in the environment and within the social structure
itself. The end product is an open system geared to reproductive efficiency and maintained by

of ethical life and progress as merely super- processes of socialization. Adaptability may be

imposed by man, as therefore an interference built into a society genetically (as in social

with the normal order of nature, is still far too insects) or may result primarily from learning

dominant among us". Even earlier, Espinas 9 in capacity, as in primates. Signals releasing group

1877 had summarized much anecdotal evidence hunting, mating, or aggressive social control

for co-operative, if not "altruistic" behaviour yield "co-operation" only in the sense that they

in animals. More recently Allee et al.l have integrate behaviour of group members in a

63
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, June 1966,58, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

manner having a clear survival value for responding and integrates its own actions in

individual and group. Clearly these systems are relation to those of the companion. A strict

not what human beings mean when they talk of definition of co-operation in human terms would

"co-operation". As systems of communication require the presence of such delay but the

such processes are, however, basic to the develop- adoption of so strict a meaning here would

ment of co-operation at more advanced levels, exclude much primate social behaviour clearly

but they are best analysed in an ethological relevant to the present discussion.

manner or in terms of some kind of communica- The examples to be discussed are heterogene-

tion theory.

ous and no attempt is made to construct from

(iii) Groups of howler monkeys may "co- them linear derivational arguments to the human

operate" in dropping sticks in the direction of condition. Co-operation occurs in diverse

intruding observers4 and chimpanzees may act behavioural situations and expresses a certain

together in waving clubs or throwing stones at a level of social integration sometimes attained in

leopard.22 Even though such group behaviour a variety of contexts by non-human primates. It

may have an effect on a predator which the cannot be derived from simple examples in the

behaviour of an individual acting alone would way the evolution of behaviour patterns, such

not have, it often seems doubtful whether this as facial expression, for example, is usually

should be described as "co-operation". Many discussed.2

examples may represent no more than the

response of separate individuals to a common Co-operative Behaviour in Non-human Primates

stimulus. Where, however, social facilitation of

response can be demonstrated we have the FIELD STUDIES

beginnings of a simple co-operation.

(a) Defensive Behaviour

(iv) "True" co-operation requires the joint There are numerous cases of supposed co-

action by two or more individuals in the operative action in the face of predators or

performance of a defined task, or in contribution intruders recorded in the primate literature but

to a joint effect (see Shorter Oxford Dictionary). relatively few are well described. Thus although

Co-operation may be often in some imprecise howler monkeys become agitated and cast down

sense "rewarding" to the animals concerned-as twigs and other objects in the presence of human

in the maternal behaviour shown by rhesus observers4 it remains unclear how far the

"aunts" to babies28 or it may occur in the displays are oriented or co-ordinated. Likewise,

presence of contrary tendencies-i.e. to flee, pay agitated geladas may turn over large stones or

no attention or to have a cup of tea-in which leap into bushes making a loud noise both in the

case the behaviour is perhaps "altruistic". presence of an intruder and during their own

Human co-operation is performed with conscious quarrels, but recent observations7 have failed

intent: it is truly teleological behaviour. Primate to reveal the co-ordinated stone rolling assaults

behaviour often appears both deliberate and on travellers suggested in older literature. The

purposive but to infer "purpose" is generally throwing observed was usually performed by

suspect among biologists unused to such high single animals and was in no case directed.

grade performances.

Under certain circumstances, however, social

We have in fact a range of cases on a con- facilitation of the behaviour could well develop

tinuum-at one end social facilitation of and function in the distraction of a potential

behaviour producing a common effect functional predator.

in relation to survival, and, at the other, the Certain open-country ground-dwelling prim-

control by role-playing individuals of social ates have a marked group organization that is

situations in the field and acts of co-operative clearly protective and which gives rise to

manipulation of apparatus by task-oriented co-operative aggression in relation to predators.

captive animals. The advanced co-operative acts Baboon troopsl6 on the move have a screen of

require a delay in response 10 such that an young males around the periphery. These may

individual relates another to a "task" prior to initiate defensive behaviour which through social

64

CO-OPERATION IN PRIMATES

facilitation may spread to other members of the group. Loveridge (quoted by Hall14) has described four old baboons surrounding aleopard and striking it with their hands. Dogs, too, may receive rough treatment from these animals. Gelada herds move in close proximity to a precipice, the females and infants always being nearest to this protective feature. Males line the outer edge of the herd. On attack by dogs the animals run down the cliff but a male, sometimes several males, will engage the dog in a loose series of manoeuvres on the cliff edge. Villagers claim to have lost dogs in the abyss on these occasions.
Macaques and baboons live in "home ranges" and intra-specific fights are limited by a studied avoidance of one group by another. In unusually structured habitats such as the temple area studied by Southwick et al.,29 rhesus groups may, however, begin fighting. The sounds of young males battling soon attract most troop members who co-operate against a common adversary. Yerkes 31 has reported a similar build-up of aggression among chimpanzees.
(b) Agonistic Behaviour within Groups
Within groups of baboons and macaques a marked differentiation of roles develops among the males as a consequence of differential access to commodities, particularly females in oestrus. Normally this results in some kind of an unstable "dominance hierarchy" the control of which is as yet inadequately analysed. These relationships are not, however, of the "peck order" type recorded in birds for they depend not only on individual characteristics but on the interindividual relations between several animals. Thus Hall and DeVore16 describe how certain adult baboons constantly associate with one another and tend to support one another in aggressive encounters with other males. Some males associate so closely as hardly ever to act independently. A group of powerful males can thus establish a central hierarchy to which all other animals are naturally peripheral. An individual's status is thus not only due to his fighting ability or the effectiveness of his threat posturing, but also to his ability to elicit the
co-operation of other males. Complex shifts in

status occur with ch!anges in relationship con-
sequent upon the disappearance of one animal or the addition of another to the group.
Threatening behaviour within groups often reveals the alliances within them. Thus individuals of low status may enlist support of a "friend" by gestures such as jerking the head from side to side roughly in the direction of the adversary. Likewise two animals may together threaten a third to which each individually is subordinate. Again Kummer 24 has described as "protected threat" encounters in which a subordinate hamadryas baboon escapes the attack or threat of another animal by running toward or standing in front of an animal yet more dominant. Similar behaviour occurred between females, who may occasionally combine against a large male and force his withdrawal.
Japanese studies on macaques19 suggest that some at least of these complex relationships may be based on kinship. Thus a juvenile male of dominant parents is more likely to become a member of a central hierarchy than juveniles born of peripheral animals. Patterns of "friendship" relations in agonistic encounters in groups are likely therefore to reflect, to some extent at least, these important blood relationships. Friendship, support and co-operation are thus not likely to be arbitrary or purely temporal phenomena but to be linked to a whole complex of social and kinship relations.
(c) Social structure,foodsharing andprotection of infants
The social structure of baboon, hamadryas and gelada herds implies a degree ofco-operation between the members. Failure to act according to the established norms or behavioural conventions of the group is apt to receive summary punishment. This is especially marked in hamadryas groups when a female wandering more than a few metres from her male "overlord" is at once severely attacked and bitten by him.25 Female geladas, like hamadryas baboons, live in "one-male groups" with their overlord male. They may, however, wander more or less at random within a large herd and may at times be some 200 metres from their male. At regular intervals they gather around him and feed near

65

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

him before spreading out again. Should he move OBSERVATIONAL AND EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES ON

off his group congregate around him and move CAPTIVE ANIMALS

both in space and time independently from the

movement of the rest of the herd and in a Studies of inter-individual relations in captive

direction set by the male. Male geladas do, primate groups reveal an elaborate texture of

however, have means of coercing wandering social responsiveness based on innate and learnt

females; the latter may be pursued until they behaviour within social situations. Harlow and

turn screaming to the male. He then sits Harlow 17 classifythese relations under categories

down and the offender comes and grooms of contrasted "affectional systems". Much of the

him.7 behaviour described in the infant-mother and

Although chimpanzee groups are far less stable maternal affectional systems clearly involves

a male or female of high social status may such a close interplay of co-ordinated behaviour

become a temporary leader; other members of that mother and child may include "co-opera-

the group following and allowing the speed and tion" in the satisfaction of their respective needs.

direction of their movement to be determined by The same may be said of the complex play

it.12 Chimpanzees have also been seen to shown within the Age-Mate system.

co-operate in the capture of a red colobus Rowell, Hinde and Spencer-Booth28 have

monkey which was then eaten. Meat eating described behaviour in a captive rhesus colony

chimps have been seen to acquire pieces of food in which maternal behaviour is regularly shown

from the meat possessor by means of begging not only by lactating females but by other

gestures such as those reported from laboratory females as well. At birth a childless female may

studies (see below).

attend the mother and continue to approach

Field observations, particularly with baboons, newborn infants for several weeks thereafter.

by Hall and DeVore16 amplify the work of The authors refer to such females as "aunts".

Rowell et al.28 on the behaviour of non-parental Their behaviour is tentative as mothers are apt

animals towards the mother-infant combination to be aggressive towards them. When babies

in a captive rhesus group. In baboon troops a moved away from their mothers, aunts would

mother with an infant attracts much "friendly" approach them, pick them up or attempt to

attention from other animals of both sexes. In groom them. Aunts would also "protect" newly

particular, males behave protectively towards parturient females from approaches by other

mothers for many weeks after the birth. Older animals and act with caution in relation to

males approach and touch infants frequently and infants-for example, holding open a heavy

may carry them on their bellies-once for as long swing door to allow an infant to pass through.

as twenty minutes. In the hamadryas baboon A baby neglected by its mother was sometimes

males relate sexually as well as protectively to cuddled by an aunt and some mothers came to

very young juvenile females but this is not use aunts as "baby sitters" leaving their baby

recorded in the gelada, a species with similar with them while they fed elsewhere. The

social structure. Gelada males and non-maternal behaviour of aunts to the infants changed as the

females may, however, pay close attention latter grew merging. eventually into grooming

to infants. During an alarm infants, which relations typical of adult "friendly" behaviour.

commonly wander about a herd far from their Aunt behaviour varies with the animal's age and

mothers, may leap on the back of any animal social status. Mothers tended to allow their

fleeing towards the nearby cliffs. Even large infants to approach subordinate rather than

males may carry a baby clinging on his back dominant aunts. Nearly all mothers finally

within the fur of his mane to safety in this way. accepted one aunt and this was usually her chief

Not all primates show protective behaviour of sitting and grooming companion. In one case a

this kind, however. Thus while some female mother died and the aunt adopted the baby

langurs other than the mother may assist a (eight months old) with little disturbance. The

squealing infant, males have never been seen to behavioural interactions in rhesus groups are

do so.20

thus extremely complex. Any attempt to define

66

CO-OPERATION IN PRIMATES

precisely what is "co-operative" and what is not to direct its companion and to monopolize the

is doomed to confusion. It is clear, however, that reward of their joint efforts. Commenting on

advanced social interactions of this kind are the these experiments Yerkes 31 remarked: "relatively

matrix within which co-operative acts between few instances of co-operative action have been

individuals can occur and show progressive reported from field or laboratory. But such as

development.

there are indicate that the dominant individual

Experiments by Crawford5 have shown that is the one to profit most and the behaviour

captive chimpanzees can learn to co-operate in described ... suggests the use of one individual

solving a learning problem while similar tests for another's advantage rather than anything

with monkeys failed.30 The chimpanzees were altruistic." Perhaps here we find ourselves

trained individually to pull a box containing examining the comparative psychology of

food close to the bars of the cage by means of a exploitation.

rope. Later the box was weighted so that two It is curious that these experiments of over

animals pulling together were necessary to move twenty years ago have not led observers to an

it. Paired chimpanzees given a rope each analysis of primate co-operation in relation to

eventually succeeded in this task. At first the the social roles of the participants. Clearly the

experimenter had to give commands and assist studies are of crucial significance in the contexts

but later the animals watched one another, of "observational" and "social" learning15 and

co-ordinating their movements without inter- one may predict replication during long-term

ference from the observer. Finally, one animal studies of captive groups. It also remains

solicited the aid of the other by means of gesture, problematical whether chimpanzees are the only

touching and gentle pushing in the direction of non-human primates capable of performing

the task and by vocalization. These communica- co-operatively in laboratory tasks.

tive acts drew the attention of the second animal to the task but in no sense "instructed" it what Sources of Co-operative Behaviour in Primitive to do. In another experiment Crawford6 taught Man

his subjects to obtain food by operating in It seems clear that higher primates are

correct sequence four devices indicated by extremely responsive to other conspecific indivi-

coloured tabs. When the subjects were separated duals, live in structured societies with con-

by bars two devices were placed with one animal ventionalized behaviour norms and individual

and two with the other. The correct sequence role playing and, finally, form complex inter-

now required the co-operation of the two personal relations with "friends". All these

animals. When this was achieved food arrived in attributes appear essential for the development

both compartments. Four of the animals tested of advanced co-operative behaviour and require

observed their partner and two reached through learning abilities of a high order. One may now

the bars and pushed or directed him to the ask what aspects of primate behaviour were

markerswhen he had made an improper response. basic to the immense flowering of co-operation

No actual pointing was observed, however. coincident with the rapid evolution of the

Nissen and Crawford26 observed the food Hominidae.

sharing behaviour of young and well-fed chim- In the absence of any living "proto-hominids"

panzees. Food sharing was found to be a highly at a grade of social organization and communica-

variable and adaptable activity which could tion superior to that of the chimpanzee it is

occur either following the begging of one animal inevitable that any discussion of this phase of

to another or without solicitation. Tokens for human evolution cannot be more than specula-

use in food vending machines were exchanged tive. However, the grounds for inference can be

more easily than actual pieces of food. In this greatly strengthened by comparative study, not

study the nature of relationships previously only of primate societies but also of those of

established by the participants was crucial to the carnivores such as wolves and hunting dogs, in

responsiveness of the pair. Likewise in the box- which advanced co-operative hunting (Kiihme,

pulling tests the animal of superior status tended 196423) occurs. In addition, further discoveries

67

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of fossil artefacts may allow inferences from tools and structures to the behavioural requirements for their use. It is most unlikely, however, that anything approaching a full story can ever be known.
In a recent discussion of this problem Koortlandt2l pointed out a series of behavioural
attributes that must have been inherent in
hunting proto-hominids and which may have
formed the basis of advanced co-operation. We may summarize some of his points briefly:
(i) Co-operative hunting requires an advanced
system of communication. Thus, group-hunting carnivores have a more developed system of expression than do non-hunting ones. In man, freed from excessive fear of predators by weapon carrying, and hence able to make sounds freely, development occurred mainly through the extension of vocal communication.
(ii) However, signalling by gesture probably
preceded a developed symbolic language, implying that mental symbolization and its expression in indicative instructions must have been present prior to developed speech.
(iii) While the chimpanzees in learning experiments show close attention to and knowledge of objects as such, in carnivores such as
dogs and cats the place or displacement of objects appears more significant. Hunting proto-hominids must have added this carnivore characteristic to the basic primate interest in order to form a subjective world picture adapted to the needs of group hunting.
(iv) The development of "stealth"-meaning the inhibition of immediate responses in favour of persistent and controlled motivation, would allow integrated performance by groups of individuals in the achievements of goals. Such controlled behaviour is already apparent in carnivores but is not an attribute of living non-human primates. Nevertheless primates show marked successes in delayed response problems. 10
An increase in the conventionalization of social behaviour far beyond that of non-human primates must have occurred. This implies the development of rule-following and signal codes, which have been of great diversity in different cultures, and which required an elaborate socialization process for inheritance. It further implies

the ontogenetic development of some kind
of "super-ego" in the personality structure of
individuals. Koortlandt2l suggests that group
hunting carnivores show evidence of this
attribute. Evidence from palaeoecology and palaeonto-
logy throws some light on the timing of these
changes. Thus, while Ramapithecus and Paranthropus have dentition indicating a primarily vegetarian diet that of Australopithecines in-
dicates omnivorous feeding including meat eating.27 The development of co-operative hunting and all that this implies is thus not likely to have preceded the evolution of Australopithecus. Crook and Gartlan 8 have recently analysed the "grades" 18 of social organization in primates in terms of their functional significance in contrasting environments. The development
of two types of society in ground-dwelling monkeys is linked with the increasing aridity of Africa in post-pliocene times and the spread of savannah and semi-desert conditions. In both these societies there is evidence of some carnivorous propensity. The pongids, and later the
proto-hominids, evolved under the same condi-
tions as the cercopithicids studied and probably showed some parallelism with their development. In the open savannah of Africa in the Pleistocene the biomass of grass eating mammals (ungulates, etc.) was such as to encourage exploitation by capable predators.3 Tool-using proto-hominids at a chimpanzee grade of social organization, forced to live in environments harsher than fruit-bearing forests or open woodland, would rapidly have acquired the taste for meat and the weapons for obtaining it. The change may well have been associated with the development of "all-male groups" (known in chimpanzees and gelada baboons, for example) into hunting parties and the institution of settlements in protective sleeping places formerly abandoned during the day-ranging of the group. The new means of co-operative aggression would have easily found fresh expression in war with neighbouring groups as soon as food shortage and population expansion demanded it. As Koortlandt's discussion implies, the "grade" of social organization necessary for a primate evolving in this way is far in advance of those apparent in living non-human primates, and

68

CO-OPERATION IN PRIMATES

combines with primate dexterity and tool-using (vii) The study of social play in both higher

the formidable co-operative tendencies of group-

primate infants and human children.

hunting carnivores.

Studies such as these will provide us with data

Conclusions

with which to analyse in more detail the conditions under which co-operation arises in both

Co-operative behaviour in primates occurs in non-human primates and in man.

various ways in a variety of contexts and in

relation to a wide range of goals or needs. Even among humans a precise categorization of Summary

classes of co-operative behaviour is not easily achieved, mainly since it arises in so broad a range of motivational situations. Compare, for instance, a business man hurrying to work but
pausing to help an old lady pick up dropped oranges; two workmen installing central heating; the dance; and a game of football. For co-operation to occur anywhere along the continuum between social facilitation and task completion in common, a certain level of social life and
inter-individual responsiveness is required. It may be suggested, therefore, that investigations concerning the general field of co-operation should avoid the use of this "blanket" term and break up the problem into component parts, more accessible in analysis. The following inquiries would be to the point:

The use of the term "co-operation" by biologists is often confused. "True" co-operation in primates requires the joint action of two or more individuals in the performance of a defined task or in contribution to a joint effect. A range of cases, from simple social facilitation to the engineering of social situations by role-playing wild primates in groups, and to the co-operative manipulation of laboratory apparatus by taskoriented animals, is described.
Co-operative behaviour in non-human primates arises only in the context of social systems characterized by a high degree of mutual responsiveness between conspecifics, elaborate role playing and conventionalized social relations, and the formation of close inter-individual bonds. The transition to a human grade of social

(i) Comparison of mammal societies in which advanced co-operative behaviour occurs with those in which it does not.
(ii) Study of processes such as social facilitation and empathy which alter the level of arousal and impel individual attention on to the behaviour of companions.
(iii) Experimental study of primate performance in acts of mimesis, immediate copying of instrumental acts, delayed response problems and learning by
imitation. (iv) A rigorous experimental study of "ob-
servational" and "social" learning as discussed by Hall.15 (v) Analysis of the conceptualization, sym-

organization required that the subtle attributes
of behavioural control apparent in some group
hunting carnivores, as well as an elaborate
communication system allowing symbolization of the external world, be superimposed upon the basic primate characteristics. This development probably did not start before the appearance of
Australopithecus. In conclusion it is suggested that problems
involved in analysing "co-operation" be subdivided into more manageable units-in particular the comparison of mammalian social systems; the analysis of empathy, copying and social learning in primates; and the study of socialization and non-verbal communication in young primates and human beings.

bolization and means of communication

apparent in the non-verbal pantomime

that constitutes a "conversation" at

REFERENCES

chimpanzee tea parties. (vi) Analysis of socialization processes yield-
ing ontogenetic development of co-
operative acts in various social contexts.

1. Allee, W. C., Emerson, A. E., Park, O., Park T., and Schmidt, K. P. 1950. Principles of Animal Ecology. Philadelphia and London, W. B. Saunders.
2. Andrew, R. J. 1963. Evolution of Facial Expression. Science, 142, 1034-41.

69

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

3. Bourliere, F. 1963. Observations on the Ecology of some large African Mammals. In African Ecology and Human Evolution. Ed. F. C. Howell and F. Bouliere. Chicago, Aldine.
4. Carpenter, C. R. 1964. A Field Study of the Behavior and Social Relations of Howling Monkeys (Alouatta palliata). In Naturalistic Behavior of Non-human Primates. Ed. C. R. Carpenter. Pennsylvania, State University Press.
5. Crawford, M. P. 1937. The Co-operative Solving of Problems by young Chimpanzees. Comp. psychol. Monog. 14, No. 2.
6. Crawford, M. P. 1941. Co-operative Solution by Chimpanzees of a Problem requiring Serial Responses to Color Cues. J. soc. Psychol. 13, 259-80.
7. Crook, J. H. (in press). Gelada Baboon Herd Structure and Movement: A Comparative Report. Symp. zool. Soc. Lond.
8. Crook J. H., and Gartlan, J. S. (in press). On the Evolution of Primate Societies. Nature.
9. Espinas, A. V. 1877. Des societes animales. Paris, Bailliere.
10. Fletcher, H. J. 1965. The Delayed Response Problem. In Behaviour of Non-human Primates. Ed. A. M. Schrier, H. F. Harlow and F. Stollnitz. New York and London, Academic Press.
11. Geddes, P., and Thompson, J. A. 1911. Evolution. New York, Holt.
12. Goodall, J. 1965. Chimpanzees of the Gombe Stream Reserve. In Primate Behavior. Ed. I. DeVore. New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
13. Hall, K. R. L. 1963. Observational Learning in Monkeys and Apes. Brit. J. Psychol. 54, 201-26.
14. Hall, K. R. L. 1964. Aggression in Monkey and Ape Societies. In The Natural History of Aggression. London, Institute of Biology.
15. Hall, K. R. L., 1965. Social Learning in Monkeys. J. Zool. 148, 15-87.
16. Hall, K. R. L. and DeVore, I. Baboon Social Behavior. In Primate Behavior. Ed. I. DeVore op. cit.
17. Harlow, H. F., and M. K. 1965. The Affectional Systems. In Behaviour of Non-human Primates. Ed. Schrier et al. op. cit.

18. Huxley, J. S. 1959. Clades and Grades. Systematics Ass. PubI. No. 3. Function and Taxonomic Importance. 21-22.
19. Imanishi, K. 1960. Social Organization of Subhuman Primates in their Natural Habitat. Curr. Anthrop. 1, 393-407.
20. Jay, P. 1965. The Common Langur of North India. In Primate Behavior. Ed. I. DeVore. op. cit.
21. Koortlandt, A. 1965. Discussion of Alan Lyle Bryan's paper: On the Essential Morphological Basis of Human Culture. Curr. Anthrop. 6, 320-26.
22. Koortlandt, A., and Koij, M. 1963. Protohominid Behaviour in Primates. Symp. zool. Soc. Lond. 10, 61-88e
23. Kiihme, W. 1965. Freilandstudien zur sociologie des Hyanenhundes (Lycaon pictus lupinus Thomas 1902) Z. Tierpsychol. 22, 495-541.
24. Kummer, H. 1957. Soziales Verhalten einer Mantelpaviangruppe. Bern and Stuttgart, Verlag Hans Huber.
25. Kummer, H., and Kurt. 1963. Social Units of a Free-living Population of Hamadryas Baboons. Folia Primat. 1, 4-19.
26. Nissen, A. W., and Crawford, M. P. 1936. A Preliminary Study of Food Sharing Behaviour in Young Chimpanzees. J. comp. Psychol. 22, 383-419.
27. Robinson, J. T. 1963. Adaptive Radiation in the Australopithecines and the Origin of Man. In African Ecology and Human Evolution. Ed. F. C. Howell et al. op. cit.
28. Rowell, T. E., Hinde, R. A., and Spencer-Booth, Y. 1964. "Aunt"-Infant Interaction in Captive Rhesus Monkeys. Anim. Behav. 12, 219-26.
29. Southwick, C. H., Beg, M. A., and Siddiqi, M. F. 1965. Rhesus Monkeys in North India. In Primate Behavior. Ed. I. DeVore. op. cit.
30. Warden, C. S., and Galt, W. 1943. A Study of Cooperation, Dominance, Grooming and other Social Factors in Monkeys. J. Genet. Psychol. 63, 213-33.
31. Yerkes, R. M. 1943. Chimpanzees-A Laboratory Colony (p. 49). New Haven, Yale University Press.

70

