i 66 EUGENICS REVIEW.

than from a study of the varying types prevalent throughout Western civilisation as a whole. Modern democratic movements have affected it profoundly, and there is evolving in consequence a type of family which itself reacts on democracy and aids in its development. It is probable that the American family represents, notwithstanding its transitional con-

ditions, a movement towards a higher type of family than any now existing and will furnish the basis on which will rest the better civilisation ot coming centuries " (p. 76).
Primarily concerned as he is with this almost vestigial form of the family, surviving in modern conditions, we can perhaps understand why Mr. Dealey is satisfied to consider the position of marriage and divorce in relation to Church and State, as the principal sociological aspect of the

family in the past. The four remaining chapters, concerning subjects with which the

author is evidently better fitted to deal, contain an interesting account of the effects of urban conditions, and a survey of the methods by which these effects might be combated.
Mr. Dealey advocates a vigorous social policy for all the evils of city

life, including somewhat drastic restrictive eugenics; while powerful

efforts to inculcate higher ethical ideals are to complete the process of

racial regeneration.

"1 This is the age of the child, emphasising its rights and demanding

that every child born into the world has honourable parentage, right

training, a morally stimulating environment, and full opportunity through

education to make the most of his latent powers. A civilisation with such

aims need have no fear of racial decadence, but rather may rely on a

pure family life, a permanent monogamous tie, and a society largely free

from its Dresent defilements" (p. I34).

R. A. FISHER.

Sehofleld, DR. A. T. and Vaughan-Jaekson, DR. P. What a Boy Should Know. London. Cassell; 1913; price 2S. 6d.; pp. ii8.

THERE is little to be said about this book, except that of its kind it is good; it is written simply, clearly and delicately, and it is hardly possible to imagine the most fastidious parent taking exception to any phrase throughout.
Nevertheless, we cannot resist the opportunity of remarking that in our opinion the book is part of a mistaken system of giving moral instruction to young boys. We hold strongly the necessity of such instruction, but the grand question is not the what? but the how? and this question is not answered by any book, whether addressed to boys or to parents. That is to say, anyone with any insight into moral problems and boy life must be aware that even a book like this one is sure to be suited to a few youngsters and unsuited to a good many more. It is probable that to those for whom it is unsuited it would do no harm. Some, if left to themselves, would find it dull; some would feel their curiosity stirred and would wish to know more than the book tells them; to a small minoritv it would be exactly what is wanted; but those who would find it sufficient in itself would be only a handful.
The facts of human nature must be faced, and the first is the immeasurable difference between temperaments and minds. Among boys exposed to the same influences, one at 14 will be found to be wholly ignorant of natural processes, while another will have become morbidly interested in them at IO. If the problem is considered which arises out of this diversity, we think there should be agreement on the method of imparting the teaching; and we believe the soundest to be as follows:First, there should be a determination to make this instruction part of the general training in self-control on its moral side, and on its intellec-
tual side part of the general intellectual training given first by the mother, then by the father. Broadly speaking, it is hardly possible to avoid the

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

I67

risk of exciting interest just in those matters where it ought to be as long

as possible dormant, unless the teaching is assimilated to the general

teaching of the home.

Next, it should be recognised that the special instruction required

about the age of 12 is very little, but it should be quite plain and to the

point. Here, of course, a difficulty arises. The father does not know

what form of words to use. The best plan, therefore, is to choose a

short flyleaf or little pamphlet, such as those sold by the St. George's

Press, Dover, and for the father to give one to the boy to read in his

presence; and at the end all that is needed is to exact a promise that if

the latter gets into any trouble at school he will be sure and tell his

father at once; or, if he has any further questions to ask he will ask them

of him and not of his school-fellows. This is not a perfect system, but it

gets over many difficulties and is free of the danger of exciting undesir-

able interest or of wearying the mind, which very likely may be quite

unable to take any lengthy teaching in, or to keep it in its right per-

qnective_

E. LVTTETLTON.

Clouston, SIR T. Before I Wed. London. Cassell; I913; price 2S. 6d.;

pp. 130.

THIS book differs widely from many which we have read on the same sub-

ject. It is not an exhortation addressed to growing youths, but an essay

on the moral and scientific aspects of adolescence. The tone is elevated

and free from cant and professional jargon, and there are some statements

as to the effect of continence on health which, coming from an eminent

medical practitioner, are weighty and valuable.

It is, however, not easy to say for whom it is written. The author

as a rule shows himself too scientifncally minded to be able to handle the

subject with anything like burning conviction; or in the tone adopted

with striking success by the late Sir Andrew Clarke. And it is clear that

no other tone will have much effect on young men who are face to face

with sexual passions. There is something in these pages which smacks

far too much of the philosopher in his study when the need is for an

Apostle or Prophet. It is a disquisition, lacking in trenchant force and

directness, and not likely, we fear, to give much support to those who are

wavering on the edge of the precipice.

Mloreover, as a disquisition, it is inevitably exposed to the danger of

mixing up science, morals and religion. The prevailing tendency of all

such writing is either to utter familiar scientific truths well within the

domain of science, or to stray outside the limits and lay down propositions

which are either platitudinous or disputable, or unintelligible. Some of

each kind could be found in this book. On p. 30 we read " Science, no

doubt, points to repression being necessary under certain conditions and

from physiological, social, legal, ethical and religious motives." But if

it deals in any of the last four kinds of motive it ceases to be science.

Later on in the same page, what are we to make of the following:-

" Hence the value, if we are to understand the philosophy of marriage,

of studying its psychology and higher meaning and of tracing out every-

thing connected with it "? This is very loose writing and conveys no dis-

tinct meaning. On p. 42 an astonishing proposition is found. " This pro-

cess of strengthening inhibition . . . . should be the bed-rock of religion

and the chief aim of all religious teaching." Is it conceivable that this

statement is introduced with the words: " I would lay down the proposi-

tion on scientific principles that the chief aim of all education . ...

should be the strengthening of the power of inhibition "? But how can

scientific principles show what the bed-rock of religion is If, too, one

thinks what inhibition means, all precision of language is set at nought

when it is connected, as above, with religion. Indeed there is a great

deal of very confused thinking and writing all through the book. On

the other hand, a very prevalent kind of exaggeration is avoided in the

last chapter.

E. LYTTELTON.

