HENRY TWITCHIN
An Account of the Society's Most Generous Benefactor
By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, D.Sc.

U P to this spring, a generous mem- no recorded signs of ill health. It is true

ber of our Society had been in the that his father, another Henry, though liv-

habit of giving us £i,ooo a year, a ing to the age of eighty-seven, retired from

fact not widely known because, respecting work when comparatively young, and was

his earnest desire that his name should not reported to have been always an invalid and

be disclosed, as little as possible was said very irritable, though with dignified, aristo-

about it. This reason for our silence, how- cratic manners when in a good temper. He

ever, no longer exists; for our benefactor, was both a reader and an independent

Mr. Henry Twitchin, died on March igth thinker, holding views considered very ad-

last, quite unexpectedly after an operation vanced in his days. Our Henry Twitchin

for appendicitis. By his will the Society also had an uncle who was deformed and not

becomes the residuary legatee of his estate, at all a desirable character. His mother

thus probably more than trebling the income was an amusing and courageous old lady of

to be received by us from this source. As he strong character; whilst his two sisters, who

is likely for long, or for ever, to head the list completed the family, and of whom he was

of our benefactors, it is fitting that some ac- very fond, both died young of consumption.

count of the man himself should accompany Our benefactor himself suffered constantly

this expression of deep gratitude for what from periods of depression, but must have

he has done for eugenics.

been physically very strong. He left no

Henry Twitchin was born on February near relatives. These details are here given

2ISt, I867, at Shaw-cum-Donnington in with reference to his remarks, to be quoted

Berkshire, his father and grandfather hav- later on, with regard to his own hereditary

ing been farmers in good circumstances, the tendencies.

latter indeed being described as ' gentle-

man ' in the death certificate. There was WEALTH FROM ANIMAL BREEDING

in Berkshire a family of this name, which Henry Twitchin was educated at Newbury

traced back to the middle of the seventeenth Grammar School, and then at Downton

century, with arms on the tomb of one of Agricultural College, where he did well,

them; and with this family our Twitchins winning several prizes. His training on the

were most probably connected, since the land led him to think of emigrating, and the

name of Andrew occurs in both pedi- fact that his father was strict and unsympa-

grees of this uncommon surname. Henry thetic confirmed his determination to leave

Twitchin's mother's name was Lovelock, England in spite of the opposition of all the

her father being a maltster, this being the family. Who supplied the funds is un-

surname of yeoman families in Berkshire known,.possibly a certain well-to-do relative

back to Elizabethan times; and the same is with no children; but certain it is that he

true of Northway, his paternal grand- was able to sail for Western Australia before

mother's name. We may, in a future issue, he was twenty-two years of age and to start

be able to give a pedigree of the Twitchin sheep farming soon after his arrival. His

family for those interested in such matters. stocks suffered heavily in some of the

His immediate ancestry nearly all lived to droughts; but, after visiting England to

advanced old age, and for the most part left raise further funds, he sunk a large number

9I

92 THE EUGENICS REVEW

of artesian wells on his property, which then opportunity of appealing to our Councils in

began to prosper greatly. When in I924 the future, when deciding on the uses to

he sold his estates of Towera and Lyndon, which this income shall be put, always at all

comprising over a million acres of pastoral events to take into consideration-I say no

leases, it was described as the biggest sale of more than that-what were the wishes and

such property ever negotiated in Western views of our great benefactor. Though I

Australia. In fact, after thirty-four years make this appeal, it is, I am sure, unneces-

hard work he returned to England, having sary, because all members of our Society are

made a considerable fortune, but with his sure always to regard the matter in this

health seriously impaired.

light. What is desirable is to ascertain

In spite of his trying and constant occupa- what these wishes and views really were.

tions, Henry Twitchin evidently had time to As to the general opinions held by Mr.

think, and did think deeply on many prob- Twitchin in regard to eugenics, and his

lems, though with little assistance of any reason for holding them, they may perhaps

kind. Judging from certain notes found best be gathered from the following extracts

amongst papers, philosophy and religion from his private correspondence with me.

occupied his thoughts a good deal at one In reading them it must, however, be re-

time; though, as we shall see, it was to membered that the earliest letters were

eugenics that his mind was most constantly written from Towera, a remote pastoral

directed. But to show that he looked to station in Western Australia, that none of

environment as well as to heredity it may them were intended for publication, and

be mentioned that by his will the British and that if he had had the least idea that thev

the Western Australian societies for the pre- would ever appear in print, he would

vention of cruelty to animals received lega- probably have expressed himself more

cies, whilst the following extract from these guardedly. His first letter to me was dated

early rough notes may also be quoted with April 4, i922, and deals largely with ques-

the same object. " I am quite aware that a tions of business. The passages which con-

vast proportion of human suffering is mainly cern us here run as follows:

due to preventable causes and in too many

instances is perhaps a just penalty for their own delinquencies; but I have also seen in

HIS INTEREST IN EUGENICS

my own family connection an amount of " I first became interested in Eugenics suffering patiently endured, for which no about 25 years ago, when the idea of cause could be assigned and by those who to applying the principle we had for a long

our view were least deserving of it, that has time made use of in improving our farm made a deep impression on me." Amongst stock to the improvement of the human these papers was found the telegram, which family occurred to me just as originally

he had kept for thirty-eight years, announcing the death of his sister; and we may guess that it was her he had in his mind when he wrote these words.

as it did to the Founder of our Society, or the Greeks of old, and no doubt to many others. This is not to be wondered at when it is known that I am descended

from a long line of countrymen at home,

OUR USE OF THE MONEY

some of whom helped to make our domestic animals what they are to-day, that I

Turning to the advantages which will was live stock prizeman at the Downton

accrue to the Societv under the terms of Mr. Farming School in i888, and since then

Twitchin's will, some paragraphs of which have devoted my whole life to the breed-

will be quoted later on, the Society is placed ing of live stock (over 40,000 last year),

under no " legal obligations " as to the way in which as you know, under the best

in which his magnificent bequest is to be practice, the principle of eugenics is the

spent. Nevertheless, I wish to take this controlling factor.

HENRY TWITCHIN

93

" Although my occupation alone would HIS LEGITIMATE EXPECTATIONS

naturally have led me to this conclusion, it was the fact that I was born of unsound

As it is of some importance to show in what ways Mr. Twitchin was led to believe

parents and inherited their weaknesses that his bequest would be spent, it may be

and consequently have suffered thereby, as well here to quote part of my reply to

that first forced this question upon me. Isolated as I was in what was then the

the above letter. It was dated June gth,
i922, and ran as follows:

Back Country here, I had no opportunity
of discussing it with people who were likely to know what had already been done to make the idea of use to the world, although it was certainly explained to one or two of my more enlightened neighbours, and it was years afterwards that I met with a reference in some paper
(The Times Weekly probably) to the work of the late Henry [Francis] Galton,

" As to the methods of utilising any further funds coming under the influence or control of our Society, that is a point on which I could say a great deal, and is one
on which you will probably wish to hear something. We now often miss an opportunity of getting a lecture delivered on
eugenics because we cannot afford to give any remuneration to our lecturers. If we
could pay even a moderate fee, we should

and of the founding of the Eugenics soon get together a capable band of lec-

Education Society. " Applying the great principle, as I was

turers, and, being able to comply with any demand, the work in this direction would

constantly doing in my work, it was natural perhaps for me to see no diffi--

soon be largely increased. Our REvIEw, as a method of propaganda, would be im-

culty in doing the same at once with men proved if we could afford to pay something

and women. And I was then advocating to our contributors. Research in certain

the immediate introduction of legislation directions is at a standstill for want of

in all civilised countries prohibiting the funds. I have in my mind especially cer-

propagation of the unfit from any cause. tain half-finished work in connection with

But after reading some of the publications the pedigrees of London pauper stock,

by the Society and other works on the which would be valuable from a scientific

subject, I realized that the great majority of the people were not ready for such a revolutionary change, and that the best
course to bring about the desired improvement was to do as the Society was doing and educate, if possible, the masses to see the inestimable advantage of
adopting the principle and gradually enforce control. .
" Believing in practice as well as in principle, I never married, although better fitted to do so probably than fully one-half of those who do-and being the last of my family I have no relatives having any claim on my property I, in I9I2,

point of view, and most helpful to lecturers
to illustrate existing evils due to heredity. Lastly, our staff is ill-paid and inadequate, which makes all progress difficult. This is
perhaps sufficient to show how greatly the whole position might be strengthened were more funds available. There is no institution throughout the world known to me which is carrying on such an active eugenic
propaganda as we should desire to initiate had we the means; and for any Society to set a proper example in this respect might produce beneficial results to posterity of incalculable magnitude."

made my Will-after providing for cer- It must be remembered that in i922 we

tain legacies-in favour of our Society, were not receiving £i,ooo a year as a gift

for the carrying on of the propaganda from Mr. Twitchin, as we did in many later

which I believe to be by far the most years.

urgent and important work possible in A few more extracts from Mr. Twitchin's

human endeavour. . . .

letters will now be given:

94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Perth, W. Australia, Nov. igth, I923.- really want to stop breeding are too careless

"You gave me some account of your more and improvident. Some day perhaps they

recent endeavours in the great cause, more will be sterilized without their consent."

particularly in securing a share of the Villa Eug&ne, April ioth, 1927.-" Re-

Rockefeller bequest for the closer study of ferring to your long letter on the subject,

heredity in England, which was an excellent you quote Pearson as saying that ' the

idea. But I suppose the money would have effect of Birth Control up till now [the time

to be devoted to the purpose specified and he wrote] has been simply disastrous.'

might not be used for general propaganda. But at that time only the better classes

I trust the special effort you were making practised it, and withholding the knowledge

to increase the membership of the Society from the inferior classes will not stop the

was successful, as it is more important to practice in the higher. It would in fact

have many people interested in our teach- have a tendency to increase the latter, as

ing than to have the money of the few.... the support of the unemployed falls on them

The last sentence is interesting as com- and renders them less able to keep their

ing from one who has bequeathed such a own families. I quite agree with the prin-

large sum for the furtherance of eugenics. ciples laid down in the Society's outline of

The next quotation is dated April 30th, a Eugenic Policy under Conception Control

I926, by which time he had come to live at [this has been somewhat modified since

the Villa Eugbne at Nice. (He told me these words were written]. Paragraph 3

laughingly that the name of his house, covers the whole question as far as Britain

though appropriate, was not given to it by is concerned. The time has come when

himself.)

owing to economic changes-loss of trade,

" The cinema and broadcasting seem to etc.-which are likely to be permanent, the

me to be the best means of reaching the children of so many people cannot be raised

largest number of people, though articles in ' in accordance with a certain minimum

the popular press would be read by a good (decent) standard of civilization.' Perhaps

many."

no one but those who have had the manage-

BIRTH CONTROL AND STERILIZATION

ment of large stock farms fully realize the practical side of this question. We know

Villa EugEne, Dec. 20th, 1926.-" Pro- the utter madness of going on breeding up

gress in practical eugenics measures is still when the Ranch is fully stocked and there

very slow, although it appears to be dawn- is no, or insufficient, outlet for the surplus.

ing on some public authorities that steriliza-

. If it is to do any good we must

tion is the only means to help them out of banish sentiment and act drastically. We

their financial difficulties in the case of the must not consider the rights of individuals

feeble-minded. Perhaps after thinking over-much-a lunatic in my opinion has no

about it for another ten years it will be rights-when the vital interests of the State

adopted. This is thoroughly British. Of are at stake."

course, we cannot begin operating until the spirit moves a sufficient majority to vote for EUGENICS AND 'STOCKYARD METHODS'

it. In the meantime, as the Government Chambord, France, Aug. 26th, I927.-

will not do anything to establish public "I should not if I were you condemn

clinics for teaching birth control methods, 'stockyard methods,' so called, so severely.

there is nothing, as I understand the law, What are they but the practice of the very

to prevent private effort in this direction. essence of eugenic principles-the preven-

There seems little doubt that the tion of the breeding of the unfit and making

poor are quite ready to practise contracep- it possible for only the best types to do so.

tion if they are only taught how to do it; It may be good policy for the present not

although I fear that only the best of the to go too far, but if eugenic teaching is ever

poor would trouble to learn. Those we to do any practical good for the human

HENRY TWITCHIN

95

family, stronger measures will have to be eugenic reform is most needed to get rid of

taken than any so far advocated."

the great burden of the unemployed."

Villa Eugene, Oct. 3oth, I928.-" I Geneva, July 2ISt, 1929.-" I certainly

have read your new book [ What is agree with you that our Society should

Eugenics?] and agree with most of the argu- advocate all measures likely to improve the

ments in it, but still think that in combat- race rather than concentrate on one only.))

ing a great social evil we should not be

over scrupulous as to the means by which TWENTY YEARS OF THOUGHT

we hope to bring about an improvement, Passing on to consider what were Mr.

and that as birth control in some form is Twitchin's more definitely expressed

the only practicable way to this end, it wishes, several wills were made by him in

should be enforced by the authority of the which his intentions of benefiting eugenics

nation regardless of the likes and dislikes were expressed, the first one being signed in

of those who haven't the intelligence to 19I2. At about that same time he wrote a

know what is good for them or the contrary. letter, from which the following extracts are

Pro bono is still supposed to be a principle taken, to be held for safe keeping with that

of democracies. Your smaller book is un- will by the Public Trustee:

doubtedly more suitable for the great " Lest it should be considered that in be-

majority of readers than the larger one and queathing the whole of the residue of my

. I should be glad to subscribe for say estate, as I have done, for the purposes of

I,ooo copies to be sent to distributing furthering the knowledge and, I trust, in

centres in large towns, if you approve the time securing the adoption of the principles

proposal."

of eugenics both in England and through-

It gives me great pleasure to think that out the world, I have acted hastily. .

this plan was carried out, the copies being I am desirous of mentioning by letter to you

sent at his suggestion to public and other that . . . I have for nearly 20 years past

libraries at home and in the Dominions. Of taken the keenest interest in all aspects of

course he may have been mistaken as to the eugenics and have read and thought much

value of that book; but we cannot be mis- upon the subject and, in the result, I am

taken in believing that his object was to thoroughly convinced that to the extent the

place a book capable of being widely under- knowledge of the science is brought home

stood where it would be widely accessible. to the people and its principles acted on and

Villa Eugdne, June i8th, I929.-" The enforced, enormous beneficial results must

other book you sent me, Posterity, is I inevitably follow, and it is to aid and assist

think a most useful contribution to the sub- in this that I very thankfully devote the

ject, very clearly and concisely stated and bulk of my property."

going a little further than you do in sug- When all the available evidence has been

gesting immediate remedies. . . . The considered, it will be agreed, I believe, that

late Health Minister could only propose the word " furthering," which occurs at the

keeping mental deficients (300,000) in beginning of this last extract, is used in

colonies and after some training letting much the same sense as the phrase about

them out under supervision as though they bringing " home to the people," which is

could then be prevented from propagating. used later on. In fact I submit that it was

Could anything be more childish? .

the wish for a wide dissemination of already

Progress is slow, but the only way is to keep accepted eugenic truths which mainly

pegging away like a patient fisherman hop- actuated the writer of this letter.

ing for a bite sooner or later. I think we In this will of I9I2, and also in one of

must look for the greatest developments in I919, both of which were cancelled, Mr.

the newer countries like America, where Twitchin gave power to the Public Trustee

deep-rooted prejudice is not so strong as it as sole executor to pass on any part of the

is in our country; and yet it is here that residuary estate to the Eugenics Education

96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Society or to any society having the same race." These words were doubtless put in

or similar objects [the italics are mine] to permit any research being undertaken in

or, if the Society was not carrying on its connection with any eugenic question. But

work efficiently, to form a trust the income they cannot be quoted as giving any indica-

from which should at all times " be em- tion of Mr. Twitchin's views or wishes;

ployed in the furtherance of the knowledge for they were written after he signed his

and principles of the science of eugenics." last will, and I have no reason to suppose

Whatever may have been the exact mean- that he ever saw them.

ing intended to be attached to these last In the Memorandum then follow three

quoted words, they are not repeated in the other headings, which are both in substance

will of I926, in which the Eugenics Educa- and in words nearly identical with the state-

tion Society was made residuary legatee in ment of our objects which has appeared al-

an unqualified manner. In I922 a codicil most unchanged in every issue of our

was signed making the President of our REvIEw since its publication began. It

Society a co-executor with the Public Trus- was from that source that Mr. Twitchin

tee, who was at the same time authorized to most probably obtained his first information

discuss the terms of the will with myself. about us, and it is to these words in our

In the will of I926 I was personally ap- REvIEw that we ought to look if we wish to

pointed, together with Sir Ernest Allen, to know what our benefactor had been led to

be co-executors with the Public Trustee, the regard as being our objects. They run as

President of the Society to act in my place follows :-" (i) Persistently to set forth the

if I failed. Finally, Mr. Twitchin signed National importance of eugenics in order to

a codicil on the day of his death which added modify public opinion and create a sense of

his French estate to the property passing responsibility in respect of bringing all

to our Society. Thus we see in these i8 matters pertaining to parenthood under the

years, from I9I2 to I930, signs of a steady dominion of eugenic ideals. (2) To spread

increase both in his wish that his property a knowledge of the laws of heredity so far

should be used in " furthering the objects as they are surely known and so far as that

of the Society " and in his trust in our knowledge may effect the improvement of

efficiency. The production of such an effect the race. (3) To further eugenic teaching

on the mind of an impartial and intensely at home, in the schools, and elsewhere."

interested observer cannot, to say the least, We can here find no foundation for a be-

be made the foundation for an argument in lief that research was held by us to be one

favour of any drastic change in our policy of our objects. Knowledge in so far as

or in our objects.

surely known is alluded to, but no mention

PRACTICE OUR MAIN OBJECT

is made of any increase in our knowledge. If we undertake research, which we are cer-

But what are our objects? Or rather, tainly at liberty to do, we must do so under

what had Mr. Twitchin been induced to be- the powers given us by our Memorandum

lieve them to be? In our Memorandum of of Association, which Mr. Twitchin prob-

Association they are set forth in the most ably never saw.

authoritative manner under a number of The words in the REVIEW concerning " all

headings, most of them dealing only with matters pertaining to parenthood " certainly

the business aspects of our proceedings. indicate that we are very practical in many

The first four of these headings, which alone of our aims. That this is so is confirmed

concern us here, runs as follows:

by the statement concerning the further-

" (I) The promotion of the science of ance of teaching " at home, in the schools,

eugenics; this science including the study and elsewhere." Home comes first, and

of the laws of human life in so far as they does not this give the idea that our first

concern human heredity and the conserva- object is to spread eugenic thought broad-

tion, evolution, and progress of the human cast and as widely as possible? Schools

HENRY TWITCHIN

97

come next and universities are not men- hope, but not a command, that we shall as

tioned. May not Mr. Twitchin have been a general rule not part with the control over

led to suppose that we regarded universi- the income arising from this bequest, and

ties as centres from which eugenic light that we shall expend it in what were then

would automatically flow in all directions declared to be the objects of the Society.

and not as dark places needing illumination What Mr. Twitchin evidently desired

by independent societies? To encourage the was that the income derived from the money

production, publication, and distribution of which he had won by many years of hard

literature suitable both for schools and for work in a trying climate should be used for

the spread of eugenic thought in homes cer- the promotion of effective measures of euge-

tainly comes within the declared scope of nic reform. He knew that our knowledge of

our work.

the laws of heredity had been sufficient to

OUR LEGAL FREEDOM The following are the operative words of
Mr. Twitchin's will of I926 as far as it affects the " Eugenics Education Society : " It is my desire that the aforesaid bequest should constitute a permanent fund and that the income derived therefrom should alone be used for furthering the objects of the Society, including the support of branches of the Society, but I expressly direct that such desire shall not impose a legal obligation on the Society or prevent the expenditure of capital if such expenditure is deemed expedient at any time." Our Society cannot now change its objects as set forth in the Memorandum of Association, whilst when these words were written they could be altered by a two-thirds majority at any annual or special meeting of the Society. Hence I submit that the words of the will may be fairly interpreted as expressing a

enable us to maintain and improve the qualities of our cattle; and this led him to
feel sure that it was also sufficient to justify practical steps being taken in order to improve the inborn qualities of our nation. The main difficulty which he foresaw was the persuasion of the public of the immense advantages thus to be obtained; and he held that, to overcome popular prejudices, a persistent propaganda should be maintained by persons who had given the subject adequate attention. The choice between many legitimate ways of spending our newly-acquired income will always be open to our Council; for Mr. Twitchin showed his confidence in our judgment by not tying our hands at all tightly. This trust in us, however, merely strengthens the obligation of honour to follow the path indicated by him so long as we agree that it leads to the end he had in view, namely the advancement of mankind in the future.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 2.

