THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.
By E. W. MACBRIDE.
PART III.
IN the last article we saw that certain evidence seemed to drlve us to the conclusion that within each species there existed a number of distinct strains fertile with one another, but each possessing its own fixed hereditary qualities. We saw further that selection with a strain was seemingly ineffective, and that the apparent effect of selection within a species was due to the gradual elimination of all strains but the one which showed the quality desired in the highest degree, and that when once this consummation had been effected, further selection could not modify the character of the species.
The laws which govern the inherited qualities of the hybrid when two separate strains of the same species are crossed, were worked out by an Augustinian Monk named Gregor Mendel, in Moravia, about fifty years ago, shortly after the time that Darwin
was publishing the " Origin of Species." Owing, however, to the fact that the results were published in a local journal with no very wide circulation, they remained entirely unnoticed by Mendel's contemporaries. In the year I9oo, however, these results were unearthed by two botanists, De Vries and Correns, who repeated some of Mendel's experiments and confirmed his results. The matter was enthusiastically taken up by Bateson, in England, and by many workers in America, and an enormous amount of research on similar lines has alreadv been accomplished. In order to give to the reader a simple account of the whole subject we shall describe Mendel's early experiments.
Mendel begins his account by stating at the outset that he determined to have nothing to do with strains differing from one another by qualities of the " more or less " order, but to deal only with strains differing from one another by some definite differentiating quality, about the presence or absence of which there could be no doubt. For this purpose the cultivated pea (Pisum sativum) offered a most suitable object for investigation.

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

2I9

It is easily cultivated and is obtainable in many clearly marked varieties. It is usually self-fertilized. We begin our survey of these varieties by taking the case of two which are distinguished from one another by a single differentiating feature. Peas when ripe and dried mnay be either of a yellowish colour or of a pale green tint. If a plant raised from a yellow pea be crossed with a plant raised from a green pea, a set of hybrid or mongrel peas will be produced. The crossing is effected by opening the flower buds of the plant which is to provide the ovules (see Part I.) and removing the stamens before they are ripe so that selffertilization is prevented. A little later when the stigma is ripe it is dusted with pollen procured from the other plant, which is known as the pollen parent. When the hybrid peas ripen it is found that they are all yellow, and this is true, no matter whether the ovules have been derived from the plant sprung from the green pea or the plant sprung from the yellow pea-or to put it another way, they are yellow whichever kind of plant actually produces the seed, and is, to use the technical phrase, the seed. parent. This generation of peas is known as the first filial
generation and is designated by the symbol Fl. When these
peas are sown and the plants to which they give rise are selffertilized, or, as it is termed for the sake of brevity, selfed a generation of peas is produced which is known as the second filial generation, and is indicated by the symbol FP.
In this generation-if enough peas are produced-it is found that, as nearly as possible, one quarter of the peas are green and three-quarters are yellow. Thus the green character which had been entirely suppressed in the first filial generation reappears in the second filial generation. Mendel termed the
character, which is thus temporarily suppressed, the recessive character, and to the character which alone appears in the first
filial generation he gave the name of dominant character. When the recessive green peas are sown they give rise to plants which, when " selfed," bear only green peas, and this is true for however many generations they may be cultivated. When the yellow peas, however, are sown they give rise to plants which, when " selfed," yield different results in different cases. Onethird of them-that is to say one-fourth of the total number

220 EUGENICS REVIEW.
of plants which can be raised from the first filial generationgive rise to yellow peas only, and these yellow peas yield only
yellow peas for however many generations the cultivation may be continued; but the remaining two-thirds of the plants raised
from the hybrid yellow peas yield both yellow and green peas in the proportion of three yellow to one green; in a word, they behave exactly as did the peas of the first filial generation of hybrids; and the peas of this third filial generation behave exactly as did the peas of the second filial generation, that is to say the green reproduce their like however long they may be cultivated, and one-third of the yellow do the same, but the remaining two-thirds yield yellow and green peas.
In order to account for this strange phenomenon Mendel put forward a theory which has been widely adopted, and which is termed the theory of the purity of the germ-cells. According to this theory when two strains are crossed their qualities are, of course, mingled in the body of the hybrid, but when this hybrid in turn forms germ-cells, these germ-cells are two kinds, each kind carrying the potentiality of developing the qualities of one strain, but not of both. Applying the theory to the case in point we assume that when the hybrids of the first filial generation come to form germ-cells, two kinds of pollen-grains and two kinds of ovules are produced, one of these kinds of pollen-grain and one of these kinds of ovule having the potentiality of producing a yellow pea, whilst the other kind, both of pollen-grain and of ovule, has the power of producing
a green pea. It is a further assumption of the theory of germ-cell purity that the two kinds of germ-cells are produced in equal numbers. If, for the sake of brevity of expression, we bestow the names of green pollen-grain and green ovule on the type of pollen-grain and ovule respectively, which carry the potentialities of becoming a green pea, and corresponding names on those which carry the potentialities of becoming a yellow pea, then the problem we have to solve is this :-given equal quantities of green pollen-grains, yellow pollen-grains, green ovules and yellow ovules, all mingled together at random, what will be the result ? On the doctrine of chances it appears probable that once in four times a green pollen-grain will meet a green ovule,

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

221

for if all the pollen-grains were the same, and there were equal numbers of yellow and green ovules, half the unions would be with each kind of ovule, but as only half the pollen grains are green it follows that only a half of a half of the total unions, that is a fourth, will be between green pollen-grains and green ovules. By a parity of reasoning we deduce that once in four times a yellow pollen-grain will meet a yellow ovule, and that once in four times a yellow pollen-grain will meet a green ovule, and that finally, once in four times a green pollen-grain will meet a yellow ovule. These last two types of union yield hybrid strains of exactly the same nature, and these hybrid strains appear to the eye like pure yellow peas because of the
dominance of yellow; but the union of the yellow pollengrains and yellow ovules yield pure yellow peas, and these added to the yellow hybrids accounts for the threequarters of the second filial generation constituted by yellow peas. Since a green pea can only be produced by the union of a green pollen and a green ovule, it follows that all the green peas produced are " pure " and yield only their like when progeny is raised from them. It will be observed that in the reasoning which has been just outlined, it is assumed that by random mingling of two sorts of pollen-grains and two sorts of ovules a definite numerical result will be obtained. This is only true if very large numbers are considered, for if smaller numbers are examined we might have accidental " runs " of one kind of pea. To give an idea, however, of the numbers actually required, and of the close approximation between the results obtained by Mendel, and those which might be theoretically expected, we may here reproduce one of the sets of figures which he gives. Two hundred and fifty-eight plants, raised from the hybrid peas of the first filial generation yielded 8,023 seedsof which 6,022 were yellow and 2,001 green. The theoretical numbers would be 6,oi8 yellow and 2,005 green. The student will do well to regard with the utmost suspicion figures adduced to prove the proportions of strains appearing in the progeny of hybrids, if these figures indicate comparatively small numbers.
Besides differences in the colour of the seed, or to speak more correctly, differences in the colour of the cotyledons

222 EUGENICS REVIEW.
or seed-leaves which constitute nearly all the bulk of the ripe pea, Mendel found other strains of peas which differed from one another in a single character. Thus some peas when ripe and dry are rounded, whilst other are shrunken and angular-some produce plants about six feet high, whilst others give rise to dwarf procumbent plants about one foot lhigh-some have the seed-coat which belongs to the maternal generation, white, whilst in others it is grey or greyish brown; the unripe pods might be of a green or of a yellow colour, and so on. In all these cases Mendel found that these strains when crossed yielded a first filial generation in which one of the differentiating characters was dominant, and that when a second filial generation was produced three-quarters of them exhibited the dominant and one-quarter of them the recessive character. It is to be noted, of course, that if the cross were made for the purpose of testing the inheritability of the seed-coat the first filial generation of seed-coats would not be exhibited by the peas produced by the first cross-since these seed-coats being maternal structures would have the character exhibited by the seed-parent to which they belong-but by the seed-coats of the peas borne by the plants raised from these peas. In a word we should have to look for our results one generation further ahead than when we were dealing with cotyledon colour (see Part I.,
page 23).
The question now arises as to what is going to happen when we cross two strains of plants with one another which differ from each other in two differentiating characters. Suppose, to take one instance, we cross plants produced from
round yellow peas with plants produced from green angular ones, of what description will the first and second filial generations be ? When the experiment is tried we find that the first filial generation consists solely of round yellow peas, since roundness is dominant to angularity and yellowness to greenness. When this generation is selfed we find that in the second filial generation three-quarters of the peas are round and one-quarter angular, and three-quarters are yellow and one-quarter green, and each differentiating quality is inherited as if the other were absent. That is to say, though three-quarters are round and

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

223

three-quarters are yellow, it is not the same three-quarters which are round which are also yellow, nor is it the same quarter that is angular that is green. It is exactly as if one had a bag of white billiard balls and one were to select three-quarters of them at random and paint them yellow, and then to put the yellow balls back into the bag and jumble the whole lot up together, and then to select again three-quarters of the whole and paint each of them with a black cross. It is obvious that in a great many cases a ball would receive both the yellow colour and the black cross, but that some white balls would receive the black cross and some yellow balls would escape it. Since three-quarters of the whole are yellow, three-quarters of three-quarters will be yellow and have the black cross, that is nine-sixteenths of the whole. Since one-quarter are white and one-quarter are without the cross, one quarter of one quarter, or one-sixteenth of the whole, will be white and unmarked. By a parity of reasoning one-quarter of three-quarters, or three-sixteenths, will be yellow and unmarked, and three-quarters of one-quarter, or threesixteenths, will be white and marked with the cross. So in the second filial generation, of the cross of yellow round and green angular peas, we find that nine-sixteenths of the peas are yellow and round, three-sixteenths yellow and wrinkled, three-sixteenths green and round, and one-sixteenth green and wrinkled. We have thus obtained two new varieties of peas, viz., green round and yellow wrinkled and therein lies one of the most important applications of experimental breeding. We are enabled in this way to combine two valuable qualities belonging to different strains. When we test the qualities of the peas of the second filial generation, by rearing from them by selfing a third filial generation, we find that all the peas exhibiting the two recessive qualities, viz., greenness and wrinkledness, breed true, and are, therefore, " pure." But of the yellow round peas only one-ninth breed true, i.e., one-sixteenth of the whole number of the second filial generation; the remaining eight-sixteenths, or one-half of the whole, exhibit the quality of hybrids with respect to one or both differentiating characters, that is to say, they either yield yellow and green peas, or round and wrinkled, or, finally, peas which may be yellow or green,

224 EUGENICS REVIEW.
round or wrinkled. Of the three-sixteenths which are yellow and wrinkled, one-third, i.e., one-sixteenth of the whole, breed true, the remaining two-sixteenths, or one-eighth of the whole, behave as hybrids with respect to yellowness; and of the threesixteenths which are green and round, one-third, i.e., onesixteenth of the whole breed true, while the remaining twosixteenths, or, one-eighth of the whole, act like hybrids so far as roundness is concerned.
These facts are explained by an extension of the hypothesis of the purity of the germ-cells.
We assume that each hybrid strain produces twice as many types of germ-cells as there are pairs of differentiating characters. Thus yellow round peas of the first filial generation produce (using the abbreviated terminology explained on page 220) yellow round pollen-grains, yellow wrinkled pollen-grains, green round pollen grains, and green wrinkled pollen-grains in equal numbers, and ovules of the same four varieties also. When a pollen-grain and ovule of the same kind meet-and this can happen only once in sixteen times-a stable variety is produced. Such a union is called a homozygous union, and the organism so produced is termed a homozygote. But where a pollen-grain and ovule of different kinds meet a hybrid variety, or heterozygote, is produced, and such a union is termed heterozygous. It is clear, however, that a pollen-grain and ovule may be alike with respect to one character and dissimilar for another. When such a pair meet the union is said to be homozygous with respect to one character and heterozygous with respect to others.
Mlendel performed some experiments in crossing strains which were separated by three pairs of differentiating characters. On the principles already explained it is a simple matter to calcu-
late the distributions of these characters in the second filial generation. Let us call the dominant members of these pairs A, B and C, and the recessive members a. b and c. The two pairs of these characters, A, B, a, b, will, as we have seen, be distributed throughout the offspring in the proportions of 9AB, 3Ab, 3aB, iab. The third pair of characters is distributed throughout the generation independently of the others in the proportion of three dominant (C) to one recessive (c). We shall,

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

225

therefore have I x 9 ABC, X x 3 AbC, T x I aBC, X x s abC, I xA ABc, xA Abc, 1 x aBc, and I X 1 abc: or, in other
wvords, twenty-seven sixty-fourths exhibiting all three dominant
characters, three lots of nine sixty-fourths exhibiting two
dominant characters accompanied by one recessive character, and three lots of three sixty-fourths each exhibiting one dominant
character accompanied by two recessive characters, and, finally, one sixty-fourth exhibiting all three recessive characters, and all progeny belonging to this last-named category will breed true. But of the other categories some will be heterozygote, with
respect to one, two, or all three characters, and further breeding
will be necessary to separate out the pure strains. Since Mendel's time the continuous work of many zoologists
and botanists has shown that similar strains, separated by differentiating characters, are to be found in a wide range of animals and plants, and that these strains when crossed behave in the same manner as those investigated by Mendel. Comparatively few new principles have been discovered, but there are one or two extensions of Mendel's principles which have come to light, and we shall now give examples to elucidate these.
The suppression of one character in the first filial generation is known as the principle of dominance; the appearance of two types of descendants in the second filial generation is termed the principle of segregation. It occasionally happens that in the first filial generation the hybrid can be discriminated from both
parental types by its appearance. In the second filial generation, in which both parental types reappear, there will consequently be one-fourth of the offspring reproducing each parental type, and one-half showing the hybrid character. One such case is given by Bateson. The so-called Andalusian fowl is a fancy breed, of a colour described by specialists as blue, but which might be more aptly described as slaty. It is produced as a hybrid by crossing two breeds, one of them of a black colour and the other of a white dotted with black here and there. When one tries to raise a breed of Andalusians one can consequently only obtain half the offspring of the Andalusian typethe other half being made up of black and white birds in equal

2 26 EUGENICS REVIEW.
numbers. For reasons which will be made clear later on this condition of affairs is termed imperfect dominance.
Characters like the yellow or green colour of the cotyledons of the pea, which replace one another are termed allelomorphs of one another. Roundness and angularity are another such pair of characters, and it is usual to speak of each of them as being a member of allelomorphic pair. One of the most interesting of the newer results is the discoverv by Bateson that the presence in the
A
BC
D
FIG. I. Illustrating the types of comb found in different breeds of fowl. A. Single comb.
B. Rose comb. C. Pea comnb. D. Walnut comb.
same embryo of two characters belonging to two different allelomorphic pairs can produce a new result different to that which would be produced by the presence of either of them alone. Bateson discovered this principle also by crossing fowls. Breeds of fowl differ much in the comb. The original wild type is seen in the Jungle Fowl of India, and also in many domesti-

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

227

cated breeds, such as the Leghorn, and is known as a single comb, which is blade-like with a serrated edge. Many breeds, such as the Hamburg, have what is called a rose comb, which has a triangular horizontal surface covered by small knobs. Then there is a type called a pea comb, which is blunter than the single comb and not serrated, but which exhibits laterally a few knobs. Finally, we have the walnut comb, which is a bulbous misshapen structure, with here and there a few tufts of vestigial feathers. (Fig. i.)
Bateson began by crossing breeds with rose and pea combs, and found, to his great surprise, that the first filial generation all
possessed walnut combs. When, however, he bred from these walnut-combed fowls he obtained offspring in the proportion of nine walnut-combed fowls to three rose-combed, three peacombed, and one single-combed fowl. Here, then, the original wild type turned up in the second filial generation, in such proportions as one would expect a type bearing two recessive qualities to appear when two strains differing from one another in two differentiating features are crossed (see page 223). This circumstance at once suggested to Bateson the explanation of the anomaly. A rose comb and a pea comb each owes its peculiarity to the presence of some peculiar factor in the germ-cell which alters the typical single comb in a peculiar manner. The allelomorphic fellow of the presence of this peculiar factor is simply its absence, and in its absence the single comb is produced. The factors giving rise to rose and pea comb belong to different allelomorphic pairs, when both are present at once in the same zygote a walnut conmb is produced. When, therefore, we cross rose- and pea-comb-bearing strains we have unwittingly crossed rose, with a strain (pea) characterised by the absence of the rose factor, and at the same time crossed pea, with a strain (rose) characterised by the absence of the pea factor, and in this way produced hybrids which segregate in the next generation.
The discovery that members of the same allelomorphic pair are distinguished by the presence in one of a factor which is absent in the other, is of far-reaching consequence. We now see how dominance is to be explained. Taking the case of

228 EUGENICS REVIEW.
yellow and green peas, we see that all unripe peas are green, but that yellow peas possess a factor absent in green peas, which changes the green into yellow as ripening comes on. When two gametes meet, if even one possesses this factor, the hybrid pea will turn yellow and will be indistinguishable to the naked eye from the pure yellow pea. But, occasionally, the presence of the factor in only one gamete-or to use the phrase commonly employed-a single dose of the factor-is insufficient to confer on the zygote the same outer appearance as two doses, and in these cases the hybrid is distinguishable by the naked eye, and we have a cause of imperfect dominance. The blue colour of the Andalusian fowl alluded to above turns out on closer investigation to be a dilute form of black, due to the zygote receiving only one " dose " of the black factor.
Another principle was discovered by the French zoologist Cuenot; this is that the presence of a factor belonging to one pair is sometimes necessary in order to allow the influence of a factor belonging to another factor to be visible. Cu6not crossed ordinary grey wild mice with tame white mice, and in the first filial generation, as was to be expected, all the hybrids were grey, since whiteness or albinism is obviously due to the absence of colour. When a second filial generation, however, was raised from these hybrids, a most curious result was obtained. On an average, out of sixteen mice, nine were grey, three were black, and four were white. Here we have to account for the appearance of black, present in neither of the parental strains, and, for the ratio 9 :3 :4. Cu6not's hypothesis (borne out by subsequent experiments) was as follows: colour in the skin of mice is due to the meeting of two factors, Qne a factor determining the kind of colour (grey, black, chocolate, etc.), and the other a factor which he named chromogen, which must be present if the colour factor is to show
itself. The albinos in this case were black mice devoid of the chromogen factor, and in the second filial generation there were produced, according to the rule for the result of crossing two strains, distinguished by two differentiating factors, nine grey,
three black with chromogen, three grey without chromogen, and one black without chromogen. The grey and black without the

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

229

chromogen component are, of course, white, and so we see why four (3 + I) mice out of sixteen are white. Greyness is dominant to blackness, the presence of chromogen to its absence. From the reasoning which we have detailed on the nature of dominance we suspect that grey must be a modification of black due to the introduction of another factor. On investigation this proves to be the case, for if the grey hairs be examined under the microscope they are seen to be partly black interrupted with bars of yellow. The " barring " factor is obviously absent in the purely black mice. But this is not all. Blackness, in turn, is found to be dominant to chocolate. Here we have to assume the presence of an " intensification " factor, which converts chocolate into black. When we get three or more colours related to one another in a series like this, by the successive elision of factors, each is said to be "epistatic " to its successor, and "hypostatic " to its predecessor in the series.
Bateson was able to get one step further than Cuenot, for he discovered a case where two factors were present as members of two different allelomorphic pairs, neither of which could manifest itself without the presence of the other. There exist two races of white swveet-pea (Lathyrus odorata), which, when selfed, yield only white flowers, but which when crossed yield purple flowers. When a second filial generation is raised from these purple flowers, then out of sixteen, on an average, nine are coloured and seven are white. If A and B denote these two factors, a,b, their absence, then the second filial generation
ought to consist of 9AB, 3Ab, 3aB, iab. But Ab, aB, and ab, will all equally yield only white, hence we have seven (3 + 3 +I)
white out of sixteen. Further most interesting extensions of Mendelian prin-
ciples have been obtained in connection with " coupling " or
" linkage " and " repulsion." By the first of these terms is
meant that in many cases, when two races differing in at least two differentiating characters are crossed with one another, the factors for two of these characters are not distributed throughout the offspring of the second filial generation independently of each other, but mostly cohere together and enter the same gametes, so that their occurrence separately is exceptional.

230 EUGENICS REVIEW.
One of the best instances of coupling is afforded by the very case just discussed, of the two white races of Lathyrus odorata, which, when crossed, yield coloured flowers. One of these races is distinguished by having grains of pollen of elliptical
outline, whereas the other possesses disc-like grains of pollen with circular outline. These two strains are spoken of as the long-pollened and the round-pollened forms respectively. The
hybrid of the first filial generation has purple flowers and long pollen, since long-pollen grains are dominant to round; but in the second filial generation not all the coloured flowers are
purple: in fact, one-fourth are red. From further experiments, which need not be detailed here, it is obvious that in addition to
the two factors, each borne by one of the parental strains, the
union of which is necessary to produce colour, there is a third independent factor carried by 'the long-pollened strain, which, when present in a zygote, turns what otherwise would be a red flower into a purple one. This factor is, of course, evenly distributed throughout the second filial generation according to the Mendelian laws of segregation, independently of the other two factors. Regarding, therefore, the coloured flowers of this generation as a whole we find that three-fourths of them possess, and one-fourth are devoid of, this factor, and consequently threefourths are purple and one-fourth red. On the same principles we
find that three-fourths of this generation bear long-pollen grains and one-fourth round grains. We should, therefore, expect in accordance with the reasoning outlined on p. 223 that i x i, i.e., 9 would combine purple colour and long pollen, and that 4 xi, i.e., - would exhibit red colour combined with round pollen. But we fine that the plants which combine purple colour with long pollen, and those which combine red colour and round pollen, are very much more numerous than this assumption would entitle us to expect; that, in fact, instead of obtaining a second filial generation consisting of nine purple flowered plants with long pollen, three purple-flowered with round pollen, three red-flowered with long pollen, and one red-flowered with round pollen, we obtain one consisting of 177 purple-flowered plants with long pollen, 15 purple-flowered with round pollen, 15 red-flowered with long pollen, and 49 red-flowered with

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

231

round pollen. If we multiply the figures for the normal propor-
tions by 5, the extent of the preponderance of the two favoured
combinations comes out more clearly. Then the ratios of the four classes of offspring in the second filial generation,
instead of being as we should expect 45 :15 :I5 :5, are actually I77:I5:15 :49. It has been calculated that if we assume that the hybrid between the strain carrying the factors for purple flowers and long pollen and the
strain carrying only the factors necessary for producing red flowers and round pollen, instead of producing equal numbers of germ-cells of the four varieties named according to
the customnary convention, purple long, purple round, red long
and red- round, produces them in the proportions of seven purple long and seven red round to one purple round and one red long,
then the random mingling of these germ-cells in fertilization will produce proportions of plants with purple flowers and long pollen, with red flowers and round pollen, with purple flowers and round pollen, and with red flowers and long pollen, agreeing closely with those actually observed. The factors for purple
flowers and for long pollen are consequently said to be coupled together. It is characteristic of coupling that the two factors associated, though they usually are found together in the same germ-cell, do not always follow the same path. If they always entered the same germ-cell, they would then cease to be distinguishable as separate factors, and would be distributed as a single ordinary Mendelian allelomorph.
By repulsion is meant that in certain cases two dominant factors belonging to two different allelomorphic pairs repel one another, so that if one enters a given germ-cell the other is unable to do so. The best examples of repulsions are found in connection with the inheritance of sex. Since either one or the other factor must be in a germ-cell, repulsion is sometimes termed spurious allelomorphism.
Verv early in the course of the investigation of the laws governing the inheritance of characters in the progeny of two parents which belonged to distinct strains, the question arose whether sex itself might not be a character which was inherited after the Mendelian manner. For in the human species, and in

232 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the vast majority of the species of the higher animals, the individuals are of two different kinds, male and female, which differ from one another vastly more than two Mendelian strains of the same species. Indeed, in the case of some insects, male and female might easily be regarded as types of distinct species if their relationship to one another were not known. The decisive difference between males and females, is, of course, that the first carry spermatozoa and the latter eggs, but with this primary difference are associated, as we all know, a number of other differences, as, for instance, the beard and moustache in men or the comb in cocks, which are known as secondary sexual characters. Now, of course, when male and female unite and produce
children these are of both sexes-since otherwise the race would come to an end-and hence the relation of the two sexes to one another cannot be simply that of dominant and recessive. Since, on the whole, in the human race and in the higher animals, the sexes are produced in approximately equal numbers, the only assumption that is tenable, if the inheritance of sex resembles that of Mendelian characters, is that one of the sexes is heterozygote and that the other is a pure recessive. If F denotes femaleness and M maleness then in a case of sexual union we must either have the cross expressed by the formula F(M) x M = F(M) + MM, or by the formula M(F) x F = M(F) + FF, the character in brackets being the recessive one. In the first case we assume that the apparent female is a heterozygote in which the female quality is dominant to the male quality, but that the male is a pure recessive. In the second case we assume that the apparent male is a heterozygote, and that the quality of maleness is dominant to femaleness, but that the female is a pure recessive. In either case we must assume that sex which we regard as heterozygote produces two kinds of germ-cells in equal numbers, one sort carrying the male and the other sort carrying the female characters. It follows that there must be either two
kinds of eggs or two kinds of spermatozoa. Curiously enough evidence has been produced to show that both these cases can
occur. It is the merit of Dr. Doncaster to have been the first to have clearly demonstrated a case where there are two kinds of eggs, and where femaleness is dominant over maleness, and we

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

233

shall give an account of his work in order to serve as a type of this kind of investigation.
One of the very common moths in England is the currant moth, Abraxas grossulariata. It is an undistinguished looking insect whose wings are mottled with blotches of a dull reddishbrown colour. There exists, however, a rather rare variety, the milky currant moth, which has the same general type of coloration on its wings, but the splashes of colour are so pale as to be nearly invisible and have somewhat different outlines. This variety is known as Abraxas lacticolor, and all the specimens of it which have been caught wild have turned out to be females. Male specimens of Abraxas lacticolor have, however, been bred in captivity. Now when one of these wild female specimens of Abraxas lacticolor is mated with a male Abraxas grossulariata, all the progeny, males as well as females, are of the grossulariata variety. We see from this that the type of coloration denominated grossulariata is dominant over the type denominated lacticolor, and this latter type, therefore, owes its peculiarities to the loss of some " factor " which confers on the offspring the quality of being grossulariata when it is present. When, however, a grossulariata female is mated with a lacticolor male, a quite different result is produced. In this case all the male offspring bear the grossulariata character, and all the females the lacticolor character. From this circumstance we are driven to conclude firstly, that the grossulariata female is a hybrid and produces two kinds of eggs, one kind carrying the grossulariata factor, and one kind devoid of the factor, and, secondly that the eggs bearing the grossulariata factor always develop into males, and those devoid of this factor into females.
Therefore, in this case at least, there are male-producing and female-producing eggs, whilst the spermatozoa of the male grossulariata, which can carry the paternal character to both male and female offspring, are all alike. There is further " repulsion " between the grossulariata factor and the factor
for femaleness-both are unable apparently to be present in the same germ-cell-and hence every female grossulariata insect must be a hybrid whose grossulariata character is derived from

234 EUGENICS REVIEW.
its father. But all the eggs, both male-producing and femaleproducing of a female lacticolor, are, of course, of the lacticolor variety, and when a male-producing lacticolor egg is fertilized by a spermatozoon from a grossulariata male, a hybrid male is
produced which give rise to an equal number of spermatozoa with and without the grossulariata factor. If now we mate this hybrid male with a lacticolor female, both male and female
eggs will be ferilized with both kinds of spermatozoa, and there will result offspring of the following types, viz., (i) hybrid male grossulariata (grossulariata spermatozoon x lacticolor male egg), (2) pure male lacticolor (lacticolor spermatozoon x
lacticolor male egg), (3) female grossulariata (grossulariata spermatozoon x lacticolor female egg), and (4) female lacticolor
(lacticolor spermatozoon x lacticolor female egg). By this cross, therefore, we are enabled to procure lacticolor males. It is a remakable fact that there is no such thing apparently as a pure grossulariata female; every one, whether caught wild or raised in captivity, when tested by being crossed with a lacticolor male reveals its hybrid nature by producing two kinds of
offspring. An instance of the same kind in which the eggs are all alike
whilst there are apparently two kinds of sperinatozoa is afforded by the little fruit fly Drosophila ampelophila. This little insect has been a very favourite subject for investigation by workers in heredity in recent years, and startling results have been
obtained by Professor Morgan, of New Yorkc, and his pupils, who have chosen it as their special subject for investigation. It has a very rapid life cycle since the period which intervenes between the fertilization of the egg and the production of ripe
eggs by the female which grows from the egg, is only about twelve days. It can be kept in complete health on a diet of
banana peel. Hence it is comparatively easy to raise enormous numbers of the insect and to have a considerable number of
generations within the period of a year. The normal colour of the eye in Drosophila is red, but
Morgan found that when he raised thousands of individuals a few white-eyed males turned up. We might guess at once that this white colour of the eye would turn out to be a Mendelian

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

235

recessive, for it is obviously due to the absence of the normal red pigment; and when these white-eyed males were mated with normal females this supposition was confirmed, for all their progeny were red-eyed. When these hybrid red-eyed insects were mated with one another, the proportions of red-eyed to white-eyed amongst the offspring in the second filial generatic.n were, as was to be expected, about three to one, but all the whiteeyed specimens were males, as were also one-third of the redeyed. To obtain white-eyed females it was necessary to mate the hybrid red-eyed females with white-eyed males; then equal numbers of both red-eyed and white-eyed males and females were produced. When red-eyed males, whether produced in this way or by mating together members of the original strain, were mated with white-eyed females, they produced red-eyed and white-eyed offspring, amongst which all the females were red-eyed and the males white-eyed. White-eyed males and females mated together gave nothing but white-eyed offspring. Adopting the same kind of reasoning which we made use of in the case of Abraxas grossulariata we conclude (i) that there are two kinds of spermatozoa, male-producing and female-producing; since we know that a hybrid red-eyed male must produce what we may term " red-eyed " and " white-eyed " germ-cells in equal numbers, and when these are used to fertilize the eggs of a white-eyed female, all of whose eggs must be recessive " white-eyed " germ-cells, all the red-eyed offspring are females. (2) That the factors for red eye and the male sex repel one another-for all red-eyed males on investigation are seen to be hybrids which betray this character as soon as they are mated with white-eyed females. Therefore, every red-eyed
male derives his red-eyed character from his mother. (3) The
eggs of the female are all alikle with regard to the transmission of sexual characters, for when hybrid red-eyed females, which, of course, produce two kinds of eggs, one bearing the " redeyed " factor and another devoid of it, were crossed with whiteeyed males, all of whose spermatozoa were devoid of the factor for red eyes, red-eyed males and females were produced as well as white-eyed males and females, showing that both " redeyed " and " white-eyed " eggs, when fertilized with " white-

236 EUGENICS REVIEW.
eyed " spermatozoa, gave rise to males and females in equal
numbers. (4) If we regard the eggs as inheriting the quality of
" femaleness " from their mother then " maleness " in
Drosophila is dominant to femaleness. In all respects, therefore,
this case is the exact converse of Abraxas grossulariata. It is a most interesting thing that there are certain types of
human disease, or rather deformity, which seem to be inherited in exactly the same manner as the red eye and the white eye in Drosophila ampelophila. One of these is the affliction known as night-blindness, the sufferer from which becomes totally blind in the dusk. This disease is due to the absence from the retina of the eye of certain sense-cells which are adapted to respond to light of low intensity. If a night-blind man marries a normal woman all his children are normal, and as the affliction is a recessive, due to the absence of something, this is what we would expect. When these children in turn marry the sons have normal children, but some of the daughters are likely to have night-blind sons. Night-blindness does not seem to affect women, except in very rare cases. We, therefore, have the paradox that the disease appears in men, but is transmitted by women. Now let us compare night-blindness to the white eye in Drosophila as we may very fairly do, since both are defects of the visual organs. We assume then that there are two kinds of spermatozoa, male-determining and female-determining, and that consequently the sex of a human being is determined by his or her father. We further assume that there is repulsion between the factor for maleness and the factor for seeing in the dusk, so that every normal male is a hybrid who derives his capacity to see in the dusk from his mother, and all his male producing spermatozoa are devoid of the factor for seeing in the dusk. When a man is afflicted with night-blindness, however, he is a pure recessive, and not only his male-producing, but also his female-producing spermatozoa are devoid of the " dusk-seeing " factor. But still he cannot transmit his affliction to his children because the defectiveness of his spermatozoa is overcome by the normality of his wife's ova. But their children, both boys and girls, are hybrids, and each produces normal and abnormal germ-cells in equal numbers. When one of these girls marries

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

237

a normal man who is also ex hypothese a hybrid, then it may happen that one of her imperfect eggs is fertilized by one of his defective male-producing spermatozoa and a night-blind male baby is produced.
The reader will see, however, that theoretically a nightblind girl-baby could be produced, if the daughter of a nightblind man were to select another night-blind man as her husband. For all the spermatozoa of her husband, femaleproducing as well as male-producing, would be defective, and as she can produce defective eggs as well as perfect ones, if such an egg were fertilized by one of her husband's femaleproducing spermatozoa, she should bear a night-blind daughter; and such- cases, though very rare, are not entirely unknown.
This type of inheritance, where the sex of the offspring is determined by the germ-cells of one of the parents, and in which certain features which are amongst the normal endowment of the species are repelled by the factor for one of the sexes, is termed by Morgan sex-linked inheritance. The name is not a very happy one-since the " link " is repulsion and not attraction-and, moreover, it is apt to cause confusion in the minds of ordinary people, since it seems to denote the inheritance of characters always associated with one sex, such as the beard in man. For these reasons Doncaster has proposed the term sex-limited inheritance, which is decidedly better.
Besides night-blindness certain other human defects are handed down according to the laws of sex-limited inheritance, and hence it will be seen that the subject is of very considerable importance for eugenists. It is probable that the number of these types of defect will be considerablv increased by future investigation.
At this point in our study we may profitably pause in order to see how far the investigation of the laws governing the inheritance of qualities by the hybrids, which are produced when different strains are crossed with one another, throws any light on the origin of the strains themselves. It must at once be conceded that by the crossing of distinct strains n&w and stable strains can be produced, which combine certain qualities derived from both parental strains, and

238 EUGENICS REVIEW.
which breed perfectly true. If we should conceive of some sudden change in the environment which would sweep away both parental strains, but which the new hybrid strain could successfully resist, a new species would in this way be produced, and it is quite conceivable that in the past new species have originated in this manner. One daring speculator (Lotsy) has asserted that this is the only way in which new species can originate, but in this view he has found few followers. Were we to accept it we should be committed to the position that from the beginnings of life on the earth, a large number of independent types of organism had existed, each with definite hereditary characters, and that all progress had been due to the combination of these factors-such as those for rose and pea-comb in fowls-as a result of the constant inter-crossing of these forms. We must reserve until the concluding article our criticism, of such views, when we come to sum up the general impression produced on us by all the evidence.
In the meantime we mav be permitted to point out the great advantage which a knowledge of the laws of Mendelian segregation confers on the practical breeder. He can combine the advantageous qualities of two different strains, and from the numerical proportions in which different varieties appear in the second and third filial generations he can select those which will prove stable and suitable for further propagation. An instance will make the high importance of the matter clear. It is well known to most people, that the red, hard wheat grown in Manitoba makes a most desirable bread and commands a high price. The grains of this wheat are rich in gluten, and when dry and broken across exhibit a smooth glassy surface of fracture. On the other hand, the wheat grown in the east of England makes a heavy doughy sort of bread, and its grains are surcharged with starch, and when broken across exhibit a white granular uneven surface. Now, Professor Biffen, of Cambridge, has shown that when suitable precautions are taken to prevent cross-fertilization, Manitoba wheat can be grown in England. The farmer, however, would find it unprofitable to do so, because the gain from the higher price which this wheat com-

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

239

mands is more than offset by the loss due to its much less yield per acre as compared with the English wheat. This lessened yield per acre, according to Professor Biffen, is due to the lax system of branching of this plant, which is a racial characteristic; the English plant, on the other hand, produces a thick tuft of close-set branches, which explains its much higher yield per acre.
Professor Biffen, by crossing these two kinds of wheat,
secured in the second filial generation a stable hybrid which combined the hard grain of the M\Ianitoba wheat with the thick tufted branching and Consequent high yield of the English wheat, and this new strain has proved most successful during a series of years, and has gained high prizes at agricultural shows. It is obvious that whilst the benefits which it confers on English farmers are not to be underestimated, if it were to be introduced into Canada and were to produce anything like the high yield there which is obtained from it in England, the profit which it would bring to the Canadian farmer would be colossal. For whereas the English farmer benefits to the extent of getting three or four shillings more per quarter for his grain, the Canadian farmer would have his harvest increased from 50 to ioo per cent. We confidently expect that in the near future great results will be obtained from experiments like this which we have just described.
Returning now to the consideration of sex, the observant reader will not have failed to discern that great difficulties are raised by the assumption that the sexes of animals are determined by the single presence or absence of a " factor," such as distinguishes the two strains of an allelomorphic pair from each other. Not only does this theory leave out of account the numerous cases of animals and the enormously preponderant number of the higher plants where hermaphroditism occurs, but it is most disconcerting to find that the presence of a factor in one species determines the sex to be male, whereas the presence of a factor in another species determines the sex to be female. Either sex is a totallv different phenomenon in the case of different species-a supposition which seems in the highest degree forced and unlikely-or the differences between the sexes

240 EUGENICS REVIEW.
are much more fundamental than what could be produced by the presence or absence of a Mendelian " factor," and all that the presence of this " factor " can do is to tip the wavering
balance now in one direction and now in another. If, indeed, the secondary sexual qualities be reckoned along
with the primary as the manifestations of sex, then according to one great authority there is in the human race no such thing as a completely male or a completely female organism. Every man possesses some traces of female characteristics, and every woman some male features. How far this is true of other species has not been worked out, but we shall now offer some evidence in support of the contention that maleness and femaleness are potentially present in both sexes. The method of the fertilization of the eggs of the common frog is probably familiar to most. The male clasps the female firmly with his forearms some time before the eggs are ripe and remains in this position for a considerable period, croaking wildly with excitement. At length when the eggs are ripe the female discharges them into the water in which she is sitting, and as they pass out the male fertilizes them by discharging his spermatozoa on to them. Now Hertwig showed that whereas both sexes develop in approximately equal numbers from spawn laid under normal circumstances, if a female, after having laid a few eggs, be forcibly separated from her male
partner and kept separate from him for 2i days, and then
allowed to rejoin him, she will lay the rest of her eggs, but the proportion of males developing from these eggs will be seven times as great as the females. One of Hertwig's pupils, by keeping male and female apart for four days, succeeded in obtaining a culture from which only males developed. As the rate of mortality in these cultures had been kept quite moderate, it is impossible to resist the conclusion that eggs which would have developed into females under ordinary circumstances had been forced to develop into males by being retained for two or three days too long within the womb of the mother. That the effect was due to a change in the eggs and not in the
spermatozoa was proved by allowing males at different periods in the breeding season to fertilize the same female, and in all

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

241

cases the same proportions of male and female developed from the spawn. The possibility of performing this experiment was afforded by the wide range of the edible frog (Rana esculenta) on the continent of Europe. It is found everywhere from northern Germany to central Italy. The breeding season begins very much earlier in the south than in the north, and so when males collected in central Germany were beginning their breeding season, males collected on the same day in central Italy were nearly at the conclusion of it. Hertwig procured males from all quarters, which were sent by express train to Munich, where the experiment was performed.
Nevertheless there is evidence to show that in the frog, as in man, the sex of the offspring can be influenced by the spermatozoon, for if different males be allowed to fertilize the eggs of the same female cultures can be obtained in which astonishing differences in the proportions of the sexes manifest themselves. In one case the eggs of a certain female fertilized by the spawn of a certain male produced 52 males and 50 females, and when the eggs of the same female were fertilized by another male three males and 64 females were produced. We are, therefore, driven to the conclusion that the sex of the frog can be determined by influences of various kinds.
In many species of animals, as we know, the sexes differ very much from one another in size; this is notably the case in Rotifera (Fig. 2). The male in this group of animals is devoid of an alimentary canal, and does not grow at all after birth; the female is, however, provided with an alimentary canal and feeds and grows. The male is produced from a much smaller egg than is the case with the female, hence in this case the sex of the organism is obviously determined in the egg. But not only male and female eggs, but also male- and female-producing females can be distinguished, for if once a female lays a small egg she continues to lay eggs only of this kind, and if she begins by laying a female egg she produces thereafter only this kind of egg. Nevertheless, females which would normallv produce female eggs if exposed immediately after hatching to a higher temperature will produce male eggs; and here there seems to be no escape from the conclusion that sex is determined

242 EUGENICS REVIEW.
by the nature of the environment. Moreover, a male-producing female-if fertilized whe'n young-does not produce male eggs, but winter eggs; these are female-producing eggs, which are provided with a hard shell'and which lie dormant during the winter, but develop in the spring. The male egg and the ordinary female egg develop at once parthenogenetically. In this case fertilization determines whether an egg is to be male or female, and this is also true in the case of the bee, for the drone develops from an unfertilized egg, and were it not for the
FIG. 2.
Male and female specimens of the Rotifer Hydatina Senta. A. The female. B. The male.
warning given us by the effect of rise in temperature we might be tempted to assume that in these cases all the spermatozoa are female producing.
But, further, we must not rashly assume that in all cases where the sexes differ greatly in size, that sex is determined by the size of the egg. The disparity in size between the sexes is carried to an extreme in the case of Bonellia, which is a fat unsegmented worm with a long grooved proboscis which stretches out in front of the mouth and is eight or ten times as long as the

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

24.3

body. The female of Bonellia, including the proboscis, may be i8 inches long, whereas the male is a microscopic parasite devoid of an alimentary canal, who passes his life within the oviduct of the female. Here we should appear to have an extreme case of the same phenomenon as that shown by Rotifera; but it has been proved that all the eggs of Bonellia are alike and develop into precisely similar free-swimming larvae. Those larvae, however, which are allowed to attach themselves to the proboscis of a female develop into males, whilst those which are prevented

FIG. 3. Male and female specimens of the worm Bonellia. A. The female. B. The male.
from doing so become full-grown females. Here, again, sex is determined by the environment.
Lastly, we have the extraordinarily interesting observations of Geoffrey Smith on the effects of certain parasites on their hosts, which, in the case we shall select for special description consist of a certain species of Mediterranean crab called Inachus scorpio (Fig 4). The parasites belong to a race of degenerate barnacles
termed Rhizocephala (Gr. C&rioq= root), because the stalk by which

244 EUGENICS REVIEW. they are attached to the unfortunate crab grows out into a series
of roots which permeate all portions of the crab's body and absorb nourishment from the blood. The alimentary canal and legs of the harnacle being no longer used, have disappeared, and its body has become reduced to a shapeless sac containing the generative organs. Like other barnacles it develops from a small free-swimming larva provided with antenna, eyes and swimming feet, all of which it loses when it finds its host. The particular species which infests Inachus scorpio is termed Sacculina neglecta, and it appears 4o attack chiefly young specimens. The diseased crabs cease to grow and are rather more sluggish in their movements than their neighbours, but otherwise they do not show any signs of inconvenience.
FIG. 4. Male specimen of the crab lnachus scorpio, viewed from above.
Now it may not be superfluous to remind our readers that the sexes of crabs possess strongly marked secondary sexual characters, which allow them to be easily distinguished from one another by the naked eye. The abdomen of the female is broad and hollowed on its under surface, which during life is kept bent upwards against the thorax. It bears four pairs of forked legs fringed with long hairs, and to these hairs the eggs after being shed are attached and the mother carries them about with her until the young ones hatch out. (Fig. 5 B.)
The abdomen of the male is much narrower and it is not grooved. It bears only two pairs of appendages which are not forked, nor much pointed, but are comparatively rigid (Fig.

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

245

5 D). These are termed the copulatory styles, because they are

used to introduce the male germ-cells, which in crabs are

motionless (see Part I.), into the egg-tubes of the female. The

male has also much larger claws than the female, which he

apparently uses in fights with his male rivals.

In immature females the abdomen is not grooved, and its

appendages are not so much jointed nor as richly provided with

hairs as in the adult female. (Fig. 5 A.) Now when a

young half-developed female is attacked by a Sacculina it

AB

C

FIG. 5. Abdomens of normal and diseased specimens of Inachus scorpio, viewed from
below. A. Abdomen of immature female., B. Abdomen, of mature female.
C. Abdomen of female which has been infected by Sacculina neglecta; the circular disc on the second segment shows where the parasite was attached. D. Abdomen of male. E. Abdomen of male which has been infected by
Sacculina neglecta.
assumes at once, without further growth, the characters of the adult female, that is, the abdomen becomes grooved and the appendages long and hairy, although some of them may be lost. (Fig. 5 C.) If we examine bv dissection the effect of the parasite on its host we find that the only organ which suffers is the ovary; the eggs mostly degenerate,

246 EUGENICS REVIEW.
break up and disappear. The parasite, on the other hand, after it has produced several batches of eggs-a process which occupies from eighteen inonths to two years-dies and drops off and its roots becomes absorbed. The place where it was attached heals up leaving a noticeable scar, and in some few cases the host still lives on and may resume growth, and in this case a remnant of the ovary may be left and may produce eggs.
On the other hand, when a half-developed male is attacked a widely different and extrenmely interesting result is produced. Female secondary sexual characters make their appearance. The abdomen becomes broad, although not quite as broad as that of a normal female, and additional abdominal appendages appear, which, though smaller than those of the normal female, have the same characteristic form. (Fig. 5 E.) The claws also remain about the size of those of a female. In the case of the male also dissection reveals the fact that the principal, if not the exclusive, damage done by the parasite is experienced by the genital organ; the lobules of which are seen to be broken up and destroyed. Nevertheless, as in the case of the female, so here, the host sometimes outlives the parasite and then resumes its growth and begins to regenerate its generative organs, but these now consist of both ovary and testis, so that the crab has become a
hermaphrodite. Here, again, beyond all doubt, an accident of
the environment has determined sex. How are we to conceive of the action of the parasite ? Do its roots emit a corrosive substance which digests and destroys the generative cells of the host, or do these cells dwindle and die simply because the parasite withdraws from the blood of the host the special substance necessary for their maintenance ? If the action of the roots of the parasite were a directly digestive one we could not understand the introduction of female characters into the male. Geoffrey Smith's brilliant and suggestive hypothesis is as follows. Every male is a potential hermaphrodite and contains what we may term female substance in his composition, which under normal circumstances is kept under by the superior potency of the male substance; but the female has only female substance. These substances'are conceived of by Geoffrey Smith as circu-

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

247

lating in the body fluids, thus producing the secondary sexual characters, and by becoming stored up in certain of the interior cells, producing the primary sexual organs also. The roots of the Sacculina are supposed to have a special affinity for the male substance, which they absorb in far greater proportion than the female substance; and as a result, in a male attacked by a parasite, the proportion of female substance increases and is sufficient to produce the female secondary sexual characters, and when the parasite is removed to generate eggs also.
Ihere is no doubt a large, measure of truth in Geoffrey Smith's hypothesis, but one or two criticisms may be made.
He points out that his hypothesis agrees with those cases of sex-limited inheritance where there are two kinds of spermatozoa, and where the male is represented by the formula M(F) and is a heterozygote. He asserts that in all cases of hermaphroditism the male elements ripen first, and that hermaphrodites only differ from ordinary males in having more female substance than they. But his hypothesis is in complete contradiction to the case of Abraxas grossulariata where there are two kinds of eggs and the female is represented by the formula F(M), whilst the male is pure M. Nor is it universally true that in hermaphrodites the male elements ripen first. In compound ascidians, like Salpa, the eggs ripen before the spermatozoa, and there are numerous indications from other divisions of the animal kingdom that females must contain some male substance.
Thus, in the primitive fish Amphioxus, in which the generative organs of both sexes consist of two longitudinal series of sacs, Goodrich has pointed out that in a female, one sac in the series may produce spermatozoa. Again, a hen when it is old and
all its eggs have been shed or absorbed can develop the plumage
of a cock, and a woman who has passed the child-bearing period sometimes develop traces of a beard and a moustache. It seems to us that facts like these point to an extension of Geoffrey Smith's hypothesis. If we assume that in the female there is always some male substance which is inhibited by the preponderance of female substance, we shall be able to understand the effect of the parasite in producing precocious female maturity. For we may reasonably regard the male substance

248 EUGENICS REVIEW.
present in a young female as the principal cause of her immaturity, and when this male substance, which normally would be inhibited by the gradually increasing female substance, is suddenly removed by the parasite, maturity at once supervenes.
Weiniger, the brilliant, but short-lived, author of " Sex and Character," seems to have thoroughly grasped this principle, at which he arrived independently of Geoffrey Smith. For he boldly laid down the law that in every human being of both sexes, male and female substances are mixed and that the proportions of the mixture vary infinitely. It follows that in seeking a mate in marriage a man or a woman is attracted by the complement of his or her nature in respect of both substances; so that an effeminate man seeks for his wife a mannish woman, and the most completely feminine woman is captivated by the bold and assertive man.
7f
FIG. 6. The second maturation division of the male germ-cell of Euschistus variolarius.
Before we sum up our final conclusions as to the cause and inheritance of sex we must give an account of some remarkable observations on the microscopical appearance of the germ-cells, which seem to corroborate the conclusions drawn from breeding experiments. These observations are concerned with what are called the idiochromosomes. In certain insects belonging to the order of the Bugs (Hemiptera), the ripening male germ-cells contain in their nuclei before meiosis two chromosomes which are unlike the rest. These are the idiochromosomes and they almost always differ from one another in size, one being larger than the other. The large one is denominated the X chromosome, the small one the Y chromosome. In the first or meiotic maturation division in which the ordinary chromosomes first unite with one another in pairs and then separate so as to be dispersed to opposite ends of the karyokinetic spindle, so that

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

249

only one chromosome of each pair goes to each daughter nucleus, the idiochromosomes, on the contrary, divide longitudinally, so that halves of both of the X and the Y chromosomes
are distributed to each daughter nucleus. In the prophase, however, of the second maturation division, in which the ordinary chromosomes become longitudinally divided, the X and Y chromosomes become united with one another, and in the metaphase of this division they become separated from one another, and one is distributed to each daughter nucleus (Fig 6). There are, therefore, two classes of spermatids giving rise to
two corresponding classes of spermatozoa, those with the X chromosome and those with the Y chromosome. Now if the eggs of the same species of insect be examined it will be found that before the maturation divisions they all contain two precisely similar idiochromosomes, of the size corresponding to the X chromosome. After the ripening divisions they all have one such chromosome. Now since the nuclei of the body-cells of the male have two idiochromosomes, an X and Y, but the nuclei of the body-cells of the female have two X idiochromosomes, the conclusion is obvious that an egg fertilized by a Y-bearing spermatozoon has given rise to a male whereas one fertilized by an X-bearing spermatozoon has given rise to a female. Drosophila ampelophila, although belonging to a different order of insects, has X and Y idiochromosomesand, as we have seen, there is independent evidence that in this insect there are two kinds of spermatozoa, and that sex is determined by them. Hence the conclusion has been very generally drawn that the chromosome X contains the femaledetermining substance, and the chromosome Y the maledetermining substance. It is, however, to be remarked that in some cases there is only one idiochromosome, which is then frequently termed the odd chromosome or heterochromosome, so that half the spermatids have one more chromosome than the rest, and as the nuclei of the body-cells of the female have one more chromosome than the male, it is obvious that this single idiochromosome corresponds to the X one in those species where there are two. This case is accordingly supposed to represent an extreme degree of the normal disparity in size between the

250 EUGENICS REVIEW.
two chromosomes, the Y chromosome being supposed to have been reduced to zero. In this case-if we assume that these chromosomes contain special substances-we must conclude that the male sex is determined by a defect of female substance, not by the presence of a special male substance. Professor M1organ enthusiastically accepts the view that special sex determining substances are contained in the idiochromosomes, and that consequently the formative substances for other organs are contained in the other chiromosomes. In a book, entitled "The Mechanism of Mendelian Heredity," he has attempted to work the theory out in detail. A sketch of the main argument may be given here. We have seen in Part I. that the ordinary chromosomes in body-nuclei are present in what is called the diploid number, and that there is evidence to show that half of these have been derived from the father and half from the mother, in the formation of the zygote by the union of the nuclei of the germ-cells. All the " ordinary chromosomes" are not exactly alike however; there are differences in size and shape between them, but every variety occurs in pairs, one member of each pair having been derived from the father
and one from the mother. The two forming a pair, according to Morgan, contain the same organ-forming substances and unite with one another in meiosis and are distributed to opposite
germ-cells in the first maturation division. Now a Mendelian recessive is supposed to be due to a loss of
some substance from one member of such a pair, so that when germ-cells are formed by a hybrid one half of these will necessarily contain the defective chromosome. This theory fits in admirably with the fact of the re-appearance of the recessive character in the second filial generation. But when we are dealing with two allelomorphs differing from one another by two differentiating characters, then we must assume that two chromosomes are defective, and since in the second filial generation the recessives with respect to each character are distributed independently of one another throughout the whole batch of offspring, we have further to deduce that in the first maturation division the same daughter germ-cell does not necessarily receive both defective chromosomes. This can only be explained if we

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

251

further suppose that the ordinary chromosomes after pairing in meiosis can be pointed indifferently in either direction, so that sometimes the paternal and sometimes the maternal end is directed towards a given pole of the karyokinetic spindle.
Even then, however, we are not at the end of our difficulties, because there are far more characters distributed in an allelomorphic manner than there are chromosomes, and it is obvious that all the characters whose formative substances are contained in a given chromosome should adhere together and be distributed to the same germ-cell in meiosis, but this is by no means always the case. Morgan, indeed, endeavours to prove
that in Drosophila the inheritable characters can be sorted into
groups, and that the members of each group are usually distributed together, in a word are coupled, and further that the number of these groups is equal to the number of chromosomes found in the ripe germ-cell. The occasional distribution ot a character to germ-cells, apart from the rest of the group to which it belongs, he explains by adopting Janssens's ingenious theory of the chiasmotype. By this theory is meant the assumption that when a pair of corresponding chromosomes unite in meiosis, the union takes place along a spiral line, but that when they separate from one another the line of disjunction is a straight line which cuts the line of the union, so that the two lines make a figure resembling the Greek letter X. According to this theory then the chromosomes after their separation are rather different from what they were before their union, each having probablv received elements from the other. This interchange of elements is denominated by Morgan a cross-over.
It seems to us, however, that all attempts to formulate the laws of such a complex subject as heredity, according to a few simple mechanical rules, are bound to break down when we take a broad view of the subject. By a little forcing simple rules can be made to cover all the phenomena exhibited by special cases, but we soon discover other cases in which it is hopeless to apply the rules-and we may now enumerate some of the grave difficulties which Morgan's " mechanism " encounters.
The most obvious assumption to make about the grouping of characters in chromnosomes is that sex-limited characters are

252 EUGENICS REVIEW.
carried by the idiochromosomes. Thus, to take the special case of Drosophila, we have seen that there is " repulsion " between the red eye and the male sex. If the factor for red eyes is contained in the X chromosome and is wanting in the Y chromosome this would be explicable. Morgan claims to have discovered about twenty characters that are sex-linked in this way in Drosophila. But it would seem to follow also that male secondary sexual characters must be also contained in Y chromosome, and female secondary sexual characters in the X chromosome, since these chromosomes are ex hypothese respectively male- and female-determining. Now this point has been
tested in a series of brilliant and exhaustive experiments by two lady workers, Miss Foote and Miss Strobell, of whose work we shall now give a short account.
These ladies chose as the subjects of their experiments two
species of the genus Euschistus. Euschistus is a genus of bugs which feed on plants; these insects show well-marked X and Y chromosomes in their germ-cells (vide Fig. 6). One of the species which was experimented with, viz., Euschistus variolarius, has in the male sex a well-defined black circular dot on the genital segment (the sixth segment of the abdomen). TIhe other species (Euschistus servus) is devoid of this spot, and in neither species does it occur in the female sex. On one occasion, and on one occasion only, a male Euschistus servus fertilized a female Euschistus variolarius. Fortunately, this union proved so prolific that no less than 120 eggs were produced, but many of these were abnormal and failed to develop. Only 27 of them succeeded in developing to maturity, and of these I I were males and I6 females, and these constitute consequently the first filial generation. Seven distinct pairs of this generation were mated with each other and produced an abundant second filial generation. An attempt was made to induce a male Euschistus variolarius
to mate Mwith a female Euschistus servus, but this was unsuccessful. It was possible, however, to induce a male Euschistus
variolarius to mate with a female hvbrid of the first filial generation, and from this union 26 perfect insects were reared.

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

253

Now the results of these experiments were somewhat unexpected. It was found that many of the F' hybrids exhibited the spot-and, therefore, this essentially male character must have been inherited from the mother, since the male parental strain belonging to the species E. servus is devoid of the spot. Consequently the " factor " which produces the spot cannot be situated in the Y chromosome, because there is no Y chromosome in the female. If we evade this difficulty by assuming that the factor for the spot, since it is inherited from the mother, is carried by the X chromosome, but can only appear in the male sex, then we have to explain the circumstance that in the offspring of the cross between the pure variolarius male and the F1 female the spot appears, and is much more strongly marked

X.YARIOLARIUS.

B. SERVVS

FIG. 7. The bugs Euschistus variolarius and Euschissus servus, seen from beneath.

than in any of the F, male hybrids. This greater strength can only be explained as due to the influence of the E. variolarius father, and, therefore, the spot can be inherited from the male E. variolarius. It follows that the factor for the spot cannot be situated in the X chromosome, for the male-determining spermatozoon does not have an X chromosome-and, of course, a male member of the hybrid strain is produced by a maledetermining spermatozoon.
In the second filial generation some of the specimens showed the spot as strongly developed as in the original parental strain, and others were completely devoid of it; but in some cases the

254 EUGENICS REVIEW.

offspring of F1 males, which are devoid of the spot, showed it strongly marked. In other cases the spot was faintly marked. If we are precluded from placing the factor for the spot in either the X or the Y chromosome, our next recourse would be to one of the ordinary chromosomes. But the factors for the spot must be situated in both members of a pair of ordinary chromosomes since, if they were in one chromosome only, there would be in the species variolarius two separate strains, one with and one without the spot, and half the males would be devoid of it, but this cannot be the case, since the spot in the pure species is a constant character. If, however, we make this assumption, then the sequence of the maturation divisions baffles us entirely. For since meiosis occurs in the first maturation division in the *case of the ordinary chromosomes, and ordinary longitudinal division in the secondary maturation division, whereas in the case of the idiochromosomes ordinary longitudinal division takes place in the first maturation division, but meiotic union and final disjunction of the supposedly male- and female-determining elements occurs in the second maturation division, any character situated in any ordinary chromosome whatever must inevitably be distributed to both male-determining and female-determining spermatozoa. A diagram will make this clear. Let us call the pairs of ordinary chromosomes A1 and A', B and B', etc., and the results of their longitudinal division a, a', b, b', etc. Let us suppose that the factors for the spot are contained in the pair of chromosomes A A'. Then the maturation divisions will be represented thus
Kabcdx female-determining spermatozoon

/ ABCDxy abcdy male-determining spermatozoon

AA1BB'CC1DD XY\

,a'b'c'd'x female-determining spermatozoon

A'B'C'D'xy(

\zblctd'y male-determining spermatozoon

We may endeavour to reconcile this conclusion with the facts by supposing that though the factors for the spot are situated in a pair of ordinary chromosomes, and it is therefore inherited by females, yet its appearance in a female is prevented by the presence of an inhibitor. But then we have to account

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

S255

for the fact that the spot is very feebly developed in most of the F1 hybrid males and completely absent from some of them, for all these hybrids have received the factors for the spot with the chromosome which has come to them from their variolarius mother. Therefore, it would seem necessary to assume that E. servus males carry an inhibitor for a spot which they do not possess-which, to say the least of it, is not a very likely assumption-and transmits this inhibitor to the male hybrid offspring. And, again, if we seek to show where this hypothetical inhibitor is placed we are faced with the same difficulties as we encountered when we endeavoured to find the situation for the factors for the spot. If it is situated in a pair of ordinary chromosomes it will be present in males and females-if only in one member of a pair, in half the females. If we place it in the X chromosome, then the male has an X chromosome which he has received from his mother. If we assume that a double dose of the inhibitor is necessary to cancel the spot and that it is absent in the female only because she alone has two X chromosomes, then we are faced with the difficulty that it is absent in all the female F1 hybrids, which, as they have received only one of each pair of chromosomes from their variolarius mother, should have only one dose of the inhibitor.
From this elaborate analysis it seems to follow that it is impossible to connect definite organ-forming factors with definite chromosomes, but that the chromatin of the nucleus functions as a whole. This conclusion is borne out by many facts. In the eggs of Abraxas, which, as we have seen, are of two kinds, male-producing and female-producing, Doncaster could not, after the closest and most prolonged scrutiny, discover anything which could be compared to idiochromosomes, and in many other species of insect this is also the case. In fact allied species often differ in this respect, and we have seen that Geoffrey Smith's idea, that maleness and femaleness are two alternative physiological conditions, has much to be said for it, and it is quite possible that the idiochromosomes when they appear are not the "causes " of the differences in sex, but are rather indications or " results " of differences which atready exist.

256 EUGENICS REVIEW.
It is probable that since, as we have already learnt, every female contains male substance and every male female substance, the balance of preponderance between the two may be determined at different periods and by different causes in different groups of animals.
We have seen that it has been definitely proved that new strains can be produced by the crossing of two strains; we have now to answer the question whether new strains can suddenly arise amongst the offspring of a member of an old strain which has not been crossed by another strain. Such a sudden appearance of a new strain is what is called a mutation, and practically all those biologists who disbelieve in the inheritability of the small individual differences which occur between members of the same family believe in the occasional appearance of mutations. The difficulty about attaining certainty in the matter is, however, very great. When we make a cross we find out first, so far as we can, the hereditary qualities of the two strains we are about to mate together-in a word we standardize our conditions. But as we do not know when a mutation is going to occur, the evidence for its occurrence is usually indirect, and in many cases it is open to the objector to say that the supposed mutation is due to an unsuspected cross with another strain; this, indeed, is the position which Lotsy takes up. The great advocate for the hypothesis that mutations occur frequently and are the principal agents in producing new species, is the Dutch botanist De Vries, and most of his evidence has been derived from the study of the evening primrose, (Enothera
lamnarckiana. TIhis species has, therefore, assumed an enormous importance in biological literature, and is, indeed, the rock on which a biological school is founded, and we must, therefore, give some account of it and of its supposed mutations.
The evening primrose is a flowering plant belonging to the Fuchsia order (Onagracea) and belongs to North America. It receives its name from the circumstance that the blossoms open at sundown and are already beginning to wither by the next morning. The genus mEnothera is represented in North America by a considerable number of species, but GEnothera lamarckiana is not amongst them. It is equallv certainly not a wifd species in

THIE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

257

Europe, since it only occurs as a garden plant, which is stated to have been brought from North America in the beginning of the eighteenth century. Therefore, the suspicion arises in our minds that GEnothera lamarckiana may, after all, be a hybridin a word, a fancy strain made by some gardener.
In i886 De Vries, who was searching in the neighbourhood of Amsterdam for instances of variation amongst wild plants, discovered near the village of Hilversum a potato-field overgrown with (Enothera lamarckiana. Subsequent enquiry proved that the plant had begun to invade the field about I875, and that it had escaped from a neighbouring park where it grew sparsely. Amongst the profusion of typical plants he detected two small groups, each representing a hitherto unknown form,
and these he named GEnothera laevifolia and aEnothera
brevistylis. From the circumstances of their occurrence he was led to suspect that they had originated by sudden mutations from (Enothera lamarckiana, and to this belief he still adheres, although neither form has ever appeared in his numerous cultures of the supposed parent species. The discovery of these forms, however, induced him to remove nine of the healthiest roots of cEnothera lamarckiana to the botanical gardens at Amsterdam, and to cultivate an extensive progeny from them during the next ten years. Thousands of these plants which are sometimes annuals and sometimes biennials were raised in every generation, t.nd as a result of prosecuting the experiment on so large a scale a certain small number of new forms were detected, isolated and cultivated separately.
Space will not permit us to enumerate all the forms which De Vries identified, but we must give some account of those which were best defined. (i) (Enothera gigas is a form with very large flowers, large leaves and a thick stem. The internodes are very short, although the plant is as high, if not higher, than (Enothera lamarckiana, and for this reason it appears to be thickly clothed with foliage. (2) (Enothera albida is a weak plant with a delicate brittle stem,
pale green leaves and pale yellow flowers. (3) Enothera
rubrinervis is distinguished by having a delicate brittle stem and red veins on the leaves, and broad red stripes on

258 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the fruit. (4) CEnothera nanella is a form resembling the parent
species in all respects except size; owing to its short internodes it is dwarf, barely attaining a half to a third the height of the
parent form. (5) Eitnothera lata is a form with broad leaves and
long leaf-stalks; the tips of the leaves are rounded instead of being pointed as in other forms. Only its female organs are fertile, its pollen is scanty, dry and sterile. When fertilized with

Oe, MOTH ERA

LAMARCKIjANA

IE;6AS.

FIG. 8.

(Enothera lamarckiana and (Enothera gigas, showing flower-buds.

pollen from (Enothera lamarckiana it yields I5 to 20 per cent. of (Enothe,ra lata., the rest are (Enothera lamarckiana. (6) (Enothera scintillans, a form with a thin stem and small flowers. Its main
distinguishing feature is constituted by its smooth shiny leaves wvith white veins. The crumplings, characteristic of the leaves of most other forms, are absent.
It is to be noted that the features distinguishing these mutants from the parent species, if they occurred in animals, would in most cases be passed over as utterly insignificant. A

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

259

plant, however, is not properly to be compared to an individual animal, but rather to an extensive colonv of animals, and each trifling point of difference in the shape of colour of a leaf, when it is caught up and repeated by hundreds of leaves, makes an
impression on the human perception out of all proportion to its significance. We shall now give some figures to show the proportions in which these various forms appear in cultures of (Enothera lamarckiana. In I889, out of I5,000 such plants five specimens of (Enothera nanella and five of cEnothera lata were found. In I89I, out of I0,000 (Enothera lamarckiana three
cEnothera nanella, three cEnothera lata, and one (Enothera rubrinervis appeared. In I895, amongst 14,350 plants raised from (Enothera lamanrkiana one (Enothera gigas, fifteen (Enothera albida, eight Enothera rubrinervis, sixty (Enothera nanella, seventy-three Enothera lata, and one cEnothera scintillans were discovered. In I896, out of a culture of 8,400 plants, one hundred and forty-two (Enothera lata, twenty-five (Enothera albida, twenty fEnothera rubrinervis, forty-nine (Enothera nanella, and six (Enothera scintillans were discovered.
When these peculiar forms were isolated and self-fertilized they produced seed, and the seed was cultivated for several generations with precautions to prevent inter-crossing. The
result was that (EUnothera albida, Enothera rubrinervis, and (Enothera nanella came perfectly true to seed, 'and so except for one plant did (E;nothera gigas. But one of the offspring of this
form was a dwarf, which, however, retained the thick stem and large leaves of the parental strain, and thus it differed from the typical cEnothera nanella, for which reason De Vries termed it (Enothera gigas-nanella.
In striking contrast with these results is the offspring obtained by raising the seed of (Enothera scintillans. Amongst the plants thus obtained only a little over one in three shows the chatacters of (Enothera scintillans; from 50 to 6o per cent. are pure (Enothera lamarckiana, one per cent. are (Enothera lata, and the remainder belong to a less well defined variety which De Vries terms (Enothera oblonga. One UEnothera scintillans plant, however, was obtained, 69 per cent. of whose offspring were (Enothera scintillans, and only eight per cent. (Enothera

2600 EUGENICS REVIEW.
lamarckiana, whilst no less than 21 per cent. belonged to iEnothera oblonga.
The study of the mutations of (Enothera has been taken up by many other workers, notably in America. Amongst these no one has devoted more care and patience to the subject than Gates, and we must now give some account of the more important additions which he has been able to make to De Vries's results.
He has shown that in some cases the appearance of mutants is correlated with disturbances in the normal divisions of chromosomes. Thus, not only in (Enothera lamarckiana, but also in several other species belonging to the genus, the diploid number of chromosomes is I4, and the reduced number is consequently 7. But in Enothera gigas the diploid number is 28 and the reduced number I4; and in accordance with the increased quantity of chromatin the volumes of all the cells are larger in the proportion of about three to two than the volumes of the corresponding cells in CEnothera lamarckiana, and most of the peculiarities of the mutant can be explained by this circumstance. Then, again, the mutant (:Enothera lata always possesses I5 chromosomes as its diploid number, and as a consequence of the odd number of chromosomes meiotic reduction is an irregular process. Sometimes one chromosome is ejected into the cytoplasm and degenerates there, and in this case the reduced number is 7, but much oftener in reduction 7 chromosomes go to one pole and 8 chromosomes to the other, so that half the pollen grains and half the embryo-sacs have 8 chromosomes, and half of each kind have 7. The pollen grains produced by fEnothera lata are, as we have seen, sterile, but its ovules fertilized by pollen from the parent species, (Enothera lamarckiana, yield abundant offspring, and, as we have learnt, about 8o per cent. of these are like (Enothera
lamarckiana, whilst I5 to 20 per cent. reproduce the features of
(Enothera lata. But it is still more interesting to learn that quite distinct species of (Enothera, such as GEnothera biennis, will sometimes produce mutants having the same kind of foliage as cEnothera lata, and that these mutants have 15 instead of the normal number of 14 chromosomes.

THE STUDY OF HEREDITY.

26I

Gates has given plausible explanations of the production of both these types of mutant. In the case of (Enothera gigas he assumes that in one of the divisions of the early embryo, after the chromosomes have become doubled by the normal process of longitudinal division, the nucleus has failed to complete the division and has gone back to the resting condition, so that in the prophase of the next division 28 instead of 14 chromosomes have appeared on the spindle. In the case of fEnothera lat. he assumes that in the meiotic division which precedes the formation of the embryo-sac (see Part I.) one of the united pairs of chromosomes, instead of disjoining and sending one of its constituents to each pole of the spindle, has passed as one piece to one pole of the spindle,
and in this way an embryo-sac, and eventually an egg-cell with 8 chromosomes, is produced. When this is fertilized by a pollen grain of UEnothera lamarckiana with 7 chromosomes a plant with 15 chromosomes is produced.
Now those who hold that the original parental stock of CEnothera lamarckiana is a hybrid, have been inclined to regard the sporadic production of mutants as in reality due to separating out of comparatively rare combinations of recessive characters. We have seen that when two strains are distinguished from one another by two differentiating characters, only one in sixteen of the second filial generation will combine. both recessive characters, and if the parental strains are distinguished by three differentiating characters only one in sixtv-four of this generation will have all three recessive characters; if by four, only one in two hundred and fifty-six, and so on. But the discoveries of Gates clearly demonstrate that some of the mutations owe their origin to irregular distributions of chromosomes as a result of what can only be described as internal accidents. Of course, it by no means follows that all the mutations are due to changes of this kind-but we have now definitely to admit that new strains can arise otherwise than by the crossing of pre-existing strains.
In animals the best evidence for the spontaneous occurrence of mutations is furnished by the fly Drosophila ampelophila, which, in the hands of Morgan, has yielded such interesting

262 EUGENICS REVIEW.
evidence on the subject of sex-limited inheritance. Doubtless, the reason for this is the ease with which enormous numbers of species can be reared and the rapidity with which the generations succeed one another.
Many mutations have appeared amongst the myriads of specimens raised by Morgan; besides insects with white eyes others have been found with light red eyes (the so-called eosineyed insects). These two mutations evidently represent two stages in the abstraction of pigment from the dark red eye of the normal form. Then, again, insects have been found with shortened wings, and other have appeared in which the wings are reduced to vestiges. All these types when mated with similar forms produce progeny exactly resembling their parents-and all when crossed with the parent form behave as recessives-as might be expected from the fact that the peculiarities of all of them consist in the partial or total loss of some feature characteristic of the parent species. In a word, all these mutations have evidently originated by the loss of a factor.
In the next and concluding article we shall take up the question whether new strains can only originate in the two ways which have been described in this article, and, if so, to what mode of origin we are to ascribe the most importance in trying to account for the bewildering mass of variety whlich we see spread out before us in the existing animal and vegetable kingdoms.

