nTHE PO:PULATIOQN PROBLEM AND THE V

:

P~~UTURE*

-

: ~~By D. V. OLASS

THE past year has seen a marlked the celebrated attacks of Godwin and

change m the general attitude towards Shelley, and the books and pamphlets of

-the population question--at least, so Graham and Weyland, Alison, Sadler and

far as can be judged 'from the articles in Doubleday. The economists of the day did,

newspapers :-and periodicals. ?Instead of however, accept the theory and used it with

seeing comments on the rapidity with which depressing results in their own field, of

various populations,'are growing, we' now quiry.

find, a general acceptance of the probability After the middle of the nineteenth century

that our poplation will decline and specula- attention was drawn away from the popula-

tions on the consequences of such a decline. tion controversy. This was not due to any

WVhat is particularly interesting about this successful refutation of Malthus's principle,

volte-face is not the phenomenon itself, but but to- the fact that industrial progress was

the length of time it needed to take plac so rapid. that the question of the pressure

nearly a hundred-and forty years.

of numbers upon the means of subsistence

The Malithusian Hypothesis

became purely theoretical. The question was not again publicly aired until the shock of

About a hundred and forty years ago what, up to I930, used to be caled the

Malthus* published his Essay on the Principle "Great Depression" had caused some

of Population, and brought population into anxiety to the people who had hitherto

the public aren,a., Beginning with two simple believed that- prosperity had come to stay.

postulates, "that food is necessary to the At the same time the belief in the automatic

existence of man," and "that' the passion action and eternal value of laisser-faire was

between the sexes is necessary and will breaking down, and the. road being thrown

remain nearly in its present state,", he open to intervention. by the State and other

arrived;at the following thesis. First, that
population is necessarily limited by the
means of subsistence. Secondly, population always increases when the, means of sub.. sistence increase, unless it is prevented by
such checks as famine, war, pl2ge or'moral
restraint. Finally,'the actual population was at its particular size because no increase in that size cou,ld be compensated by greater or
even equal increases in the means of subsistence..
Even at the beginning of the nineteenth
century, when the effects of the Napoleonic
Wars were being felt severely, and when the

institutions. Once external control is an
accepted possibility, the population question assumes a new importance, and it is not
surprising to find, in. the 'nineties, such statisticians as Dr. Ogle and Dr. G. B1.
Longstaff again referrng to the "most
formidable" rate of natural increase in
England and Wales, and the imminent need
to control that rate in order to.prevent the pressure of numbers on the means of subsistence. Yet while these statisticians were re-creating the Malthusian spectre, the birthrate was already sliding dow.nwards.

process of indus.trial, change was bearing Technique of Population Analysis

heav.ily upo>n the ".common man.," accept- If we look back to the period we have just

ance of the .Maithusianl doctrinIe was by no discussed, two .fa.cts become evident. First,

*means uniiversal. T.h.ere were, .for .example, the early nineteenth-centuiry theorists were

* A Paper read at. the Anual C~onference of Educa-
tiOnalA¶ssociations, Ja;nuary 1937.

discussing hypothetical. rates of increase-v
both the Malthusians and their opponents.

39

40 THE FJGENICS REVIEW

Secondl, the overpqpulation x

of The nse sbpW by te; figw is very smnll

the later part of the century were discussing the future, as their successors still do-t y,

-overathewhole period it amountt t6 only
about 6*5 per cent.-and since the period

in terms of the crude rate of natural increase was -one in which the system of registration

shown at the timethat is, the- percentage was.- still in process of completion, it is

by which the population increases from year possible that the' real increase was' even

to year. Both forms of discussion are likely smaller. Tlhe second fact, whic fllows

to lead to incorrect condusions: the first direotly from the.first, is that the' major

because the imagination is unhampered by factor responsible for the growth of the

the bonds of vital statistics, and the second population was not the rise in fertility but

because the technique of analysis is basically the fall in mortality.* Thirdly, instead of an

unsound.

increase in material productivity being

In view of the recent publicity given to the accompanied by a corresponding rse in

topic, it is unnecessary here to recapitulate fertility, it was, after I870, accompanied by

the criteria which must be fulfilled in the a marked fall. .The average number of

accurate analysis of population trends. It children born to each woman passig through

will be sufficient to state, as a reminder, that the child-bearing perod was

these criteria are not satisfied by birth-rates,

4* 64 im I88I

general fertility rates, or crude rates of natural increase. To estimate the trend of a
populaton we need to know not just how

4.16 in i8gi
3 - 5im I9O1
2*94 m 1911 2*72 in 1921

many births and deaths there are each year, showing a fall of over 43 per. cent. between

but to what extent the fertile sections of the I87I and 1921. Since we want to know the

population are replacing themselves from extent to which each woman is replacing

generation to generation. Consequently not herself,we are concerned particularly with

until the extension of vital statistics and the the average number of female children born

development of methods of analysis like to each woman passing through the child.

those of Kuczynski, Burgdbrfer and Dublin bearng period. This is shown in Column B

and Lotka were we in a position to discuss of Table I.

anything more than hypothetical rates of
growth. The Malthusian controversy, so far
as its scientific aspect is concerned, has thus

TABLE I
AB Averge number of Average number of

resolved itself into a discussion of what has been and what is now taking-place, instead

children born to female children born
each woman passing to each woman i through the child- the same circum-

of what might perhaps take place if fertility

bearing period ; with stances.

were unchecked.

the fertility rates, found in different

years in England

Population Trend Since 1851

and Wales.

Looking at the population of England and

I85I ...
I86i .

4.49 4.61

2*20
2q26

Wales from this point of view, we notice I87I ...

4.78

2.34

three facts. In the first place, there is no

I88I ... I89I ...

reason to believe that fertility varied a great

4*64
41I6

2-28 2-04

deal up to the third quarter of the nineteenth century. We cannot, with any accuracy, go

1911 ... 1921 ... 1931 ...

2-94
2.72
1-9I

1.44
In32~
0-93

back before I85I, but examniIing the fertility J934 *.

I[.79

0-.87

rates from that point to I87I, we see that the average number of children born to a woman
passing through the child-bearing period was

4.49 in I851

4.61
4.78

inl
in

I86I
187I

Significance of Decline in Replacement Rate
The figures indlicate that.by 1934 fertility
had fallen so low that even if all the female
* The mean expectation of life at birth .hasi;rlsen
from 41.19 years in 838-44to 6O*76yearnx93o-2.

. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~1 A *AA.

en or to-- eah woman wre themselv-tos surve until the completion of the
l-bag period, the rate of replacement

only a
basedo trends.

s we n gi* are general ones, very rough analys of historical

would not be adequate to maintain the

ppula1ion. Whenr in addition, it is remem- The- Persistence of the Decline in Fertility

bered fthat some of the children die between the agesr^f, o and so years, the deficit is still
more appaent. In '934, in fact, tak into account the existing conditions of fertility
and mortality, the rate of replacement was only 76 per cent. of that necessary to main-
tain the population. It follows- that. if
fertility remains unchanged our population
will soon reach its peak. level, and after a
transition period of' slow decline will begin to fall off at the rate of 24-per cent. in every generation. At this rate of decline, it would
be reduced to about I5 per cent. of its previous size in just over two hundred years.* The rate of decline could be reduced slightly
by further reductions in mortality, but the effect would be insignificant. This is so,
first, beaiause no amount of reduction in
mortality between the ages of o and -50 years would make the replacement rate adequate, and, secondly, because no extension in the expectation of life beyond these ages, since

If the decline in fertility were the product

of only one or tIo decades, or of smal

statist.cal

.eht l justified in

assuming that it was likely to be ephemeral

and unimportant. But it has been in

evidence in this country for about sixty

years, and during that period it has pro-

ceeded so ra-id1ythat the'average number

of children born to a woman living tlihough

the child-bearing period has fallen from 4*78

to 1.79, a decline of nearly 63 per cent.

Moreover, the phenomenon is not confined

to England and Wales, but is apparent in

every country of the Western World. - The

table of- net reproductin rates* given

in Table II shows that of sixteen European

and other Western countries, nine had net

reproduction rates below unity at the

dates when the figures were last available,

and it is probable that in at least three

more of the countries the rates have fallen

they are outside the child-bearing period,

TABLE II

could increase the reproductive capacity of
the nation. In this situation the population
question has changed its direction. We are

COUNTRIES WITH NET REPRODUCTION RATES UNDER

UNITYrt

Ausbtia
England

000 ...
and Wales

1931/2 1933

0*714
-0 735

no longer concerned, in the Western World
at any rate, with the pressure of numbers on the means of subsistence.. On the contrary

Germany 1... . . 931
Sweden 000 . 926/30
Friance 1... ... 931
Latvia 1.. ... 1929

0o748
0857
o - 86o
0.900

the problem now. appears to be the possible
effect of declining numbers on the economic and social 'progress of the community. The
Malthusian is(sue, whatever its original appli-

United States Australia ... New Zealand

... 1933
... 1932/3 ..I 933

0*°940
O.976
0-978

COUNTRIES WITH NET REsPRODUCTION RLATES ABOVE
UNITYf

cability might have been, is now no longer of

Hungary *0*.....930/T.OII01I

practical interest to us. The question that arises is: Are we
justcified in considering that the decline in

Denmark ... ... I926/30

Finland *..... ... z92I/3o

Itay

......... 1931

Canada ~*.. ... I93T1

I *0I2 1..I074
1..I*209 I*3I9

fertility creates a real problem ? The implica-
tion istwofold. Is there any reason to believe
that the decline is likely to be permanent,
and, if .so, is the prospect of a declining population. a disconcerting one ? These ques-
tions take us into what is at present prac-.
tically the realm of the unknown, and the

Portugal *..... ... I930/I Bulgarna ......... 1926/7

Ix3*34 1I.446

* The net reproduction rate combines the number of cfwtsgvhueheiirnrmtlveoahidrulv-agteebthh,ei'ecaohurneitinx.lh,nddetgerere'nncpthgetibirlovoideorw.ndn.hbcietoicaonnrh,idantigghtiwfoviosepoenemn'rsacihcnooiofdlnpddmariiosentrsntiiao'wntlnighisletltyoht,sfrhu;oeacfmuncesgedreehtlidplvtiaihenstessgy

* That is, compcistion

in
had

twro hundredx
becbme; stable.

years after -i

the

age.

M-eatsuTPrheemeanbtovoef rPa>toepsulaartieonfrGormowKtuhc,zwyrnistkhit,heR.exRc.e,ptTihoen
of those for Friance and the United States.

42

.LJ-3~ E4TUIE...E(ItVlKW '

-

below unity since the dates riven. Moreover our present st ofthnical knowledge aad

in every country wth the possible excep- capital equipment, LEngld and Wales is

tion of Germany, and even there the possi- slightly overpopulated.- If so, a reduction in

bility is not very great-the downward numbers, unaccompanied by any other

trend has been unbroken and shows no signs change, would increase the national dividend

oI Deing checked i m.otrcent
the countnres whose rates are

yves
still

ab-oAlvseo

and ought therefore to increase the ,er capita income of the population. Atthe same

unity are those in which the process of time, there is no reason to believe that

Westernization, or industrialization, began further advances in technique will not be

latest. The persistence of relatively high made during the perod in which thepopula-

rates in those countries is, then, more pro- tion is falling, and every advance in know-

bably due to-a time-lag in their development ledge tends to increase the size of the

than to any basic difference between them population w,hich would give the most

and the countries where replacement is- no efficAent use of the productive equipment

longer adequate. To call the phenomenon of and resources of the co nunity. -It. might

declining fertility superficial and ephemeral then happen that, with the ensuin.g technical

is, consequently, to shirk the question, and progress, a stationary number of inhabitants

not to dispose of it. It is vital that we would mean underpopulation---not that the

realize the probability of a declining popula- standard of life would fal, but that it might

tion in the near future and at least take not rise as much as it would have. done if

steps to meet the problems -presented by numbers~s w~er~e i. ncreasng.

such a decline, even if we are not prepared

to attempt a reversal of the trend.

Infence of Smaller Numbers on Economic

Demand

The Term " Declining Population"

But to state the problem in this way is to

So far as the second implication referred put it very crudely. In reality there are

to above is concerned- namely whether the many complex factors which may swing the

prospect of a declining population is a balance in either direction. For example,

disconcerting one-it is imperative that we there is the influence of smaller numbers on

should clearly understand what the term the demand for different kinds of goods and

" declining population "means. Popular inter- for goods in general. To some extent the

pretation of the term is at present confused, future of large-scale production depends

translating it into two possibilities: either upon this, though it also depends upon the

that the population falls for a time but then size of the aggregate national dividend In

stabilizes itself at a lower level, or that' it general, there is no reason to fear that the

falls. continuously without any sign of total demand for goods and services will

stabilization. The importance of distin- necessarily be reduced with a smaller popula-

gushing between these current interpreta- tion, even though the demands for specific

tions is due to the fact that the economiic and products may be smaller. But there is also

social consequences of the two events are the point that production is generally

likely to be very different. In the first case carried on ahead of demand, and usually in

we have two problems to encounter-one anticipation of a growing demand. .With

arising from an initial decrease in aggregate fixed numbers there m.ight.soon be.a satia-

numbers, and the other arising out of the tion point for particular products, an.d the

fact of stability. In the former problem we flow would thenceforth have to be .more .or

are concerned with the effect of reduction less constant. ISw certain fields this might

inl numbers on the demand for goods and have the result- of a cons:tant red.uctio.n -of

services, and on the efficiency with which thke human employment.. :In agriculture, .for

productive resources of the community are example, this would be the case. But with

used. Tvhat is, the question is one of optimum. technical p.rogress we should in any case

population. Now it is possible that, given expect the production of. anly one commo4ity

'PO

-, 11,

r

0FUTURE

43

or one group of ot to need a smaller amount of labour, ad the problem created by stationary ppultion is not

than with inceasing numbers, and flexibility

will be howrever,

somewhat impaed. Here again, the problem is closely connected

new even tough it ma:y be more notble.
It is at question -o- preventing decreasing employment in one branch of production from bom g incr ing unemployment, and is more itimately connected with the given economic-and social system -than with the given' siz of the -population. Again,
reverting to our previous discussion, although
rising- numbers might, from sobne points: of

with the extent to which the society is run

on planned lines. The tendency in general

production is for the average worker to

become a skilled machine-tender, and with

a correctly
there is no

onenLL; reason to

fear

una education
a decrease in the

adaptability of the labour supply.

Influence of Age-Composition of Population

view, increase the stanard of lfe more
quicld thanm stationary numbers, there
might at the same time be- a point beyond which increasing physical congestion in ,housing and the' connected social services,
as well as in transport, would send up the
costs - of the economic system to a level higher than we anticipate. Nor must we
forget that the possibilities 'of technical progress in production. are so great that we might easily afford to sacrifice part of our
future economic well-being if, *for other
reasons, we decided to have a stationary, instead of a growing, population.

This brings up the problem of the age-

composition of the population. A good many

references have been made to it in the last

few months, and it certainly does mean a

change in the structure. of the economic system. It may mean that fewer toys will be

wanted; but on the other hand it may result

in a greater. dem.and for armchairs and

slippers. It may mean an increase in the

amount spent on pensions, but also a

decrease in the aggregate Thus the disadvantage of

cost of education. a slight ageing of

the population is by no means to be taken

for granted, particularly when we.remember

influence of Stabilit in Nurs
The stability aspect of' the stationary

that the
muniity is

productive capacity- of
likely to be'i,ncreasing

the the

comwhole

time.

population* is no less complex than the size aspect. In the first place we have to think of the flexibility -of the economic system under the new conditions. In our present
population, adaptability 'to new demands
and new production is met largely by a redirection of young recruits to industry and the professions. In a growing popTlation
where ~the proportion of yzoung people is
larger than that of aged, this redirection is made somewhat easier. But with the swing in the age-composition that must necessarily occur under the impact of stationary num-
bers, there Will tend to be.less recruiitment at the 'bttom anld more wastage at the top

Moreover, if we are not prepared to accept

some ageing of the population we must

realize what the protest implies. If we were

to stabilize our population at any level-at

ten millions or a hundred millions we should

have a larger proportion of old persons than

we have mortality

at present. If we rates* as our basis,

take present a stationary

population of any size would have approxi-

mately the age structure shownl in Table III.

TABLE III

AGE

STRUCTURE OF A MORTALITY

STATIONARY POPULATION
RATES OF T1930 TO 1932

AT

THE

Age of Persons.. 0-15 Years.

Percentage of Total Population. 22.37

I5-60 years.
* See Robbins, -L., " Notes on Some Probable 6o years and over.

0*I
i7 -'44

iCgonGwreeuaetnBcreistaofint"he(AEdcvoneonmticoaf,*

Stationary Population
1929); Wolfe, A. B.,

This is rather different from our present

"Tlhe Theory Am. Ac.id. of

of Optimum Population" Pol. and Soc. Sc., Nov.

(Annal& of 1936)'; and

Wolfe, A. B., "
Reproduction *

The (in

RaEtcioonnoamliicssa,t'ionSoocfiPorloogdyuctainodn

and
the

situation, which, according to the 1931
Census, showed4mI allocation of 23*83 per

Moder World, ed. N. Hi*,'s I935).'-

* As given in the English Life 'Table No. IO.

- THE'--
.

ICSI?., RIDVI

.,fllj 41

I
.1 I

t

i.

cent.. of the population under z5; years of postion rverywimiar tQ our own; ani

age, 64* 6i per cent.. between 15 and 6o secondy, it ignores the iyofattract"

years, and II-56 per cent. over 6o years ing. man-power fromother ountriesbymeans

of age. But if we wished tokeep this kid of immgation f ie. It appears para-

of age-composition we should have to follow doxical that many of those who lament .the

tne proceduue o-fcycli-sca1 trends in fertility- falling off in our mandipower for. military

alternations of low and high fertility-for purposes also believe in the maintenance: QI

the present position is the result of a special the present immigration regations... In any

history of fertility. It anses from the com- case there might be one good reason to

bination of high fertility in the past and low welc.ome a. relative detenotion in our

fertility in the present. High fertility by numbers, if it were carried far enough;. we

itself would not achieve the exact result, for might then give up, like Dmk, attempts

although helping to reduce the- proportion to. compete in the armaments race .and

of the very old, it would at the same time devote that section of our. expenditure to a

raise the proportion of the very young. But more worthy cause.

the change caused by the achievement of a

stationary population would not, if regarded Influence of Continuous Decline in Numbers

as a whole, be radical. Actually it would At the beginning of this. section of the

mean an increase in the non-active section discussion, we noted a second interpretation

of the population from 35*39 to 39-8i per of the term "decl g population "-a

cent., and even this might be more apparent population the size of which continues to

than real. It might be made much greater fall, with no tendency. for. stabilization to

by prolonged education of the younger take place. Now the results of such a situa-

sections of the population, or much less by tion may be serious. In the first place there

the increased use of machinery involving would be an intensification of the-difficulties

little arduous labour on the part of the mentioned in the analysis of a stationary

workers using it, and thus capable of being population-changes in the size and nature

operated by persons much older than we are of the demand for goods and services,

accustomed to find in our industrial system decreasing flexibility of .the system due. to

to-day.

shrinkage in the flow' of new recruits to

Falling Population and Military Strength

industry, and so forth. There are also two additional influences to take into account.

All this discussion merely skims the sur- With falling numbers, the change in the age-

face of the problem of stabilizing our popula- composition of the population may be v.ery

tion at lower numbers than we have at large. For example, according to the second

present. But it at least serves to show how estimate computed by Dr. Charles,* the non-

much spade-work is needed in this field, and, active section of the population might rise

in particular, how much the material situa- to as much as.6o *7 per cent.-consisting of

tion of the future depends upon the adequate 2-96 per cent. of .p;ersons aged o to I5 years,

planLning of the economiic system. I have and.57 *75 per cent. of persons aged 6o years

attempted here to deal only with. those and over., T.his estimate assum.es t.hat fer-

problems which are pertinent to the- popula- .tility ceases to decline after 1985, 50 that

tion.trend, and not with those which arise eventually a stable agec.omposition wo.uld.be

largely from prejudice or unfounded fears. reached. If fertility .actually. continued. to

In the latter category is, for example, the decline after' that date, the ageing of the

anxiety that a fall in our numbers may population would be even.more marked.

result in a deterioration of our military At the same time the decine in the numbers

position vis-d-vis the other Powers. There

is not a great deal of justification for this * Charles, E:.: " The Effect of Present Trends in

fear since first, as we have seen, most of the
counltries of the Western World. are in a

Fertility and Mortality upon the Future Population of

England and Wales " (Londt
Service, Special Memrndu;m

Naof.s.d

C40a,mbAruidgguetEIc9o3n5o)m.-jc

THE POPULA PROBLEM "AND' THE FUTURE

45

themselves would, involvea the constant ivilization, the results might, well be

remotilding Of. the econoniic structure at a thoroughly disastrous, so-far as we can judge

rate *hichi might ver well tax its powers of from the past reactions "to disturbances

recuperation. Consider, for example, the which, by companson, were relatively un-

impact of a fall of 25 per cent. in our num- important.

bgeernseer-vAa-!eurTyO&o'tuith-ilnr-t,yt.yaaeairsn(i.de.emiannsducactesesvievne Prerequisites of a Stationary Popatin

a constant level would involve a very high SUppOSe, then,that we decide. to have a

rate of increase in individual purchasing stationary population. What would this

power, wrhile if this were not done the involve? Primarily, it would mean raising

obsolescence factor would rise fat above any
figure we have ever known. -These are not

fertility to a much higher level than its present one, though it need not mean an

problems about which we would wish to be annual supply of births larger than we had,

dogmatic, but. it is evident that the difficulties for_example, in I934. This may sound self-

brought in the train of a continuously falling contradictory, but the justification for the

population would be of a magnitude demanding the most -senous consideration. And

statement becomes clear if we refer back to the earlier discussion on fertility and replace-

though they could be surmounted with the ment. At that stage we noticed that a

help' of some rational planning, they would probably divert, in the process, energies which might be better utilized.
IThis analysis has concerned itself with the economic effects of a declining population

population would only be maintained if each woman had, on the average, a sufficient number of girl children to replace her in the
next generation of potential mothers. If
there were no mortality between the ages of

upon a society in which the means of pro.
duction are privately owned.- Were the

o and 50 years, one girl child born to each
woman would be sufficient, and, taking the

resources owned by the community as a
whole, the arguments would' be far less applicable. There are two main reasons for this. First, because in that case it would be much easier to plan for the country and avoid discrepancies between supply and demand. Secondly, because the most palpable danger
of a falling population-the impact of contracting markets upon individual producers and, through them, upon the workers in
the affected industries-would not arise. HIowever, evAen a public economy would
have a number of problems to meet if its
population were in: a state of continuous decline.- Of these, the most important would be the structural rigidity introduced
by the diminishing proportioyn of. young
recruiits to industry, and the general social
consequences of a continuous ageing of the
popullation. To sum UP the situation, we may
conclude that whereas in balance a stationary
popiiation may offer distinct advantages overagrowing one, the same could.notbe said ofa continuouslygallingpopulation, evenin a
country in which the meanis of production were owned comunally. In an i-ndividualist

present ratio of male to female live births,
this would mean an average total of 2*o5
children. But there is, of course, a con-
siderable mortality between the ages of o and 50 years, and taking the present survival rate as the basis, each woman would need an average total of 2 37 children. If, further, we assume that as large a proportion of women will not marry as was shown in the
193i Census-i.e. I7-46 per cent. between
the ages of 40 and 49 years-then each mared woman must, during her fertile period, bear 2 *87 children in order for the population to be maintained.. HIaving achieved that average, the total number of *births only matters in deciding upon the level at which. we wish to stabilize the
population. In 1934, our population was
40* 467 millions. Stabilization. at .that lev.el,
given our present mortality, would require a annual supply of about 666,ooo live
births. If, on the other had, we wished to
stabilize the number of women aged 15 to 49
years found in our 1934 population, we should r.equiire an annual supply of about 764,000 liv.e births, and the total population

46 1HE' EUGENICS RE-IEW

would then become stationary at the level of p.resent time we have about the maxhnuux

46426 millions.*

number of potentially fertile womenaia oNr

In I934 there were, in England and Wales, total. population, an immediatecampafor

597,642 live births. According to our calcu- the mantenance. of :-a given population

laions (S-e Table IV), an annual supply of would. need least initial change eifnertility

that size should be enough to procduce a Suppose we. had decided to maintain a

stationary population of about 36*3 millions, population. equal in size to that. found in

and were that the prospect for the future, we England and Wales in 934- that is, 40'467

should have no cause for anxiety. But in millions. Requiring an annual supply of

reality we had a large number of births not 666,ooo live births with present Lmortality

because fertility was high, but because there rates, this would involve, if we had decided

TABLE IV ANNUAL SUPPLY OF LIvE BIRTHS NECESSARY FOR MAINTAINING POPULATIONS OF DIFFERENT SIZES

to inaugurate the change in 1936, an increase of general fertility to 57-19 per thousand in
that year as compared with 53* 8o per,thou-

(WITH PRESENT MORTALITY RkTES)

sand in 1934 (see Table V). Since the -num-

Size of Annual Supply of No. of Women aged Population Live Births neces- IS to 49 in the in millions. sary. Given Populations
(MiHlions).

ber of women aged I1 to 49 years will decline in the future, the continued annual supply of 666,ooo live births would mean a steady nse

50 822,900
48 790,000

I I*965 11*486

in the general fertility rate until about 1976,

46 757,100
44 724,200 42 69I,200 40 658,300

II o007
10s529
10*050
9 572

TABLE V
GE:NERAL FERTILITY RATE: REQUIRED, BEGINNING IN 1936, TO MAINTAIN A POPULATION OF 40A-467 MILLIONS,

38 625,400

9.093

MORTALITY ASSUMED TO REMAIN AT THE I930/2

36 592,500

8-614

LE&VEL

34 559,600
32 526,700
30 493,700
28 460,800 26 427,900

8*136
7-657
7 3179
6-700 6-222

Year.
1936 1941

No. of Women aged
15 to 49 years
(Millions).
11646
11T194

No. of Live Births per i,ooo Women
aged 15 to 49 years.
57-19
59' 50

was a large number of women of child-

1946 1951

10°979
O1633

60-66 62*64

bearing age. And this, in turn, was due to 1956

I0.335

64.44

the high fertility of the previous generation.
In I934, there were II,109,200 women aged

x961
I966
1971

IO007 9-768 9*667

65.55
68-T8 68-.go

15 to 49 years and 597,642 live births, giving a general fertility rate of 53*8o per

1976
198I I986 &sUbs.

9-531
9 579 9-683

thousand. But with present mortality the

69'88 69-53
68.78

general fertility rate should be 68*78 per after which the number of women in these

thousand if the population is to be replaced. age groups would,rise slightly and.stabilize

What, therefore, was happening according t.hemselves, by 1986, at 9* 683 milons.''The

to fertility in 1934 was that, instead of each maintenance of ~a population 9f .40.467

woman bearing during her lifetime the aver- millions would thencef.orth requitre a co.n-

age of 2*37 children necessary to replace stant gen.eral fertility o.f 68'*78 per thousand.

herself, she was bearing only I-79 children. Since the rise in fertility shown .in. Ta.ble V is

With such fertility it is impossible for the quiite gradual-in .the first .f,orty years. it

population to stabilize itself at any level. .m,eans a total increase of under 21 per cent.-

this method would probably'be the least

Fertility Rates Required for Stable Population difficult to follow.

'

The only way to make replacement But to find a method t.hat. ap?pears s.imple

adequate is to raise fertility, and since at the from the mechanical po.int of v.iew does .not

TIhese results are obtained by variations of tShe method explained by Dr. F. Burgdbrfer in his book,
Dcv' Geburtenrickgatzg und seine BekDampfung (T929).

provide a ssolution. to a. -problem in. so.cial b.iology. The questio.n. thatxstill rernains
unans.wered is : Can wee..persuiade: people to

t 'i~YL~TON:OE AN T FUTRE

47

se ir fertility ini thi fasn, or can we
pe ;hntoeas their featilitayt al.?
We cannot, at present, give an answer to this
question. Alth we have a ;fi know-
ledge of the gneral trend of fertility in the past century, we have scarcely even begun
to i.ikuis trend! or fluctuations in it, with te 'movements of other' factors inl a way which could help us to solve the problem

but it is extremely unlikely that this done unless, at the same time, some

will be of the

major characteristics of thIe present social

.and economkc miliu are also altered. EveiD

to provide fairly substantial family a1low.1

ancessay, ten shillings per week for second

and subsequent children-up
age-iwul.dprobably involve

to
a

15 years of fundamental

reconstruction of our society, since it is

of depopulation.*

extremely doubtful if the cost, which would

amount to well over a hundred and fifty

Conclusion

million pounds a year, could be raised simply

So long as this' state of igno,rance pevails, attempts to check the fall in fertility cannot hope to be successful, since they will be
directed, as Dr. Kuezynski says, by " sentiment and prejudice," instead of by informed
concern. At present we can only point to such general features in the situation as the changing nature and functions of the
family, and notice that in our civilization the
demands for a high standard of life and large families seem to be incompatible at the moment, though there is no technological reason why they should continue to be so. To be successful, measures for raising fertility will have to alter the attitude of the
average person to marriage and the family,

by the imposition of further taxes. My own

view is that such a sum could only be raisedc

either by reducing expenditure on arma-

mernts, section

or of

by putting aside for allowances a,
a much larger national dividendt

than we now have. Neither course appears

feasible at the present time.

For the moment, therefore, our conclusion,

must be a relatively barren one. First, that

the problems of a stationary or a declining

population will not be met adequately by an

unplanned economic system such as we have

to-day. Secondly, only under some form of

rationally planned civilization are we likely

to produce an environment in which high

fertility and a high standard of life will both

be possible. This conclusion does not provide

* e.g. See Kuczynski, R. R.: "Economc Causes
and Consequences of Population Movements " (Index,

us with immediate practical remedies, but it.
is suggested that it points out the directior,

November 1936).

in which future research. must proceed.

Uwmi. tReview, VoL.1 , No. .

