GALTON'S HEREDITARY GENIUS * t

Editor's Note: The title Hereditary Genius has been much misunderstood and criticized. In the prefatory chapter of the second edition (I892) Galton wrote that he regretted the choice of tite because it seemed to mislead readers and that if the title could be altered he would make st
Hereditary Ability. He stated that he used the word genius " as expressing an ability that was exceptionaly high and at the same time inborn."
The current reprinting of the book was subsidized by the Eugenics Society (British).

N the eighty-two years which have passed
sinsce the first publication of Galton's book, the science of genetics has become
established, and the sciences of social anthropology, psychology, sociology and demography have provided entirely new insights
for the study and understanding of man.
Much of Galton's thinking reflects the insufficiency of the basic data then available. But the conclusions which Galton draws
from his actual studies of British families are

factor in size of family, and by the standards
of today families were enormous. Under the
conditions then prevailing, Galton's natural and proper conclusion was that the social
factors affecting age at marriage should be radically altered. How correct he was under
the conditions of that time can be seen from the table on this page, the figures in which
seem quite unbelievable to anyone living in a country of Western European civilization today.

still fresh and unassailable and need repeat-
ing: ability runs in families; size of family is a function of the social environent.
The basis of the modern eugenics move-
ment is laid down in the first page of the
introductory chapter: I shall show that social agencies of

With the spread of birth control and the general practice of family limitation a great number of new factors have come into play
to affect size of family; but so far as we know they are all factors which are socially determined. Galton's opening paragraph is not only still true, but truer in a larger sense

an ordinary character, whose influences are little suspected, are at this moment working towards the degradation of human nature, and that others are working towards its improvement.
I conclude that each generation has
enormous power over the natural gifts
of those that follow, and maintain that it is a duty we owe to humanity to investigate the range of that power, and to exercise it in a way that, without being unwise with ourselves, shall be most advantageous to future inhabitants of the earth. Birth control was not widely practised in England at the time Galton wrote Hereditary Genius. Age at marriage was the determining
* Reprinted from the Eugenical News, September
I951, 36 3.
t Galton, Francis. Hereditary Genius: An Inquiry into its Laws and Consequences. Original edition, I869; reprint with new prefatory chapter in 1892; reprint of I892 edition in 1950 by Watts & Co. of London.
379 pp., IOs. 6d.

than it was in his time.
In studying the survival and extinction of English peerages, Galton came upon figures

TABLE
PERCENTAGE-FREQUENCIES OF NUMBERS OF CHILDREN BORN TO SURVIVING COUPLES, ENGLAND AND WALES, 1911, BY DATE OF MARRIAGE, 1851 - 187I, AND BY
WIFE'S MARRIAGE AGE3

Percentage of small and large families by number of children
ever born

Wife's marriage Families with five Families with six
marriage or less children or more children

15-19
I85I-I86I
20-24 I85I-I86I
25-29 I85I-I86I
30-34 I86I-I87I
35-44
I861-i871

22-5 per cent
30*2 per cent 45*I per cent
75 I per cent
92*8 per cent

77'5 per cent 69*8 per cent
54-9 per cent 24-9 per cent 7*2 per cent

t Abridged from Table XVI, Census of England and Wales, I911, Vol. 13, p. xlii.

39

40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which led him to a shrewd guess about human beings into seven grades of natural

fertility which is amply confirmed by more ability, separated by equal intervals, and in

recent studies. Galton writes: " We might one of his final chapters he wrote:

indeed have expected that an heiress, who is If we could raise the average standard

the sole issue of a marriage, would not be so of our race only one grade, what. vast

fertile as a woman who has many brothers changes would be produced ! The number

and sisters. Comparative infertility must be
hereditary in the same way as other physical
attributes." Galton's studies showed that the marriage of peers to heiresses was a frequent cause of the decline or extinction of
their stocks. There is much of current interest in
Galton's studies in such widely different occupational fields of Judges, Commanders, Poets, Oarsmen, and Wrestlers of the north
country. Modem studies using new techniques and new approaches all tend to

of men of natural gifts increased, more than tenfold . ., but far more important to the progress of civilization would be the
increase in the yet higher orders of
intellect . . . the numbers in these, the loftiest grades of intellect, would be increased in a still higher proportion than
that which I have been speaking of; thus the men that now rank under class G would
be increased seventeen fold, by raising the average ability of the whole nation in a
single grade.

confirm Galton's modest statement: " What Galton refers here, of course, to a change

I profess to prove is this: that if two children in hereditary potential. Recent studies by

are taken, of whom one has a parent excep- psychologists point to the same conclusion.

tionally gifted in a high degree-say as one It is now generally agreed that if the average

in 4,000, or as one in a million-and the of the hereditary potential is raised by even

other has not, the former child has an a small amount, there is a great increase in

enormously greater chance of tuning out to the proportion of the gifted; whereas when

be gifted in a high degree, than the other." the environment is improved, the proportion

While such a view is widely accepted today, of the very dull is much diminished, but the

it was apparently not current in Galton's proportion of the gifted increases only

time. His half-cousin Charles Darwin wrote slightly.

him, after reading Hereditary Genius: " You Galton's concluding words take on added

have made a convert of an opponent in one significance today. He wrote: " It seems to

sense, for I have always maintained that, me essential to the well-being of future

excepting fools, men did not differ much in generations, that the average standard of

intellect, only in zeal and hard work."

ability of the present should be raised.... An

The most far-reaching and important extended civiliztion like ours comprises

of Galton's conclusions is one which has more interests 6lan the ordinary statesman

recently been voiced by American psycholo- or philosophers of our present race are

gists as a result of studies of quite a different capable of dealing with."

nature from those of Galton. Galton classified

FREDERICK OSBORN.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 1

