H. YUAN TIEN
Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Birth Control in Mainland China: Ideology and Politics*

The Innocuous Begining

doubtedly furnished a great deal of support to

EVENTS IN THE birth control campaign the person or persons who apparently had

in China can be conveniently divided into already made some small headway in intro-

four phases. A speech by Shao Li-tzu on ducing a de facto change in the official view

September 18th, 1954, at the First National regarding fertility control. Who were they?

People's Congress, has been generally, and Available information suggests that Shao Li-tzu

erroneously, taken to be the beginning of the was one of them, or indeed could have been

first phase of the birth control campaign. Shao alone in this endeavour. He was then a member

was a deputy to the Congress and also had held of the State Council, serving apparently in a

high positions in the previous regime.

non-Communist capacity. But there were other

The inception of the campaign to promote non-Party members on the Council at that time,

birth control was much more innocuous than six of whom were later purged when the so-called

this widely publicized speech of 1954. In an rightists were accused of using the birth control

editorial in the People's Daily more than two issue to advance their own political ambitions.2

years later, in March 1957, it was disclosed that While Shao Li-tzu certainly played an im-

the State Council (the highest administrative portant role in the birth control campaign, the

organ in China) had in August 1953, quietly timing of his open advocacy of its necessity in

instructed the Ministry of Health to help the September 1954, seems to have been accidental

masses to control reproduction and also had as the National People's Congress then met for

approved the Ministry's revised regulations the first time and provided an opportunity which

governing contraception and induced abortion.' did not previously exist. The significance of his

The original regulations, therefore, must have speech lies in the fact that it anticipated much

already existed for some time, and the actual of what was said subsequently in the birth

work to revise them must also have begun before control campaign. Shao introduced the subject

that date. The other significant point here is this: in language which, in harmony with official

the introduction of birth control programmes views, discredited Malthus and argued for birth

was not, as has also been generally assumed, control in terms of the welfare of mothers and

simply a reaction to the consequences, real and children during the transition to socialism.3

imagined, of the fact that the 1953 population

of Mainland China was nearly 600 million; The Slow Acquiescence

the action by the State Council in 1953 preceded Shao's speech therefore probably should be

the 1954 announcement of the census results by regarded as the beginning of the second phase of

some ten months.

the birth control campaign. . . . Its

To be sure, the census "confirmation" of the seed was, from the point of view of the Party, of

size of the large and growing population un- an "alien" variety. And its germination was very

slow in the then ideologically unfavourable soil;

*The Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 1963, 41, the article in People's Daily (November 1st,

269-90. This shortened version is reprinted by permission 1954) which discussed the result of the 1953

of the author and of the Editorial Board. The study was supported by a grant from the Social Science Research Council.

Census, played up the theme "Six Hundred Million People-A Great Strength for Socialist

213

THE EUGENICS REVEEW, January 1964, 55, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Construction." Note also the long interval of over two years between the first steps taken in August 1953 and the appearance in October 1955, in the Party's chief journal for ideological indoctrination, of the first major article defining and accepting the need for birth control.4
In all probability, the leadership of the Party was not then prepared for an all-out acceptance of birth control, even if it did tacitly allow the adoption of the 1953 measure by the State Council. At best, it was probably a marriage of convenience rather than true love. Nonetheless, some steps were taken to cultivate the ground for possible further developments:
Following the symposium on the problem of birth control called by Comrade Liu Shao-chi on December 27th, 1954, the Second Bureau of the State Council designated the responsible officials of the government departments concerned to form study groups on the question of contraception, [and] put forth a number of methods to promote birth control."
The Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, which, in fact, is the highest policy-maker in China, followed with instructions in March 1955:
Under the present historical circumstances and in the interest of the nation, family, and the new generation, our Party seconds appropriately planned births.5
But the climate remained unfavourable as far as any concrete measures to implement the policy were concerned. . . In February 1956, Chen Po-ta, a highly-placed theoretician of the Party, proclaimed, "There is no sign of overpopulation in China, . . . [and] China can provide room for at least another 600 million people."6 It was also reiterated that "under the leadership of the Communist Party, as long as there are people, any miracle known to men can be accomplished."7
This unfavourable climate was later recalled by Ma Yin-chu (who was to become the most vocal advocate of birth control in 1957-59):
In 1955 . . . I drafted a speech concerning the population question [New Population Theory], ... and planned to deliver it at the 1955 session of
* This is based on the author's examination and classification of over 500 news items on birth control which appeared in Chinese newspapers in the course of the birth control campaign.

the National People's Congress. Before doing so, I submitted it to the Chekiang subcommittee for discussion. At the meeting of the subcommittee, all but a minority of the members either refrained from expressing any opinions, or disagreed with my views. There were people who asserted that my statements were the same as Malthus'. There were also people who maintained that, though my phraseology differed from that of Malthus, the essence of my thought was of the same persuasion. Although their opinions were not acceptable to me, I felt that they were given in goodwill. On my own initiative, I therefore withdrew the draft of the speech and waited quietly for the time to ripen enough for its presentation to the whole Congress.8
It was not until March 31st, 1957, that Ma
made the contents of the speech known to the public.9
Another salient indication of the unfavourable
climate lies in the more or less completely silent treatment accorded to birth control in the pages of the People's Daily. From August 1953, when the State Council first took action, to the end of 1956, only a handful of items on the subject were given space, none of which was of any consequence. Apart from a few short articles in New China's Women and China Youth (both of which have a nation-wide circulation),10 news about birth control appeared mostly, and infrequently, in newspapers in major provincial capitals and in Peking and Shanghai.*
The appearance of these articles seems to have emanated from the almost single-handed and persistent efforts of Shao Li-tzu, who repeatedly raised the issue at both the 1955 and 1956 sessions of the National People's Congress. He urged in 1956 the acceleration of birth control propaganda and the relaxation of restrictions on the use of birth prevention techniques, particularly sterilization. Instead of limiting either vasectomy or salpingectomy to couples with six or more children, he recommended that sterilization be permitted after the birth of three or four children if both the husband and wife give the consent for one of them to undergo the operation." About a year later, the Ministry of Health announced that sterilization would be allowed without reference to family size.... n
Meantime, on September 16th, 1956, Premier Chou En-lai declared:
To protect women and children and bring up and
educate our younger generation in a way con-

214

BIRTH CONTROL IN MAINLAND CHINA: IDEOLOGY AND POLITICS

ducive to the health and prosperity of the nation, ... if this year the number of babies should be

we agree that a due measure of birth control is 23,310,000, . . . then each year thereafter the total

desirable.'3

number of children born would be still larger....

However, Li Teh-chuan, the Minister of Health, devoted only two sentences to birth control in her report to the 1956 People's Con-

The proverb "Two in the first generation means a thousand in ten generations" (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024) is therefore not without foundation.15

gress.... Thus, a real improvement in the over-all situa-
tion had yet to evolve and it did so in February 1957, when Mao Tse-tung is reported to have said the number of births each year was indicative of:
Great progress made in medical service and the general rise in living standards, especially in the countryside; and of the faith people have in the future. But this figure must also be of great con-

The moment was indeed auspicious and ripe
for birth control. Yet, as Chuang Hui-nan expressed it, the need for birth control was no longer confined to the original arguments of Shao Li-tzu, who emphasized its necessity exclusively in terms of the welfare of mothers and children....
Throughout the ages people everywhere have been called upon (implicitly or otherwise) by

cern to us all.... The increase in grain harvest for the last two years has been 10,000,000 tons a year. This is barely sufficient to cover the needs of our growing population.... It is estimated that at present 40 per cent of our youth have not been placed in primary schools. Steps must therefore

society to be fruitful or to desist, as the case may be. "Population control" may be used to denote this regulation of population numbers in the interest of the society as a whole. Yet, in the modern era, the number and timing of preg-

be taken to keep our population for a long time at a stable level, say, of 600,000,000. A wide campaign of explanation and proper help must be undertaken to achieve this aim."4
The above quotation appears to have been one of the portions of a speech which Mao delivered at a meeting of the Supreme State Council, but which was later deleted. The revised version of this speech was published in June 1957, under the well-known title "On the Correct Handling

nancies increasingly reflect the desire and decision of individual parents. In other words, "fertility control" refers to the regulation of childbearing in accordance with personal circumstances and inclination. This distinction is important; and, as a case in point, fertility control gained support and momentum in the West only when it was wedded to a line of appeal.

of Contradictions among the People." The Which insisted that over-large families were a

reason for the deletion is unknown, but may have been due to its Malthusian overtone and to a lack of unanimity in the Party leadership on birth control. Be that as it may, the pronounce-

cause of poverty, that restraint of late marriage was an overheavy burden to lay upon people at large, and that some artificial check might regulate the size of families to economic bounds and enable the conception of children to be checked.

ment represented an acquiescence, however reluctantly arrived at, to the need for birth
control.

Cast in these utilitarian terms and known as neo-Malthusianism, this appeal fell a step short of recognizing Malthus' natural checks to

The Auspicious Moment

population.16

Meeting less than two weeks after Mao's speech, Thus, the invocation of the Malthusian threat,

no fewer than twenty-five deputies to the Third however disguised in the writings of Ch'en Ta,

Session of the Second National People's Political Wu Ching-chao, Fei Hsiao-tung and otherse7

Consultative Conference, spoke out on birth during this third phase of the birth control

control early in March 1957. Li Teh-chuan, the movement, transformed the need for fertility

Health Minister, delivered her longest and most control into a question of "population control."

informative speech in public in favour of con- Almost no effort is required to demonstrate

traception. All these speeches were carried in empirically the advantages of controlled fertility

full in the People's Daily, even though one of in terms of the immediate well-being of indi-

them contained the most specific and undiluted vidual families; whereas, Malthus' principle of

remarks echoing Malthus:

population has never been factually validated.

2IS

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Nor is it free from inconsistencies and ambiguities.18 Nor, of course, have the counterarguments of the Communists been verified by concrete examples....
But, the "indiscretion" of non-Communist demographers and others were not limited to discussing the need for population control in Malthusian terms. In one instance, Chen Po-ta's thesis that China could in twelve years' time absorb another 600,000,000 people was declared to be "rather too optimistic." And the attack on Wang Ya-nan, the President of Amoy University and one of the most ardent antiMalthusian partisans in Communist China, could not have been more forceful and forthright:
Wang can be regarded as the representative of the blindly optimistic school. His great book, Marxist Population Theory and China's Population Problems, is nothing but an exercise in the rigid transposition of dogmas and cannot have any relevance for China's existing circumstances. Therefore, his population theory has fallen behind the times and cannot solve any problems.,
Wang's personal indignation must have been considerable, for he had been suspicious even of the motives of Shao Li-tzu, whose views proved acceptable. In the preface of his own book, Wang declared,
As regards the current birth control propaganda, ... it is very possible for people to consider the question of contraception and the population problems together, and even to look upon supporters of birth control as the supporters of the Malthusian population theory.... Childbearing, especially when it is too frequent and too close, is rather troublesome for the mother in any society. At the same time, it will be difficult to take good care of the children already born. This is why there are no restrictions against the use of various methods of fertility control (by those who have too many children or who have had them too closely together) in the Soviet Union where unemployment has been completely eliminated and where labour shortage is often felt. I hope this is the precise motive which led Mr. Shao Li-tzu to promote birth control.... If this is really true, and if we are able to view this question from the point of view of Marxism, we shall then not have to fear that, in the course of the current birth control campaign, the widespread thought remnants of Malthusianism would be able to resurrect themselves in a borrowed body.20
Ch'en Ta, Wu Ching-chao, Fei Hsiao-tung

and others evidently misjudged the situation, even though they had no quarrel with the argument that childbearing, if unregulated, is troublesome for the mother in any society. What divided them and Wang Ya-nan and his optimistic school lies in their respective extrapolations, into both the immediate and distant future, of post-1949 trends in industrial and agricultural developments in this society-the People's Republic of China. The dialogue ran like this:
Wu CHING-CHAO: The employment of an additional 1-5 million workers each year is not a small number according to the experience of other countries.... In 1900, there were 28-3 million job-holders in the United States, and in 1956, there were 68-8 million. During these fifty-six years, the increase amounted to a total of 40 5 million, or an annual average of 0-7 million. ... At the beginning of her First Five-year Plan, a total of 10-8 million persons were employed in the Soviet Union, but by 1955, 48-4 million were employed. The total gain of 37-6 million jobholders in twenty-seven years meant an annual average of only 1-4 million. In our own country, the increase in the number of employed persons reached an annual average of 1 1 million during the period of the First Five-year Plan (19531957).... The Second Five-year Plan (1958-1962) calls for an increase of an additional six to seven million persons, . . . (or) at most, an annual average of 14 million. . . . But, if our rate of natural increase were still to be twenty per 1,000, then in 1967 (the end of the Third Five-year Plan) there will possibly be more than six million people who will demand new jobs each year!5
WANG YA-NAN: Because [the socialist system] absorbs and mobilizes a great many more people in production, and because it can stimulate all those joining in production to exhibit selfless enthusiasm and to activate all hidden potentials, (it) can speedily increase the social wealth.... Having witnessed the high tide in agricultural cooperation in August 1955, the attainment of the increases in agricultural production as envisaged in the First Five-year Plan for the expansion of our national economy has become a very conservative goal. According to the National Programme for Agricultural Development, 1956-1967, agricultural production will be very greatly increased on the basis of co-operativized agriculture.... After the (1955) high tide in agricultural co-operativization, only about three years will be needed to bring to full maturity a new form of the socialist revolution. The elimination of unemployment and the total utilization of surplus manpower obviously need not wait until the Second and Third Five-year Plans.2"

2I6

BIRTH CONTROL IN MAINLAND CHINA: IDEOLOGY AND POLITICS

The gap between these estimations of future
trends could not have been wider by any standards....
The Acrimonious Repercussion It began with the "exposure" of Chang Nai-chi,
Lo Lung-chi, Chang Pai-chun, Huang Shaohung, Wang K'un-lun, and T'an Pin-shan who were accused of being anti-Party, anti-people, anti-socialist, and anti-democratic dictatorship, and of harbouring political ambitions. All six were members of the State Council when it first acted on birth control revisions in 1953, and belonged to either the China Democratic League or some other minority political parties. Chang Po-chun and Lo Lung-chi were the leaders of this so-called "Chang-Lo Alliance." They and Chang Nai-chi consequently were removed from their ministerial posts in the Departments of Communication, Forest Industry, and Food, respectively.21
While the ideological conviction of Wang Ya-nan, and those whom he typified, is unequivocal, their suspicion of Shao Li-tzu is also not without foundation; for, as Taeuber noted in passing, Shao is "a late convert from the old regime."22 Notwithstanding this suspicion, Shao was not purged from the government along with the other rightists. In fact, he joined in the attack on them.23 In answering the call to go after the rightists, Shao Li-tzu may well have acted either to salvage, or forestall the turning tide against birth control as a national policy. There were already clear signs of its retrench-
ment.
As previously noted, in March 1957, Li Teh-chuan delivered her most vigorous speech in favour of birth control; at the July 1957 session of the National People's Congress, however, Li was even more curt than she was at the 1956 People's Congress, covering birth control in only one sentence in her report.24 Shao seems to have been successful at that juncture as reports and articles on birth control continued to appear in newspapers even after the removal of the rightists, and might well have carried the campaign further had Ma Yin-chu also yielded to the same pressures which brought about the retreat of the rightists. Ma Yin-chu was not affiliated with any political party or clique,

and until he was relieved of his post as the President of Peking University on March
26th, 1960, he was increasingly more aggressive
in spite of all official "persuasions" to induce a change in his population and economic views.26 His refusal to yield may have been the last straw that decided the final outcome of the previous attempt at mass education in contraception. Nevertheless, it does not seem tenable that Ma Yin-chu could have been connected with the first wave of reactions against birth control in the spring of 1957. In his speech calling for a clear line to separate the rightists from others, Shao Li-tzu even expressed his basic agreement with Ma's "New Population Theory."23 Wu Ching-chao, Ch'en Ta, and Fei Hsiao-tung were, among others, the rightists under attack.
A member of the China Democratic League,
Fei Hsiao-tung was, according to his own
"admission of crimes," involved in various activities in which the Chang-Lo Alliance had an interest.... 26 WU Ching-chao is also a member of the Democratic League.
The abolition of sociology departments and sociology courses took place in China in 1952, when a re-organization of the curriculum of institutions of higher learning was made. In
January 1957, Wu published in New Construction an article "Does Sociology Still Have a Place in New China ?" Fei followed with a statement in a Shanghai paper, Wen Hui Pao, on February 20th, and also formally requested a change in the official attitude towards sociology at a conference on propaganda activities called by the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party (March 24th). On April 10th, New Construction organized a symposium on sociology, which was chaired by Fei. Less than two weeks later (April 23rd), Fei, Wu, and six others were elected at a meeting of the Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences of the Academy of Sciences, to form an "organization subcommittee." Its functions were, at the suitable opportunity, to assist in establishing (within the Department) a committee of research in "social problems."
Simultaneously, Ch'en, Wu, and others were also engaged in a number of other activities: in a petition to the National Committee ofthe Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference

BR-B

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(March 7th), they urged the establishment could her existing millions be effectively . . .

of a population research organization and the and usefully accommodated? As Mao Tse-tung

re-introduction of courses in demography at the has often been quoted by writers in Communist

university level. In an interview published in China since 1957 to have said, "China has a

Wen Hui Pao on April 16, Ch'en reiterated his population of 600 million people. This must

view about the restoration of sociology. In May, never be forgotten," it does not seem merely a

Ch'en and others wrote a letter to the Ministry coincidence that the Great Leap Forward and

of Higher Education, voicing their opposition the People's Commune followed closely the

to the previous elimination of sociology depart- deflation of the birth control campaign.

ments. And, there was a "private" meeting in Both the Great Leap Forward and People's

June, which was attended by Ch'en, Fei, Wu Commune appear to have been in the making

and others and was held at Ch'en's home. It for some time before they were extensively

was alleged that the name of the research com- publicized as formal national policies. Direc-

mittee on social problems was changed, without tives calling for some de-centralization of

proper authorization, to "Sociology Work industrial and commercial enterprises were

Committee," and Ch'en was elected the com- issued by the State Council as early as Novem-

mittee chairman. The resolutions of that meeting ber 1957. In December of the same year, a

included: (1) a systematic recruitment of those National Economic Planning Conference ap-

academic colleagues trained in "bourgeois" proved the draft of the 1958 economic plan,

sociology, (2) the re-establishment of the Chinese which already embodied the Leap Forward

Sociological Society, (3) the restoration of theme-that is, to catch up to or surpass Britain

sociology departments in universities, . . . and within fifteen years or so in the output of steel

(4) the tentative appointment of Wu Ching-chao and other major industrial products. The idea

as the director of a sociological research centre itself must therefore have been under con-

at the People's University in Peking.

sideration prior to that conference, though it

The "conspiracy" proved a complete failure was not until May 1958, that the Second

as was the attempt of Wu, Fei, and Ch'en to Session of the Eighth National Congress of the

expand the need for fertility control into a Chinese Communist Party, "guided by Mao

question of population control. Apart from the Tse-tung's thinking, . . . formulated the general

flood of criticism of the state of affairs during line of going all out, aiming high and achieving

the Hundred Flowers and the allegation that greater, faster, better and more economic results

the Chang-Lo Alliance sought to advance the in building socialism....28

status of minority political parties to be at parity In his report on the proposals for the Second

with that of the Communist Party, Fei, Wu, Five-year Plan at the Eighth National Congress

Ch'en and others were also accused of using the on September 16th, 1956, Chou En-lai also

huge population of China to prove that ". . . the referred to a discussion then under way:

transformation of China into a socialist country

is impossible, it is like the building of palaces on a sand beach, a totally wasteful effort."27 Thus, it seems that the issue of birth control was

In order that the enterprises may be built in a more rational way, we may, whenever this is necessary and feasible, establish a large enterprise stage by stage. As regards small and medium

implicated in a situation where ideology, enterprises, wherever resources are plentiful and

politics, and personalities were poignantly entangled and where the climate of opinions once again became hostile to a factual apprecia-

other conditions are available, we may draw up a comprehensive plan to pave the way for future development. . . .13

tion of population trends.

It must be stressed that, even if the intensive

campaign of 1957 had been continued, the

The Accelerated Solution

effect of its possible success would not have

But, solutions must still be found to escape the become evident until, at least, some fifteen or

demographic dilemma in which China finds twenty years later. That means that birth control

herself, irrespective of the party in power. How is a long-term investment. Judging from Chou

2I8

BIRTH CONTROL IN MAINLAND CHINA: IDEOLOGY AND POLITICS

En-lai's presentation, the establishment of the People's Commune and the Great Leap Forward, particularly the mushrooming of backyard industries, seem to have been the simultaneous implementation of the two divergent views regarding industrial development. They also assumed significance in the demographic context. The belief was that the people's communes could fully mobilize and make rational use of rural manpower, and that "the countryside is like a vast expanse of the sea in which the labour force is swallowed up."29
Since 1949, though briefly entertaining the idea of a short-term need for fertility control, the Party leadership has also consistently maintained a fairly sanguine outlook on the longterm demographic prospects. Typical of this line of reasoning is the following:
the population of various nations can be grouped into three categories: (1) Colonial, semi-colonial countries, or countries whose productive power is low, or whose development is at the early stage of capitalism. Fertility and mortality are both high, but the rate of natural increase is small. Countries included in this group are Old China, India and Egypt before independence, Chile, Imperial Russia before the Revolution, England, France, and Germany in the 19th century; (2) Countries which have a relatively high productive capacity, or which have already reached the last stage of capitalistic expansion. Even though mortality has declined, fertility has decreased even further; therefore, the rate of natural increase is also not very high. England, France, West Germany, the United States of America, Australia, and New Zealand belong to this second group; and (3) The third group includes all socialist countries. Apart from the U.S.S.R., the other socialist nations are still in the early stages of socialist construction. In these nations, the rate of natural increase tends to go up because of the improved standard of living, a rapid decline in the death rate, and little changed fertility. And, in response to further advancement in socialist construction and a still higher standard of living, the practice of late marriage and birth control will emerge. There will be a gradual drop in the birth rate, but the speed of the decline in the death rate (which has already approached the minimum) will also slow down. A reduction in the rate of natural increase will, in turn, become evident. In short, in the course of socialist construction, population numbers will proceed, step by step, from an initial rapid increase to a stable growth.-"
* E.g., irrigation schemes.

This politically flavoured population typology and prophecy serves to emphasize and outline the framework within which the question of population growth was viewed in some influential quarters in Communist China. If (as seems to be the case) the Great Leap Forward and the People's Commune were to be vehicles for economic development as well as solutions to the short-term population question in terms of labour-intensive projects,* questions associated with rapid population growth in the long run were postulated out of existence as the Party and government confidently pushed the plans for accelerated industrialization: economic development and its concomitant social transformation would, in due course, stimulate the practice of fertility control and, as a consequence, a reduction in the rate of natural increase.
Thus, aside from internal politics and political developments of which the birth control debate was a part, the financial and ideological costs also may have seemed too large and unnecessary. All indications, so it appeared, pointed to a quick transition from an agricultural and backward nation to an industrialized and advanced state, implying the automatic emergence of the practice of fertility control, as it were, at no extra cost. Up to the end of 1957, both the rate and volume of economic development were impressive, and agricultural forecasts to the end of the Third Five-year Plan (1967) had not been shattered by the march of events since 1958.
A Quiet Resumption Nevertheless, even though the vigorous birth control campaign in Communist China was gradually brought to a standstill, the population problem itself has not been entirely or permanently dismissed. The door has been left ajar to allow the admission of fertility control as a national policy:
Whether the stable growth in population (a byproduct of socialist construction) will be at a relatively high or low level is related to whether or not the Party and government encourage fertility. In this connection, we know that, in the socialist countries, if the Party and government do not adopt a pronatal policy, the birth rate will
decline and become stabilized at a comparatively low level or that, if the Party and government

219

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

follow a policy designed to curb population numbers the birth rate then will decrease and become stable at a still lower level.80
As late as in March 1959, draft regulations of one people's commune contained provisions for birth control instructions.31 And in the bitter aftermath of the Great Leap Forward, the National People's Congress again met after an interval of two years: among the ten tasks set for the adjustment of the national economy is one (the fourth) which reads:
To reduce the urban population and the number of workers and functionaries to an appropriate extent by persuading, first of all, those workers and functionaries who had come from the rural areas to return to rural productive work and strengthen the agricultural front.'2
Of course, even if this policy should be successfully implemented, it would not resolve the question of population numbers.
But, it has also been reliably reported that, from March 8th to April 10th, 1962, an exhibition of planned parenthood was held in Canton, and over 10,000 visitors saw the display of charts, models and specimens during the first two weeks.33 A few months earlier in January, the State Council approved a revised schedule of important duties to allow the importation of contraceptive appliances and drugs into China duty-free.34 And, since early April 1962, a series of articles has appeared in the People's Daily and other newspapers, arguing that "it is not good to get married and give birth to a child too early."35
Of still greater significance, People's Daily has recently (since November 1962) printed advertisements to promote the sale of publications in which birth control is advocated. Descriptions of various conventional contraceptives now available in retail stores in China also appeared in Ta Kung Pao (Peking). In four of the six recent issues of China's Women since December 1962, planned parenthood was promoted. Along with postponement of marriage, diaphragms, condoms, and jelly, sterilization (vasectomy and salpingectomy) have been strongly recommended in recent months.36 No mention, however, was made of abortion as a suitable means of fertility control.37
A resumption of birth control activities clearly is under way. But, in view of the enormity and

complexity and delicacy of the question of population control in China, it also seems clear that the road to success in fertility control in China will be neither smooth nor short.
REFERENCES
1. People's Daily (Hereafter JMJP), March 5th, 1957. 2. See People's Handbook for 1953. 3. See Communist China-The Population Problem,
Current Notes on International Affairs, Department of External Affairs, Canberra, Australia, November 1958, 29. 4. Yang, Ssu-ying: On Maithusianism, Hsueh Hsi (Study), October 2nd, 1955. 5. See Wu, Ching-chao: A New Treatise on the Problem of China's Population, Hsin Chien She (New Construction), March 3, 1957. 6. New China News Agency (Hereafter NCNA), February 2nd, 1956. 7. Chao, Ching: A Critique of Recent Reactionary Population Theories in China, New Construction, December 3rd, 1955. This thesis was first stated by
Mao Tse-tung in 1949. See Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung, Vol. IV, Peking, Foreign Languages Press,
1961. 8. Ma, Yin-chu: New Population Theory, The Complete
Report. First National People's Congress, 4th session, Peking, 1957. A revised version of this speech later appeared in New Construction, November 7th, 1959. 9. Kuang-ming Jih-pao (Peking), April 4, 1957. It has been erroneously reported that Ma first publicized his "Population Theory" at the National People's Congress on July 3rd, 1957. 10. See China Youth, February 16th, 1955; and New China's Women, April 28th, 1955 and May 28th, 1955. 11. The recommendation was contained in Shao's speech in The Complete Report. The First National People's Congress, 3rd Session, Peldng, 1956. 12. JMJP, May 23rd, 1957. 13. Chou, En-lai: Report on the Proposals for the Second Five- Year Plan for Development of the National Economy. Peking, 1956. Foreign Languages Press. 14. As quoted in Communist China-The Population Problem, op. cit. 15. Chung, Hui-man: JMJP, March 17th, 1957. Subsequently, in 1958, Ching was accused of being a "bourgeois expert" and of resisting the leadership of the party. See The Journal of Chinese Medicine, October 10th, 1958. 16. Micklewright, F. H. Amphlett: The Rise and Decline
of English Neo-Malthusianism, Population Studies, July 1961, 15. 17. See Wu, Ching-chao: op. cit.; Ta, Ch'en, Deferred Marriage, Birth Control, and Population Problems of New China, New Construction, May 1957, and Fei, Hsiao-tung: What Is Meant by Demographic Research? New Construction, April 1957. 18. See Davis, Kinsley: Malthus and the Theory of Population, in Paul F. Lazarsfeld and Morris Rosenberg, eds.: The Language of Social Research: A Reader in the Methodology of Social Research. Glencoe, 1955. The Free Press. 19. Chen, Chang-hen: Wen Hui Pao (Shanghai), May 3rd and 4th, 1957.

220

BIRTH CONTROL IN MAINLAND CHINA: IDEOLOGY AND POLITICS

20. Wang, Ya-nan: Marxist Population Theory and China's Population Problems. Peking, 1956. Science Publishing Co.
21. See People's Handbook for 1956 and 1957. 22. See Taeuber, Irene B.: Population Policies in Com-
munist China, Population Index, October 1956, 22. 23. Shao Li-tzu's speech delivered before the First
National People's Congress, 4th Session, Peking, 1957. See The Complete Report [of the conference]. 24. See Li's speech, ibid. 25. See Ma, Yin-chu: My Philosophy and Economic Theory, New Construction, November 1959; and To Repeat My Request, New Construction, January 1960. 26. Fei, Hsiao-tung: in The Complete Report. First National People's Congress, 4th Session, Peking, 1957. 27. Li, P'u: Do Not Allow the Rightists to Use the Population Question to Advance their Political Conspiracy, JMJP, October 4th, 1957. 28. Tan, Chen-lin: Strive for the Fulfillment, Ahead of Schedule, of the National Programme for Agricultural Development, in National Programme for Agricultural Development, 1956-1967. Peking, 1960. Foreign Languages Press. 29. As quoted in Orleans, Leo: Problems of Manpower Absorption in Rural China, China Quarterly, JulySeptember 1961.

30. Chang, Pai-kun et al.: A Socialist Theory of Population and China's Population Problem, Economic Research, August 17th, 1957.
31. See Jen-min Pao-chien (People's Health Protection), March 1959.
32. Press Communique of the 3rd Session of the Second National People's Congress of China, NCNA, April 16th, 1962.
33. Yang-cheng Wan-pao (Canton Evening), March 25th, 1962.
34. Ta Kung Pao (Hong Kong), January 16th, 1962. 35. JMJP, April 4th, 1962: Chung-kuo Ch'ing-nien Pao
(China Youth Daily, Peking), April 12th, and May 10th, 1962; and Kung-jen Jih-pao (Daily Worker, Peking), May 4th, 1962. For a fuller account of these developments, see Tien, H. Y.: Population Control: Recent Developments in Mainland China, Asian Survey, July 1962. 36. Ta Kung Pao (Peking), April 22nd, 1963, and China's Women, December 1st, 1962; February 1st, 1963; April 1st, 1963; and May 1st, 1963. 37. For a discussion of the prospects for using abortion as the principal means of population control in China, see Tien, H.Y.: Induced Abortion and Population Control in Mainland China, Marriage and Family Living, February, 1963.

221

