THE GALTON LABORATORY: ITS WORK AND AIMS*

By L. S. PENROSE, M.A., M.D.
University College, London

I HAVE been invited to address this of those agencies under social control that

Society on the subject of the work of the
Galton Laboratory. Although I am not
a member, I do so with pleasure for more than one reason. In the first instance, I welcome the opportunity of outlining some of the methods of research employed by my colleagues and myself. Secondly, the Galton Laboratory investigates man and must rely
on the goodwill of members of the human race to co-operate in its researches, so that it is sometimes necessary to explain what we are trying to do. Furthermore, in I9IO, Galton laid it down that the business of the Eugenics Education Society, of which he was then president, should be to make known to the public the results of scientific work. It does not seem out of order to place information before their successors. Moreover, as a representative of the academic interests of the subject of eugenics, I have no hesitation in expressing the views which
I hold on the subject and which probably differ considerably from those held by many of this Society's members. I understand that membership is open to anyone interested in eugenics; but interpretation of the term is open to a good deal of latitude and members may be interested in studying
alternative points of view.

may improve or impair the racial qualities
of future generations, either physically or mentally," a formula wide enough to permit the inclusion of any scientific work on human
heredity, on demography or on problems relating to public health. It is difficult to say exactly when the work of the laboratory began. Actually, the Francis Galton Laboratory was not officially placed at University College by statute until 1933, but the organization emerged gradually out of much
earlier activities. The journal Biometrika was founded in
I90I by Weldon, Galton and Pearson in
connection with the biometrical laboratory, but the earliest numbers contained papers
on human genetics. The Eugenic Record Office in Gower Street began in I904 under Galton's own supervision. A research fellowship on eugenics was established in I906; and the first to be appointed to this post were Edgar Schuster and subsequently David Heron. Karl Pearson, who took over from Galton the direction of the office, was appointed to a professorship endowed under the Galton bequest, in i9II. The Eugenics Laboratory publications soon emerged; the lectures and the memoir series, which are still in print, covered a wide range
of problems on nature and nurture. Among

History of the Laboratory

them were Miss Elderton's studies on

I will deal briefly with the past work of the Laboratory. Many of the results are now well known and have become classical. A reminder on some points may be of service to those unfamiliar with the contents of the Galton Laboratory publications.
The recognition of eugenics as an academic subject was slow and cautious. The definition adopted by the University was " The study
* A paper read before the Euge-nics Society on Janu-
ary 25th, 1949.

consanguinity, Pearson's on tuberculosis and Heron's on mental deficiency, followed by the analysis of intelligence as a graded character by Pearson and Jaderholm. Closely integrated with the work of the laboratory were Goring's observations on
criminals, on the basis of which he was able
to dispose of the notion of a special criminal type of humanity, so dear to the hearts of nineteenth-century anthropologists.
The study of human pedigree material,

I7

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which had been pursued by Pearson in- in this, Dr. G. M. Morant became the

tensively from the first, found its chief undisputed authority.

expression in the publication of The Under Fisher's far-sighted direction, the

Treasury of Human Inheritance. The original developments in anthropometry took a new

gigantic plan, to summarize for research turn. Common characters which segregated

workers all the known facts about hereditary began to be studied intensively and a

diseases, has been carried on steadily since serological unit was initiated. The success

I909. In recent years the Treasury has owed of this enterprise was immediate and the

everything to the persistent efforts of foundations were thus laid for the sero-

Dr. Julia Bell. The Annals of Eugenics, logical laboratory, now autonomous, at the

edited by Pearson, came into existence in Lister Institute, where Dr. Race, Dr. Mourant

I925 as a natural extension of Biometrika. and their associates are enlarging the scope

Alongside papers originating from many of human genetics by the discovery of new

parts of the world on human genetics and antigens at a breath-taking speed.

related problems, it contained accounts

of the current researches in the Galton Present Organization

Laboratory. Under the editorship of In the face of the traditions and achieve-

Professor R. A. Fisher, over a period of ments which I have outlined, it will be

some ten years from I934, it became the readily appreciated that to live up to the

vehicle of a great many important papers expectations of our predecessors-even with-

by himself and others, many of which broke out attempting to expand the field of

new ground in statistical theory and method. research-is a severe task. My colleagues

There were frequent contributions from and I have, however, many advantages

prominent biological statisticians, such as which enable us to proceed in an atmosphere

Haldane, Yates, Mather, Stevens, and Fin- of optimism. The Treasury still continues

ney. It also continued to place on record in the hands of Dr. Bell; and Miss Karn

extensive data from new genetical enquiries, has been able to proceed with her statistical

including substantial papers by Sjogren and analysis of environmental agencies. We are

Fraser Roberts.

able to maintain a liaison with Dr. Race,

A certain type of anthropometrical in- which is extremely profitable to us and, I

vestigation was regarded as very significant hope, occasionally useful to him. It is

by Galton. In his Memories, published in especially significant that we are always

I908, he drew attention to the pressing able to obtain advice and criticism from

need of obtaining a multitude of measure- Professor Haldane, now the Senior Professor

ments relating to every faculty of body in the Department of Eugenics, Biometry

and mind in more than one generation. and Genetics. His basic contributions to

Analysis of measurements of stature by the subject of human genetics over a long

Karl Pearson gave rise to the generally period of years together with his knowledge

accepted correlation values of these traits in sibs. The ascertainment of measurements
in two generations, however, presented
difficulties. Much preliminary work had to be done in finding the distributions of measurements in the general population,
the allometric relations between measurements and the effects of environmental agencies. Dr. Percy Stocks and Miss M.

and experience ensure continuity with all the earlier work of the laboratory. The interplay of ideas between our own group
and those who are working on animal genetics and upon biometrical problems is extremely stimulating. At the present time the trend of the researches in the Galton Laboratory is towards medical aspects of
human heredity. The adjacent work of Dr. Griineberg on genetical pathology and

Karn played a prominent part in these physiology of the mouse forms a useful

metrical studies. There was also an bridge between medicine and the more

anthropological aspect to the work and, erudite genetics of insects. Moreover, it

THE GALTON LABORATORY: ITS WORK AND AIMS

I9

is our aim to continue the development of physical traits, the configurations of the

a close relationship between ourselves and dermal ridges on hands and feet have proved

our medical friends on the staff of University an intriguing source of information. These

College Hospital. They provide us with markings are, as Galton himself showed,

clinical problems connected with human influenced by heredity and they are easy to

genetics and biometry and we try to interest record. The type of hereditary influence is

them in some of the genetical and statistical still far from being understood. Dr. Holt

ideas which turn up in our work. The same has done some valuable preliminary work on

applies, of course, to a great many other the variation of dermal ridge counts in the

hospitals and institutions with which we general population. In order to assess

are in contact. Finally, we are fortunate in correctly the likenesses found in families

having in the laboratory an excellent and the changes associated with develop-

technical and clerical staff.

mental defects, random samples, such as can

Forty years ago it needed only one person be obtained from normal school-children are

to ascertain a few cases of an unusual absolutely essential. Peculiarities of configu-

disease for quite a good paper on human ration found among mentally defective

genetics to follow. But the standards are subjects are being studied by Mr. Fang.

rising. In the future, teams of experts will be One of our continual aims is to build up

essential. At the present time, the personnel a large amount of material suitable for the

of the Galton Laboratory is by no means study of genetical linkage in man. This

complete in this respect, but we have is a long-term proposition. It presumes the

sufficient expert assistance to enable us to establishment of a battery of tests of known

carry out quite a number of investigations marker characters, presumably unlinked with

under close scrutiny. I will mention a few one another. When a disease with known

of the lines of work which have been pro- genetics is ascertained, the battery is applied

ductive since the laboratory at University to each member of the family. The results

College has become active again after the accumulate and are finally handed over to

second world war.

the mathematicians to work out the most

Special Researches on Heredity

likely linkage values. Usually, I may say, the value is near zero but, sooner or later,

The first problem in our work is the fairly strong linkages will be found with

identification and accurate description of increasing frequency.

human traits known to be-or thought to be Linkage investigation emphasises the team

-inherited. Some of these traits are character of modern research in human

difficult to measure and improvements in genetics. Take, for example, the study of

technique are constantly needed if the ectrodactyly, a rare and striking abnormality,

genetical backgrounds are to be properly which greatly interested Pearson forty years

understood. Many of them involve psycho- ago. In reported pedigrees this condition

logical problems. One interesting example is transmitted as a dominant mendelian

is the trait of " tune deafness," e.g. inability trait. It does not interfere with vitality or

to recognize the national anthem, which fertility and may even enhance these

Dr. Kalmus has studied in collaboration qualities. We do not know all the effects of

with Dr. Fry of the Department of Phonetics the gene but it causes malformations of

of the College. Colour blindness, olfactory the hands and feet in the cases we have

defects, taste deficiencies and disabilities studied. There is much variability in the

in spelling have received a great deal of manifestation and occasionally the hands

attention. The less subjective characters are unaffected. The pedigree was pub-

like hair form and hair colour are also under lished by Lewis and Embleton in I908*

investigation. Here again new techniques and records of names and addresses

of measurement are being developed by Dr. Kalmus and Dr. Harris. Among other

* Lewis, T., and Embleton, D. (I9o8), " Split-hand
and Split-foot Deformities," Biometrika 6, 26.

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

were lodged with the College of Surgeons vestigating these matters and, indeed, many

Library. Forty years later contact with others, the selection of striking cases of

the family was renewed by Miss MacKenzie, inherited disease is undesirable. The collec-

and we were thus enabled to add considerably tion of outstanding pedigrees is useful for

to the pedigree. The new individuals are linkage studies but, in more fundamental

separated by a thick line fromthose previously work on human heredity, population samples

ascertained. All available members were or samples of cases not selected by familial

seen, X-rayed, palm-printed and subjected incidence are necessary. When the whole

to the battery of genetical tests, which field of ectrodactylous cases is studied, for

included serological analysis carried out by example, the number of easily interpreted

Dr. S. Lawler. Active eugenists would tend pedigrees is found to be few and most

to pronounce judgment on this family as a instances are unique in their families.

racial menace. Professor Kemp remarked Methods of survey by collecting all avail-

to me that in Denmark such people would able cases of one type of disease are therefore

all have been sterilized. Let us look more adopted in many of the Galton Laboratory

deeply into the question. The affected investigations. I can refer specifically to

members of this pedigree, if their hands the comprehensive study of the genetics of

and feet were not observed, would, I believe, diabetes by Dr. Harris. Up to the present

qualify as desirable members of the human time, information on this question has been

race. Furthermore, in nature such animals inadequate and interpretations have been

as sloths find too many digits an en- unconvincing. In launching the present

cumbrance. Even in human civilized life study, Dr. Harris has had the good fortune

there are skills which do not demand the of the clinical advice of such authorities as

usual quantum of fingers. Ectrodactylous Professor Himsworth and Dr. Lawrence.

subjects can excel at outdoor games, clerical He has amassed a great quantity of data,

work, draughtsmanship and turning. The which he has found possible to analyse in

eugenic objection to ectrodactyly is mainly ways never previously attempted. It is

asthetic-not biological.

not for me to anticipate his conclusions

It takes more than one family to establish but I can mention that, as found in almost

linkage in human genetics and in the study all accurate genetical investigations on

of rare diseases, co-operation is sought from human diseases, no simple mendelian ex-

all those who meet with suitable cases. planation will fit all the facts. We must

Recently we have been able to observe give up the attempt to express results in

families containing myopathics, albinos, terms of presence or absence of diseases.

phenylketonurics, cases with multiple Pedigrees with black and white blobs are

exostoses, congenital dislocation of the hip, useful only for crude demonstration purposes.

polycystic kidneys and so on, which have We must think in terms of processes with

been brought to our notice. Dr. Fraser variable ages of onset and varying degrees of

Roberts very kindly put us in touch with a manifestation in different cases. The

new ectrodactylous family. The defect was environment of each individual also has to be

transmitted through two generations but carefully studied. The traditional belief

arose in the first place from unaffected that inherited human diseases are always

parents. Pedigrees are known where a dominant, recessive or sex-linked has to be

dominant condition skips one or more greatly modified in the light of modern

generations, but we must also be on the researches. A comprehensive study of the

look-out for indications of fresh mutation. genetics of human mammary cancer, carried

The problem of measuring spontaneous out in the laboratory by Miss MacKenzie,

mutation rate in the human species is made Miss Karn, Dr. Kalmus, and myself, gave

very difficult by the lack of knowledge about no suggestion of mendelian inheritance

the reasons why manifestation varies so though familial concentration could be

much in different individuals. When in- proved.

THE GALTON LABORATORY: ITS WORK AND AIMS

2I

Special Researches on Environment

between the effects of heredity and environ-

The specific investigation of environmental ment, initiated by Galton's own work, is

influences as causes of congenital disease the investigation of twins. For elementary

is a rapidly growing field. The effects of purposes, it is obviously necessary to be

maternal age and order of birth are com- able to separate binovular and monovular

paratively easy to examine objectively. They types. The biometrical and serological

have been considered in several papers techniques, such as are in use at the

published in the Annals of Eugenics. The laboratory, are helpful to this end. The

interrelations between these variables and amount of genetical information obtainable

the problems of maternal and infant welfare from twin studies is, however, considerably

present fundamental eugenical problems. more restricted than is often supposed.

Statistics of premature birth, neonatal The facts can also be most misleading for a

mortality, duration of pregnancy, spacing variety of reasons, which I cannot elaborate

of births, etc., have hitherto been in- here. Suffice to say that we are extremely

sufficiently analysed from the biological interested in twins and Miss McArthur

point of view, and familial data are scanty. is working in the laboratory on the genetics

Experiments by animal biologists have of multiple births; but our approach differs

repeatedly shown that " phenocopies " very much from the traditional analysis of

(apparently genetical abnormalities) can be collections into concordant and discordant

produced by poisoning or infecting the pairs.

embryo in very early stages of development.

Mumps and german measles, affecting a The Teaching of Eugenics

woman in early pregnancy, are known to Besides carrying out a full research pro-

be capable of inducing abnormality in the gramme at the Galton Laboratory we are

foetus. There are also suggestions that obliged to give instruction at the post-

incompatible antigens may be damaging to graduate level on the subject of eugenics and

early development. Clearly the correct its related fields. An important branch of

evaluation of the genetical and environ- teaching is concerned with the application of

mental agencies in foetal disease is a problem statistics to genetical data. We are fortunate

worthy of close study. It is most unlikely in having Dr. Cedric Smith on our staff to

that simple mendelian rules will account for deal with this subject, to expound established

more than a small fraction of the cases. methods and to invent new ones as occasion

Besides environment we have to think of arises in the course of research work. The

new mutations and chromosome abnormal- instruction given in the laboratory is

ities as possible causes of such conditions as integrated with that given in the rest of the

anencephaly, mongolism and congenital Department of Biometry, Eugenics and

heart disease. Whatever the cause, one Genetics, so that students attached to the

practical point emerges, namely, that the laboratory can obtain a balanced knowledge

optimal maternal ages are about the same, of nearly all branches of genetical work.

both from the point of view of the mother The department has its own library.

and of the child. For minimal risks, the first One of the ends served, I hope, by this

child should be born at about 22 years and breadth of approach, is to make those who

the remainder, up to about five altogether, will study and teach human genetics in the

spaced at intervals of approximately two future aware of the immense complexity of

years. It is noteworthy that the twentieth- the subject. The results of experimental

century decline in family size tended animal genetics must be fully appreciated,

especially to eliminate the children born at yet great caution is required in their

late maternal ages. From the point of view application to human problems. The human

of the incidence of foetal malformation it race resembles a wild population and is

must have actually been a eugenic process. not a herd of domestic or laboratory animals.

A favourite method of distinguishing It has often astonished me that advocates of

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

race improvement are so often unaware of Developments of Eugenical Theory

the difficulties in the tasks which they set Since the discovery of the prevalence of

themselves. Eighty years ago it seemed maternal and foetal incompatibility, new

reasonable to Galton, on the analogy with light has been thrown upon the mechanics of

the breeding of dogs and horses, to expect elimination of harmful genes. In some

to be able to produce a superior race of men circumstances, as shown by Haldane, selec-

in a few generations. But knowledge of tion against a gene increases the frequency of

medicine and of genetics has increased enormously since that time, and with it has grown the perception of our ignorance.
It is much easier than formerly to give an accurate prognosis of the likelihood that a certain well-defined rare disease will be repeated in a given relative. Problems of

the foetal disease which it causes. Another difficult eugenic situation is concerned with the relation of inbreeding to the production of rare recessive traits. A simple way of reducing the frequency, say, of phenylke-
tonuria, would be to recommend the abolition
of cousin marriages. The tendency for inbreeding to grow less during the last fifty

this sort are constantly occurring in medical years in European communities may have

practice. Many reach the laboratory though reduced the actual numbers of lethal

not all can be satisfactorily solved. To lay recessives in the population. But simul-

down any general rules for improvement of taneously the carriers have probably become

the human stock in the light of modern slightly more prevalent than formerly. Even

knowledge, however, is pretentious and more disturbing to any complacency, which

absurd. It is my personal opinion, after much may remain in the minds of eugenists, is the

experience in research work, that active problem of heterosis (or hybrid vigour) and

eugenical propaganda is, on the whole, my remaining remarks will be devoted to

inimical to the advance of scientific know- this topic.

ledge. It is premature and assumes that When breeding pure lines of plants or

knowledge is a static and not a growing animals, it has been found fairly regularly

structure.

that physical vigour and fertility are likely

Before attempting to improve on nature to be diminished. The vigour is restored by

and defeat her at her own game, we must outcrossing. In the case of maize, the

understand her methods very thoroughly.v standard method of obtaining maximal

Some of the processes of natural selection yield is to cross two pure lines, individually

are very baffling and often appear super- both inferior to the resulting hybrid.

ficially dysgenic. For example, genes which The phenomenon of hybrid vigour or

appear to be very harmful are constantly " heterosis " is not an isolated phenomenon

arising in healthy stocks by spontaneous and it may well apply to man. If it does,

fresh mutations. No amount of eugenic attempts to inbreed for purposes of producing

effort can prevent this from occurring. eugenically desirable pure lines of men are

Mutation rate can, of course, be speeded up likely to fail. There are also other objections

experimentally by radiations and other to pure stocks. It is advantageous for a

methods and the implications of the fact species to be variable-to possess both good

may be of great significance to future human and bad genes. Bad genes in a new genetical

generations. Incidentally, this aspect of context or in another type of environment

genetics is not neglected in the Galton may become good. The collective quality of

Laboratory, where the experimental pro- variation-the energy of the species, as Fisher

duction of new hereditary characters in termed it-is the greatest asset in the long run

cultures of fungi (basidio mycetes) is being in the struggle for survival. We do not know

studied by Miss Mittwoch. However, muta- what environments the human race has yet

tion is not necessarily a bad thing. Indeed to face. The present evidence suggests that

it is a valuable asset for species to be able there will be no lack of variation to meet

to experiment with new forms.

them unless some political lunatic succeeds in

THE GALTON LABORATORY: ITS WORK AND AIMS

23

eliminating everyone except those belonging
to a pure stock. Fortunately, human lunatics
are variable and do not all have the same delusions. Differences of opinion about the requirements of the master race will probably
make its realization impossible. To come back to more immediate consider-
ations, it is easy to show that improvements in health can be much more rapidly, efficiently,
and pleasantly brought about by altering environment than by altering heredity. In the meantime, the action of natural selection is slow and, for most practical purposes, the population can be expected to be in genetical equilibrium. Now, equilibrium can be stable, when there is heterosis, that is, when heterozygotes are more fertile than homozygotes. A typical example, suggested by Haldane, is this. Juvenile amaurotic idiocy is a condition caused by a lethal gene in homozygous form. The carriers, or unaffected heterozygotes, need only have

more than doubled as compared with the rest
of the population; the mental disabilities of the parents are transmitted to the offspring; there is much infant mortality; finally,
assortative mating, which is very marked in human populations as far as intelligence level is concerned, ensures that the members of the group usually marry one another. Eugenists themselves are not likely to be
members of this class and it is customary to
regard it as composed of inferior stock. To my mind this is a contradiction in terms
and I prefer a more objective attitude. If these people are really the most fertile, then they must, ipso facto, be most biologically fit and the superiority of the infertile intellectuals is illusory. I will not press this point
because I want to emphasize something else. In spite of appearances, a population composed of two such elements, one group intelligent and the other less so but more fertile, can be in stable equilibrium. A

FIG. I

MODEL POPULATION IN STABLE GENIC EQUILIBRIUM WITH ASSORTATIVE MATING AND DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY

Type of Parental
Mating

Relative

Offspring

Frequency per Mating

Types of Offspring

Normal AA
(I.Q. Io8)

Defective and Defective and Fertile Aa Infertile aa

(I.Q. 66)

(I.Q 24)

AA X AA

9

1*89 17

-

_

Aa x Aa

I

4*00

I

2

I

aa X aa

0

o-oo

_

Total Offspring ... ... ...

x8

2

one per cent more children as compared with non-carrier parents to keep the gene in
circulation indefinitely (with random mating) without having to rely upon new mutation. This one per cent increase in fertility might
be associated with an imperceptible lowering of mean scholastic intelligence of carriers. I will now proceed ruthlessly to generalize
this conception. The Eugenics Society has for some time
past busied itself with the examination of what has been called the " social problem " group. This " submerged tenth " of the
population is alleged to have, in some degree, the following properties. Intelligence is grossly below the average; fertility is high,

nation with a social problem group having the properties outlined is not necessarily " silently rotting at the core " as has been feared; it might even be improving.
Stability in a Model Population
Intelligence is commonly believed to be inherited like an additive (intermediate) character because the mean level of children agrees with that of the parents. Members of the social problem group, when they mate with one another, naturally must have offspring with average ability for that group but there will also be variations above and below this level. Some time ago, I demon-

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

strated a model of an imaginary population*
with all the main properties alleged to apply to the normal and social problem groups, which I quote here with slight alterations, in Fig. i. Imagine a race composed of three main types determined by a single intelligence gene. The type AA is supposed to be normal; we will say it has an I.Q. slightly above IOO and people of this type make up about nine-tenths of the population. Their net fertility is too low to keep up their numbers and I suppose them to have an average of less than two children per family. There is, next, a social problem group making up about one-tenth of the population, all the members of which are heterozygous for a gene a. This gene produces intellectual defect and is associated with a greatly increased fertility-about double the normal and implying an average of four children per family. The individuals homozygous for a will be mental and physical weaklings, incapable of reproduction. Owing to the additive nature of the gene, their mental grades must be too low to be compatible with mating or even survival in most cases. Now, we assume perfectly assortative mating, so that no unions take place between the normals and the defectives and we set the
system in motion. We find that it has genic equilibrium. This is due to the fact that the defectives' matings not only maintain their own numbers among their offspring but
also contribute to the superior group; the proportion of weaklings produced implies a large infant mortality in addition. The I.Q. levels of the groups have been chosen so that the mean for the whole population at birth is Ioo. In Fig. i, the proportions of the groups are such that there is exact replacement in each generation. Furthermore, the equilibrium is stable. If we should suppose that the size of the normal group were suddenly halved, the mean I.Q. would fall below IOO. However, in each succeeding generation it would rise appreciably until it finally settled again at Ioo after the complete rebuilding of the normal group. Conversely, if there were initially too many
* Penrose, L. S. (I948), " The Supposed Threat of Declining Intelligence," Am. J. Ment. Def., 53.

normals, their numbers would gradually diminish until the same stable proportions were reached. In the region of equilibrium the rate of change per generation would be extremely slow. The defectives are the genetical backbone of this population. If an efficient sterilization programme were instituted against this submerged fertile tenth, it would diminish the total fertility of the whole group and eventually lead to extermination of the whole race.
Conclusions
The analogy between this model and human society is probably not close but it should perhaps give food for thought. It supplies a reason for rejecting eugenical theories, which assume that the group to which the propounder belongs is necessarily at the centre of the human biological universe. The truth may be the very reverse of this and the traditional Ptolemic system of eugenics may have to give way to a Copernican conception, where the infertile intellectuals are found to be peripheral to a nucleus of fertile labourers. The essence of this suggestion is that differential fertility in human populations is a phenomenon due to heterosis. The example given is only a very simple case of a type of problem, which has to be tackled by students of evolution and which sometimes involves difficult mathematics.
This particular demonstration arose from an examination of the probable fallacies in arguments predicting a decline in national intelligence level from observations on differential fertility. It seems inherently improbable that rapid changes should be taking place in the distribution of " intelligence genes" in the population and not at the same time in the frequencies of other genes. For this and numerous further reasons I regard as invalid the conclusions usually drawn from the negative correlation between sib number and intelligence. Naturally, the results of the experiment which repeated tests on Scottish children after a lapse of fifteen years were of great interest to me. Physique and intelligence are positively correlated and a slight

THE GALTON LABORATORY: ITS WORK AND AIMS

25

improvement in the mean intelligence level " K. P,'s" lectures. The other 50 per cent

was to be expected on analogy with the results was " K. P.'s" assistant, John Blakeman,

of enquiries showing gradually improving whose name was still associated with a long

physique. I fully agree with the interpre- obsolete criterion of linear regression.

tation that the improvements found are To any moderately well-educated young

due to non-genetical causes. But, if the man or woman of I949, continued Professor

results of the Scottish tests had gone the Greenwood, the notions young people in 1904

other way, there might have been a differ- had of heredity, or genetics, must seem as odd

ence of opinion. A significant drop in the as the clinical medicine of Thomas Syden-

mean level would have been hailed by most ham seemed to a newly qualified medical

people as a confirmation of their worst man in 1904. It was true that Mendel's work

fears, whereas I would willingly have had already been rediscovered, but the

attributed it to environmental agencies or biometric laboratory of University College

naccuracies of measurement.

was not quite the best place in which to learn

In this lecture I have outlined the history Mendelism, although the best place in which

and the present aims of the Galton Labora- to learn how Francis Galton's ideas could be,

tory. I have also explained some of my first, mathematically formulated and then

personal views on eugenical theory, for arithmetically applied to data. For young

which, of course, my colleagues cannot be people like himself, whose mathematics

held responsible. In conclusion, it is fair, beyond " intermediate " standard were self-

I think, to emphasize that the orientation of taught, " K. P.'s" insistence that no

our work is towards medical research; algebraical result was of value which could

five people working in the laboratory are not be tried out arithmetically was en-

medically qualified. The genetical con- couraging. He was a very great teacher. He

stitution of the human race is unlikely to encouraged young people to master what

be changed appreciably in the foreseeable was, to them, difficult algebra because he

future as a consequence of our findings. convinced them it was useful. Of course they

We expect, however, to be able to make were uncritical, but he taught them to work.

useful, if modest, contributions to medical His own humble share of the eugenic re-

science.

searches of that epoch was to help in the

DISCUSSION

compilation of a bibliography of human

Professor Major Greenwood, Dr. C. P. albinism, and doing,so under the eye of the

Blacker, Professor Aubrey Lewis and Dr. master taught him a good deal. He learned

Eliot Slater took part in the discussion, the how to use a library and how to abstract.

two latter welcoming the expression by He thought his gradual lapse from Carlovig-

Professor Penrose of views which were at nian orthodoxy was emotional rather than

variance with those held by the Society. intellectual; an increasing distaste for the

Professor Major Greenwood said that his sharp antithesis of Nature against Nurture;

apology for accepting the chairman's invita- a cynical suspicion that correlation co-

tion to speak on a subject of which he had efficients which favoured " Nature " would

no expert knowledge was that Professor not have to submit to the third degree, or

Penrose had stirred pleasant memories of his Sovietic, scrutiny which would certainly be

youth. He was certainly not the oldest sur- the fate of any statistical evidence that

viving pupil of " K. P "-that distinction seemed to favour " Nurture." Well, now,

probably belonged to Mr. Udny Yule, who forty-five years on, Professor Penrose told

was nine years his senior-but he spent the them that such emotional reactions had, and

academic year I904-5 under the wand of the have, an intellectual justification. Both

magician, and I904-5 belonged to a vanished Biometricians and Mendelians of I904-to

age. In that session he was a youth just use the old battle cries-erred and strayed

through the undergraduate medical curri- from the ways of Nature, or the Nature of

culum and 50 per cent of the audience of. Things, but not quite like lost sheep. The

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

biometricians, inspired by the Master Bio- passer. His only excuse for speaking was a

metrician, forged the intellectual tools- desire to remind the elderly and to tell the

vehemently rejected by the Mendelians of young of battles forty years ago. Helmholtz

I904-which the geneticists of I949, who said that to come under the influence of a

were, he supposed, the spiritual children of great researcher changed one's whole scale of

the old Mendelians, found indispensable. If, values. That was the effect " K. P." had on

in one sense, the old biometricians fought a all young people who came within his sphere

losing battle, in another equally real sense of influence. It was a very wide influence.

they won a great victory. Even in their, The affection he inspired and the anger he

as it seemed now, naive exaggerations of provoked both did good. H. G. Wells wrote

what they called Nature they were not a delightful story of a man of science whose

wholly mischievous. Professor Penrose had life work was based on a desire to disprove

told them that the orientation of the Galton the conclusions of another scientist he dis-

Laboratory was towards medical research liked. The history of modem biometry

and that he and his colleagues expected to be provided illustrations.

able to make useful, if modest, contributions Dr. C. P. Blacker also expressed apprecia-

to medical science. Professor Greenwood was tion of the lecture. He recalled that in

sure they would succeed in this undertaking, January I948 we had listened to Dr. Henry

indeed had already succeeded. In I904 the Harris, who was a member of Professor

medical profession was but faintly interested Penrose's staff; Dr. Blacker hoped to

in heredity and not interested at all in establish a precedent by which, each year,

statistical methods. In I949 the picture was the January meeting should be an occasion

changed. He thought that Karl Pearson's for a lecture from a research worker in the

studies of tuberculosis and polemics against Galton Laboratory.

eminent physicians forty years ago were the It was understandable that workers in-the

first writings to make the " doctors " be- difficult field of human genetics, wherein

lieve, or perhaps fear, that there might be new complexities were being continually dis-

something in biometry. Indeed this was closed, should be hesitant about eugenic

acknowledged by Osler in his once-famous policies. Misgivings were especially felt by

textbook as early as I9I2.

those who were preoccupied with rare

It was easy to point now to weaknesses in segregating characters rather than with the

" K. P.'s " arguments and to recall that his common, metrical and graded characters such

belief that the rate of mortality from tuber- as were represented in Professor Penrose's

culosis would increase in the next generation ectrodactyly pedigree. But it was possible

had been signally falsified; but the speaker's to get so lost in obscurities as to forget the

own generation of obscure medical biometri- workings of simple background principles.

cians profited from his onslaughts. After The biochemistry of the simplest muscular

all, " K. P." was the first " layman " of contraction was so complex as to make

eminence who ventured to treat what the understandable the remark of the young

public called " eminent Harley Street lady who said that she had never appreciated

Specialists " de puissance d puissance, over a how much cleverer her body was than her

medical issue and to do so effectively. Cer- brain. Preoccupation with the complexities

tainly our views of heredity were very dif- of genetics could cause us to forget that

ferent from those of Galton and " K. P.," evolution had taken place blindly by natural

but, in these days of bettered environment selection; and that it had been by a selection

and progressive social medicine, the problems almost as blind that our ancestors, from time

of medical genetics were, so he had been told immemorial, had shaped in accordance with

by a distinguished worker, not less but more their needs, our domesticated animals and

important than two generations ago. That, plants. Our ancestors knew nothing of the

however, said Professor Greenwood, brought laws of Mendelism, of chromosomes or genes.

him to a field on which he would be a tres- They proceeded on the. simple rule that like

THE GALTON LABORATORY: ITS WORK AND AIMS

27

produced like. We would not go far wrong
in applying the same rule. Science could not determine our values: it
could not influence the choice of what qualities we thought good or bad. Our eugenic
values to-day were not as simple as they had been for some of Galton's followers and camp-followers. We no longer thought in terms of race or class. But the difficulty
presented by the evolution of our values
should not be confused with that arising from the application of our knowledge. Science was ethically neutral and could be made to serve bad ends as well as good.
Galton's outlook on eugenics, though remarkably stable throughout his life, had changed in perceptible ways which he had described in his Memories. He had come to

recognise, in his last decade, that it was not as easy as he had first thought to translate science into policy. Dr. Blacker quoted the following passage, written by Galton in I904:
Over-zeal leading to hasty action would do harm, by holding out expectations of a near golden age, which will certainly be falsified and cause the science to be discredited. The first and main point is to secure the general intellectual acceptance of eugenics as a hopeful and most important study. Then let its principles work into the heart of the nation, who will gradually give practical effect to them in ways that we may not wholly foresee.
This was a cautious statement which we could as readily accept to-day as when it was written. It represented the standpoint of the Eugenics Society.

UNDERSTAND YOUR CHILD

By D. B. HUDSON, M.B., Ch.B., D.P.H., Assistant County Medical Officer of Healthfor E:ssex.
A manual covering all aspects of child welfare from birth to school-days. The chapters

devoted to special subjects such as Sex Problems in Childhood and Adolescence,

Maladjustments at School, The Use of the Guidance Clinic and Juvenile Delinquency,

will prove of particular value to parents, teachers and child welfare workers.

Ioo pages

Paper covers, 5S.

SEX AND MARRIAGE

By NoRmAN ROBERTSON. This book is designed to cover those aspects of the subject

which have received inadequate treatment elsewhere and those which have been dealt

with in terminology beyond the comprehension of the layman. It is a corhprehensive

textbook covering both physical technique and psychological problems and this, with

its low price, makes it ideal for distribution and recommendation by social workers.

50 pages

Paper covers, 2s. 6d.

THE DRIVING FORCES OF HUMAN NATURE

and their adjustment

By DOM. T. V. MooRE, Ph.D., M.D. An introduction to psychology and, simultaneously,

a synthesis of the three phases of modern psychological thought. Philosophy, experimental

psychology, and psychiatry are presented as supplementing each other.

475 pages

20 illustrations

32s. 6d.

Havelock Ellis titles in stock

PSYCHOLOGY OF SEX. 12th Printing

SEX IN RELATION TO SOCIETY. 3rd Printing - - - - -

ON LIFE AND SEX

---------

1-55. 21S. 17S. 6d.

WM. HEINEMANN MEDICAL BOOKS LTD., LONDON, W.C.I

Eugenics Review, Vol. XIJ, No. 1

