DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY
A Further Report of the Merseyside Social Survey By D. CARADOG JONES
(From the University of Liverpool School of Social Sciences and Administration.)
IN the course of the Merseyside Survey by visits paid to families in which a birth an attempt has been made to collect in- occurred any time during the first fortnight formation as to the fertility of various of February I930. This group, numbering
groups of families, differing as to social in all 700 families, will be identified by the class, economic position, health of family, label i.w. (i), the letters standing for Infant presence or absence of certain defects. By Welfare, because the main object of this fertility is meant, throughout, the actual, particular inquiry was to determine the innot the potential production of children. fluence of various social factors upon the
Social class and economic position are in health and progress of the infant, though themselves vague terms, but precision has some of the results are used in the present
been given to them by a determination of paper for another purpose. No attempt was the position of each family relative to a made to ascertain the incomes of these defined poverty line and by grading heads families. of families according to type and regularity 3. A third random sample of a special of occupation. Consideration has been given class labelled i.w. (ii) was obtained by visitalso to such factors as the kind of district ing the relatively small class of mothers and home in which the family lives, giving birth to infants during the period whether poor and overcrowded or otherwise. February to August, I930, who did not Different and quite independent samples come under the care or attention of the have been used in the investigation, namely: official Health Visitors directed by the Local
i. A large random sample of the ordinary Authority. working class population, obtained by visit- 4. Other samples were obtained as the ing every thirtieth house in every street result of a special investigation of various throughout the area of investigation, and sub-normal types in the community, famigetting, wherever possible, particulars of lies containing individuals suffering from the family if it was of the class, broadly some defect, congenital or acquired, such as speaking, would come within the orbit of deafness, blindness, or mental deficiency, national insurance. The investigators suc- and others containing persons- who had been ceeded in getting fairly full information of in receipt of Public Assistance over a long the type indicated above, including particu- period of time. Here the data required were lars as to earnings and other sources of generally copied from case-paper records income, from nearly 7,000 families on kept by the official or voluntary agency Merseyside (over 4,000 in Liverpool alone) charged with the supervision or care of these -more than go per cent. of those concerned. particular classes. This group will be identified by the letters H.C., standing for Household Census. In OCCUPATIONAL CLASS DIFFERENCES some tables the Merseyside figures will be Some idea of the difference in class beused, in others the Liverpool figures, the tween the populations from which the first difference between them being only slight. three of the samples mentioned were drawn
2. Another sample, of smaller size, drawn can be obtained from Table i where housefrom households of all classes, but neces- holds with male heads in them are classified sarily containing mothers who had not according to the grades of occupation folpassed the reproductive period, was obtained lowed by these males.
'75

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 1. DISTRIBUTION BY OCCUPATIONAL GRADE OF HEADS OF FAMIE IN THE CLASES FROM WHICH RANDOM SAMPLES WERE DRAWN

Occupational Percentage of Total Sample in each

Grade of Head

Occupational Grade

( I)

(2) (3)

(4)

i and 2 3 4 5 6
7 8

H.C. I.W.(I) I.W.(I I)

7 17
24

2-5 910

5.

25 I5

i8

26-5 23 39 46

4

100 100

IOO

The following brief description of the grades, as numbered in the table, will indicate the basis of the
classification:
Grade i-The highest professional and administrative posts.
,, 2-Teachers of all kinds. 3-Responsible commercial posts, specialized clerks. 4-{Ordinary clerks.
,, 5-Shop assistants, insurance and other agents. 6-Skilled manual workers. 7-Semi-skilled manual workers.
St 8-Unskilled manual workers.

-The figures in Table i show that the H.C.
sample is made up broadly of working-class families, including about io per cent. where
the head falls into occupational grade 3, 4, or 5. The i.w. (i) sample is interesting in the indication it gives of the relative contributions of different classes to the population.
Not far short of one-half the births in the particular fortnight selected occurred in families where the head belonged to the unskilled labouring class. In nearly a quarter the head was only semi-skilled. Skilled artisans and the non-manual working classes were about equally represented among the
heads of the remaining families. Bearing in mind that the aim in the choice
of the H.C. sample was only to include classes with a limited income, whereas a birth may occur in any class, a comparison of the figures in Columns (i) and (2) makes it clear that Occupational Grade 8 is contributing more than its full share to the rising generation. The same is probably true in less degree of Grade 7, whereas other grades are almost certainly not contributing as they

might. For example, less than i per cent. of the births in this particular fortnight occurred in families where the head was of Grade I or 2. That this small proportion was not exceptional was confirmed by an examination of the occupational grades of the heads of families in which births were notified over a period of twelve months.
The second INFANT WELFARE sample, drawn from households not visited by the official representatives of the Public Health Department, is heavily weighted, as is natural, by families in which the head is of Occupational Grades I, 2, and 3, 6o per cent. of the total coming from one of these grades. Surprise may be expressed that so high a proportion of manual workers should appear in this sample. It is highly probable, however, that some were not visited on account of the distance at which they resided from the centre of the city, while others may have indicated that they did not wish the Health Visitors to call.
OCCUPATIONAL GRADE AND EMPLOYMENT
The main groups sampled have been compared as to the occupational grade of the head of the family, and it is worth while noting here how regularity of employment is associated with occupational grade, as judged by the HOUSEHOLD CENSUS random sample of over 4,000 families.
TABLE 2. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OCCUPATIONAL GRADE AND DEGREE OF EMlPLOYMENT EXPERIENCED (H.C. Sample)

Occupational
Grade of
Adult Males

Percentage of Employment in Week of Enquiry
Full-time Part-time Unemployed

I, 2, 3
4, 5 6 7 8
All

92 7 3-[ 4-2

8o*8 9-I I-0I

84.8
79-2

45..59

I0-7
I4.9

56 7 20-0 23 3

72-o II.4 I6-6

Table 2 shows that unemployment rises steadily as the occupational grade falls; but while Grades 4 and 5 are practically level with Grade 6 in proportion of unem-

DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

I77

ployment, there was in addition more parttime work experienced in the two former grades than in either Grade 6 or Grade 7. Grade 8 families were easily in the worst plight as regards unemployment and parttime. We infer-what seems eminently reasonable-that it is the least skilled man, whether he belongs to the manual workingclass or to the black-coated class, who is most liable in a time of industrial stress to lose his job.
OCCUPATION AND ECONOMIC POSITION
When the head of the house is unemployed or only partially employed the financial outlook for the family becomes precarious. This is reflected in Table 3 (based also on HOUSEHOLD CENSUS returns) where a close relationship is found to exist between the occupational grade of the chief earner and the economic position of the family measured by a poverty line standard*-precisely what was to be expected in view of the conclusion reached in the preceding paragraph. As the occupational grade falls, the percentage of families below the poverty line rises, and again we find Grade 8 families in the most serious position, while those in Grade 5 are worse off than those in Grade 6.
FAMILIES RECEIVING SOCIAL INCOME
The majority of families which are below the poverty line and many of those which are above, are in receipt of unemployment benefit, public assistance, or some other form of social income, such as a war pension or a widow's pension. An analysis (see Table 4) of a large random sample of nearly 7,000 working-class households on Merseyside brings out the point that the families which get most, and presumably those which need most, assistance from public sources are: (i) those without an adult male earner,
* The measurement was made by comparing the net income of each family, from all sources exclusive of public assistance (after subtracting what was spent on rent, national insurance, and travel to and from work), with the sum needed to obtain a defined minimum level of subsistence. (See Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol. XCIII, Pt. IV, I930, pp. 563-4.)

and (2) those where the chief earner is either unemployed or only casually employed.
TABLE 8. RELATIONSEIP BETWEEN OCCuPATIONAL GRADE AND ECONOMIC POSION OF FALY AS MEASURED BY A POVERTY
LIE STANDARD (H.C. Sample)

Occupational Grade of Percentage of Families

Chief Earner

below the Poverty Line

I, 2,3
4 5 6
7
8
All

3.7 6-6
9'2
7-O II.3 I9-6
I7-O

TABLE 4. PERCENTAGE OF FAMILIE OF VARIOUS ECONOMIC TYPES IN RECEIPT OF (1) SOM1 FORM OF SOCIAL INCOME, (2) PUBLIC ASITANCE (H.C. Sample)

Percentage of Families of
each type benefiting

The Chief EarnerAl

Families in receipt of

. 0 8 Types - oOff Family

z

i. Some Form of
Social Income... 65 I9 47 84 36
2. Public Assistance ... I7 I 8 27 7
Now the majority of families in the main Infant Welfare sample, i.w. (i), seeing that the mother has recently been confined, will contain an adult male as a potential, if not an actual earner. It follows that if we were looking for some criterion of economic status in this group, where incomes can only be very roughly estimated, we should look for one related to lack of employment, since that would appear to be the main cause for such families seeking public support.
Thus, whereas rather over a third of all the families sampled in Table 4 enjoyed some form of social income, in families with the chief earner unemployed the proportion rose to over 8o per cent. Also, the same group of families showed a proportion in receipt of public assistance nearly four times as high as that for the whole sample. But

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

one of the chief forms of social income, cer- Classes A, B, CD are in this paper fre-

tainly for families experiencing unemploy- quently grouped together and referred to as

ment, is insurance benefit or transitional the lower social classes, while E, F, G, H

payment. And when those who are without are also grouped together and referred to as

work are disqualified from such assistance the higher social classes. The terms higher

-and sometimes when they are not-they and lower are not entirely happy, but it is

are obliged to fall back upon poor relief or not easy to find more appropriate ones.

the charity of their friends and relations if Their use must not be taken to imply any

they have no other means of support. We preconceived derogatory judgment of one

shall not be far wrong, therefore, if we class as opposed to another.

take dependence on public assistance by any It is necessary to point out here that this

family as an indication that the family in classification differs from one based simply

question is somewhere near the bottom of on the nature of the occupation of the head

the social and economic scale; while families of the family, in that it takes into account

which are frequently dependent on unem- other factors also of some importance in the

ployment benefit, but not in receipt of public assessment of the social standing of the

assistance, may be regarded as occupying a family. At the same time, since occupa-

stage above the first group.

tional grade is in itself one of the most

helpful indicators of class, there should be a

CLASS OF INFANT WELFARE SAMPLE high correlation between social class as de-

In the light of the preceding discussion we fined above and occupational grade. That

can now proceed to a social classification of this is so is apparent from Table 5.

the INFANT WELFARE family samples. In Attention has already been drawn to the

principle it is much the same as that adopted high proportion of births, nearly 70 per

by Charles Booth and revised by Professor cent., occurring in families of Occupational

Bowley for use in the New London Survey. Grade 7 or 8. It is interesting to observe,

It takes into account the character of the further, that rather over half of them were

street in which the family lived, the nature in the lower social classes. Very roughly,

of the father's occupation, unemployment, they fall into four nearly equal groups in

destitution, and any other relevant informa- Classes A, B; CD;E, F, G, H.

tion supplied by the visitor. The broad lines

of division were as follows, but they are to be regarded as descriptive of type rather

FERTILITY IN DIFFERENT SAMPLES

than as representing in every case a rigid We are now in a position to go on to

assessment:

examine the difference in average fertility

Social Classes

Description

A The Lowest Class of Slum-Dweller, fre-

quently living in a one-room tenement

shown by various groups of families, distinguished by social class or occupational

and in receipt of Public Assistance. grade.

B

The Very Poor. Casual workers and others with income, for a normal family, of less than 34s. All in receipt of Public Assistance not in Class A.

In the INFANT WELFARE inquiry a separate card was provided for each infant born in the selected fortnight of February I930.

CD Two classes distinguished by Charles On this card were recorded particulars ascer-

Booth are here combined forming The Poor. Casual workers and others with a family income of 34S. to 40S.

tained by the visitor as to the health and progress of the child, the health and

E

All in receipt of unemployment benefit or transitional payment not in Class A or B.
Ordinary Labour above the poverty

genetical history of the mother, the nature of the occupation of the father, home conditions and type of neighbourhood where the

line. Income 40s. to 6os.

family lived, etc. An analysis was then

F G
H

Higher Class Labour. Income £3 to £5.
Lower Middle Class. Income JJ5 to Lio. Upper Middle Class. Income Lio up-
wards.

made of this material with a view to discovering the association betwen various factors and the progress of the infant over a

DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

I79

TABLE 5. CORRELATION BETWEEN SOCIAL CLASS OF FAMNLY AND GRADE OF FATHER'S OCCUPATION. SAMPLE I.W. (i)

Grade of Occupation

Number of Families of Each Social Class

A B CD

E FGH

Total Per cent of Sample

1, 2, 3 - 4, 5 3

8

8 37

6 38

9

3

48 64

7
9

6 3 24
7 5 30 4I 8 52 93 107

22 5I
78 5
64

2

I02 I5
159 23
3I6 46

Total

57 129 i8o

I70 I02 48

3

689

I00

Per cent of Sample 8 I9 26

25 I5 7 0

I00

period of two years. The results of the
analysis will be published separately. Along with other information to be given
on the card, the visitors were asked to state
the number of children living and the number of children dead to each family. If
figures were not given under either of these heads-e.g. number dead-the family in question was not included in the determination of the mean number dead for the group. The mean number of children born for any group was obtained by adding together the
mean number living and the mean number dead. Still-births were counted both as
births and deaths. Although the HOUSEHOLD CENSUS sample
and the INFANT WELFARE sample were
obtained quite independently, and do not relate, as has been explained, to precisely the same social class of families, it will be instructive to compare the fertility figures wherever possible.
The mean number of births in the i.w. (i) group is somewhat less than in the H.C. group for two reasons: the latter, on the average, contains more completed families than the former; the H.C. group also contains relatively fewer families in the higher occupational grades, where the size of

TABLE 6. AVERAGE SIZE OF FAMILY IN DIFFERENT SAMPLES

Mean Number of Children per

Number of

Family

Group Families

Sampled

Born Dead Living

H.C. 4,379 I.W.(i) 700 I.W.(ii) I57

3 .92 0°95 3.49 I 053
I1*97 01I0

2.97
2-96 I*87

family is believed to be more severely
limited. On the other hand, by the method of selection adopted, sterile matings are included in the H.C. group, but not in the i.w. group and this factor acts in the opposite direction and tends to equalize the figures.
Owing to the death rate being higher in the one group than the other-the average age in the H.C. families being higher-the net number of children left alive in both groups is practically the same. It is estimated that if sterile matings were excluded from the H.C. sample the mean number of living children would be increased by about one-
third of a child per family. The very pronounced fall both in the
number of births and in the number of

i8o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

deaths per family as we pass to Group deaths in Grade 8 is at least three times

i.w. (ii)-which, it may be added, contains that in Grades I-5. The net result is an

only families in the highest social classes, excess in the lowest grade over the others of

F, G, or H-is striking. As judged by these I to I 5 children per family. In each grade,

samples, in the working-class population except those born in Grade 8, the mean num-

there are on the average nearly 4 children bers of children born and dead in the i.w. (i)

born to each family; in the general popu- group come out less than the corresponding

lation (selected to the extent already de- numbers in the H.C. group. Reasons for this

fined), the number born is about 3-5; in have already been submitted in discussing

that social class which is beyond the reach the last table, and they need not be recapitu-

of the Public Health Visitor (partially lated. The second reason does not apply

selected, as in the previous case), the num- when a comparison can be made between in-

ber born is less than 2 per family. Further- dividual grades (e.g. 6, 7, and 8 here) in the

more, there is about one death in every two groups.

family among the working classes; there is According to the larger sample in Table

one death in every two families in the gene- 7a the size of family definitely increases as

ral population; while there is only i death the chances of employment become more pre-

in every io families in the highest social carious, but the gap in the mean number of

classes. But, owing to the method of selec- children living between families where the

tion, while the comparison between the two head is regularly employed and where he is

INFANT WELFARE groups is justifiable, that unemployed is less-than the gap in the mean

between them and the H.C. group is not quite number of children born between the same

on the same footing for reasons already indi- families, because the mean number of child-

cated. It would be better if we could in all ren who die is twice as great in the latter

cases compare completed families and in- group as in the former. In the smaller

clude in all cases sterile matings. By omit- i.w. (i) sample the figures for different

ting sterile matings from the H.C. Group, employment groups are more equal and less

the number of living children per family is regular, the net effect being to give families

increased by about *33 and the number of when the head is regularly employed the

dead by -Io.

highest mean number of living children.

SIZE OF FAMILY, GRADE, AND WORK
In Table 7 the Merseyside H.C. sample and the i.w. (i) sample are each broken up into four sub-groups, according to the occupation of the male head of the household, where there is a male head whose occupation is known; and the mean number of children, living and dead, is given for each sub-

But it is to be observed that here all the
figures relate to unskilled workers. If this result were confirmed by further research
it would be of some importance as indicating that although unskilled workers may have large families as compared with skilled workers, these large families are more fre-
quently to be found, on the whole, among the unskilled who are in regular employ-

group. As many other investigations have ment. shown, there is a well-marked increase in

size of family as we pass down the occupa- SIZE OF FAMILY AND SOCIAL CLASS

tional scale from Grades 1-5 to Grade 8, so that nearly two more children are born to the family in the unskilled manual workers' class as compared with all the black-coated classes combined.* The mean number of

In Table 5 we considered the number of births registered in each social class in Liverpool in a particular fortnight of the year. We shall now proceed to examine whether the families in which births were

* But it is interesting to note that the mean num- registered were large or small. In other

ber of children alive per family in Grades 4, 5 words, the relation of size of family to social

(clerks, shop-assistants, small agents) is slightly less than in Grades I 2, 3 (the professions and higher business and administrative posts).

class will be considered. The figures are given in Table 8.

They

DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

i8i

TABLE 7. SIZE OF FAMILY Di RELATION TO OCCIUPATIONAL GRADE OF FATHER

Grade Number of of Families
Occupation Sampled

H.C. Group-Merseyside Mean Size of Family

Number of Families

Born Dead Living Sampled

IW. (I) Group Mean Size of Family
Born Dead Living

1, 2, 3
4, 5 6
7
8

II4
345
1,369
1,377 2,076

2*49

0.33

2*I6

24I

0o36

2-05

3 . 28 0o56 2 72

3.51 o-68 2-83

4.I6 I * o6& 3IO

48 64 102
I59
3I6

2*36

o*I6

2*20

2 I6

OI5

2*01

2 *95 O*36 2 .59

3.I2 o04o 2-72

4.33 o * 8xI 3.52

TABL1E 7A. SIZE OF FAMILY I RELATION TO FATHER'S REGULARITY OF WORK

Number of Male Head Families
Sampled

H.C. Group Mean size of Family
Born Dead Living

Number of Families
Sampled

I.W. (I) Group
(Unskilled Workers only) Mean size of Family
Born Dead Living

Regularly
Employed
Casually Employed
Unemployed

2,244
597 360

33I | o-62
4*10 I*22 4*35 I *23

2 69 76 2 * 88 103 312 1I37

4-44 0.73 3-7I
4.20 0°79 3.4I 4 *36 o*86 3*50

TABIE 8. RELATION OF SIZE OF FAMILY TO SOCIAL CLASS

SampledSoScoicail ClaCassss | Number of Families

Mean Number of Children Born Dead

Living

LOWER
A B
CD
HIGHER E F
G, H
All Classes

59 134 I83
I75
I03 46
700

3 .90 4-24 .4I2
40o6
3I4 2-5512.8i 2-09J
3*49

09go 0-9I .0-74
o-56J
0-36'
o-26 0-29 0-I5
0.53

3 00
3-33 >3-38
3'50
2478
2-29 ,2.52 I*94J
2*96

reveal a considerable difference between the It is worth while to group the classes in

lower and the higher social classes, amount- Table 8 on a slightly different basis,

ing roughly to about one more birth to every as in Table 9, where all families with the

family and one more death to every two father earning probably under £3 a week

families in the lower group. The sharp drop are assembled together (Classes A to E) and

in crossing the line of division is striking. contrasted with Classes F, G, which include

There is also a consistent fall in the mean families of the better-type artisan who earns

number of births and deaths as we ascend over £3 a week and the lower middle class

the social scale within the higher group of families. Cases visited by the Survey have

families, but this is not true of the lower been taken out of the latter group, so that

group. There we find most births in Class it includes only the Public Health Depart-

B and most living in Class CD, though the ment cases. A further contrast is obtained

differences are sometimes slight and may not in the figures for the i.w. (ii) sample which

be significant.

are shown in the same table. This last

i82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

group of families, it will be remembered, I am straying, however, into a field which

were those of a somewhat superior class up- is outside the intended range of this paper.

on whom the Health Visitors did not call. Let us return to a more amenable factor

It only included families classed as F, G, or about which enough is known for it to be

H, and between these three classes there measurable, I mean age at marriage and

appeared to be no significant difference in duration of marriage which have, I think,

the number of children born or living.

played some part in producing the results

TABLE 9. CONTRAST IN SIZE OF BETWEEN CERTAIN GROUPED

FA MY SOCIAL

shown in Table 9. That this is so is suggested by the fact that the percentage of first

CLASSES

babies in Classes A to E was 2Ir5, whereas

in each of the other groups in the table it

No. of Mean Number of Children was over 40. We can partially eliminate this

Group

Families Sampled

__

complicating element from the figures by

Born Dead Living relating the size of family, as in Tables io

and i i, in turn to the age of the mother and

I.W. (i) Classes A to E 551

3-89

o062

3'27

to the duration of marriage. These tables are complementary. In

Classes F, G I20 2*46 0o24 2*22 general, the older the mother, the longer is

I.W. (ii): Classes F, G, H I57

197

0*I0

I.87

the duration of marriage; but, theoretically, it would be possible for all married women

at present of age 25-34 (say) in the higher

Again we note a definite fall in the mean
number of children born and dead as we pass
up the social scale. These figures can be explained on the hypothesis that not only
the professional classes, but also the better type of commercial worker and artisan are limiting the size of their families, while the poorer classes, if they are doing so at all, cannot be doing so to the same extent.

class to have married so late in life that their duration of marriage would only equal that of married women at present of age i624 in the lower class. This kind of thing does in fact happen, though not in the extreme form here suggested. Hence the
necessity for the two tables. Had the sample been large enough it would have been better still to take into account age of mother and duration of marriage simultaneously.

SIZE OF FAMILY IN RELATION TO AGE OF When allowance is made for them inde-

MOTHER AND DURATION OF MARRIAGE pendently, it is evident that fertility in the

There is a tendency perhaps in these days to lay over-much stress on artificial methods for the prevention of conception, as if they were the one and only explanation of all
fertility differences to be found in human kind. They possibly are the most effective of the forces at work in that direction, but
in concentrating attention upon them too narrowly there is a danger of overlooking
others which are not unimportant. It has been suggested that the formation of new habits accounts for more than we generally

lower classes still very appreciably exceeds that in the higher social classes. Although these tables are only based on the total of families for which the facts were ascertained and not on the complete sample, the closeness of agreement between this partial sample and the full sample in the mean number of children born (when calculated irrespective of the age of the mother or the duration of marriage) suggests that the part may be regarded as reasonably representative of the
whole. It may be mentioned incidentally

imagine-e.g. the twin-bed habit-and it is that 8i per cent. of the marriages in the

not improbable that further research into the higher social classes were of less than ten

physiology of human conception-the how years' duration, whereas this was true of

and the when and the why of it-might inci- only 62 per cent. of those in the lower social

dentally throw light upon the subject of classes. Also about one-third of the infants

differential fertility.

were first-born in the former group and only

DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

I83

TABLE 10. RELATION OF SIZE OF FAMILY TO AGE OF MOTER IN CERTAIN SOCIAL CLASSES

GROUP

Number of Families Sampled Age of Mother

Mean Number of Children Born Age of Mother

I6-24

25-34

35+

I6-24

25-34

35+ All Ages

I.W. (i) Lower Social Classes (A to D) Higher Social Classes (E to H)
I1W. (ii)
Classes (F to H)

91
69
i8

173 100 175 3 67 7-02 4* I2 i8i 6o 1'73 2* j8 4*6I 2 8r ioI 36 i*i6 1I75 3'05 1|99

TABLE 11. RELATION OF SIZE OF FAMILY TO DURATION OF MARRIAGE IN CERTAIN SOCIAL CLASSES

___

GROUP
.__ _ _ _

I1W. (i) Lower Social Classes (A to D) Higher Social Classes (E to H)
I.W. (ii) Classes (Fto H)

Number of Families Sampled

Mean Number of Children Born

Duration of Marriage

Duration of Marriage

i___ _ _ _

I__ _ _

_ _ ___

__ _ _

0-5 5-10 IO+ 0-5 5-IO O+

l
Durations

6i 48 66 I .95 4 02 7.I5 4.49 72 55 30 I*58 2 *92 583 2*80

63

46

24

I~7

2~3

.1 2

about one-fifth in the latter. This goes to confirm the later age at marriage in the
higher class.

TABLCCEEHRITDIAlRIa.EN NSPOWECEIRARCLEENCTBLAAOGSRESNESOINFTOTMWWOOTHHOYEMERASRTSWDOI

One consequence of the earlier age at marriage of the lower social classes is that children follow each other in quicker succession in this group as compared with the higher

Lower Social Classes
A.B. C.D.
25 i8

Higher Social Classes
E.F. G.H.
13 0

social classes, because the younger the wife

215

11.5

the greater in general is the chance of a birth occurring. During the period of the INFANT

FERTILITY OF THE LOWEST CLASS

WELFARE inquiry, when 652 families were From the description given on page I78

visited periodically over a space of i8 months to two years, io8 mothers had each had 2 infants born to them (one had twins and another had a total of 3 infants in the two years). Table iia shows the proportion of families in certain grouped classes in which another infant was born. It appears that the
percentage of mothers in the lower social classes who gave birth to a second infant within two years of the first was nearly
double that in the higher social classes, and it is significant that a large proportion of these more prolific families were in receipt of public assistance or unemployment benefit.

of the different social classes it will be seen that all families in receipt of public assistance would be in one or other of the two lowest classes, A or B, while families in receipt of unemployment benefit or transitional payment, but not of public assistance, would be in class CD. These families would have a relatively low standard of living and the majority of them might be expected to be below the poverty line. We shall, therefore, go on now to compare with the figures previously given the size of family as shown by the HOUSEHOLD CENSUS sample, in three groups of households-those subsisting on poor relief, and those living below and those above a defined poverty line.

i84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 12. AVERAGE SIZE OF FAMY IN CERTAIN CONTRASTED HOUSEHOLDS
Description of FNaomi.lioefs MeanpNeor.FoafmCihliyldren
Hdou Sampled Born Dead Living
Lower Social Classes (I.W. (i)) ... ... 376 4*12 0.74 3 .38
In receipt of Public
Assistance (H.C.)... 2I6 4 54 I.37 3.17
Below the Poverty
Line (H.C.) ... 75I 4*70 I *42 3 .28
Above the Poverty
Line (H.C.) ... 3,628 3 .76 o.85 2 9I
Higher Social Classes
(I.W.0il)) ... .. 324 2*8i 0*29 2-52

receipt of public assistance-we should expect also to find bad housing conditions. It is not surprising, therefore, to find, as in Table I3, that overcrowded families are in
general above the average in size. It should be explained that it was possible to apply a
more exact standard of overcrowding in the HOUSEHOLD CENSUS than in the INFANT WELFARE inquiry where the visitor had usually to judge the position from general considerations.* In the former i i per cent.,
while in the latter I7 per cent., of all the
families sampled were overcrowded, but the various districts of Liverpool come in much
the same order under both standards.

In the first place it may be noted that the mean number of children born

TABLE 18. ASSOCIATION CROWDING AND SI

BETWEEN OVEROF FAMY

and the mean number dead in the INFANT WELFARE group of families (lower

Group

No. of Mean No. of Children Families

social classes) are appreciably less than the corresponding figures in the two

Sampled Born Dead Living

groups of HOUSEHOLD CENSUS families,
those in receipt of public assistance and those below the poverty line, for the reasons already given in comparing the normal i.w. (i) and H.C. samples. In the second place, a difference in the size of families

Overcrowded Families

H.C. .. ...

I.W.(i)
I.W.

....
(i) with

both parents in

poor health.

397
I21
6o

6 o6 1I50 4*56 5.6I I *I6 4-45
6-I5 I*45 4.70

below and above the poverty line is dis-
covered of roughly the same order as was
found between families in the lower and the higher social classes, namely, two more
births and one more death in every two families. And, in the third place, the size of family in the lowest group of all, the Public Assistance group, is not quite so
large as in the group below the poverty line, which may be regarded as slightly superior to the other. This is in line with the figures in Table 8, where the mean number of children living in the CD group rather exceeded the mean number living in the A, B group. A similar result emerged, it will be remembered, in the discussion of Table 7a.

The number of children born per family in these overcrowded groups are among the highest that we have so far met, and the mean number of children dead per family is also unusually high (the figures for the main i.w. sample being, as before, rather less than those for the H.C. sample). The reason is not far to seek. It is obviously the very large families, unable to afford to move into
a more commodious home, which are the most likely to be overcrowded. When, in addition, poor health on the part of the parents is associated with overcrowding, the number of living and dead children per family tends still further to increase. This also is natural, since the conditions which

OVERCROWDING AND SIZE OF FAMILY give rise to poor health in the parents are

Where families are larger than the average and where large families are at the same time associated with poor economic condi-
tions, as is the case in the groups we have been considering--:the lower social classes, those below the poverty line, and those in

* See Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Vol.
XCIII, Part IV, pp. 502-3. Although largeness of family is conducive to overcrowding, it is important to note that according to the Liverpool standard quite a small family may be overcrowded, e.g. husband, wife, and grown-up daughter living in one
room.

DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

I85

equally unfavourable to the children, and suggests that the standard of assessment

when the parents are weakly they can was not very stringent.

scarcely be expected to produce robust off- The reader will be struck, on examining

sprnng.

the H.C. groups, by the difference in the

mean number born between families of

SIZE OF FAMILY AND HEALTH

afflicted children and families of afflicted

One of the unexpected results of this sur- parents. This is essentially a statistical

vey of differential fertility has been the effect due to the fact that, in considering

discovery of the large families born in homes families of afflicted parents, sterile matings

where there is a record of poor health in the are included, but every family of afflicted

parents or in the children. The figures children must have had at least one afflicted

obtained in the HOUSEHOLD CENSUS and in child. Moreover, in a large family there is

the INFANT WELFARE inquiry are not in general a greater chance of at least one

strictly comparable, but it is convenient to afflicted child appearing than in a small

consider them together in Table I4. In the family, and, the larger the family, the

HOUSEHOLD CENSUS the record relates to the greater the chance. Hence, by selecting

state of health of parents and children in the families containing an afflicted child there

week of inquiry. If the indisposition seemed is a simultaneous bias in favour of the selec-

to be only of a temporary character, it was tion of families containing several children.

classed as " sickness "; if it were of rela- For this reason when we select for afflicted

tively long standing, or likely to be so, it parents the figures are not really on the

was classed as " chronic illness," except same footing as those obtained when we

that " crippled or tubercular " persons were select for afflicted children.

described as such.

On the same principle, when in the i.w.

In the INFANT WELFARE inquiry the group we select families containing at least

general state of health of the parents was one dead child, we rule out of the calcula-

assessed on their past record as ascertained tion families containing fewer than two

by the visitors. In three out of every four children, namely the dead child and the

of these families in the sample the health of infant that was the centre figure of the

both parents was stated to be satisfactory inquiry; also, as before, death is more

and in only i S per cent of the total were likely to strike a large family than a small,

both parents said to have poor health, which because there are more children at risk of

TABLE 14. ASSOCIATION BETWEN HEALTH OF PARENTS AND SIZE OF FAMY

GROUP

Number of

Mean Number of Children per Family

Families

Sampled Born Dead Living

H.C. Children with one or both Parents Sick ... ... ... ... Families containing one or more Sick Children ... ... ... f Children with one or both Parents suffering from Chronic Illness ... Familes containing one or more Children suffering from Chronic Illness f
Children with one or both Parents Crippled or Tubercular ... ... Families containing one or more Children Crippled or Tubercular ... f

72 55 92 80
32 37

5*3 I 2 4 1. 6*6 I .4 5.2 4*7 17 3 *0 5*9 12 4*7 4 4 1I5 2.9 6*5 2 *2 4*3

I.W. (1)

Health of Parents Good

... ... ... ... ...

Health of Parents Fair or Poor

... ...

...

Health of Parents Good and no Child dead ...

...

Health of Parents Fair or Poor but no Child dead ... ...

Health of Parents Good but at least one Child dead ...

Health of Parents Fair or Poor and at least one Child dead

... ... f
...
...
...
...

517 183 375 113 1I42 70

3X22 0|43 4-29 o 8i 2-38 290 5.47 1.45 6-54 2,12

2-79
3.48
2-38
290 4-02
4-42

B

i86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

death. Hence the first two groups in the i.w. (i) set are comparable with each other,

TABLE 15. SIZE GENETICAL

OF FAMILY HISTORY OF

IN RELATION THE MOTER

TO

and the second pair and the last pair are

also comparable with each other, but the

Lower Social Classes Higher Social Classes

members of one pair are not comparable with those of another pair.
But, granted the explanation given as to why some of the figures are high, it must
be observed that it only helps to explain

Genetical History

Number Mean Number Mean of Numberof of Numberof
Families Children Families Children Sampled Born Sampled Born

them: it does not explain them away. It still remains true that the number of child-

Good Fair

ren born to every group where either parents Poor

or children have poor health is significantly

Per cent. ... 68
... 23
... 9

Per cent. 3*79 66 4*55 29
5 22 5

2-54 3 *22 3 .87

high in comparison with the number born
in families enjoying good health. Also, death more readily strikes children in fami-

remains that the large family must exist to run such a chance.

lies which have a poor health record.

EMERGENCE OF A SUB-NORMAL TYPE

GENETICAL HISTORY OF THE MOTHER
Weakness, and probably early death, may, however, be the heritage of the infant as the result of the genetical constitution, rather than the ill-health, of the mother.
Hence it is of interest to see if there is any association between size of family and the mother's genetical history. This was classed as " good " if there were no records of miscarriages, still- or premature births, and if the infant was breast-fed. It was classed as " fair " if there was one adverse record under any of these heads, and as " poor'" if there were two or more such records. No information of this kind was collected in the HOUSEHOLD CENSUS, SO that only the results of the INFANT WELFARE inquiry are available and these are given in Table I5.
A rather bigger percentage of the mothers sampled was recorded as having made only fair progress, but a smaller percentage was said to have made poor progress, in the higher as compared with the lower social classes. For each grade the size of family is

We have seen how size of family is related to social class, and we have defined class by a consideration of the occupational grade of the head of the household, the stability of his employment, economic position as measured by the relation of the income to a poverty-line standard of needs, dependence for a living on unemployment benefit or public assistance. We have also discussed the bearing of housing conditions (taking into account overcrowding) and the health of the family upon the number of children who are born and who die.
In every case, without exception, the worse the conditions, however defined, the larger, on the average, is the family. It is difficult to escape the conclusion that these different phenomena are inter-related. In short, the simplest explanation of the consistently large number of births and deaths to be found in certain groups of families is that they contain a foundation of families of a poor type in common, and possibly a superstructure of others closely akin to them but not the same families in every group.

less in the higher group than the other, but The lower social classes are made up in both it definitely falls, i.e. irrespective largely of a type that is fairly clearly deof class, as the genetical history of the fined, whose heads are of low occupational mother improves. There is no doubt that grade, who are lacking in stability of emhere again the fall can be largely ex- ployment, who fall frequently below the

plained by the greater chance which the poverty line and become dependent on unlarger family runs of experiencing an employment pay or public assistance. Many adverse genetical record, but the fact of these self-same families, too, are to be

DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

I87

found living in overcrowded conditions, families have had four or more children

they have a high rate of infant mortality, and from 20 to 30 per cent. of the

and the health of the parents and children mothers gave birth to a second infant with-

is decidedly below the average. We might, in the two-year period covered by the

indeed, describe the type of family which inquiry. All these figures are in striking

emerges as the common element responsible contrast to those for normal families shown

for the high fertility figures in the tables, in the same table.

as generally sub-normal in characteristics

which are vital to the achievement of CLASS CONTRIBUTION OF CHILDREN

personal well-being and successful social The result of our study, therefore, is to

adaptation.

show that the sub-normal group generally

Clear evidence of this recurrent sub-nor- is contributing considerably more than its

mality and its association with high fertility fair share to the future population, whereas

is presented in Table i6, where (i) the fami- if we estimate its cost to the community

lies comprising the two lowest social classes and its worth on any reasonable valuation,

(A, B) in the INFANT WELFARE sample, and it would probably be agreed that so large a

also (2) those families in receipt of public contribution in relation to other classes

assistance, are contrasted with (3) the whole ought by some means to be checked. The

sample as to their record of low skill, unem- position is summarized in Tables I7 and i8.

ployment, public assistance, overcrowding, Table I7 shows that half the families in

poor health, and fertility. The position in the Lower Social Classes, but less than a

relation to the poverty line cannot be quarter of those in the Upper Social

exactly determined for these subnormal Classes, contain four or more children.

families, but it may be observed that the When we analyze, as in Table i8, the

majority, if not all, of them are likely to be households in which births occurred during

below the line judging from the evidence the selected fortnight, it appears that while

available. In nearly 8o per cent. of them families of the lower social classes repre-

the head of the family is an unskilled sented just over half the total sample, the

labourer and unemployment is more than children born to them made up 63 per cent.

double that experienced in ordinary fami- of the total births. The death rate is still

lies. Over 40 per cent. are living in over- higher in these classes, being 74 per cent.

crowded conditions; in about half, the of the total deaths, so that their net contri-

parents have poor health and in nearly bution in living children is reduced to 6i

three-quarters the same is true of the child- per cent. of the total in the sample. The

ren. Yet almost 50 to 6o per cent of these majority of these families, it should be

TABLE 16. PERCENTAGE OF (1) FAILES ON PUBLIC ASSISTANCE; (2) FAM S IN THE LOWST SOCIAL CLASSES; AND (3) ALL FAMILIS SAMPLED RECORDING CERTAI FACTORS ADVERSE TO PROGRESS

GROUP

No. of Families Sampled

(I)
Father of
Occupational Grade 8

(2)
Father Unemployed

(3
In

i (4)
Over-

(5O (6) (;7 I (8)
Parents' Childrens' Families Families

receipt crowded Health Health of 4 or with 2

of Poor Poor more Births in

P.A. Children 2 Years

i. In receipt of
Public Assistance ... 77 78 IOO IOO 44 55 74 58
2. Social Classes A, B i96 78 59 5I 42 45 75 49

30 22

3. All Families (I.W. (i)) *.. 700 46 29 27

17 26 63 37

17

*Only 13 per cent. of the heads of families in Classes A, B were in regular work. Liverpool is unhappily notorious
as a centre of casual labour, especially at the docks.

i88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 17. PERCENTAGE OF FAMII DIFFRNT SIZE IN THE LOWER HIGHER SOCIAL CLASSES

OF AND

where the father is in unskilled or semiskilled work, earning £2 to £3 a week,

while Class F consists of artisans, shop-

Percentage of Families

assistants, and clerical workers earning

with number of Births as

shown below

Total

from £3 to 65 a week. This latter group
represented I5 per cent. of the total sample

Group

(I) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6+)

which registered any births at all during

the chosen fortnight, and it contributed

Lower Social Classes I9 15 i6 15 9 26 IOO only ii per cent. to the total of children

50 50

living, the mean number of children born to

the group being about 2-5 per family.

Higher Social Classes 32 25 I9 7 5 I2 100

GRAVER SUB-NORMAL TYPES OF FAMILY

76 24

There remain other samples of families

to which reference was made at the begin-

remembered, are existing on unemployment ning of this paper as group (4). Nothing

benefit and public assistance.

has so far been said about them, and it is not

A:n interesting comparison can also be proposed here to do more than call attention

made between the two groups of families to their fertility. They can, perhaps, be

immediately above and below the line which called sub-normal with stronger justification

separates the lower and the higher social than the types of family to which that term

groups. From Table 8 we found the mean has already been applied, because they

number of births in Classes CD to be either contain one or more individuals

four, while in Class E it dropped to about suffering from some rather severe physical

three. From Table I 7 it further appears or mental disability, such as blindness, deaf-

that Classes CD together contribute the ness, epilepsy, mental defect, or some con-

largest percentage of children to the sample, genital or acquired deformity, or they have

and Class B contributes about the same pro- experienced chronic destitution and been in

portion as Class E, although the former receipt of public assistance more or less con-

class is distinctly smaller in our sample tinuously for a period of at least two years.

than the latter.

In a previous article* the writer has shown

It is believed that even the skilled artisan that certain of these types have families

is following the example of the professional which are distinctly larger than the aver-

classes and failing to maintain his numerical age, or that they are themselves members

importance in relation to other classes in the population. Our figures seem to bear this out. Class E consists chiefly of families

* EUGENics REvIEw, July 1932, Vol. XXIV, No. 2,
PP. 97-IO5. See note, " Differential Class Fertility,"
on p. 2IO.

TABLE 18. PERCENTAGE OF CH
Percentage of Total Families Sampled

CONTRIBUTED BY DIFFERENT SOCIAL CLASSES
Percentage of Children Born Dead Living

Lower Social Classes ... Higher Social Classes ...

A B

188:55 ?53 0

CD 26-o

E 24-5
F 15 0 470°05 GH 7.5

I00*0

9.5
230 t63 305J
22-5
o37
4-0
100*0

14
33 74 27J
17
7 26
2
100*0

8-5
215 }6I
3
23.5 I J39
4OO
100.0

DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

I89

of large families. It will be convenient to assemble here in a single table figures, obtained in the course of the Merseyside Survey, showing the mean number of children, born, dead, and living, in these and other families, as well as in most of those which have been the subject of the main discussion in this paper. Comparison can then be readily made between them.
ARE THERE CONNECTING LINKS?
From our main discussion a sub-normal type of family emerged as the ' villain of the piece,' parading under one or more disguises, sometimes under the cloak of unemployment, sometimes dependent on public assistance,-sometimes living in overcrowded conditions-the chance of the moment probably determining the nature of the appearance of any particular family of the typebut all alike above the average in fertility. So consistent were they in this last respect that high fertility might almost be taken as a criterion of the type, enabling us to penetrate behind their differences.
In the last section of Table I9 several other groups of families are found also

registering high fertility. It is tempting to bridge the gap and to conclude that these families, too, fall in certain respects into
the same broad classification as the milder sub-normal types already considered. In the article mentioned above, the writer has dis-
cussed the particular case of mental defi-
ciency, the higher grades of which are
believed to appear with much greater frequency in what is now termed the ' social problem group ' than in the general popula-
tion. Now the social problem group is precisely that which possesses some or all of the characteristics defining our milder subnormal types-I mean those not necessarily containing an individual suffering from a gross physical or mental disability-and the
question I wish to raise is whether the same term can be stretched to embrace the
majority of the types which have been shown in this paper to possess the common criterion
of high fertility. I do not wish to be misunderstood. I am
far from suggesting that all cases of disability have a common origin, or that high fertility can be taken as a basis for their scientific classification. High fertility itself is as much an effect as a cause, and where

TABLE 19. ASSOCIATION BETWEEN SUB-NORMALITY AND FERTILITY

Number oaf
Families

Definition of Group
HOUSEHOLD CENSUS

4,379 3,628
751 zi6
397
II4
345
1,369
I,377
2,076
2,244
597
360 234 I89 72 55 92 8o 32 37

Random Sample of Working-Class Families ... ... ... ...

Families Above the Poverty Line ... ... ... ... ...

oi Below the Poverty Line

... ... ... ... ...

Male Head in Receipt of Public A ssistance ... ... ... ...

Families Overcrowded ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

Families according to descending Occupational Grade of Head, 1, 2, 3.

... ... ... ...
...
...

'

P,, ,

',

J,, JJ, 4, 5

...

" , ,, , ,,P,,,,,, 6. ...

-P0 PP JI J,

7."

JI J JI,

..

. .. .P P i1, , JVs

i 8.

...

Families according to Economic Class: Male Head in Regular Employment

,,

,, ,, ,,

,,,,,,,, Casual

,,

, ,,,

,.,,,, Unemployed ...

...

Children Families

of Men Unemployed for some
containing Men Unemployed

time ... for some

time..

...
...

...
...

...
...

Children of Sick Parents

... ... ... ... ... ... ...

Families containing Sick Children

... ... ... ... ...

Children of Parents suffering from Chronic Illness ... ... ... ...

Families containing Children suffering from Chronic Illness ... ...

Children of Parents Crippled or Tubercular ... ... ... ... ...

Families containing Children Crippled or Tubercular ... ...

Mean Number of Children
Born Dead Living

3 .92 0.95
3 - 76 °*85 4.70 I.42
4.54 1.37
6*o6 1.50
2.49 0.33
2-41 0-36
3.28 0o56 3 5I o *68 4.I6 I *o6 3.3I o-62 410 I*22 4*35 1I23
4*34 I*2I
6.74 i*88 5*3 I*2 6*6 . I 4 4*7 I.7 5 9 I,2 4*4 I.5 6-5 212

2-97 2 *91 3.28 3.17 4.56 2 i6
2 05
2*72
2-@83
3. IO 2-69 2-88 3.I2
3.13
4-86 4.I
5*2 3.0 4'7 2.9
4-3

Continued overleaf

190 THE EUGENICS RIEVIEW

TABLE 19. ASSOCIATON BETWEENSUB-NORMALITY AND FERTILITY-Continued

Number of
Children

Definition of Group
INFANT WELFARE GROUP

Mean Number of
___Children
Born Dead Living

700 Random Sample of Families with Young Infant ... ... ... ... 3.49 0.53 2 '96

1157 It
324 P,P
376 ,,

,, ,,
PR

,, , Superior Class ... ... 1.97 O*I0 I*87
,, of Higher Social Class (E, F, G,H) 2 8i 0*29 2.-52
,,P,, of Lower Social Clas.s(A, B,C, D) 4*12 0.-74 3-38

I21 Pi ,

Overcrowded Families

... ... ... ... ... 5-6i i-i6 4'45

48 pi ,

according to descending Occupational Grade I, 2, 3. ... 2 36 o* i6 2'20

64 ,,

,

,, , ,

P,

J,

.1 4, 5.

... 2'i6 0.15 2'01

102

Sp

,,

pi ,

,,

,,P

,,P 6. ..

.. 2 95 0-36 2 -59

316

SP

P.,,,,

, 8. ..

... 4.33 0-8i 3'52

5I7

,, Health of Parents, good.

0.43 2-79...

...

...

...

...

... 3 -22

183

,, ,,SI,J, fair or poor.

... ... ... ... ... 4-29 o-8i 3.'48

142 ,1, ,,,, P,, good but i or more children dead ... ... 5'47 I"45 4 02

70 ,

,,, fair or poor and i or more children dead ... 6-54 2-I2 4'42

SUB-NORMAL TYPES INVESTIGATION

Families containing i or more Defective Children, Aged 5-22:

1,115 Mental Defect ... ... ... ... ... . ... ... ... 7-2 2 -5 4.7

86 Blindness ...

...

...

...

...

.

...

...

...

...

- 4*9

i86 Deafness ...

...

...

...

...

...

...

.

...

...

- 46

247 Physical Defect (Congenital Deformity, Heart, Paralysis) ... ... .. 5.-0 I I I 3.9

351 pi, (Acquired Rickets, Tubercular joints or Glands) ... ... 6'i 1 -5 4-

56

0.9 ~(Miscellaneous-Rheumatic, Hearts, etc.)

... ... 6.7 2' I 4*6

Families in receipt of Public A ssistance for two years or more:

6i Male Head unemployed, under 5o, Occupational Grade i-6.

... ... 4'5 o-8 3.7

I48 PR, P,

,,.

Pt Po

,, ,

7. .. ... 4.2 o'8 3.4

65 Widow, under 5o, Occupational Grade of late Husband i-6.

... ... 3.-6 0.5 3.'I

34 Deserted Wife, under 5o, Occupational Grade of Husband ii-6. ..

86 ,

, P,,,,

,,

il, ,

P., 8.

.. 3*2 o0*4 2 -8
3.8 0.7 3.

high fertility is common to certain groups it is probably because they have other factors in common of a kind conducive to high fertility. I merely throw out the suggestion that there appears to be close relation-
ship between the milder sub-normal types of family (synonymous with the social prob-
lem group) and some again between them and the types of family which from time to
time produce feeble-minded offspring. May there not possibly be links connecting them also with other serious types of disability?
But, whether or not that be so, if it can

be taken as proved that high fertility is closely associated with most types of subnormality, both mild and grave, we must face the fact as constituting a social problem of peculiar gravity. I personally do not regard it as an intractable problem; but this is not the place in which to offer any suggestions for its solution.
My grateful thanks are due to Miss J. E. McCrindell for considerable help in the collection and analysis of the Infant Welfare material for this paper.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

erbliche Einfluisse. FThe Decline of the Birth
Rate explained by Heredity.] Monograph VI of the Eugenics Research Association, New York,
'93'. 4. Uber die Ursachen des Geburtenruckganges
beim deutschen Adel. [The Decline in the Birth Rate of the German Nobility and its Causes.] Archiv fur Sociale Hygiene und Demographie,
VI, 5. 193I.
5. Die Fruchtbarkeit der Danziger Bevolker-
ung im i8ten Jahrhundert. [The Fertility of the Population of Danzig in the i8th Century.]

Mitteilungen des West-preussischen Gesc vereins, XXXI, I.
6. Die Wandlungen der Fruchtbarkeit deutschen Adels im Igten Jahrhundert. Fluctuations in the Fertility of the
Nobility in the igth Century.] Archiv fur R
hygiene, XXV, 2, 1932. 7. Zahlenmiissiger Nachweis des Einflusses
Erbmasse auf die Kinderzahlen des Hochb [Statistical Proof of the Influence of Heredi the Number of Children of the Higher Nob'
Eugenik, 1932.

DIFFERENTIAL CLASS FERTILITY

(See footnote on p. I88. D. Caradog Jones's article.)

To prevent any possible misunderstanding of the fertility figures in this first paper it is perhaps well to explain here that we were not seeking to find out how many children families containing an ament could produce if they tried, nor how many they would produce by the time their families were completed, but simply how many children on the average they had produced per family at the time of investigation. The result came out large in comparison with the average number of children per family in a random sample of the working-class population, where also the families were not necessarily completed. It might not have appeared so large had we adopted some other standard for comparison. We took the most general standard available, but it may be argued that it would have been more appropriate to take a random sample of families containing at least one child of school age, since (i) a family cannot have a feeble-minded child if it has no child at all, and (2) feeblemindedness may not be detected till a child reaches school-age. But our object was to compare the mean accomplished fertility of families containing an ament with the mean accomplished fertility of families in general, and the latter group contains, among others, families which, by their own wish or otherwise, produce no children and families whose children die before they reach school age. Both these classes ought to be adequately represented in their failure to contribute to the general population, but they would be ignored if we took as our norm families containing at least one school

child. Moreover, if the standard adopted w
limited at one end, it ought for consistency to
limited at the other end also. One would theref be driven to take a random sample of families taining at least one child between the ages of and 22, since all the ament families contained least one ament between these ages. To rule families with no child over 5 would tend to r the accomplished fertility in comparison with of families in general (the standard actu adopted), but to rule out families with no under 22 would tend in just the opposite directi and these two tendencies would go some way cancel each other out.
There is another important point to which atte tion should be drawn. Quite apart from any oth forces at work in that direction, there is doubtedly a higher probability of an ament bei' found in a large family than in a small family just as there is a higher probability of finding genius in a large family-simply because there more children available to be genius or amen Some readers may be interested to inquire what influence of this factor is upon the figures. I ha discussed the question with two distinguish statisticians and they estimate that it would raise the average size of family by one chi-id to a chil and-a-half. Consequently, an allownce of aba that amount might be made in reading the reIevant tables if it be desired to determine .he effect upon them of other factors independently of this one.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 3.

