THE STATE OF THE NATION
As Deduced from recent Vital Statistics

T HREE publications of the Registrar- one person per acre (England and Wales=

General,' 2 3one each of the Ministry 37,340,338 acres). By June I929 the total

of Health4 and the Board of Educa- figure had risen to 39,607,000, comprising

tion5 and one of the Board of Control6 pro- i8,969,000 males and 20,638,000 females.

vide almost as complete a survey of the state The Quarterly Return does not give these

of the English people as is possible during figures for the middle of I930. The rate of

the inter-censal period.

natural increase was 5.0 per i,ooo in I928

The first of these publications, the Text, a slight rise above the 4.3 of I927-but

1928, is in many ways more useful than the dropped in 1929 to 2.9, which is the lowest

two other parts, Medical and Civil, pub- figure recorded in the history of registration.

lished the previous year, since it not only The crude birth and death rates (per i,ooo

gives most of the essential tables, but also of population) responsible for that figure

discusses the validity of its own statistics, were:

the movements of population, mortality

Year.

Births.

Deaths.

rates by age and cause, etc., and generally

I928

... I6.7 ... II.7

surveys the present state of the country in

I929

... I6.3 ... I3.4

the light of the past. The bulk of the two others (ic9i9) is occupied by detailed tables for the various counties and districts of
England and Wales. The one important criticism of the Text is its tardy appearance -practically two years after the time to which it refers. Probably, however, this is inevitable without a larger staff. Sometimes, also, the style of the writing is somewhat too involved to render the distinctly solid subject easy of digestion.
The estimated population of England and Wales at the end of June i928 is given as 39,482,ooo persons-i8,896,ooo males and 20,586,ooo females-which means that we have now well passed the density figure of

But, as both the Text and the volume on Public Health point out, these crude rates are misleading and cannot be considered apart from the sex and age constitution of the population. The latter is the most important and, naturally, is constantly changing. At the last census (I92I) the average age of all males was 29.9, and of all females
31.2; by the middle of 1928 these figures had risen to 3I.I and 32.7 respectively. While, therefore, our population is increasingly composed of old persons who must before long die off, there are comparatively few girls-the important sex in this respect -growing up to replace the women who are passing out of the reproductive age. In any

case, we cannot expect the death rate,

1 Statistical Review of England and Wales for Z928: Text. Pp. vii+i87. Price 5S.
2 Ditto for I929. Tables. Part I, Medical. Pp. iii+5o5. Price 7s. 6d. Part II, Civil.

already remarkably low, to fall much more, and it is bound to rise before very long; while the present low and falling birth rate

Pp. iV+ 128. Price 2S. 3 Quarterly Return of Births and Deaths (third
quarter) and Marriages (second quarter). Pp.
Viii+25. Price gd.

is, when standardized, even lower than it appears. Unless women actually become more fertile, our crude birth rate will in a

4 On the State of the Public Health in 1929. Pp. 240. Price 3s. 6d.
5 The Health of the School Child in 1929. Pp. 152. Price 2S.

few years fall short of the crude death rate. While the standardization of birth and
death rates, with the light it throws on

6 Sixteenth Annual Report (for 1929): Part II. Pp. 403. Price 6s. 6d.
All published in London, I930, by the Stationery

future population increase, have been considerably discussed of late, the Text sets

Office. out the whole matter very fully, with con-

265

266 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

crete examples, besides indicating how stan- 5-15 in the later years of last century

dardization radically alters not only the seems to have definitely disappeared, the

general death rate, but also those of specific rate being, for the first time, substan-

diseases.

tially higher for males at every age in

THE "'BIRTH-STRIKE" SLACKENING?

i928, though indeed it was actually higher in some degree at every age in

In a recent wireless talk,* however, Dr. each of the three previous years also"

R. A. Fisher pointed out that in one very (Text, p. 3).

important sense the mere number of births may be a better guide to the movement of fertility than the more refined mathematical methods. Using the Registrar-General's data, he shows that while births are still falling, the rate of fall is now slackening. He therefore tentatively suggests that what the Germans call the " birth-strike " is nearing its end, and that practically all those who are willing to use contraception have now taken to it. He thereby implies that there is a considerable residuum of those who won't use it (as distinct from those who can't) and who may be expected before long to make their influence felt by doing most of the nation's reproduction and, eventually, by pushing up the birth rate as the infertile die off.
The I928 Text also shows that the sexratio is becoming more masculine. Were this a natural phenomenon, it might be alarming (vid. Pitt-Rivers in this REviEw of April I929), but it seems only to be the beginning of the return to normal after the slaughter of the War. Indeed, an increase in masculinity bevond the normal scarcely

Much space is devoted in the Text to the sex differences in mortality from various diseases: they are very interesting, but cannot be condensed into a summary. Equally interesting are the changes which are occuring in the causes of death in both sexes, but the subject is rendered dangerous ground by variations in diagnosis and certification.
Infant mortality, as need scarcely be said, is still falling, though with a slight upward fluctuation from 65 per i ,ooo live births in I928 to 74 in I929; in the third quarter of I930, however, it dropped to 45, which is 9 below the figure for the corresponding quarter of the previous year.
The Civil volume is mainly concerned with the places, ages, and conditions of marriage, with divorce, migration-as far as possible-Parliamentary and Local Government electors, and with certain Empire and foreign vital statistics. The Medical volume gives many tables comprehensively analyzing mortality by place, age, cause, and sex.

seems probable at present, since the sexratio at birth remains fairly constant, while

THE DIFFERENTIAL BIRTH RATE

excess male mortality is higher than ever. Beyond these broad details of those who

" The excess of male mortality, 25 per cent., in I928, has grown very steadily from less than io per cent. in the middle of last century. It was increased during the war by deaths of combatants occurring in this country, but even the 24 per cent. excess of I9I6-20 iS now (for the first time) exceeded. At all ages under i5 the male excess for T928 iS the highest recorded in the table, as also at 45-55 and 75-85. The period of male advantage at

enter and leave this country by the ports of life and death, the Registrar-General's publications give few data on differential birth and death rates. Both the Medical (Table I4) and the Civil (Table E) volumes, however, yield a rough glimpse of the progress of the class-differential rates of increase, in their separate statements of the vital statistics of the various London boroughs.
In the following small table I have combined Bermondsey, Bethnal Green, and Poplar, to represent the poorest wage-earn-

* Since reprinted ioth, I930.

in the

Listener,

December

ing class; Fulham, Lewisham, and Marylebone, the ' middle ' class; and Hampstead,

THE STATE OF THIE NATION

267

Kensington, and Westminster, the wealthy
' upper middle ' class. This classification
is, of course, very rough, since no London borough is entirely homogeneous, and all of the last six must include a certain proportion of the poorest class. Births, deaths, and natural increase are per i,ooo of popu-
lation; infant mortality is per I,000 live
births. The last column I have myself calculated by deducting the total number of infant deaths from the total number of
births and giving the result, surviving children, per i,ooo of the population living in the districts. It may, perhaps, give a more accurate idea of the relative rates of
increase than does the ordinary natural increase, a figure which is liable to distortion
by deaths in hospitals, age constitution, etc. I ought to add that Kensington, which I
have made an ' Upper Middle ' borough,
has a higher birth rate (14.5) than Maryle-
bone (I2.o), a ' Middle ' borough-a result
which may be significant, but is equally likely to be due to my own choice of representative boroughs. The lowest birth rate is that of Westminster, with I0.5. Marylebone has a natural decrease of 2.2, and all the ' Upper Middle ' boroughs show natural decreases. But the greatest anomaly is that the highest rates of infant mortality
occur in what have usually been reckoned
the three wealthiest residential London boroughs. The lowest rate of any is that of
Lewisham, 44, a figure which greatly re-
duces the average of the three ' Middle '
boroughs. Stoke Newington, with 47, comes next. Both these results may be due to the existence of maternity hospitals.

Class of

Nat'rl Deaths Children

Population Births Deaths In- under Surviv'g

crease i yr.

Lower ... I9*2 I4.I 5.I 70 17.8

Middle ... 144 I3.2 I*2 65 13.9

Upper Middle 12 I I4.6 -2.5 72 II*5

All Classes:

England and

Wales

I6.3 13-4 2'9

74

I6

If the figures in the foregoing table could be taken as reliable indications of population movements, then we should be forced to conclude that the poorest class of I929 had a rate of natural increase almost double that of the country as a whole, which, in its turn, was more than double that of the ' Middle ' class. Meanwhile the ' Upper Middle ' class is fast dying out. But the mere facts that my ' Lower ' group has an infant mortality rate below that of the nation, and my ' Upper Middle ' group a general death rate above the country's average, indicate that we are dealing with selected populations. It does therefore seem probable, as I expected before making the table, that the last column is most truly representative of the relative rates of increase-with the poorest class somewhat above the average, the middle class a little more below it, and the wealthiest class not even ' placed.' The average children surviving to all three groups together is I4.4, which would probably rise to about the country's average if due weight were given to the numerical preponderance of the poorest class.
THIRTY YEARS AGO
This rough-and, indeed, necessarily hasty-analysis of current statistics was made as far as possible on lines comparable with Heron's famous study* of London boroughs in I85I and I901. He found that while the ' lower ' classes were more fertile than the 'upper ' even in i85i (Stevenson considers that the opposite was the case some twenty or more years before), the disparity had increased by the beginning of the present century. Heron's was a thorough study, and he was able to define the comparative wealth of his boroughs in measurable terms, whereas I have had to rely on a purely personal, and therefore inaccurate, knowledge of the districts. None of his figures, therefore, are strictly comparable with mine, since even his birth rates (legitimate) are given per ioo wives aged I5-54.
* Heron, David, M.A.: On the Relation of Fertility in Man to Social Status. . . . London, Iqo6. Dulau & Co. (Drapers' Company Research Memoirs).

268 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

But I have been able to choose from his powers of resistance. In other words, the

material exactly the same nine boroughs as maintenance of the population in this way

in the foregoing table, and their relative [differential birth rate and falling child

social and economic status is probably much mortality] and from its present sources is,

what it was thirty years ago.

with all its advantages, one of the factors

which, for the present, is tending to modify

Births Children Infant the physical and mental character of the

Class of Population

(legit.) aged I3-15 Mortality people. . .

per ioo per ioo per iooo wives 15-54 wives I5-54 births

Both reports and both quotations are the

work of the same man, Sir George Newman,

Lower ... ...

22I5

40*7

I62 whose two annual ' leading articles ' on

Middle ... ...

I7 45

33.9

I29 national health have now taken a welldeserved place among the important events

Upper Middle ... 13 57 33*I

I34 of the year.

The second passage occurs in the " Con-

It is not possible, of course, to compare clusions " (p. 72) of the Child report, where

the birth rates in this table with those of Sir George discusses the failure of all the

1929; but it seems as if, in the general increasing efforts of his two departments to

fall in fertility, the three groups still stand effect any appreciable improvement in the

at almost exactly the same distance from real health of the children. Another pas-
each other as they did thirty years ago. The sage (p. 7I) is significant: " First it should

infant mortality column is put in more for be observed that this great mass of disease

curiosity's sake than for any other reason, affects about a quarter of the children only,

since it cannot indicate relative net survival. the remaining three-quarters are healthy

The middle column, however, of children normal specimens of humanity."

aged I3-I5, does afford a very rough com- Biologically, that is exactly what is to be

parison with the chil(dren surviving infant expected in a population subjected to a

mortality in i929. It suggests that the rela- steadily improving environment and conse-

tive survival value of the poorest class is quently a steadily falling death rate. The

now even greater than it was, that the health of the majority would naturally im-

' Middle ' class still occupies a central posi- prove, but the general betterment would be

tion, while the wealthiest group has dropped gradually offset and obscured by the in-

yet further below the others. If, however, crease in the numbers of the constitutionally

the I929 figures wer-e those of children aged unfit-or else, as the " Conclusions " indi-

13-I5, they might well show little or no cate, would be only temporarily maintained

change.

by ever greater efforts. Sir George seems

half to recognize this, but flinches from the

OUR WEAKLY CHILDREN

logical conclusion that the constitutionally

On turning now to the reports of the unfit must somehow be eliminated. He

Ministry of Health and the Board of Educa- calls, instead, for yet more efforts to keep

tion, one notices a rather striking difference them alive and in health.

in their general tone. The first, on the The taxpayer, we expect, will eventually

State of the Public Health, is mainly con- have something to say to this; and the

cerned with adults, and concludes that the idealist may some day raise his voice against

health of the nation is " relatively sound " the befogged sentimentality which, in the

(p. 206), while the second, on the Health name of the Child, makes a cult of degener-

of the School Child, strikes a note of warn- acy. But our only business here is to point

ing, if not of pessimism, when it concludes, out that the process cannot go on indefi-

".. . we cannot fail to recognize that the nitely: we doubt if Sir George would expect

present generation of school children may be or want it to, if he drew a clearer distinction

relatively lacking in physical stamina and between healthy surroundings and healthy

THE STATE OF THE NATION

269

people. While he comments, as I have 25th) that the Army was below strength

quoted, on the falling death rate as a cause owing to a shortage of recruits. Replying

of unfitness, he also looks to yet further to a supplementary question, he added that

environmental improvements to build a there was no lack of applicants, but that

healthier race-see both these " Conclu- too few of them were up to the mental and

sions " and those in the Public Health physical standard required.

report, especially the reference in the latter Since this standard is not very high, ex-

to " the dysgenic and destructive influences cept for certain regiments, the implication

of disease."

is that the youthful male physique of the

nation is depressingly low. In a time of

AND OUR TOUGHER ADULTS

prosperity and little unemployment it would be possible to avoid that implication on the

The figures in the Child report do not ground that only the rejects from all other

run far enough back to enable comparisons jobs would have recourse to the Army. But

of value to be made between I929 and pre- it is impossible to put forward such an argu-

vious years (indeed, we would beg for a few ment in these times, of unexampled unem-

full tables covering a fair range of years, ployment, when those without jobs must

and especially for one like that of the Lon- largely consist of normally constituted and

don County Council, giving the percentage employable mell, and when the Army offers

of A. i-ness in the children). But, generally, a better career than it ever did before-as

infectious diseases are declining, environ- it has progressively done for many years

mental conditions are improving, and consti- past.

tutional inadequacies still seem to be fluctu- But while the War ()ffice has steadily

ating about the same mark, some a little tried, practically ever since the Boer War,

up and some a little down. Sir George, to attract a better and better type of man,

though, has reason to think that the general it has equally steadily been forced-con-

health of the children is at any rate no trary to general belief-to lower its standard

better-and possibly worse-than it was; of acceptance.

and it is instructive to compare this with his It should be noted that the present defi-

view of the " relative soundness " of the ciency of physically and mentally adequate

adult population. The majority of the latter recruits cannot be attributed to the War,

were born before the immense reductions in for the men who now apply were children at

infantile mortality; many had passed their that time. Born, roughly, between I905 and

earlv years before the general child mor- I9II, thev are the predecessors by but a few

tality had fallen more than a point or two; years of the children now under Sir

and a few, whose great age makes them un- George's care. America seems to be expe-

duly important statistically, survived an era riencing much the same difference between

with a very high death rate. All these have, old and young-see " Sickness and the Life

in varying degrees, been selected for tough- Curve " in these Notes and Memoranda.

ness, and now-witness the high proportion The last volume, Part II of the Annual

of aged people-they blossom forth like Report of the Board of Control, is one of

a hardy plant in the spring sunshine. But those solid publications that it is better to

the children are-well, children, of a pros- possess than to review. The slimmer Part I

perous and hygienic age, and they have been (reviewed in our October number, p. 2I3)

subjected to comparatively little selection. contains, in its text and tables, the distilled

But in this connection, it is well to recall essence of the facts and recommendations,

both Sir George's own remarks a year or while the present volume is the accompany-

two ago on the unfitness of the adolescent, ing and essential book of reference.

and a recent discussion in the House of Alienists and general practitioners will also

Commons. Answering a question, the Sec- find much of value in the supplement on

retary of State for War said (November " Scientific Research Work in Mental Hos-

270 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

pitals." But while the reports in this section throw light on the physiology of insanity and amentia, the genetics of the subject, if mentioned at all, are usually compressed into " Father alcoholic " or "Mother and aunt psychotic." Could not
the Board persuade their conltributors to supply pedigrees of such patients as they subject to special examination? They must

often possess practically all the relevant

data, or be able easily to obtain it from

social wvorkers. Quite apart from the crude

question of its inheritance, the immediate

causes of mental disease will never be

properly understood until the physiological

factors are differentiated by the clinician and

their inheritance traced by the general

geneticist.

E. M.

THE GALTON DINNER
will be held at
THE REMBRANDT HOTEL
SOUTH KENSINGTON
on Monday, February 16th, at 7.15 p.m. for 7.30
The Galton Lecture WARNINGS FROM NATURE
will be given by
PROFESSOR SIR J. ARTHUR THOMSON, M.A., LL.D. The Very Reverend the Dean of St. Paul's will be in the Chair
Fellows and Members are requested to get their tickets (10/6) from the Secretary as early as possible
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 4.

