The Mental Deficiency Acts and their
Administration.
By H. B. BRACKENBUIRY,
(Vice-President anid Chairman of Educationi Commlittee, Central
Association for Mental Welfare; Chairmani of Maniagers of the Joinit Special School for Finchley, Hornsey and Wood Green; Vice-President of the Association of Education Committees of England and Wales; Member of Counicil and Deputy Chairman of Representati-e Body of the British Medical Association.)
The Royal Commissioni oni the Care and Control of the Feebleminded was appointed in the year 1-904 and its Report was issued in 1908. The Defective and Epilep-tic Childreni Act.; are dated 1899 and 1914. and the MIental Deficiencv Act, 1913. The Act; them elves are initerdependenit, but they have niever, as a whole, beeni fully, brought inito operation or zealously adminiistered. Partly owinig to the seeminig inability of many public men to envisage the importance of the problem with which the Acts deal, partly owinig to a division of administrative powers and duties with regard thereto, and largely be ause of the disturbed financial position produced by the War and the Peace, most of the duties imposed oIn Local Authoritie s by t-hese Acts are very imperfectly performed, in many areas many of their more important provisions are a dead letter, and, inideed any active steps towards doing what the law requires have not only niot beeni enforced but in some instances have beeni imperatively discouraged or forbidden by the two Government Departments centrally responsible. This state of affairs is still continuing. It is to be hoped that the period of inlactivity will not be allowed to last much longer; but we ought at least to use the pause to review the positioni. to revise our ideas and to gather such wisdom as we may from the partial experimiients and limited experienice which the con-ditions of the last nine years have permitted.
To have a considerable portion- of the population permanently incapable of reachinig the lower limit of the normal humani mind is obviously a very serious social problem. It is an eniormous handicap not only to the n-ation but to humanity at large. Left to itself thi,S sore of society shows no tendency towards cure. Oni the contrary it becomes more accentuated generation by generation. Feeble-minded persons are mo e fecund than the niormal; they have a tendency to mate together, and so to produce offspring markedly partaking of the parental characteristics. There are olO reliable statistics as to the number of mentally defective persons. Those of the Royal Commission still remain the best. These gave for January 1st, 1906, a total of 138,529 in a population for England and WVales of 34,349,435, or one mentally defective person in every 248. This is almost certainly an under-estimate. Even at that time the figures were based upon the number of defectives in institutions, rescue homes, workhouses and prisons, i.e., places where all failures congregate. There was no

394 EWUGNICS REVIEW.
evidence of the number at home and well caredlfor-or at all events not
an intolerable economic burden or markedly impossible in conductin all classes of society. To-day, in addition to this, e-en the very partial administration of the Acts has showni that certifving medical officers may have very different stanidards; that want of trained and experienced officers results in great hesitancv in certifying high-grade defectives; and that such defectives are more numerous than was at one time believed. On the basis of the original figures there are in every hundred mentallv defective persons 6 idiots, 18 imbeciles and 76 feeble-minded morons. The Report of the Chief Medical Officer of the Board of Education for 1921 gives:-feeble-minded 31,000, imbeciles 5,000; idiots 1,000; but this estimate of 31,000 feeble-minded children of school age must be a very coniservative onie indeed. Some of the reasons are obvious. The estimate of niumbers may be fairly reliable
in areas where special schools exist; but in the far larger number of areas, especially county areas, where there are no such schools. the examiniation is far less thorough. and the lack of experience both of teachers and of medical officers causes the numbers reported to be much smaller thani would otherwise be the case.
The first business of the community with regard to defective per-
sons is discoverv early discovery wherever possible-and classifica-
tioln. The acts leave this funiction mainlv to the Local Education Authorities. The Poor Law Guardians and the magistrates are of course also concerned especially in cases which havTe escaped discovery during childhood. A double kind of classification has at once to be attempted. The definitions of the three prinicipal degrees of defectidiocy, imbecility, feeble-mindedness given in the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913, may or may not be scientifically the best, but they are practically useful. It is a help to have a defective child defillitely recognised as being in onie or other of these groups. It is to be remembered that the boundary lines are byino means distinct, but as the differences are of degree merely and niot of kind, it is not a matter of
great importance in which class a border-linie case is placed. It is a matter-
of much greater administrative importance to be able to distinguish a high-grade feeble-minded child from those of lower grades, as the practical methods of dealinig with them may be X ery different. This is true also of the other kind of classification required by the Acts into
educable, and uneducable or no longer educable. Unfortuniatelv
there is in this case no definition of the terms. The words of the Act "incapable by reason of mental defect of receiving benefit or further benefit from instruction in special schools, or classes" are really worse than useless. They make the drawing of a reasonable line practically impossible. This is in fact perhaps the most important point to which we can at the present time direct our minds, to see whether experience will not enable us to frame a useful definition of educability in this
connection, with a view to its practical applicationi. I shall return to this point later. Meanwhile we have to note, as stated above, that this business of discovery and classification is as yet very imperfectly carried out.
The problem presented to societv by these menitally defective per*sons is three-fold-first, so to deal with them as to make their

TIlE MENTAL DEFICIENCY ACTS.

395

individual lives as healthy, happy. and full as may be; second, to protect the community as far as possible from the economic and social
and hygienic consequences of their inevitable failure to meet the con-
ditions of life; third, to prevent thein from becoming ancestors of like-
minded descendants. Each of these is of great importance. I do not know that one ought to be put before the others, but perhaps the second
is the moA,t immediately urgent to-day. Fortunately. some of the
means of dealing with the problem will accomplish all these purposes alike and simultaneously.
The meanis of dealing with this social and eugeniic evil are, broadly, -training, supervision, segregation, and sterilization. The last of these is of a different character from the others and must be considered
beparately, though it is obviously not incompatible with the rest. The others are not mutually exclusive; they are interdependent and are being used piecemeal in thi& country. There is no considerable
area where they are all being applied consistently, completely and
intelligently. Reasons for this serious neglect are, that there is division of authority; that it is realised-or at all events dimly apprehendedthat the administrative system is faulty and wasteful and that the training of some defectives is costing, or will cost, much more than thev are worth; and that there is in some areas no one of sufficient public spirit who undertandss the problem and knows what to do, and no one from the central departments of government concerned who will help to do anything or insist that anything shall be done. The result is patchiness and confusion; zealous authorities wasting much of their effort, inert or parsimonious authorities laughing at the law; individual lives neglected and undeveloped, preventible social evils perpetuated and paid for, and a new generation growing up with the same problem to tackle aggravated not ameliorated.
The persons with whom we are concerned require communial help not primarily because they are destitute or poor, nlot primarily even
because they require education, but primarily because they have defective mind;. The help they nieed varies very much in extent and in kind, but so far as they need it, they require it throughout the whole
of their lives. Either they can n-ever face the world at all, or if they can in some cases face it, they can not do so without disaster unless they have some kind of prop, and this they will never be able to do without. The Authorities niow constituted to care for these people
are the Board of Control and Local M.D. Control Authorities,-the County Counicils and County Borough Councils, actinog through Committees supposed to be made up of members who are interested in or have kniowledge of the problem with which they have to deal. It has been found convenient, however, to entrust the Local Education Authorities with large and importanit powers and duties of discovery, training and notification in connection with mental defectives. In the great majority of cases the Local Control Authority and the Local Education Authority do not deal with the same area. They are com posed of different people and have different officers. There is no pro-
vision for representation of one upon the other. They act indepentdently. So we have the spectacle of a Control Authority making provision to do its part and willing to do it, with a Local Education

396 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Authority affordinig it nio adequate preliminary help: and we have an Education Authority faithfully discovering, classifying, educating and notifying its defectives, with a Control Authoritv either not functioning at all, or, through inefficiency or neglect, quite unable to provide suitable care for the children as they leave the school. Sometimes neither control nor Education Authoritv does anything, and each excuses itself by the delinquency of the other.
Other difficulties make themselves evident even when each Authority iL doing its best, or where the two Authorities ar- the same (though acting through different Committees) as in County Boroughs. There is the difficulty of knowing exactly wheni a child who is not an idiot or a low grade imbecile should be transferred from the care of the Education Authority to that of the Conitrol Authority. With the greatest wish to transfer a low -grade moron to the home or institution
where he will be best cared for, it might be difficult for a head teacher
or a medical officer to certify that he is "incapable of receiving further benefit from instruction in the special school or class." There is the difficulty of the County Education Authority, whose cases arefew and scattered, to provide the (-xpensive residential school that circumstances dictate as necessary, whereas it would be less difficult to place these children with others in a suitable institution under the aegis of the Local Control Authority. There is the difficulty experienced when the high-grade moron is leaving the school, that the Education Authoritv is not able to niotify him as requiring, nor is the Control Authority bound to provide, that form of care-supervisionwhich may be most appropriate for the case in question.
The fact is that the menital deficiency Act, 1913, urgently requires amendment in various ways, among others in this, that "education" by the Local Education Authority and "supervision" by the Local Control Authority should be made more strictly complementary to one another. There are some low-grade mentally deficient children who do not require communal help at all because they come from homes where all the requisite care and control can otherwis be provided, but even of these cases there ought to be knowledge, as circumstances may at any time change. There are others who require only supervision because they come from homes where, with a little instruction and encruragement, all that is niecessary can still be done. Most lowgrade cases, however will require institutional care of some kind throughout life. High-grade morons on the other hand, when properly educated, can meet successfully many of the circumstances of life, and can do a good deal of useful work provided that it does not require initiative or planning, with but little supervision. Supervision, whether the child or young person be at home or in suitable residential employment, consists of visits and advice to the parents or guardians or employers as to training, efforts to secure proper occupation, and the establishment of friendly relations, so that those responsible may apply for help when needed and so that immediate reference may be made to the Local Authority should institutional care be desirable. It is obviously necessary that supervisors should have received special training for their work. Such training is provided under the auspices of the Central Association for Mental Welfare, and supervisors are

THE MENTAL4 DEFICIENCY ACTS.

397

in many areas paid or v\oluntary workers in coiinnectioin vith Local Associations established by that organisationl, wlhile in other areas they
are public health visitors or special officers appointed by the Local Control Committee.
A degree of independence and usefulness needing onily such supervision as this can never be secured w ithout special education. The
place of the special school in the scheme of things canniot vet be regarded
as finally determined. Such schools are verv costly, so costly as to
prophibit the provision of such accommodation for all mentally defectiv-e children who could "receive benefit" from them. In my opinion the main purpose of such schools or classes should be to provide the training necessary for those high-grade feeble-minded children who
will be able to take such a place in the world as that inidicated in the preceding paragraph; and the criterion of suitability for such a school
should be, not capacit-y to receive benefit therefionm. but probable
capacity to take such a place in the world after leaving the school. As
soon as a child was found to be short of this capacity he shou d be removed from the care of the Education Authority to that of the Control Authority usually with a view to being placed in ani institution. To establish this position would mean that less school-places would be required than would otherwise be the case (though more than those at present existing), but that all such schools should be staffed by certi-
ficated teachers with special qualifications, paid at a somewhat higher
rate than their colleagues in the public elementarv schools. A sub-
sidiary but still necessary purpose of the special school or class would be the temporary training of doubtful cases pending a decisioni as to their exact nature. Such a definition of the place and purpose of a special school would have the further advantages of makinig the parents
of the high-grade moron more willing to send their childreni, for they
have a natural reluctanice to associate them with those of a very low
type; and of allowing some places for the education of some of that large but varied class of childrein with unstable but not defective ridds who need care and traininlg in schools and institutions similar to those for mental defectives but who cannot and should not be brought under the Acts.
This does niot mean that those imbeciles and lower grade morons who were excluded from the special -ehools would go without training. Many i ould at once be provided for in suitable institutions. Others, especially in urban areas, would fin-d suitable places in suich Occupation Centres as those which have recently been established in a number of localities. The object of these is not to replace or act as alterilatives to special schools for high-grade children but merely to supply opportunities for training other defectives in disciplinie, manniers and conduct. and in simple domestic and manual work. They are, in fact, part of the supervision provided by the Local Control Authority. It is almost impossible to give a defective child the right sort of training and occupation in an ordinary home. This particular kind of simple individual training would be almost as impossible in a special school of the type indicated above, and a waste of time and effort for a highly certificateL' teacher to undertake. Most of the children who coald attend an Occupation Centre would eventually go to institutions and with some definite traininig in good habits they would have a better chance there.

3g8 8EUGENICS REVIEW.

The training of other low-grade defectives is carried on in the

institutions or colonies to which they are sent for care, and in which

they will live. In most cases they will be, and in all properly classi-

fied cases they should be, inmates of these institutions or colonies

until death. In these cases training is correlated not with supervision,

technically so called, but with segregation-both under the authority

of the Board of Control, with the Local Control Committees, or some-

times unfortunately the Poor Law Authorities. The following anal-

ysis of the accommodation in such places is taken from the Board of

Control's list of September, 1922:

State Institutions for dangerous or violent de-

fectives .. .. .. .. .. for 300 cases.

Certified Institutions provided by Local Author-

ities .4. .5. .. .. ..

,,4,385

Certified Institutions provided by Voluntary

Committees .. .. .. .

, 6,928

Institutions (160) approved under Section 37 i.e.

Workhouses and Institutions other than

M.A.B

..

,, 5,877

M.A.B. Institutions under M.D. Act (Total

accommodation in M.A.B. Institutions,

7285) 3.. .. .. .. ..

Certified Homes .. .. .. .

Approved Homes

.. .. ..

,,1,16
330 ,, 399

l'otal 19,535
This is, however, fallacious. The aid of the Poor Law Institutions was necessary as a war economy, but it prevented the Local Authorities from providing places of their own. The accommodation in Section 37 places is either (a) in special Institutions provided for the purpose only, or (b) in part of an ordinary workhouse set apart for defectives, or (c) in the general workhouses, where only a few defectives are received and mingle with the other inmates. Of these institutions 18 take children to the approximate number of 2710, and of these only three are certified by the Board of Education for 223 children. Thus much of the accommodation in these Poor Law Institutions is either unsuitable, or not generally avaiJable, on the ground that only local cases, or only special classes of cases, are taken in. In spite of tbe fact, therefore, that a considerable proportion of the accommodation above enumerated is vacant, the Board of Control is quite right in saying that many more places are required. In practice, accommodation can be secured by strenuous effort for most ordinary cases of defect in need of institutional care, but not for very low grade children, epileptic defectives, immoral or troublesome cases. The present accommodation does not afford classification for all types of cases; and it does not even make adequate provision for teaching children in all places where children are taken-an obvious iniquity.
The provision of proper and sufficient accommodation in institutions or colonies for the mentally defective is essential for all the three purposes which the state and those who are dealing with mental defectives wish to accomplish.-. It is necessary in the interests of the defec-

THE MENTAL DEFICIENCY ACTS.

.899

tives themselves. Institutional care does not enitail unhappiness. It is true that some defectives resent such care, but these are usually persons of markedly anti-social propensities so that for other reasons their liberty must be restricted. The great majority of defectives are found to be much happier in suitable institutions, associating with their
mental equals and having a congenial occupation, than in the midst of the difficulties of the outside world to which they feel themselves unequal. Such segregation is specially necessary -for the protection of the community from the effects of the anti-social conduct or economic
failure of the defectives. In an institution or colony a proportion of eveni low-grade defectives can be helped to contribute something towards the cost of their upkeep: some few may be made self-supporting. It has been calculated that 54 per cent. of the idiots and imbeciles are
paupers, and that about 18 per cent. of the workhouse inmates of this country are feeble-minded. It is not surprising that a very large proportion of the mentally defective should sooner or later, under present conditions, have to be maintained by the Poor Law Authorities. This
should not however be regarded as a normal state of affairs. They should be discovered, trained as far as possible, and cared for from their
early years by authorities whose business it is to deal with mental defect, and not by those whose primary business it is to deal with destitution and poverty. Similar provision should prevent the fall of the
great majority of those mentally deficient persons who in adole,cence
or early adult life become criminals, inebriates, or prostitutes. They ought to be tested and protected before life applies the test under which the individual fails. It needs no laboured proof to show that the social
and economic gain would be enormous.
Segregation in institutions is necessary, too, for the prevention of the propagation of mentally defective children. It is obvious that the compulsory segregation of mentally defective persons during the reproductive age would accomplish this so far as potential parents of this class are concerned. But mentally defective persons are not alone the procreators of mentally defective children. It has to be recognised that a majority of such children are the offspring either of parents who appear to be normal (although frequently "carriers") or of those suffer-
ing from insanity, psychoneurosis, or a mild degree of mental abnormality or instability which is not certifiable. Nevertheless, this third
reason for segregation holds good. It may be taken as established that where both parents are mentally defective all the offspring are the same, that where only one of the parents is mentally defective a majority of the offspring are exceedingly likely to be so, and that the proportion of mentally defective children to the entire population is undergoing a steady increase. If we can stop only one certain source of the supply it is a great gain; and may perhaps lead the way to the stopping of other sources later on.
. Of late years it has been increasingly argued that sterilization, lnot segregation, is the remedy. Now, this may very well be true in some individual instances, and few wouild wish to rule these out. The necessary operation in the male is simple and safe, and in the female not very much less so. It is however with sterilization as a public policy and routine practice that we are concerned, and it is difficult

4fCO UEUGENICS REVIEW.
to see how it can reasonably be contended in the light of present know ledge that sterilization has any advantage over adequate segregation. If it be answered that segregation is not, in fact, adequate and cannot be made so, the reply to this is that the difficulties in the way of adequate segregation are to-day certainly less than those in the way of routine sterilization. The limitations of both procedures as effec-
tive preventives of mental deficiency are the same, and segregation
has the advantage of dealing at the same time with the social failings of the individual. Sterilization, on the other hand, might, and probably would, lead to a false sense of security and so to a series of social
disasters which might have been prevented. To sum up, the three-fold problenm presented by mental deficiency
is of immense national and racial importance. To postpone effective
dealing with it is to make it progressively more difficult to deal with.
To save money one year by neglecting mentally defective children is
to spend four-fold a few years later on the consequences of this neglect. The Defective and Epileptic Children Acts and the Mental Deficiency Act together form a foundation on which successful results might be built; but they are not at present effectively in operation. The Mental Deficiency Act cannot be administered unless the provisions of the other Acts are fully carried out. These Acts are the only preventive measures for securing the protection of defectives. Yet there are at least 16000 feeble-minded children (as distinct from inibeciles and idiots) under no effective instruction; and even the duty of ascertainment is very irregularly carried out. Some Authorities do not make any effort to perform it, being afraid of discovering cases they may have to deal with. In other areas the Mental Deficiency Act itself is virtually
inoperative. All Local Authorities have appointed Committees. Many of these are actively at work; others scarcely ever meet and discharge hardly any of their duties. The economy campaign has made it difficult to put pressure upon them. Supervision is in many areas non-existent or feeble. There is serious lack of suitable institutional accommodation. To remedv all this the Acts should be enforced and in some respects amended, and administration should be strengthened. Where Committees are active a great deal can be done. The Board of Control has directed that only "urgent " cases are now to be dealt with; but Local Authorities are at liberty within wide limits to interpret "urgent " according to their own views. If they are enlightened they deal with most of the cases coming under the Act taking a wide national view of what is urgent: others take the narrowest possible view. The specific place of the Education Authorities in this connection ought to be more clearly defined, and brought in practice into closer correlation with the wider functions of the M.D. Control Authorities. No other Authorities ought to have independent powers or to perform unrelated functions.
There is great need, too, for the further education and enlightenment of those concerned with duties under the Acts, and for co-operation between them. In this direction the work of the Central Association for Mental Welfare is very important and useful. The Local Voluntary Associations formed in some fifty areas in connection therewith bring together various types of workers, and have dealt with

THE MENTAL DEFICIENCY ACTS.

401

about 28,000 cases. The Association has conducted a series of educa-
tional courses for social workers and supervisors, for te chers, for medi-
cal officers, and now is contemplating one for magistrates! All this is
pioneer work of the most valuable kind, but we ought to be getting now beyond the pioneer stage. There is still great need for more widespread technical knowledge of mental deficiency among all these classes, and for the enlightenment of public opinion as to the enormous and urgent importance of this problem to the community, to the nation, and to the race. An immediately practical step would be for the Gov-
ernment Departments concerned to confer together, to gather up the results of recent experience, to review the position, to readjuvt the machinery, and then to set it to work in every area with renewed vigour and increased effectiveness at the earliest possible moment.

