R. W. PICKFORD
Professor of Psychology in The University of Glasgow
Natural Selection and Colour Blindness*

(G QOD COLOUR VISIONwasevolvedamong
I,..~ insects, fishes and reptiles. Frogs and toads
are colour blind. Birds have good colour vision, except owls which are totally colour blind. Colour vision was lost in the evolution of mammals, all of which are totally colour blind, except the Primates, for whom it was re-evolved. The problem of the frequency of red-green blindness in Man is of great interest because it appears that in the course of civilization there may be a tendency for colour blindness to be on the in-
crease.
Studies of the frequencies of red-green blindness in various parts of the world and among various peoples have shown that it is most frequent among Caucasian white populations in Europe, America and elsewhere, and least frequent among such groups as the Australian aborigines and North American Indians. Polyak1 pointed out the importance ofcolour vision in the evolution of Man, in food gathering and hunting. Pickford2,3 suggested that colour blindness might tend to be eliminated by natural selection less in civilized Man, for whom choice of fruit which is neither under- nor over-ripe, and the recognition of enemies by colour become less and less important. This would possibly account for its greater frequency in civilized peoples, because fewer normal than colour blind people, especially children, would die of food poisoning or diarrhoea. Post' has developed similar ideas much more fully, suggesting that the numbers of colour blind would tend to increase by mutations if the rigours of natural selection against them were relaxed. He8 has also suggested that increases in the frequencies of myopia may have been brought about in the same way.
* Read at the Seventh International Days of Colour
Padua, Italy, May 1963.

Colour Blindness Round the World
In their survey of the frequencies of colour blind-
ness round the world Kherumian and Pickford5 have cited fifty-seven studies, mostly by means of the Ishihara test, but some with other tests, including the anomaloscope. Some of them were
summarized by Pickford previously.6 These data show that among European, American and Australian Whites the frequency of colour blind-
ness among men is about 6 to 10 per cent. The
average figure of 7T25 per cent given by Vernon and Straker7 for 123,414 British men is typical.
Among Turks, Armenians, Finns, Jews in various parts, and other Eastern peoples, however, the frequency falls to about 4 to 7 per cent. It is about 5 or 6 per cent among the Chinese, but as low as 2 to 5 per cent among the Japanese, Indians and Mexicans. Among American Indians it may be as low as 1 to 2 per cent, while half
castes have a higher frequency. The same holds for Negroes and Australian aborigines, and for half castes the frequencies are intermediate.
These figures strongly suggest racial differences, especially as it is known that red-green blindness is hereditary, being a sex linked Mendelian recessive. The question raised by Pickford,
however, was whether there might not be biological causes for these racial differences, which
seem to reverse an evolution towards better colour vision, if such a conclusion could be drawn from the study of racial groups which cannot be supposed to have evolved from each
other.
It is more satisfactory to suppose, with Post'
that those groups which have the lowest frequency of colour blindness are most closely dependent on hunting and food gathering. In these activities colour vision would be important, and the colour blind would be under a strong disability. It is well known that the red-green blind

97 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1963, 55, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

often cannot distinguish over-ripe or rotten from ripe, or ripe from unripe fruit by colour, and often cannot readily distinguish ripe fruit such as cherries or gooseberries from the leaves of the trees or bushes. Those groups which have the lowest frequencies for colour blindness are, in-
deed, still living in almost Neolothic conditions, or have been until quite recently. This suggested to Post that they may indicate to us the kind of frequency for colour blindness which may have existed in Neolithic times, while the frequencies
found in Caucasian whites, who are most re-
moved from direct hunting and food gathering may show the effects of a relaxation of natural selection. He suggests that the changes in frequency may have taken place in about 120
generations. Post has divided the population groups which
he discusses into three classes: A. Hunters and food gatherers; B. Those somewhat removed from hunting in time or habitat, and also those descended from mixtures of hunters and food gatherers with the third group, C, who are most removed from hunting and food gathering in time or habitat. The frequencies so classified give decided support to the general hypothesis of relaxation of natural selection, as shown in Table I.

TABLE 1 RATES OF COLOUR BLINDNESS IN DIFFERENT GROUPS
(from Post, 1962, pp. 133 and 137.)

NUMBER

A. Hunters and gatherers

7,712

B. Somewhat removed from A. 9,443

C. Most removed from A.

436,853

RATE
0-0200 0-0330
0-0507

TABLE 2

FREQUENCIES OF COLOUR BLIND MEN IN BRITAIN

AREA

NUMBER RATE

N.E. and Central and N. Scotland
East Coast London and S.E. Industrial N. Central N.W. Industrial W. Scotland and N.W. England S. Wales and Somerset S. Central S.W.

6,403 12,900 28,873 15,182 22,485 9,046 7,907 14,455 6,163

00500 0-0665 0-0668 0-0730 00742 0-0731 0-0741 0-0863 0 0920

Colour Blindness in Great Britain
Vernon and Straker,7 in 1943, published a survey of colour blindness frequencies throughout Britain, carried out in testing recruits for the Royal Navy with a combination of the Ishihara

and Stilling tests. The data were fully published by Kherumian and Pickford5 in 1959. The results showed statistically significant differences among nine groups of areas, as shown in Table 2.
There is a strong tendency for colour blindness to be least frequent on the East Coast of England and Scotland, and towards the North, while it is most frequent in the South and West. Vernon and Straker associated these differences with possible invasions of peoples from Europe, who drove the earlier inhabitants into the Southern and Western regions. Post points out that this is compatible with the relaxation of natural selection hypothesis, according to which the successive invading peoples would be more and more removed from direct food gathering and hunting. In addition the highest frequencies of colour blindness are found in those parts of England which were most fully settled by the Romans, whereas the extreme Western and North Western areas of Great Britain were in Roman times still inhabited by tribes less fully removed from food gathering and hunting.
Colour Blindness Among Students in Paris Kherumian and his colleagues carried out a survey of 9,151 men students, 6,635 being of French origin, 959 from the Union Franraise and the Etats Associes, and 1,557 foreign students, in Paris, between 1955 and 1957. The results were published fully by Kherumian and Pickford.5 All the students were classified in terms of their origin from their mothers' birthplaces. Corresponding groups of women students were also tested, but for the present purpose the frequencies of colour blindness in men are more interesting.
In Metropolitan France the frequencies of colour blindness in men show three interesting groups. First there are the Departments along the Channel Coast and in the North of France. These show frequencies ranging from 6 18 per cent in Mayenne and Sarthe combined, up to 15-79 per cent in the Pas de Calais, and the majority of frequencies are about 9 or 10 per cent. In the second place there are the Departments of the Mediterranean Coast and the South West. Here the range is from 5-81 per cent in Haute-Loire, Aveyron and Lozere combined, to 13-89 in the Haute Savoie and Savoie.

98

NATURAL SELECTION AND COLOUR BLINDNESS

In the third place there are the Departments in the central band running from E.N.E. to W.S.W. Here the frequency falls as low as 4-12 in Moselle
and Vosges together, but is as high as 12-86 in Indre. In Corsica the frequency is only 5-26.
Kherumian and Pickford point out that the series of forty-eight groups taken as a whole are homogeneous for frequencies of colour blindness when tested by the chi-squared technique. Nevertheless, in this research, as in many others, if larger numbers of subjects were collected, for instance as many as Vernon and Straker collected for Great Britain, similar differences would become statistically significant. Then it would appear, as Post has pointed out to the writer (private communication), that there would be two areas of highest frequencies, the English
Channel and the Mediterranean coastal areas, which were associated with the two greatest waves of immigration of advanced culture, the Megalithic and Chalcolithic, respectively. The areas of lowest frequency are on poor soils where hunting and food gathering may have lasted longest, and then led into pastoralism with a minimum of urbanization. This would support the hypothesis of relaxation of natural selection for the areas of highest frequency.
The effect of splitting up the frequencies in France may be seen from Table 3.

TABLE 3

FREQUENCIES OF COLOUR BLINDNESS IN FRANCE

AREAS

NUMBER CB. %

N. & S. Coastal and N. plains 3249 407 12.5

Central and Mountainous

1961 170 8-67

The differences are significant on the 001 level, and would be even more marked if the central and mountainous areas were chosen more carefully, omitting, for example, the Rhone waterway and the Alpine areas, but this would risk favouring the theory.

Differences of Type and Degree of Defect In the group of students from the French Union there is a very interesting point. The proportion of protans to deutans is about 30 to 70 in Metropolitan France and among foreign students in Paris, but in those from the French Union it is about 50 to 50. This difference is accounted for largely by the greater number of protans from Algeria, Tunisia and Morocco. Whether this

difference might be associated with any selection process is difficult to say, but probably protans are more frequent among Moslems from North Africa. It would be an interesting speculation
whether any custom or activity in relation to hunting or food-gathering might favour the relaxation of selection against protan defects more for one human group than for another. Any restrictions on hunting or food seeking at dusk or dawn, as by the Moslem observance of obligatory prayers, when black and dark brown colours are more readily confused by protans
than by deutans, might have this effect, because red fruits or brown animals would be confused with shadows by protans more than by deutans
at these hours. This is purely a speculation. Interesting data are quoted by Post4 (pp. 141-
2). For example, Table 4 shows the proportion of protans to deutans in three groups of pooled samples, namely Negroes, Europeans, and Jews in Israel. Apparently among the Jews protan defects are considerably more frequent in proportion to deutan defects than they are in the other two groups. It is not easy to suggest a possible interpretation of this difference.

TABLE 4 RELATIVE FREQUENCIES OF PROTAN AND DEUTAN
DEFECTS IN THREE GROUPS OF SAMPLES
GROUP NUMBER PROTANS DEUTANS RATIO

Four Samples of Negroes
Seven Samples of Europeans
Eight Samples of Jews in Israel

2,749 22,518
3,001

0-0096 0-0229
0 0204

0f0267
0O0581
0-0388

*37 *38
*48

Pickford suggested in 1951 that in the racial
groups with lower frequencies of colour blind-
ness we might sometimes be dealing with relatively more of the less severely defective types of
protanomalous and deuteranomalous subjects, and relatively fewer of the more severely defective dichromats. Unfortunately the anomaloscope has been used very little except among white populations, as shown by the survey by Kherumian and Pickford5. Where the Ishihara
test was used, and this was the most popular test, differences of supposed degree and type of defect could not be relied upon to reveal the proportion of anomalous trichromats to dichromats

99

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with any confidence. Pseudo-isochromatic plates and presumably the higher castes are farther re-

are very unsatisfactory from this point of view. moved from hunting and food gathering than

Nevertheless, a study of the relative frequen- the lower. Similar figures are quoted by Post'

cies of types and degrees of defect in a variety of (pp. 134, 136).

different groups would be interesting. For

example, it would be suspected that protanopia is the most severe handicap in choice of food,

TABLE 5 FREQUENCIES OF COLOUR BLIND MEN AMONG 973
INDIANS

food gathering and hunting, because in it black

is confused with dark red and brown, and greens
are confused with light reds and browns, while purples are confused with blues and pink is confused with sky blue. Extreme protanomaly would come next in severity, and probably after that deuteranopia. This condition would be disabling

CASTE OR GROUP NUMBER DEFECTIVES

Moslems

118 6 (5S08)

Brahmins

238 12 (5 04)

Vannias

131 6 (4 58)

Vellajas, Poulles, Mondeliars 158

6 (3 80)

Maquouas

117 4 (3 42)

Harijans (outcastes)

121 4 (3-31)

Various

90 4 (4.44)

because all reds, yellows, browns and greens tend to be confused, and so do all purples, violets and
blues. On the other hand, in protanopia reds may often be identified because the objects seen may be known not to be black and are inferred to be
red in consequence, whereas in deuteranopia this advantage is lost, since black is never confused with red. The least disabling forms of colour blindness would be simple protanomaly and deuteranomaly, the first being more severe than the second because of the darkening of the red end of the spectrum. It would be worth while
to test these hypotheses by data showing the relative frequencies of the different types in various food gathering, hunting and settled agricultural or urban populations. The greater frequency of protans in Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia might

If we pool the data given by Post, with those of Kherumian and Pickfords (p. 85), P. N.
Bhattacharjee (1956, Bull. Dept. Anth., Gov.
India, 5, 1, p. 26), N. Kumar (1957, Bull. Dept.
Anth., Gov. India, 6, 1, p. 87), N. Kumar and D.
B. Sastry (1961 Z. Morph. Anthrop., 51, 3, p.
352) and S. R. Das, N. Kumar, P. N. Bhatacharjee (sic.) and D. B. Sastry (1961, J. Royal Anthrop. Inst., 91, 3, p. 353), Table 6 is obtained. It shows that 4-86 per cent of Brahmins and 3 79
per cent of men of other castes and tribesmen were colour blind in total samples of 1,194 and 4,031 respectively. This difference is statistically significant on the 0'01 level of confidence, showing that the Brahmins were more frequently colour blind than the others.

be interpreted less as related to religious obser-

TABLE 6

vances, and more in relation to certain facts FREQUENCIES OF COLOUR BLIND MEN AMONG

about the conditions of hunting and food

BRAHMINS AND OTHER INDIANS

gathering life there if we knew the facts.

Brahmins

COLOUR BLIND NORMAL TOTALS
58 (4-86%) 1,136 1,194

Other Castes

The Indian Caste System

and Tribesmen Totals

A further suggestion is that in some groups of

153 (3 79%) 211

3,878 4,031 5,014 5,225

Indians it has been found that Moslems and Road Accidents and Colour Blindness

higher castes, especially Brahmins, tend to have It is a point not without interest that more

more frequent colour blindness than the lower colour blind than normal persons may be killed

castes. This is seen in the figures quoted by or injured on the roads. The writer's car has been

Kherumian and Pickford5 for 973 men tested by run into twice at night from behind by persons

G. Olivier and J. Ponnou, and shown in Table 5. who may not have seen the brake lights come

These differences are not significant if tested by into action. In one case it was proved that the

the Chi-squared technique. Nevertheless, the culprit was under the influence of alcohol, but

total number, namely 973 men, was not very this might have caused the accident only by

large, and it is more than likely that significant making a protanope's difficulty with red brake-

differences would be established by testing much light signals greater than usual. It does not take

larger numbers. Castes are endogamous groups, much thought to realise that the protan runs

10O

NATURAL SELECTION AND COLOUR BLINDNESS

greater risks than the normal by his difficulty in in Great Britain the areas in which colour blind-

seeing red signals as well as by his confusion of ness is most frequent are the South and East-

green and amber, while the deutan may tend to coastal regions which were populated by in-

confuse or react with less than normal speed to vaders of more settled agricultural habits, and

any of the three colours.

were more fully civilized by the Roman occupa-

In consequence it would be interesting if one tion. In France colour blindness is most frequent

could find out whether people who are injured in the North and South littoral areas and the

in road accidents, due to their own apparent Northern plains, which were most fully settled

failure to react appropriately to colour signals, by Megalithic and Chalcolithic invaders, and

are more often colour blind than the frequency least frequent in the central and mountainous

of the defects in the population as a whole, men areas. Colour blindness is possibly more fre-

being treated separately from women, of course. quent in the superior than in the inferior Indian

Also, differences in frequencies of accidents in castes. At the present day it is an interesting

relation to the frequency of the different kinds question whether the dangers of road traffic and

and degrees of colour blindness would be in- the dependence of safety on red brake lights, and

teresting. Unfortunately there is often no know- on red, amber and green signal lights might tend

ledge whether a child or adult who was killed was to reverse a relaxation of natural selection

colour blind or not, but sometimes it may be against colour blindness resulting from the pro-

known. Road and other accidents resulting from gress of civilization.

failure to react to colour signals might lead to a

reversal of the relaxation of natural selection against colour blindness.

REFERENCES 1. Polyak, S. 1957. The Vertebrate Visual System.

Chicago U.P. (pp. 969-974).

Conclusion

2. Pickford, R. W. 1958. A Review of Some Problems

Data about the frequencies of red-green blindness throughout the world suggest that those

of Colour Vision and Colour Blindness. The Advancement of Science, 25, 104-117. 3. Pickford, R. W. 1959. The Inheritance and Frequency

groups in which it is most frequent, namely of Colour Blindness, Surgo (Glasgow), 26, 29-32.

European and American whites, may have undergone a relaxation of natural selection

4. Post, R. H. 1962. Population Differences in Red and Green Colour Vision Deficiency: Review and a Query on Selection Relaxation. Eugenics Quarterly, 9,

against colour blindness owing to the influence of civilization in removing them from dangerous

131-146. 5. Kherumian, R. and Pickford, R. W. 1959. HJrddite
et Frequence des Dyschromatopsies. Paris, Vigot

food choices, from direct food gathering and Freres.

hunting. On the other hand, those groups in which it is least frequent, such as Australian

6. Pickford. R. W. 1951. Individual Differences in Colour Vision. London, Routledge and Kegan Paul.
7. Vernon, P. E. and Straker, A. 1943. Distribution of

aborigines, Negroes and American Indians, are Colour-Blind Men in Great Britain. Nature. 152, 690.

much more closely dependent on choice offoods, hunting and food gathering. It is also found that

8. Post, R. H. 1962. Population Differences in Vision Acuity: A Review, with speculative Notes on Selection Relaxation. Eugenics Quarterly, 9, 189-212.

IOI

