C. 0. CARTER
B.A., B.M., M.R.C.P.
Three Surveys of Promising Families*

Positive Eugenics

undesirably, uniform system of education in the

THE ESSENCE of positive eugenics is that
those parents who are likely to transmit
an above average genetic endowment to
their children and to give them a good upbringing should have large families. It is eugenically desirable that the size of their families should be larger than the national average for the most recent years of 2-2 children per married couple.
Whether any direct steps should be taken to encourage such parents is a matter on which eugenists hold different views. Galton himself favoured direct financial grants-at the turn of
the century he was thinking in terms of a family allowance of one shilling a week, but others, such as Mr. Frederick Osborn, Secretary of the American Eugenics Society, think any form of discrimination unwise. Mr. Osborn would

primary schools. In these schools teachers are in a position to compare children with differing gifts in a way which is impossible later. Children's intellectual promise and character traits may change somewhat in adolscence and later, but only in the infant and junior schools can
they be seen in the perspective of a nearly random sample of their contemporaries. The only children not attending these schools are a small proportion in private schools and a
small proportion who are educationally subnormal or ineducable. Finally, in spite of all the outcry about the selection of children for different types of secondary schools at age eleven, selection of promising families by children would be more acceptable to public opinion than selection by adults.

rather attempt to achieve a culture in which

eugenically desirable parents selected them- The mechanism of the survey

selves to have large families. In either case it is important to consider how parents who are likely to transmit an above average genetic
endowment to their children and to rear them well may be ascertained. It is also important to try and discover the factors that influence them in planning the number of children they will
have.
There are obvious technical difficulties in ascertaining promising parents directly and any such selection by an external agency would certainly be unpopular. Discovering parents
through their children has many advantages. It is sounder genetically, since if parents have been handicapped by lack of educational opportunity or other environmental misfortune this will not affect the genetic constitution they transmit to their children. It is technically simple and perhaps more reliable since, apart from a small minority in private schools, children in Great Britain now undergo a remarkably, perhaps

Accordingly, on the initiative, primarily of Dr.
Blacker, your Council formed a sub-committee
to consider ways of ascertaining "Promising Families" through schoolchildren. The method adopted was to seek the permission of local education authorities to ask the headmasters
and headmistresses of their schools to nominate children. Heads of schools were asked to
nominate 5 to 10 per cent of children in an age group who seemed most likely when they grew up to lead lives of special value to the community, on grounds of character as well as ability. Having made their choice the heads of schools then sent an explanatory letter from the Society to the parents of the nominees together with a slip which a parent could send back to the Society saying whether they wished to participate or not. If the parents were willing they were either sent a questionnaire, or if they preferred, the questionnaire was taken to them, explained and left with them. This questionnaire

* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on May 21st, 1958.

asked details of the marriage, educational history, income, occupation and leisure time

I 59
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1958, 50, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

activities of the parents; it asked details of their
children, the schools their children attended; it also asked whether the parents were satisfied or dissatisfied with the number of their children. If the parents had fewer children than they would have liked they were asked to state the reasons for this and to indicate any social policies which might have helped them to achieve their wishes. Where there were other children of school age in the family a letter was
sent to the heads of the schools these brothers and sisters were attending asking for a report on the child.
Three local authorities were found who were willing to allow a survey to take place in their schools and we are much indebted to them, their education officers, and the headmasters and headmistresses of their schools for their help. They were all three in Southern England, one being a county borough and two county authorities.

have liked a larger family than they actually have. Their fertility is below replacement rate and, if their wishes had been realized, would have been just about at replacement rate and above that of the population as a whole. 4. The main obstacles to parents realizing their wishes for the size of their families have been economic rather than medical. 5. Many parents have definite views on the social measures needed to overcome these obstacles and these agree well with the suggestions of the Royal Commission on Population.
The findings in detail
Coming now to the details. The first survey was of thirteen- to sixteen-year-old children at grammar schools in a county area. All but one of the heads of grammar schools took part. It should be remembered that children in secondary grammar schools are already selected for intellectual ability and to some extent for character traits. They comprise about 20 per cent of the school population of this age, the remaining

eighty per cent going to secondary modern

The findings in general

schools. Accordingly, nominees from grammar

There are obvious limitations to an inquiry by questionnaire, even when supplemented by the visits to the homes of those, about one-seventh of the total, who wanted an explanation of the
questionnaire. It was possible, however, to get partial answers to some of the questions which are relevant to any plans for positive eugenics; and more information will come in if further investigations are made of these families in some years' time. The present results may be summarized in advance: they are all results one might have predicted, but it is good to have them established by inquiry.

schools will comprise some ofthe most promising children of the age group in their area; in fact nomination of the most promising 5 to 10 per cent in a grammar school will, if successful, have been at the 1 to 2 per cent level of the general school population. The parents of
eighty-six children co-operated fully and re-
turned the questionnaire; these eighty-six were 70 per cent of the children nominated. The second and third surveys were of eight- and nine-year-old children from a sample of primary schools in the two areas, one a county borough and the other a county authority. Here the selection, at the 5 to 10 per cent level is from

1. Parents of nominees came from all social classes, though the upper middle class parents are proportionately better represented than lower middle class parents, who in turn are

the whole age group. Selection at eight or nine will be less reliable than at thirteen; this can be checked by getting reports on these young

better represented than working class parents. children in say seven years' time. Selection at

2. The brothers and sisters of a child nominated this age, however, has the important practical

as promising are on the whole well above average themselves on the same criteria, though naturally not as promising as the

advantage that the parents are still young enough to have more children. These two

selected children. Since there is known to be primary school surveys resulted in full co-

little or no relationship between order of birth operation from 186 parents, 75 per cent of the

in a family and ability or character, this suggests that further children born into these families would also be well above average. 3. A considerable proportion, about a third of

parents approached. The two primary school surveys can conveniently be grouped together, but the grammar schools survey is best dis-

all the parents of those nominated, would both tinguished in the analysis. There may well be

i6o

THREE SURVEYS OF PROMISING FAMILIES

some bias in the results, in both the grammar school and the primary school surveys, from the 25-30 per cent failure to co-operate.
The parents

school; but in part too, it is probably due to the stricter selection of the grammar school children.
The current gross income of the fathers varied from £6,500 to £290 per annum. The detailed percentage distribution is shown below.

First the information about the parents of the nominees. The Social Class of the parents is shown in Table 1 and there compared with that for the general population taken from the 1951 Census and also with that of the fathers of the top 8 per cent of the Six Day Sample of 1,208 eleven-year-old children given the TermanMerrill test in the Scottish Mental Survey of 1947.1 The classification of the parental occupations is not fully accurate since there was not always enough information on this, but it is probably satisfactory for making broad comparisons.
TABLE 1
SOCIAL CLASS OF FATHER
General Grammar Primary High Scores Social Popula- School School in Scottish Class tion Nominees Nominees Survey
% % % %_

I. 4 35

8 13

II. 17 40 55 23

III. 52 26 34 52

IV. 16 0 2 9

V. 12 0 2 4

Income

TABLE 2
INCOME OF FATHER

Grammar School Primary School

Survey

Survey

2,000+ 1,500+ 1,000+
750+ 500+ 500Not stated Number

7 5 34 19 16 15 5
86

4 2 18 28 33 5 11
186

The grammar school nominees' parents show rather more in the higher income ranges paralleling the social class difference and probably due
to the same causes; they also show rather more with incomes under £500. This is mostly, I think, due to rising wages; the grammar school survey was about a year and a half earlier.
The educational status of the parents is shown in the next table, again as percentages.

Number -

86 186 101

TABLE 3
EDUCATION OF PARENTS

The striking feature of this table is perhaps the very low proportion of unskilled and semiskilled manual workers among the fathers of the nominees compared with the general population and also to a lesser degree with the Scottish Survey children selected purely on intelligence. These Social Class IV and V parents may well have been just those who were not willing to co-operate. In addition, however, it is well known that of two children of the same intelligence the one from the higher social class tends to do better in school. Another interesting feature is the relatively higher proportion of Social Class
I parents among the parents of the grammar school than of the primary school nominees. In part this may be due to the practice of many Social Class I parents of using private schools at the primary level, but local authority grammar schools at the secondary level where their children had qualified for entry to a grammar

Education Father Mother

Grammar School Survey

Primary School Surey

UU

84

UG

82

GU

21

U El 1 2

El U

02

G G 41 23

G El 15 14

El G

6 14

El El 19 38

Number

86 186

The distribution runs very much parallel to
that with social class. Roughly twice the proportion of parents of the grammar school nominees had had a university education, while about half the proportion had had an elementary education. It is noteworthy that a quarter of the fathers of the grammar school nominees had had an elementary school education only and this

I 6I

2-ER.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was true of over half the parents of the primary mate, but living with his mother; the mother

school nominees. An elementary school educa- later married a man not the father of the

tion in the last generation corresponds roughly nominee. One nominee was adopted, the

to a primary followed by a secondary modern questionnaire being completed by the adopting

education in this generation.

parents. It must be remembered however, that

The finding that a considerable proportion of parents who had had unsuccessful marriages

promising children came from homes with may have occurred in the 25-30 per cent who did

relatively low incomes and from parents who not co-operate, and the heads of schools may

had little schooling is, of course, common know- to some extent have refrained from nominating

ledge. In part this will be due to genetic segre- otherwise suitable children if they came from

gation. For example, with respect to intelligence, broken homes.

though parents of average intelligence will have A final, though subjective, point on the parents

a very intelligent child only exceptionally, yet is that a colleague and I who visited the forty-odd

there are relatively many parents of average parents who wished a questionnaire brought to

intelligence so that a considerable proportion of them, were left with a general impression of

all highly intelligent children are born to average energy, good sense and reliability.

parents. In part too, however, promising children will have manual working class parents The brothers and sisters

because educational and socio-economic status I turn now to the second set of data, that about

is only a rough guide to parental ability. Again, the brothers and sisters of the nominees, whose

taking intelligence as the illustration, though the quality is the test whether nomination by a

same is probably true of other qualities inherent single child has a reasonable probability of

in our concept of promise, the follow-up studies leading to a family which is promising; their

of Terman and of The Scottish Council for quality is also the best indication of the promise

Research in Education' show that a small but of any further children that might be born into

significant proportion of children of good in- these families. It is important here to try and

tellectual capacity end up in manual and even allow for the bias from heads of schools nom-

unskilled occupations.

inating children in part because they know of

This is illustrated by some of the answers to other promising children from the same family

the section of the questionnaire on the parents' in the school.

life history. Fathers who were manual workers The heads of schools were asked to assess the

usually had active and worthwhile hobbies. brothers and sisters in terms of the other children

Most too, had reached positions of responsi- in the school, to put them in the top 20 per cent,

bility in the Armed Services during the war, for middle 60 per cent or bottom 20 per cent of the

example, the turner who had been a sergeant- children in their school. In converting these to

major in a Rifle Regiment and the wireman the rough equivalents in terms of the general

whose hobbies were electronics and music. population of children I have taken children as

Sometimes too, it was the father's father who being assessed in the top 20 per cent of a gram-

had shown distinction, for example, the Corpora- mar school as being in the top 4 per cent of the

tion labourer whose father had been awarded the general population, a child classed in the middle

O.B.E. for trades union leadership. In two 60 per cent of a grammar school as being in the

instances at least men who were skilled had next 12 per cent of the population, the children

deliberately taken semi-skilled and unskilled, in the bottom 20 per cent of the grammar school

but safe, jobs because it gave greater security and the top 20 per cent of the secondary modern

for the family.

school as being in the next 20 per cent of the

A noteworthy feature ofthe parents' marriages general population; the children in the middle

was that they were remarkably stable. Only one 60 per cent of the secondary modern as being in

of the 272 pairs of parents had been divorced the next 48 per cent and finally the children in

and none judicially separated. In two instances the bottom 20 per cent of the secondary modern

the father was dead. One nominee was illegiti- as being in the bottom 16 per cent. The very few

I62

THREE SURVEYS OF PROMISING FAMILIES

children attending technical schools were classed The fifty-four brothers and sisters of the

with the grammar school children. There are still primary school nominees, who were attending

some reports coming for the second primary secondary schools on whom we have reports

school survey.

are also clearly of unusual promise, but less so,

The distribution of the brothers and sisters of as one might expect, since the nominees were

the children in the three series now attending less highly selected than those from the grammar

secondary schools is shown in Table 4.

schools. Here too we have information, though

TABLE 4
SIBS AT SECONDARY SCHOOLS

Grammar School Primary School

Survey

Survey

Number % Number %

no head teachers' reports on the further brothers
and sisters who have now left school. There are seventeen of these and twelve attended grammar or technical schools and so were academically above average. The parents have given further details of six; four are now at Universities, one

Top 4%

24 75

15 28 at a Teachers' Training College and one at a

Next 12% Next 20% Next 48% Bottom 16%

7
0 1 0

22
0 3 0

22 6 10 0

42 11 19

Technical College. These children too cannot perhaps be taken altogether as a guide to the

0 probable quality of further children born into the

No report

32 6

53 13

family since they may have passed through the school of the primary school head teacher who

Total 38

nominated their brother or sister. 66 Coming now to the brothers and sisters at

primary schools, these children may be taken as

The top group may perhaps be regarded as of representing a classification in terms of the

outstanding promise, the next 12 per cent of general child population. These assessments are

good promise, and only the bottom 16 per cent shown in Table 5.

as of poor promise. The thirty-two brothers and sisters of the

TABLE 5
SIBS AT PRIMARY SCHOOLS

grammar school nominees at secondary schools on whom we have reports are clearly a most

Grammar School Primary School

Survey

Survey

promising group of children. Three-quarters are outstanding and nearly all in the top 16 per cent.

Number % Number %

In addition we know that all of thirty-one other Top 20% 33 73 59 64

brothers and sisters who have left school attended grammar schools and so academically

Middle 60%
Bottom 20 %

12 0

27 0

32 2

35 2

at least were above average. We have no teachers' assessment on these children who have left No report

45 10

93 13

school, but the parents have volunteered in- Total

55

106

formation about nineteen of them and we know

that nine are now at Universities, three at The assessments of the younger brothers and

Teachers' Training Colleges, two at the Royal sisters of the Grammar School series is of special

Aeronautical Establishment, two at the Royal value. There will be no bias here because these

Academy of Music, one at the Royal Military children will be quite unknown to the Grammar

Academy, one is training as a nurse and one is School head teachers choosing the nominee, and

at an Art School. These brothers and sisters too the distribution provides perhaps the most

are clearly of exceptional promise. For all these reliable estimate of the promise of other children

children, however, there may well be an element in the nominee's families. Not only were thirty-

of bias in that the headmasters were influenced three out of forty-five on whom we have reports

in their nomination by their knowledge of these estimated to be in the top 20 per cent, but

brothers and sisters, who often were or had. been additional information given by the head teacher

at the same school.

indicated that many of these thirty-three were of

I63

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

outstanding promise. There are a further fourteen children of this series not yet at school. One of these children is a mongolian imbecile; such biological accidents are bound to occur in these families as in others and have no bearing on the general promise of these families. The brothers and sisters at primary schools of the second
series were of similar promise, but many of these were at the same school as the nominee so there was opportunity for the head of the school to be influenced by them in making the nomination. There are, however, fifty-eight younger children not yet at school, and in five years' time an inquiry would provide information about the promise of these children, which was unbiassed, to supplement that which we already have from the grammar school nominees' brothers and sisters now at primary schools.
There are, however, I think, clear indications from the reports we already have that nomination by headmasters of a single child in a family is, in a most satisfactory proportion of instances, a guide to families which are promising as a whole.

Fertility of parents

Turning now to the third set of data we have
about the fertility of parents of nominees and the factors affecting this fertility. The actual family size distribution in the two groups is shown in Table 6.

TABLE 6
FAMILY SIZE

Family Size Grammar School Primary School

Nominees

Nominees

Number % Number %

1 8 9 32 17

2 36 42 77 41

3 27 31 60 32

4

12 14 11

6

5 3353

6 0000

7 001 1

Total families Total children Average family
size Corrected

86 224
2.6 19

186 442
2.4 17

The distribution is similar in the two groups, with the highest proportion of families having two

children, but many having more. There are only nine large families with five or more children.
The uncorrected average fertility of these parents, 2-6 in the grammar school series and 2-4 in the primary series, seems not unsatisfactory compared with the national average for marriages in the same years, which is close to
2-0. In 1956 the average family size for marriages
occurring between 1932 and 1939 was 2-0 and for those between 1940 and 1942, 19. Allowance must be made, however, for the fact that, other
things being equal, a five-child family is five times as likely to contain a nominee as a onechild family. To correct for this in estimating fertility the number of families of each size should be divided by the family size. One should count, for instance, in the grammar school series only nine three-child families and not twentyseven. The corrected average family size then
becomes 2'2. Similarly, for the parents of nominees from primary schools this correction makes
the family size 2-0. These estimates must further be corrected for the fact that the series include no childless families. Taking this figure at 15 per cent, which is appropriate for a group of this social class distribution, it reduces the average family size to 1 9 and 1-7 respectively. In both series the families were nearly complete. The youngest mother of the eighty-six grammar school nominees was thirty-four and only one in eight of these mothers were under forty. Only
one mother intended to have more children and she was thirty-six. The mothers of the 186 primary school nominees were naturally younger. Just over two-thirds were under the age of forty and included in this were forty-six mothers, a quarter of the whole, under the age of thirtyfive. However, only seven mothers, aged from thirty-one to thirty-nine, said that they intended to have more children, in addition nineteen said they were undecided. So the averages of 1 9 will not be increased and that of 17 will not be much increased. Both will just fall short of the national average, and fall rather more short of the replacement of about 2-3, and of course be much below the family size that eugenists would like to see in these parents.
On the other hand in both series a significant proportion of parents would have liked more children than they have, in fact, had. In the

I 64

THREE SURVEYS OF PROMISING FAMILIES

grammar school series in twenty-four instances sizes are well above the average for marriages of

(over a quarter) both parents would have liked the same period and near replacement rate.

more children, and in a further nine instances I have examined the distribution of the extra

one parent only would have liked more children. children wanted in various ways. It has little to

Similarly, in the primary school series in forty- do with mother's age at marriage. It is note-

seven instances, a quarter, both would have liked worthy that only for mothers marrying after the

more children, and in a further twenty-five age of of thirty-five does the average size in this

instances one parent only would have liked series significantly decrease, and whatever the

more. In each series where the parents differed age at marriage the number of extra children

it was the mother, twice as often as the father, parents would like to have had was approxi-

who would have liked more children. The distri- mately constant. It must be noted, however, that

bution of the extra children wanted by both these are all mothers who had at least one

parents by present family size is shown in Table child.

7. When parents said one or two more this was There are, however, significant differences

counted as one more.

both in fertility and the extra children desired

according to income and educational status.

TABLE 7

The 1951 Census indicated, I think for the first

ADDITIONAL CHILDREN WANTED BY PRESENT time in this country, that there is developing a

FAMILY SIZE

positive relation between father's occupation

Family Size

ADDITIONAL CHILDREN WANTED
Grammar School Primary School

and fertility for the non-manual occupations. The Census shows that the major professional

Survey

Survey and managerial class at ten years of marriage

1 21 3

j2

3

have more children than the minor professions and small employers, who in turn have more

1 2
3

3 7
5

1 6
-

1 1411 - 10 4 - 14 2

-
-
1

children than the clerks. For the manual workers there was still, however, a negative relationship;

41

I skilled workers had fewer children than the semi-

16

7

1 38

8

1

skilled, who in turn had fewer children than the unskilled. These differences represent, I think, a

positive relationship between fertility and socio-

It will be seen that in most instances, economic status for planned children, but a

irrespective of family size, parents wanted one strongly negative relationship for unplanned

more child, but that a significant proportion children. The latter relationship is now largely

would have liked two more children. If these affecting only the manual working classes, the

wanted children had been born it would have had remainder having very few unplanned children.

an appreciable effect on the fertility of these The positive relationship shows in our series

parents. For example, the parents of grammar clearly for both income and educational status.

school nominees would have had an uncorrected I have used these indices rather than Social Class

average family size of 3 0 and not 2-6 children, by father's occupation as the information on

the parents of primary school nominees 2-7 and them was more precise. The average family sizes

not 2*4 children. Correcting for ascertainment by income are shown in Table 8.

according to family size, these family sizes Some of the groups are small and there is

become 2*7 for the grammar school parents and inevitably random fluctuation, but drawing a line

2*5 for primary school nominees. Making allow- at income £1,000 per annum there is a signi-

ance for childless families the figures become ficantly higher fertility for parents above this

2*3 and 2*1 on the assumption that none of the level with an average of 2-72, than for those

15 per cent of childless marriages wanted below it with an average of 2-33. The standard

children. In fact some of them would have deviation of family size is about 1.0, so these

wanted children and this would further have differences are most unlikely to be chance

raised average family size. These average family differences.

i6S

Income £s
2,000+ 1,500+ 1,000+
750+ 500+ 500Not stated Total

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 8
INCOME AND FERTILITY
Families Children

Average Family Size

131 8 82 61J 681 76 166 22J 24

381 17 223 168J 1531 179 386 54 57

301 2 1 2-72 2-8J
2-31 2'4 2'33 2*5J 2.4

272 666 2-5

If one now examines the extra children wanted in relation to income and education it is interesting to see the position is reversed. The higher income groups and the better educated have, more nearly, had as many children as they would have liked than the remainder. If one adds the extra children wanted to the average
family size in each group any significant relationship with income and education disappears. If one made corrections to these family sizes for
ascertainment according to family size the differences would become smaller still.

The same relationship holds for education

TABLE 10

and this is shown in Table 9.
TABLE 9

FAMILY SIZE WANTED
INCOME More children wanted
;Es

Total

EDUCATION AND FERTILITY

Education Families

Children

Average Family Size

1,000+ 750+ 750-

+-35 +'57 +-42

3 05 2.82 2-80

UU

15

39 261

EDUCATION

U
uE
GG
E1EGE1l Gl
El El Not stated

14
~~6
78 70
86 3

Total 272

39
16 195 160
212 5
666

28 2869
2-7J 2-50

University GG G Ell El Gj El El

+ 23 +-37
+A49
+ 50

2-92 2.87 2-78 2.96

2-3 2*5

~~~~~~2-38

The only for "family

comparable size wanted"

figures which I know are those collected in

25

the Obstetrics Department of Aberdeen by Miss Eileen Scott3 from mothers attending there, who

For parents, one of whom at least has had a university education, average family size is 2-69. The numbers here are small, but when corrected to 2-3 for ascertainment proportional to family size, then fertility agrees well with that found by Mrs. Hubback2 in her recent survey of graduate
wives, her estimate being 2-2. For parents who both have had a grammar school education ( have included central schools and technical schools here) average family size is 2 50 and for those ofwhom at least one has had an elementary
school education it is 2-38. The absence of any
strong indications of a rise in fertility at the

were pregnant for the first time. She found that the higher the husband's occupational class the more children the wife wanted. She also found, however, that the higher the mother's score on an intelligence test the more children she
wanted. From additional data with which she kindly supplied me it was possible to show that intelligent mothers tended to want fairly large families, whatever their husbands' occupation. This is very similar to what we see here. It is clear, however, that the parents in the higher socio-economic groups more often realize their wishes.

lowest income groups and educational levels in this series in contrast to the general population Obstacles to reaching desired family size and is, I think, what one would expect, since these social policies to remove them

selected parents even if manual workers will not The next point to consider is the reasons given

have many children in excess of the number by the parents to explain why they had had

planned.

fewer children than they would have liked.

i66

THREE SURVEYS OF PROMISING FAMILIES

These are very similar in the two series. The reasons are summarized in Table 11.

TABLE 11
LIMITING FACTORS

Reason given

Grammar School Survey

Primary School Survey

Economic difficulties 22 35 50 40

Housing

5 8 21 17

No domestic help .. 6 10 5 4

Educational costs .. 4 6 8 6

Wartime separation .. 15 24 14 11

Medical .. .. 5 8 19 15

Age .

.I. 6 10 7 6

Total.. .. .. 63

124 |

The difficulties and separation due to the war
are, one hopes, non-recurring; naturally they
bore more heavily on the older parents of the grammar school nominees. Apart from these, the striking feature of this Table is, I think, the preponderance of socio-economic reasons over medical and biological. Medical and advanced age of parents were given as the main reason by
only about one-fifth of the parents. The parents were asked to suggest what
general social policies might have overcome the difficulties which prevented them from having as many children as they would have liked. The replies were consistent in both series and followed the lines one might expect. They are
shown in Table 12.

TABLE 12
POLICIES
Family Allowances Educational Grants Housing Income Tax Relief

27
11 9 7

be raised to lOs. per week at secondary school age, double the allowance at that time, and corresponding in terms of purchasing power to 14s. to-day; compared with the present allowances to-day of 8s. for the second child and lOs. for subsequent children. For younger children the Commission's recommendation of an increase to 7s. a week has been substantially met at present costs for the children on the lOs. a week allowance. The demand for a larger allowance at age twelve has not been met, though income tax relief has been increased at this age.
The Royal Commission also recommended the introduction of special schemes of allowances within the professions. Such schemes now operate for the staffs of Universities and the Government Research Councils. The allowances are not large, £50 per annum per child, and an increase is overdue, but they are most helpful. An extension to other professions within the sphere of public employment was regarded as specially desirable by the Royal Commission and would have been of great value to the parents in our series, many of whom are in the teaching profession, the Civil Service, the Armed Services, or in Local Government Service.
It would appear that financial help of this kind, either special family allowances or much increased income tax rebates, would have had only a small effect on those parents in our survey who were in the highest income and educational groups, their fertility is already fairly high; such help might well, however, have raised the fertility of the rest of these parents to replacement rate and well above that of their contemporaries in the general population.
REFERENCES

The proposals substantiate the essential correctness of the analysis of the Royal Commission on Population. You will remember that they proposed that the Family Allowance should

1 Macpherson, John S. 1958. Eleven- Year-Olds Grow Up. University of London Press.
2 Hubback, Judith. 1955. The Fertility of Graduate Women. Eugen. Rev., 47, 107.
3 Baird, D. and Scott, Eileen M. 1953. Intelligence and Childbearing. Eugen. Rev., 45, 139.

167

