UNSATISFACTORY PARENTS AND PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDER
IN THEIR CHILDREN*

By HILDA LEWIS, M.D., M.R.C.P.

Introductory Remarks
W HAT good or harm parents can do their children is a subject that has
been of constant interest for many a long day. A wide variety of opinions has been held in the past and it is only comparatively recently that objective studies have been made to remove this important matter from the realms of personal impression,
cultural prejudice and changing dogmas. But the subject is complex, and the methods of social and psychological investigation appropriate to it are by no means satisfactory for answering the fundamental questions about causes and relationships.
They are fundamental, not only to an
understanding of how children come to behave as they do under varying conditions, but also to any effort at preventing or lessening the amount of maladjustment, delinquency and ill health.
I shall concern myself almost entirely with the investigation I made at the Mersham Reception Centre from I947 onwards. I would certainly not claim for this investigation that it provided clear and conclusive answers to the problems set. It did, however, afford an opportunity for examining without bias the features in children's homes and upbringing to which current theory, previous investigations or clinical experience pointed as significant factors in determining a child's behaviour and it enabled us to see what relation there was between these features of the child's background and his conduct both before he came to the Centre and while he was under our observation there.

I should say at the outset that there was one hiatus in our investigation which will strike you immediately, namely, that we could not study the influence of heredity in these children. This important gap existed not because of any lack of awareness on our part that constitutional factors had a potent influence on the children's behaviour and development, but because the data we could collect did not satisfy the requirements of a
genetic investigation. In the statisticaf
treatment of the environmental data which I shall put before you, the genetic factor could not therefore be taken into account though much of what we knew about the parents of these children gave grounds for suspecting that heredity played a far from negligible part.
There were 500 children. They stayed at the Reception Centre for three to six weeks. During this time they were carefully observed by experienced staff during free play, in the,: general daily routine and in the schoolroom., I examined each child and an educationaV
psychologist made psychometric observa4 tions. Full reports on the parents and th& family background were obtained from' welfare agencies and were supplemented by personal inquiry by the psychiatric social worker. The mass of information thus
accumulated about the five hundred children was analysed after the items had been transferred to punched cards, and an initial comparison was made between various groups, e.g. the children removed from dirty
and neglectful homes-the " social problem families "-and those who had not come from

* A paper read at a Memberis' Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on March 23rd, 1955.

such homes, and between children who had been steadily in their mother's care and the

I53

154 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

E63 per cent who had been previously separated from their mothers.
The children were then classified into three broad groups according to their behaviour: II9 children were normal, 155 slightly disturbed and 326 definitely disturbed. A correlation between these three groups and a number of background influences generally thought to be harmful to a child's development pointed to some decidedly significant associations but did not, of course, permit any relationship to be distinguished between particular adverse influences and particular forms of disturbed behaviour. A method of classification which had been used and submitted to careful statistical analysis by Jenkins1 and his associates in Michigan was found to be applicable with slight modifications. The adverse background situations were divided into three main patterns:
(i) Parental rejection, (2) Parental neglect
and bad company, and (3) Constraint, and
similarly three main patterns of disturbed behaviour were recognized. I shall call them
(i) Unsocialized aggression, (2) Socialized delinquency, and (3) Over-inhibited neurotic behaviour.
The behaviour of all but thirty-seven of the disturbed children fell into these three groups; the thirty-seven seemed a mixture of two or three of the patterns without any one of them predominating.
The Children's General Background
Before I go on to talk about particular children, I should mention briefly something about the general social background and experiences of the 500 children. They came from 363 families and with two or three exceptions - psychotic or maladjusted children referred by child guidance clinicstheir homes had broken down or had proved unsatisfactory. The common characteristics were over crowding, high fertility in the mothers, medical disabilities in the parents, low income, lack of harmony between the parents or homes broken by death, separation or desertion. Ninety-nine of the known fathers and i8o mothers had some mental disability-a defect of intellect or personality

or a definite mental illness. Many parents had neglected or ill-treated their children and half the children had been removed from their homes by the public authority on a previous occasion. Of these IO9 were still in public care at the time of admission to the centre. Of the 500 children, 63 per cent had been previously separated from their mothers for two months or more, I42 of them for many years or permanently. The break had occurred before two years in fifty-four of these, and between two and five in another fifty-four. These children early separated from their mothers had sometimes been moved time and again from the substitute homes or institutions in which they had been placed: from infant nurseries to wartime toddler nurseries and then to foster homes or children's homes - with correspondingly frequent changes of school as they grew older. Some of the neurotic children had experienced six or eight moves. The initial maternal separation seemed of little significance compared with the tribulations and difficulties the children had gone through in repeatedly having to adjust themselves to temporary substitutes for their mothers.
Social Problem Families
(a) Family Background. There were I4I children who came from sixty-six " social problem" families in which there had been gross physical neglect and filthy conditions. In these families the mental qualities of the parents were poor on the whole-half the mothers were below average in intelligence, six being certified defectives, and just over a quarter of them (the mothers) were neurotic, psychopathic or psychotic. In twenty-eight families both parents had some disability, as a rule, mental dullness or psychopathic personality. Their poor personalities were reflected in the greater incidence of unemployment, drunkenness, quarrelsomeness, and brutality in the fathers and greater sexual laxity and shiftlessness in the mothers than in the other families in which there had been no such dirt and squalor. Nevertheless, a greater proportion of the mothers in the social problem group seemed fond of their children. The most

UNSATISFACTORY PARENTS

155

striking finding was the normality of th' went on. This indeed was what happened in

children from these homes. There were' the case of a large family whom we decided to

sixty-six of them who were considered: allow to go home with a recommendation for

normal, and indeed they supplied the rehabilitation and aid from welfare workers.

majority of the ii9 children in the whole After a short period of improvement, the

sample who were found quite normal in home deteriorated, more children were born

behaviour. Another forty-six children from' and during three years, the children, satisfac-

the problem families were near normal, that tory at their first admission, became shiftless

is to say they were somewhat shy or anxious and apathetic; two younger boys, more

or had shown slightly delinquent behaviour intelligent than the others felt so embarrassed

but were otherwise satisfactory. Only by their ragged clothes and backwardness

twenty-nine of the children from squalid that tI?ey played truant from school persist-

homes were definitely disturbed. These had ently or put on tantrums if sent forcibly.

mostly come to the reception centre because They had become insolent and defiant to

they had been behaving badly and not their mother, whose mental incapacity they

because their parents had been charged with began to realize. Such was the picture when

neglecting them.

they were readmitted to the reception centre

It was impressive to watch how quickly three years later.

these sixty-six normal children accom- (c) Need for Treatment. These children

modated themselves to the routine and from social problem families need a compre-

social life of the reception centre in spite of hensive programme of special education,

having come from appalling conditions in training, and general kindly support if they

their homes-they were pleasant, responsive, are to be induced -to accept and adopt a

and affectionate to their siblings, and the better standard of life. It is true that if their

older children were sometimes socially more parents are fond of them, and they of their

mature than their years even though their parents, we do not want them to forfeit

intelligence was on the whole not as high as this Affection nor do we want by court

that of children coming from cleaner homes. proceedings to arouse hostilities towards

Of the rest of the normally behaved'> our efforts to help them, but I doubt whether

children-fifty-three in all-who did not measures to educate them satisfactorily can

come from dirty homes, eleven had been in") be effective while they are living at home,

public care for a year or more, and came for-" especially where their mothers are very dull
administrative reasons, while the remainder-0 or defective and, as in many cases, go on

came because of the recent death or having a baby every year. Effective birth

prolonged illness of a parent.

control would, of course, be highly desirable

(b) Educational Backwardness. When I speak of the "normal" children from problem families-I do not wish -to imply
that all was well with them. In common with the majority of the deprived children they were backward at school when compared
with other children of similar age and intelligence. This backwardness and their
attachment to their homes made it seem
likely that unless 'they were given some special training away from home, they might,
when they grew up, repeat the same unsatisfactory pattern of life which they had

but the practical obstacles are great. Where there is a large and growing family, training away from home with the parents' co-operation will often be the best course for the older
children when accompanied by family welfare work. If well educated, highly intelligent, and socially responsible parents seek expert training in boarding schools for their children, how much more do these offspring of dullards and psychopaths need special types of boarding schools and hostels-particularly
when the children are of good intelligence.
I describe a family in Deprived Children2

met with in their parents. If they returned to where this was the case: A thirteen-year-old

their bad homes we might have found them boy of superior intelligence, acutely aware of

less satisfactory individuals as the years the disadvantage of his poor home and of his

I56 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

mother's mental deficiency, was placed in a them had become dramatically more respon-

foster home; but this only served to sive and mentaUy active, especially when

aggravate his feelings of inadequacy and encouraged to talk and play in the company

resentment since he did not feel one of the of a single adult.

new family. He begged to be allowed to Some of the young children reared in war-

return home; he tried hard to help his time nurseries were noticeably poor in

mother and improve the home; he kept vocabulary, having difficulty in naming

himself clean and tidy under great difficulties. common objects and in forming sentences

Had he been placed in a suitable boarding which would be mastered easily by normal

school, returning home for holidays, he children of their age. With individual

might have minded the separation less and teaching and encouragement they seemed to

had a better time. Two of his younger sisters learn rapidly even during the short stay at

had been placed in foster homes and had the centre. Many of the effects of separating

accepted them as permanent homes, with infants and young children from their

happy results.

mothers and placing them with strangers in

nurseries or foster homes, are probably due,

Educational Backwardness

not to any rupture of a mystic bond between

You may regard any general discussion mother and child but to the sudden breaking of the educational achievement of the down of familiar vocal communication children as going beyond the scope of my between the infant and the adult and lack of address, but this is really not so. Educational sufficient effort or time on the part of those retardation may be associated with depriva- who later take on the child's care to undertion of intellectual stimuli, i.e. poor contact stand and stimulate his efforts to speak and in early childhood with neglectful parents, make himself understood. Anna Freud3 lack of outlets for play and occupation, living commented on this delay in vocalization in in a large impersonal institution. In children her study of infants in War Time Nurseries; from bad homes, however, it is more ofteni Skeels4 and his co-workers in Iowa found due to constant fear of failure or emotional that backward children taken from an underconflict upsetting the child's powers of staffed and poorly equipped orphanage concentrating on what is being taught, or developed amazingly fast when put in an causing special inhibitions in learning which institution for defectives where they were may be a serious obstacle when remedial given much attention by the adult high grade teaching is undertaken. It is therefore not defectives and their attendants. They began surprising that a large percentage of the to play and speak and the majority were Mersham children were educationally below shortly afterwards successfully placed in their mental capacity; when tested on foster homes as normal children. Experts in Burt's reading and arithmetic tests, 76 per training deaf children to speak emphasize cent, gave a reading age that was lower (on the importance 'of encouraging the deaf
the average by ij to 24 years) than their infant even before a year old to make the mental age and 96 per cent in arithmetic. sounds which precede the use of recognizable Their lack of confidence combined with their words. How easily in the busy life of a backwardness often gave a false impression public nursery this may be overlooked by of mental dullness and it was disconcerting the nurses, and even more so by the parents,
to find in a follow up of a hundred of the when an infant is unwanted.

children two years after reception that, although there had been some general school

One boy was admitted at 5 years 9 months to the care of a voluntary children's society

progress, some of the children who at the from a public institution in which he had been

centre had been found to be of average intelligence were still regarded by their teachers as dull, yet in the permissive atmosphere of the reception centre some of

a delicate infant. (He was illegitimate and at the time of his birth his mother had been destitute; she had had to leave him in the infirmary ward and later had been unable to provide for him.) When he was sent to school

UNSATISFACTORY PARENTS

I57

he was undersized and dull in manner. He deprivation had not suffered psychological

appeared to learn nothing and the Educational Psychologist reported that his I.Q. was sixty-two. He was placed in a small residential school for maladjusted and backward children, where I

harm; but in the disturbed children, the mother's mental illness, mental instability or psychopathic personality was an associated

was the psychiatrist. His appearance at first and probably a causal factor.

seemed to confirm the reports sent about him but within a day or two striking changes were

(a) Patterns of Disturbed Behaviour. The

apparent; he showed delight and enthusiasm disturbed children presented various types

at naming and tracing big coloured letters in the class room and beamed at anyone who praised his efforts and he very rapidly entered into all the social activities of the place, though he was a little shy and rather more gentle than

of behaviour though there was, of course, some overlapping of symptoms and some degree of anxiety was common to the whole group.

the average child. He wet the bed at night v6ry Some children were particularly anxious

occasionally but this gradually cleared up and his progress was generally swift and unbroken. After one year a retest of his I.Q. on the StanfordBinet Scale was ninety-one, and in less than three

and timid, lacking self confidence, retreating from any task in which they feared they would fail; many of them wet the bed, or

years it was possible for him to be placed in a had done so before admission, they made few

good foster home and to attend an ordinary friends, spoke little, slept badly, had night

primary school.
He had grown into a charming boy, vivacious, enthusiastic and intellectually rather indepen-

terrors, bit their nails badly and often showed other habit spasms or tics. Other children,

dent, ready to challenge adult opinion fearlessly' also anxious and prone to wet the bed, were

and good humouredly. He has been more than restless and constantly sought the attention

two years now in his foster home where he is much loved, and he is regarded as a completely normal child who is getting on well at school.

of adults, wanting to be caressed or noticed in a manner babyish for their years. Both these types, which I labelled the " over-

Disturbed Behaviour Home Conditions

and

Unsatisfactory

inhibited neurotic," wished to please adults and do what they were told, either from fear or with a desire to please. They sometimes

Having made the classification referred to engaged in petty pilfering or hoarding of

earlier, it was necessary to see in the first trifles or stole to make gifts to curry friend-

place whether any particular features of the ship and affection.

children's backgrounds were significantly The other children's disturbed behaviour

often associated with disturbance of lay in the opposite direction. Their offences

behaviour. There were in fact such features: were against law, discipline or social codes.

viz. lack of parental affection, a long period Two usually distinct patterns could be

in public care, a mother who had died or distinguished:

deserted the child or who had otherwise been apart from the child in his early life, an over-indulgent mother or father, and a mentally unstable mother. On the other hand, as I have already mentioned, the background features of neglect, dirty home and having a dull mother were significantly associated with normal behaviour. This was partly because the children of the social problem families were admitted primarily

(i) Those who were aggressive towards other children, attacking them without provocation, hostile in their relationships
with adults, easily upset, defiant of authority, and destructive to property. If they stole, they stole secretly on their own, often with a
malicious intent and frequently showing inadequate guilt. They made no lasting friendships with other children.

on account of their parents' failings and (2) Children who were friendly with others

not because their behaviour was causing of their kind in whose company they

concern as had been the case with most of committed offences-the gang delinquents

the other children received. The dull, who truanted from school, wandered from

shiftless and negligent mothers had affection home, staying away overnight, who stole,

for their children who in spite of physical destroyed property-or if girls misbehaved

I58 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

themselves sexually. These children showed (I) Parental rejection (items indicating lack

,landinsufficient regard for codes of conduct and of parental affection). (2) Parental neglect
for property rights of those outside their bad company (items including exposure

own group. Following Jenkins, I labelled the to other delinquents in the home or

first type of behaviour the " unsocialized neighbourhood, and neglect, including lax or

aggressive" pattern, and the second ill-timed discipline and lack of common

" socialized delinquency."

decencies in the home). (3) Constraint-

The over-inhibited, neurotic children represented by a rigid routine or excessive

included forty-seven who were shy and discipline; dominating, over-protective or

seclusive and thirty-three of the anxious, hypercritical parents; lack of family warmth

restless, attention-seeking children; among or enforced isolation.

the former inhibited, shy children were six aA difficulty occurred where a child had

who seemed incapable of showing affection or lived at home experiencing neglect and

arousing it-two of them were manifesting exposure, or lack of affection and had been

psychotic disorders. Fifty-two children removed to an institution. If this had

showed behaviour of the unsocialized occurred fairly recently, the earlier back-

aggressive pattern though not with identical ground influences could hardly be said to

strength or persistence and seldom without have ceased to affect the child's mental

some features indicating anxiety or emotional state. Similarly the background pattern of

insecurity. Ten of them were cold and lack- neglect and bad company was sometimes

ing in guilt feelings. Fifty-seven children found in conjunction with that of parental

showed the predominant features of the rejection. In such cases both patterns were

socialised delinquent although twenty-seven recorded: Table 38 from Deprived Children

of these children had shown aggressive is reproduced here to show the distribution

traits such as defiance of authority and a of the three background patterns in the three

tendency to quarrel with other children, and main patterns of disturbed behaviour.

to have outbursts of temper and destructive-

ness at times. Some were also neurotic. Their thefts in company with other children were sometimes trifling, sometimes seriousjudged in terms of the value of the goods

Background pattern

Child's Pattern of Disturbed Behaviour at Reception
Unsocialized Socialized Inhibited, aggression delinquency neurotic Total (52 children) (57 children) (80 children)

stolen. The persistence of the delinquency Rejection .39

was a grave feature in some (one seven-year-

Neglect and bad company

Constraint

.. ..

5 28

23 27 43 5 21 50

89 53 99

old child had been in court for larceny twenty

times!)

, 'The pattern of parental rejection was

There remained thirty-seven disturbed ,significantly related to the unsocialized

children whose conduct seemed to contain aggressive pattern of behaviour, and when

even mixtures of delinquency and neurosis Xhis background pattern was present in

so that it was impossible to assign them thildren of the two other types of disturbed

definitely to one of the three main patterns. jbehaviour, these children showed more

They resembled a pattern of " disturbed aggressive traits than when it was absent.

delinquents " isolated by Jenkins5 in a study Thus among the fifty-seven socialized

of older children in a New York Approved delinquents, of twenty-three who were

School.

" rejected " by their parents, nineteen

(b) Background Patterns. Having classified showed aggressive features, whereas only

disturbed behaviour into these broad group- eight of thirty-four not rejected by their

ings or patterns, a search was made for back- parents showed aggressive tendencies.

ground patterns in the history of the child. Similarly, among eighty inhibited, neurotic

Three main types of adverse influences were children thirteen, out of twenty-seven who

definable by grouping together a number of had been rejected, were occasionally

related items in the history of each child: aggressive, quarrelsome and defiant as

UNSATISFACTORY PARENTS

I59

against seven out of fifty-three who had not at leaving his grandmother that it was impossible

been rejected. In a sample of children coming into public
care it is not surprising to find such a wide-

to examine him for a few days. He was a wellgrown boy for his age though rather pale; he
wore glasses for mild myopia, his teeth were in poor condition, he had some chronic infection of

spread pattern of parental rejection-and the his tonsils and slight catarrh of the middle ear,

hostility of the children who have suffered not at the moment causing deafness. When he

in this way may not surprise us either. The pattern of neglect and exposure to bad <

was calm enough to be examined, he still seemed anxious in spite of having been given reassurance that he would be kept in touch with his grand-

company was common among the young mother; his face twitched, he plucked at his

delinquents who came on remand: it was fingers, the nails of which were badly bitten.

found in forty-three out of fifty-seven in the ;
group diagnosed as socialized delinquents. This background of socialized delinquency

He seemed a thoughtful and quite intelligent
boy who was emotionally disturbed. He was bitter about being taken away from his grandmother and said that it was against her will as

was essentially thb opposite of that of the well as his. He regarded himself as having been

superior children in the Kent Paediatric
Survey6, where parental discipline, though not harsh, was well defined and consistent,

necessary to support her and protect her against
the hostile elements in their neighbourhood. He boasted that he had the control of the out-ofschool activities of sixty-two small boys, and

and the parents acted in harmony and man- that he organized relays of them at railway

aged their incomes and their homes carefully. stations and bus termini to earn money carrying

The parents of these Mersham delinquents, though sometimes quite fond of their children, lacked harmony between them-

baggage. He said he gave them a good hiding when they did not obey him, and he also attacked
anyone who was rude to his grandmother. At times he had worried because he had injured one

selves, had less strict codes of conduct, of the boys and said that he had had nightmares

applied no discipline or only inconsistent discipline, and were often casual, and sometimes disorderly.

afterwards. During his stay at the centre he
continued to be very anxious and did not sleep well. He was destructive, aggressive and quarrelsome with the other children, but he would talk

The following is a brief account of a well and sensibly with adults. He showed

socialized delinquent boy who showed some interest and competence in practical work, but

aggressive features and anxiety. Although not lacking in intelligence, he had not learned to read:

educationally he was extremely backward-his reading level was that of a five-year-old child; in other words he only knew a few letters of the
alphabet. Tests, however, revealed that he was

William, aged 9 years 7 months was an illegitimate boy who had lived with his old maternal grandmother since birth; she had been
having frequent heart attacks and could no longer control him or care for him properly. His admission (to a voluntary society) had been brought about by the school welfare officer as

of at least average intelligence. He was distractible during the testing and needed to have questions repeated to him and to be reassured frequently-signs which indicated that. his reading backwardness was largely due to
emotional causes.
The relationship of constraint to the

he seemed in danger of getting into the hands of causation of the over-inhibited, neurotic

the police. The boy and his grandmother had type of behaviour was less clear, partly

been living together in the basement of a tenement building in a very poor central London
district. William had been going about with a

because this group contained a number of children who had neurotic or mentally

gang of boys which had been recently broken up unstable mothers, or who had had prolonged

by the police and he had been playing truant. physical illnesses in early childhood. The

At school he was regarded as a boy of rather low intelligence who could be helpful but easily
became too self-assertive. His mother, a rather flashy woman, unhappily married to a.very bad

incidence of the pattern was higher (as Jenkins found) among the children who were shy and withdrawing than in the anxious,

tempered man, used to call almost daily on her attention seeking children. The constraint

mother to talk over her troubles but she did not background was present in 75 per cent of

invite William to her own home (on account of her husband's attitude) and she did not have a
very close attachment to her son.

the former, and in 45 per cent of the latter; the relationship therefore to inhibited'

At the reception centre William was so upset (neurotic) behaviour is clearly not fortuitous.

i6o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In this group some of the children had earlier suffered from parental rejection or had previously been exposed to neglect and bad company, and later had been taken into large institutions or suffered from unsatisfactory fostering.
Constraint associated with isolation, particularly after early maternal separation and institutional upbringing has sometimes been suggested as a cause of autistic behaviour. There were only two such children in the 500 and these two had not been separated from their mothers, and their parents were not socially unsatisfactory. Jenkins,7 studying the background features in cases of schizophrenia among 5,000 children who had attended a child guidance clinic, found that the homes of these children were above the average in stability and social class and that the only closely related factor was a " perfectionist " mother.
Sibling Rivalry. The thirty-seven children who seemed to suffer from an even mixture of emotional disturbance and delinquent trends did not show in their backgrounds a mixture of the unfavourable background patterns as one might have expected. Thirteen were rejected children, nine had been exposed to neglect and bad company, and eleven subjected to constraint, but a considerable proportion of them had been in a situation of sibling rivalry-seven were members of large poverty-stricken families and ten lived with parents and step-parents who showed open preference for another child in the family. Although not rejected children in the full sense, they felt their position in the family to be highly insecure. This showed itself in quarrelsomeness at home, and they were constantly at war with other children at school and elsewhere.
Maternal Separation
I should now like to consider briefly, but with some emphasis, a belief that has gained ground and indeed wide-spread acceptance during the last four or five years-the belief that any home is better than an institution. A child-so this contention runs-cannot be removed from his mother, especially in the early years, without the risk of grave

consequences, no matter how cruel or negligent she may be. This doctrine, like so many simple formulae regarding children's upbringing and welfare, is a half-truth; and, in the manner of half-truths, can do much harm, as well as good, when literally applied. The harm can be primarily to the children themselves ; and secondarily to the society of which they are members, and to the children whom they, in turn, will bring into the world.
If the doctrine were true, we should expect to find, in any large group of children, that those who had been separated from their mothers in early life were more prone, other things being equal, to exhibit distortions of personality and conduct than children fortunate enough to have always been in their mothers' care. But in the five hundred children I studied this was not the
case.
Among the Mersham children there was no greater association between separation from
the mother in early years and mental abnormality than there was between such separation and good mental health; the only exception to this which we found was in the case of children who had suffered lengthy separation from their mothers before the age of two; this group tended more towards mental disturbance than towards normality, but even then the tendency was more towards mild than towards severe disturbance.
Separation can seldom be considered properly without regard to the circumstances that brought it about and the ensuing events. The children admitted to Mersham who had been separated from their mother in early life were mostly orphans, or illegitimate or rejected children; many of them had been moved from one institution or home to another, often through no fault of their own. Those who appeared normal had found a woman who stood securely in their mother's place in their affections. But this was not always so. One girl, for example, who had been separated early from her mother and had passed through a number of children's homes where she could form no stable or lasting attachment was, nevertheless, a

UNSATISFACTORY PARENTS

i6i

capable, socially and psychologically well- of a child may suffer if he is without parental

adjusted child; it was only in her preference affection or reasonable training and guidance

for group life that she betrayed the effects of in his home. The damage to him may later

her chequered upbringing.

make him a liability or a danger to society.

It is constantly stressed-and rightly so- The lack of his parents' affection may be no

that all possible help must be given to keep a more harmful than a feeling on the child's

family together and improve the material part that he has lost their affection, as

and psychological conditions under which occurs if he is removed when very young

the parents bring up their children. But from affectionate but neglectful parents so

more harm can be done in many cases by that he feels they have cast him off. There

leaving a child in the hands of a mother who is no sacred and peculiar distinction, from

dislikes him or ill-treats him than by remov- this point of view, between a child's natural

ing him to a suitable nursery, school or foster parents and substitute parents who have

home. If the point at issue is the future cared for him with parental solicitude and

personality and behaviour of the children, towards whom he has developed filial love.

there is not at present any convincing If a child has become unwanted or orphaned,

evidence that they are harmed by removal he needs someone who will stand in the place

from a very adverse environment created by of his natural parents. The ill-effects of a

a rejectirng and grossly psychopathic or home which does not afford parental

neurotic mother, and- there is much evidence affection, steady discipline, interest and.

to suggest that it does them good if they can healthy stimulation to a child, may take

be transferred to an emotionally and socially many forms-delinquency, apathy, neurotic

favourable atmosphere. Such an atmosphere behaviour, and persistent educational

may be provided by a foster home, a boarding backwardness.

school, or a wisely staffed institution.

Ideally, parents would be wise and

It occasionally happens, however, that a affectionate, children would be healthy, and

child who is being ill-treated by his parents psychiatrists and welfare workers would

still longs for their affection and clings so tenaciously to them that he reacts with
hostility or emotional inhibition if he is
removed from them. It is possible to lessen
this distress by letting the child freely
express his fears and resentment about leaving home, but the immediate emotional disturbance wliich removal may thus provoke puts upon the welfare worker and the health visitor an obligation to make as careful an appraisal as she can of the home situation from the psychological point of view before making any recommendation that the child should be taken away. She must consider
whether the parents have so little concern or affection for the child that it will be

have little to do. Such a Utopia is unattain-
able but that does not prevent us from striving to mitigate and' prevent the ill-
effects of bad upbringing and harmful environment seen in each generation. So far
as anomalies are hereditary, their prevention calls for much fuller knowledge. than we now have and, probably, more self discipline and foresight than we can count on to-day. So far as it is the parents who fall short in their relations with one another and with their children, there is promise of improvement from three directions-from actual guidance or treatment of the parents, from the steady amelioration of social conditions which have,

damaging for him to be left any longer with already effected such striking changes for

them, while efforts are made to improve the the better in general behaviour, and lastly

parents' attitude. The final decision may be from interruption of the vicious circle; that

so difficult that it calls for psychiatric is, by dealing with the disturbed children

investigation and advice.

so that they do not carry with them into

adult life a pattern of behaviour which will

Conclusions

have an adverse influence on their

It is clear that the developing personality offspring.

I62 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

REFERENCES
I. Hewitt, L. E. and Jenkins, R. L. (I946), Ftndamental Patterns of Maladjustment: The Dynamics of their Origin. State of Illinois.
2. Lewis, H. (I954), Deprived Children: The Mersham Experiment. Nuffield Foundation and Oxford University Press.
3. Burlingham, D. and Freud, A. (I943), Infants
without Families. Allen & Unwin.

4. Skeels, H. M. and Dye, H. B. (I939), Proc. Amer. Assoc. mental Defic. 44, i, 114-36.
5. Jenkins, R. L. and Glickman, S. (I947), The Nervous Child. 6, 3, 329-39.
6. Kent Paediatric Society (I954). A Study in the Epidemiology of Health among io-I I year old Schoolchildren in the Borough of Bexley.
7. Jenkins, R. L. and Glickman, S. (I946), Amer. J.> Orthopsychiat. 16, 2, 244-6I.

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL

The Quarterly Journal of the Royal Economic Society

NO. 259

SEPTEMBER I955

Vol. LXV

1. ARTICLES

ECONOMIC FOUNDATIONS OF WAGE POLICY

J. R. HICKS

WHAT ALL IS UTILITY?

M. FRIEDMAN

A REJOINDER

SIR DENNIS ROBERTSON

THE ECONOMICS OF SOCIALISM RECONSIDERED

H. SMITH
I

CONVERTIBILITY AND TRIANGULAR TRADE AS SAFEGUARDS AGAINST ECONOMIC DEPRESSION C. M. WRIGHT

THE CONCEPT AND MEASUREMENT OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVES

W. M. BROWN

PRODUCT ELASTICITIES OF SUBSTITUTION" IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE

R. J. NICHOLSON

A REJOINDER

SIR DONALD MACDOUGALL

TRADE IMBALANCE, GAINS FROM TRADE AND NATIONAL INCOME CHANGE

V. K. RAMAsWAMI

KEYNES AND SUPPLY FUNCTIONS

SIR DENNIS ROBERTSON

MATHEMATICAL APPENDIX

H. G. JOHNSON

A SECOND REJOINDER

F. J. DE JONG

INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION AND PROFITS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM AND THE UNITED STATES E. H. STERN
II. REVIEWS

III. NOTES AND MEMORANDA

IV. RECENT PERIODICALS AND NEW BOOKS

MACMILLAN & CO., LTD., LONDON, W.C.2

Application for Fellowship to

ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY, 2I Bentinck Street, London, W. I

Annual Subscription CI IOS.

Single Copy Ten Shillings

I62

