THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
GALTON ANNIVERSARY, 1917.
THE DISABLED SAILOR AND SOLDIER AND THE FUTURE OF OUR RACE.
ON February i6th this year the anniversary of Galton's birth-
day was celebrated as usual, by an evening.meeting, and, in
place of a single address as heretofore, a discussion was held on the above subject. Major Darwin opened the proceedings with the following address:-
On a third occasion we meet during war-time to celebrate the Galton anniversary, and as Galton's most enduring work was in connection with the methods of bettering the racial qualities of mankind, our thoughts naturally now turn to the disabled sailor and soldier and the future of our race. This war is being fought for the maintenance of the civilisation of Europe, and we all feel that we owe it to those who have died in this cause not to falter in our course until a satisfactory peace has been secured. But will our obligations then cease? The injury resulting from this struggle will last fdr a very long time, and if when peace is at last won we then relax in our efforts to wipe away the stain of war, this bloodshed will not have secured to our nation all the safeguards that might thus have been attained. Many will be the directions in which we ought to strive in order to remove the damage done to our civilisation, and in all our efforts let us above all things endeavour to avoid those petty jealousies
between the various necessary organisations which are so likely to stand in the way of our national reconstruction. Amongst these various efforts, no one denies the importance of endeavouring to make smooth the path of the combatant when returning to

2 EUGENICS REVIEW.
civil life; for first amongst our debts to the dead must rank the duty of insuring that their comrades in arms shall take up the threads of their former lives in such a manner as to be most beneficial, not only to themselves, but also to our nation in the future.
As our fighting men have behaved magnificently, and as everyone feels that they deserve well of their country, a good deal of attention is certain to be devoted to their immediate needs when returning from the front. All such efforts are most praiseworthy, though, if they are not accompanied by much thought and study, many foolish things will be done. There is, however, great danger that the steps necessary to safeguard the future of the nation will receive but scant consideration; and in order to perceive the importance of this branch of our duties with regard to the home-coming combatants, it is in the first place necessary to realise the extent to which the sailors and soldiers, who have actually fought in this war, constitute a class above the average in civic worth, to use the expression coined by Sir Francis Galton. To enforce this and other points, I shall deal with the soldiers of the new army only, both because it is numerically the largest question, and because it is that with which I am most familiar. In the earlier days of the war all who enlisted were volunteers, in itself a guarantee that they possessed certain high qualities; and it was the earliest to join who suffered the most. Then again, large numbers have always been rejected at enlistment, including those defective in body and obviously defective in mind, and, of course, all those confined or resident in prisons, lunatic asylums, homes for imbeciles, hospitals, and other institutions. After enlistment many were sent back to their
homes as unfit, and many were retained in England as unequa,l
to active service, a very large class in all. Lastly of those who went abroad, the boldest and those with the strongest sense of duty generally forced their way into the fighting line; though many such were necessarily employed in the rear and in comparatively safe jobs. No doubt many picked men were retained for special work in England; but when all this is realised, can it be denied that the men who have served in the trenches form a selected class of the community, both in many physical and in some mental qualities?

' THE DISABLED SAILOR AND SOLDIER, ETC.

3

It may perhaps be urged that whilst the physical fitness of our fighters has undoubtedly resulted in their being as a class somewhat above the average as regards the possession of worldly goods, yet that, if this be so, their superiority in this respect affords no reason whatever for giving them still further advantages. We are, however, pleading that our fighting men shall be placed in a position, not of superiority to, but of equality with their stay-at-home neighbours. Moreover, it is as well to enquire a little more closely in what respects and why these men are above the average of the nation. All who have watched the subsequent careers of the boys with whom they were at school must, I think, now realise that their former companions started life with greatly differing natural endowments, and also that on the whole, though with curious exceptions, it has been the best endowed by nature who have made for themselves the most profitable careers. The good circumstances in which the naturally well endowed were able to place themselves reacted, no doubt, on their characters; or, in other words, the grown man is always the result of both heredity and environment acting in such a manner that it is almost impossible to disentangle their separate effects. Now we eugenists hold that the good qualities of the men occupying these more favoured homes will be passed on to the coming generations both by natural inheritance and by tradition, whilst as to the transmission of human characteristics by natural inheritance, we hold it to be especially important, because we believe that the quality of the stream of life which we allow thus to flow on into the ocean of time beyond us will be an influence which will endure for long ages, and not a mere external effect liable to slowly die out as time goes by. We are, however, most anxious to join forces with all those who agree with us no further than in believing that the tradition of our existing good homes will be an influence on our descendants greatly worth striving for. In short, the men who have fought so nobly in this war come from homes somewhat above the average in civic worth; they will themselves form homes above the average if they are given a fair chance; and we desire to see that as much as possible of this good influence shall be passed on to posterity whatever be the methods of its transmission. As to

4 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the men who stopped at home, we know that no adequate steps are being taken to prevent even those of them who are lunatics, imbeciles, drunkards and criminals from parenthood, let alone the host of the other unfit; whilst, on the other hand, the sailors and soldiers who have died in this war unmated-a picked class, as we have seen-can have left no living legacies behind them. This slaughter of the fittest is a grievous loss to the nation, and this is a loss which we should mitigate, as far as possible, by endeavouring to insure that those who have fought and survived shall have homes not inferior to the homes of their fathers, and that they shall be encouraged rather than discouraged if they desire to marry, so that as many British as possible shall be able in future to boast of having the heroes of this war amongst their ancestry.
We all agree that our sailors and soldiers who have been injured in the war should receive compensation, though few of us have taken the trouble to consider how that compensation ought to be estimated. We are apt to value all things by their money value, and we are thus led only to think of those things which money can replace. The compensation given should no doubt be proportionate to the damage sustained; but if a man loses his chances of establishing a comfortable home he has lost something which is beyond all price. Any added difficulty in maintaining or making a home is the greatest injury which his service to his country can inflict on the soldier, and this added difficulty is the best measure of the compensation justly due to the man himself. Moreover, looking to the future needs of the nation, what we desire is that our fighting men shall not be placed at any disadvantage in comparison with their neighbours in regard to parenthood; and on the grounds of both abstract
justice and national requirement it seems that it may be laid down as a general principle that our fighting men should be
compensated so as to place them, if possible, in as good a
position for marriage and home life as if they had not fought. In passing on to consider in detail how this compensation
can best be given, it will be convenient to divide the enquiry under two heads. It should be ascertained, in the first place, what compensation is due to the disabled combatant in order to

THE DISABLED SAILOR AND SOLDIER, ETC.

5

place him on an equality with his more fortunate and nominally undamaged comrade in arms. After this adjustment has been settled, it should then be decided what compensation should be given to all combatants to place them on an equality with the stay-at-home population. Dealing with the first of these topics, and remembering that our object should be to place the disabled on an equality with the undamaged soldier as regards the possibilities of home life, our attention is naturally first turned to the question of pensions. Here we are glad to find that this principle has been recognised in a measure. Pensions on a certain scale will be allotted to all soldiers who have sustained certain defined injuries, and in addition, certain small allowances may be made for each child born of a marriage contracted before the man's discharge; and it is presumed that these allowances are intended to equalise the lot of the disabled and the undamaged parent as far as may be. As to the injured soldier, whether now married or unmarried, if he has children subsequently to his discharge, no allowance may be made for them; an omission which presumably is defended on the ground that there is no necessity for a man to marry or have children in these circumstances, and that if he does so it is with his eyes open to the consequences. But this is in great measure to abandon the idea that compensation to the soldier is to be judged by the added difficulty of making for himself a decent home. The State in effect says to the disabled bachelor soldier, " Marry or not, just as you please, but mind you don't have any children "; and, whatever else may be said, this is to abandon the effort to insure that the qualities found in our superior homes shall be passed on as largely as possible to future generations. Surely something might be done to abolish or to lessen this distinction between the treatment of
post-war and pre-war children. Though no general complaint can be raised on the grounds
of inadequacy against the pensions granted, yet those who look into this matter will, I think, agree that the extra allowances are hardly ever large enough to fully compensate for the cost of feeding and clothing the children. If it is not too late to make changes, it would be advantageous if the pension for the soldier were to be fixed on a lower scale and the allowance per child

6 EUGENICS REVIEW.
were to be more generous, thus causing no alteration in the total cost to the State. Such a scheme of pensions would be fairer as between different households, and it would have obvious racial advantages. Moreover, it has been urged that the pension system must always carry with it the danger that it tempts an undesirable class of women to seek to entrap the soldiers for the sake of their money value. Though the very little evidence known to me tells against the reality of this danger, yet it ought not to be overlooked; and since it is money and not children that the objectionable woman has in view, an alteration in the scale of pensions in the direction suggested would somewhat safeguard the soldier from capture.
No flat rate scheme of pensions can, however, in reality put the disabled soldier on an equality with the undamaged man of similar social standing; and, if this equality is to be obtained,! the compensation given must vary in accordance with the opportunities which the soldier has lost through his disablement. Here again we find the general principle is admitted, for in place of the flat rate allowances per child, the Statutory Committee have power to make special grants for educational purposes in order to enable the children to be brought up more nearly as they would have been had the father not been injured. But here again we ought on racial grounds to press for the admission of post-war children of disabled soldiers to these advantages. Since State funds are raised from both the rich and the poor, it must, however, be admitted that it may be difficult for the Statutory Committee to deal adequately with this matter without
voluntary contributions, and that appeals may have to be made to supplement Governmental educational grants. Such appeals we should all endorse with all the influence at our command, and the eugenist will be able to join in this movement as such if the post-war children of the disabled combatants are admitted to
these benefits. A very real difficulty has to be faced, however, in whatever
way we regard these questions. Large numbers of men joined the army who ought never to have been enlisted, and, moreover, a certain proportion must have volunteered or been called up having constitutional defects which could not then have been

THE DISABLED SAILOR AND SOLDIER, ETC.

7

recognised, but which were bound to declare themselves before long. Hence a large number will be invalided out of the army for causes which had either very little or nothing whatever to do with the war, and I believe many such are now receiving help from local Statutory Committees. To distinguish ill-health which would have occurred under home conditions from illhealth due to the war is a difficult task, and in doubtful cases the applicant will presumably be given the benefit of the doubt. But if assistance were to be given to parents in all these dubious
cases in order to cover the cost of their post-war children, the result would be in no inconsiderable measure to encourage the reproduction of bad heritable tendencies. For instance, large
numbers of consumptives are, I am told, on the books of the Statutory Committees, and we ought not to take any steps especially designed to encourage to become parents those who are likely to be endowed with a heritable tendency to this disease. This is a very real eugenic danger which cannot be neglected. It would be best met, it seems to me, by the Statutory Committee deciding to admit claims for assistance for post-war children only when it was established, without leaving any doubts in the minds of the authorities charged with the decisions in such matters, that the disablement of the parent was solely due to war conditions not merely abroad, but at the front. We all feel that wounded men stand first for consideration, and they would then receive this additional assistance without question. The war conditions at the front have been no doubt such as to destroy the health of many men fairly classed as healthy, and the limitation of this assistance to those really thus injured,
especially since those who have entered the firing line certainly form a specially selected class of the community, would therefore exclude men with constitutional defects to a sufficient extent to make these allowances on the whole racially beneficial. Since general rules must be laid down with regard to Governmental assistance, such help would no doubt somtimes be given in cases which had better be left unaided; but I think had I time I could prove that, on eugenic as well as on all other grounds, it is better in some matters to treat whole classes according to their average merits rather than be frightened into complete inaction by the

8 EUGENICS REVIEW.
existence of inevitable exceptions. In fact, we submit that those who have not only been in the firing line, but have unquestionably been disabled by war conditions at the front, should receive additional assistance to that already sanctioned, this assistance to be in the form of allowances to cover the cost of their post-war children; and this help, we hold, should not be withheld either because it would entail a minority being helped who had better not be aided or because others would fail to get the help which they might well have been given.
It is, of course, impossible to place the disabled soldier on an equality with his luckier comrades, though, as we have seen, something can be done in this direction. All soldiers must, moreover, be to a certain extent injured as regards their future prospects by their hardships and by their absence from home, and this brings us to our second problem, namely, the placing of all combatants on an equality with stay-at-home workers. On this topic I propose to say little, as I have nothing new to suggest. It is now generally admitted that all pensions, except, of course, in the case of the hopelessly disabled, are in a measure injurious, as tempting the recipient to idleness; and to attempt to compensate the undamaged soldier for his privations by the award of a small pension would be the worst possible policy. With regard to the return to civil life of all soldiers, damaged or undamaged, all other questions in fact shrink into insignificance compared with that of getting them back to work; and as men after returning from the front quickly deteriorate if idle, so it is said, this is matter of great urgency. Idleness is apt to lead to discontent and drink, whilst the man who gets employment, whether he is drawing a pension or not, will benefit greatly by his wages. Compared with the idler, the man in employment will be far more likely to marry and make a comfortable home for himself, and consequently from that home to pass on to posterity the tradition of both perseverance and temperance. It will, moreover, be the naturally unfit for whom it will be most difficult to find work; and help to get employment for the returning soldier will be especially effective in the case of men possessl ing good innate qualities, qualities which will, therefore, more often be transmitted to posterity by natural inheritance because

THE DISABLED SAILOR AND SOLDIER, ETC.

9

of that help. After thorough medical treatment in the case of the disabled, the re-establishment in civil life of the sailor and soldier may be assisted by putting them in the way of finding jobs in their old lines of work, by training them for new employments, or by giving them.necessary employment under the State; and all such efforts unquestionably merit every possible encouragement.
Whenever steps are taken to obtain work under Govern-
ment, or indeed under any other employer, for the returning
combatant, let us avoid as far as possible the grievous mistake of encouraging useless work. Where work is not really needed, this will soon be perceived, and it will often be negligently performed, a condition of affairs demoralising to both workman and employer. Let me here add that where work under the State is being given, every effort should be made to persuade the authorities either to provide quarters adequate for a growing family, or else to give wages sufficient to enable such accommodation to be hired. " Men with encumbrances need not apply " is a notice which should in future be universally anathematised.
Though the disabled combatant is the subject of to-day's discussion, I cannot resist the temptation of stepping a little beyond its limits to mention one or two other points which ought to be considered in peace-time. The permanent staff of the Army and Navy will always, it may be hoped, constitute a picked class of the community, and they should, therefore, on racial grounds, always be given proper facilities for maintaining homes. Not only are better married quarters needed, I believe, in some cases, but the number of married men on the strength should be increased. Part of the pay of all such as are allowed quarters, and of all officers, should take the form of an allowance for each child under a fixed age. Lastly, in all large garrisons, schools for the younger children of officers ought to be established and maintained at the expense of the State. These are reforms which can be advocated, not only on eugenic grounds, but also in order to afford the soldier a decent environment during his years of service.
To-day I have endeavoured to indicate that whether we look to the individual or to the race, our main efforts with regard to

IC) EUGENICS REVIEW.
the disabled combatant ought to be to enable and to encourage him to make a suitable home for himself, and I have urged that all children, whenever born, must be considered as part of that home. Employment and the establishment of a home will form the best guarantees to those we wish to help that their surroundings will be good, and we may be certain that if a good comfortable home is established the good surroundings there found will
always, in a measure, be passed on by tradition to several suc-
ceeding generations. Moreover, in assisting the disabled combatant to form a home, we shall, as a rule, be assisting men naturally endowed with some superiority in inborn qualities; and the better the qualities of the man we are trying to help, the more effective will be our efforts. It follows, therefore, that the result of our endeavours will be the more frequent passing on, by natural inheritance, of those superior qualities to posterity for an indefinite number of generations. The civilisation of a nation depends on both the innate qualities and the surroundings of its people; and if we desire true greatness for our descendants, not German greatness, or the greatness of the bully, it is absolutely essential that we should take innate character, as well as environment, into consideration. The wellbeing of our descendants at home, and the reputation in the future of our country abroad, will depend on its civilisation; for it our sailors and soldiers have died by thousands, and for it we who live must continue to strive.
The following discussion then took place:MR. PERCY HARRIS said that as Chairman of the London WVar Pensions Committee he represented part of the organisation which was charged with the duty of taking care of disabled soldiers and sailors after they left the service, and the importance of that duty could not be exaggerated, whether it was regarded from the point of view of the future usefulness and happiness of the men or from the point of view which specially interested the Eugenics Society, namely, the racial qualities of future generations. He wished he could say that the arrangements for discharging that duty were all that could be wished, but various difficulties stood in the way, including a question of policy which the authorities seemed quite unable to decide. The question was whether men whose fighting days are over, but who need re-making for civil life, should be retained in the army, some of them, at any rate, for that purpose, or whether they

THE DISABLED SAILOR AND SOLDIER, ETC.

II

should be handed over at once to the civil organisation. The military authorities had their hands full and naturally did not wish to have to look after men who had ceased to be of any military value. On the other hand, the civilian organisation has no power of discipline nor any means of insisting that men should accept or persevere in the treatment which was essential for them. He always thought that some combination of military and civil effort was desirable; and it did not seem commonsense to scatter tuberculous, neurasthenic, and epileptic soldiers and sailors over the country and leave it to the Local Pensions Committees to hunt them up and get them to accept treatment, if they would do so. The Eugenics Society might well take a strong line on this subject, for the race must suffer if these damaged men were not repaired as quickly and effectively as possible. If it were decided that the responsibility must rest upon a purely civilian organisation he hoped the Government would so arrange their system of pensions and allowances that it would offer strong inducements to men to accept treatment. It would pay the nation to be liberal in this direction.
He added that, though the arrangements for dealing with disabled men needed to be strengthened and extended, much was being done for them. He referred to what St. Dunstan's was doing for the blind and Roehampton for the mutilated; and numbers of men were being treated in one way or another through the agency of the Local Committees. The class which had been the despair of Local Committees was that of the warshaken men, the neurasthenics. He was glad to say that an institution was in course of formation at Golder's Green which would afford an extraordinarily interesting experiment. Men suffering from neurasthenia would be sent there, but would be mixed with men who were not suffering from nerves but were recovering from wounds, and it was hoped that the good influence of the latter, who would be chosen for their cheerful disposition, would help the neurasthenics to recover their health. The men would be engaged in gardening and other outdoor work and would receive therapeutic treatment.
There would shortly be issued a new pensions scheme which, he hoped, would do complete justice to our gallant men.
MR. WILLIAM SCHOOLING said:One thing that especially strikes me about the President's address is his plea for the creation of conditions-the modification of environment-in order to give full play to the force of heredity. Those who desire improvement too frequently look to immediate results and ignore those more remote consequences with which, in general, eugenics are especially concerned. A marked distinction between the savage and the civilised is to be found in the absence or presence of provision for the

12 EUGENICS REVIEW.
future, and the extent of such forethought is no bad measure of the degree of civilisation attained by communities or by individuals. We should, therefore, expect to find that the study of eugenics would only become possible at a comparatively late stage of social evolution, and that, even were our knowledge of heredity greater than it is, there would be little hope of applying our science in practice until we had reached such a stage of progress as to cause the welfare of a relatively remote future to make an effective appeal to our thoughts and activities.
For the majority of people the perception of some tangible result of their labours is necessary for the maintenance of their interest, and it seems to me that the President's arguments in favour of a good environment for disabled soldiers can scarcely fail to meet with widespread and energetic support. Like most other things that are soundly based, these proposals give expression to our keen sense of gratitude and justice, at the same time that they guarantee the nation a return upon its outlay incomparably- in excess of any expenditure that would be incurred.
There are, of course, well-recognised dangers in connection with pensions, especially when these provide an adequate or generous return for services rendered. In the case of pensioners who will be engaging in civil employment, there is the risk, which does not attach to old-age pensions, that the possession of a fixed income may lead them to accept work at lower wages than the current rate; this both deprives the pensioners of the benefit to which they are entitled, and tends to injure other workers who are wholly dependent upon their earnings. This consideration lends additional force to Major Darwin's contention that increase in, or liberality of, pensions should to a great extent take the form of allowances for children; this arrangement would not only make for the improvement of the race by encouraging the parenthood of the best types, but would diminish the probability of mischievous competition with current rates of wages. Moreover, if the allowances for children ceased at some such age, as sixteen, they could be made on a liberal scale, and yet the total cost of pensions to the nation would be substantially less than an even slightly increased pension for life to men who for the most part are not thirty years of age.
Happily, there are countless instances of disabled men acquiring a large amount of skill in many directionS, in spite of their incapacity. The possibility of training, if not altogether a new departure, is being carried out far more successfully than ever before, and it might very well prove a wise procedure to pay unemployed people, whether disabled soldiers or others, a
reasonable wage during unavoidable unemployment, provided they went through a course of training which would at the same

THE DISABLED SAILOR AND SOLDIER, ETC.

13

time increase their own status and earning capacity, as well as make them more valuable members of the community.
The proposals which the President has put before us are, you will agree, entirely convincing, and it is to be hoped that they will receive a large measure of support, and that each one of us in his own way will use his influence to help in bringing them into effect.

THE HON. LADY NORMAIN said in the course of her observa.. tions:
I venture to make a few remarks on this subject because my husband was asked by the War Office to draw up a report upon the treatment and training of disabled soldiers in France. I accompanied him during his investigations, and therefore had a good opportunity of studying the questions in France. The conclusion I arrived at was the great necessity for establishing in our own country a scheme of re-education within the reach of all men who, through loss of limb or functional disablement, are invalided out of the service.
I feel that it is very desirable to give such men an adequate pension as a compensation for what they have endured and, indeed, possibly lost for ever; but that our obligations by no means end there.
Opinions differ very much as to whether this re-education should be compulsory or voluntary only. My own view is that a man should only obtain his maximum pension when he has been admnitted to have done all in his power, both as regards medical treatment and vocational training, to return himself as an independent economic citizen to civil life.

MR. THEODORE CHAMBERS said that he had been sitting at the Surveyors' Institution as a member of a special committee to consider the problems likely to arise at the termination of the war, more particularly in connection with possible unemployment on the disbanding of the Army and munition workers.
The committee, though by no means favourably disposed to municipalisation, had unanimously reported in favour of local authorities being authorised to prepare extensive housing schemes, to be financed by the State, in such places where there was a scarcity of housing accommodation.
In his opinion, the policy would be beneficial from the eugenic point of view. It would tend to bring men back into a very large number of trades. It would also tend to check the tendency to which Mr. Schooling had referred, namely, advantage being taken of a surplus of labour and of a large number of pensioners for the lowering of wages.
The absorption of the millions of fit men released from war service was, owing to its dimensions, as important a prob-

14 EUGENICS REVIEW.
lem as that of the injured. The fit men must be reinstated as rapidly as possible in productive work.
It was not possible to isolate the eugenic aspect of the question, but he was sure that the policy of providing Stateaided productive employment after the war was sound from the eugenic standpoint.
MR. W. HOWARD HAZELL said: I think in discussing this question it would be well to bear in mind what has been done by the United States in granting pensions to her disabled soldiers, and to learn from the mistakes that country has made in dealing with this difficult problem. That Government has recognised the principle that widows of soldiers are entitled to a pension even in the case of post-war marriages. The result is extraordinary, for when I was in America some 15 years ago there were about 12 widows of men who had fought under George Washington still drawing their pensions. This is not due to the abnormal longevity of American women, but to the fact that old soldiers of 8o have often been married by young women for the sake of the pension they will receive as long as they do not remarry. The United States Government, in its anxiety to deal liberally with its soldiers, also grants pensions to ex-soldiers whose sickness or disability can be attributed to the privations of the campaign. The result is that 40 years after the Civil War new pensioners were claiming relief on account of ailments supposed to be due to the war, and there was a case I came across of a man who claimed an increased pension because of I9 new diseases from which he fotind he was suffering. The whole system has been greatly abused, and it is well that we should avoid such errors. Major Darwin's suggestion, however, that the children of disabled soldiers-either those of pre-war or post-war marriages-should have an allowance granted to them, seems to me to follow somewhat the American svstem, but to avoid its possibility of abuse. It is a suggestion that should commend itself to such a Society as this, as it deals with the problem from a eugenic standpoint, and must promote the health and well-being of the children of men who, though prevented by disablement due to the war from earning a proper wage, will generally be of robust physique and probably the parents of healthy children. As far as I know, this principle has not been adopted by America or any other country, but it has many advantages. The expense is not permanent or even long continued, as the allowance ceases when the child reaches a certain age, and the soldier receives the income just when his family expenditure is highest. If this suggestion should be adopted, the country is not paying pensions to promote matrimony as in America, but to promote and safeguard the desirable results of inatrimony.

THE DISABLED SAILOR AND SOLDIER, ETC.

15

DR. R. MURRAY LESLIE: There is one important point to
which I should like briefly to refer. We all agree that heredity
is the basis of eugenics, and therefore, as eugenists, we should recommend that the hereditary aspect of disabilities ought to be considered in awarding pensions. Now in the official " Medical Reports on Invalid Soldiers " which medical officers of military hospitals have to fill up before cases are considered by the Medical Boards, no specific mention is made of the question of heredity. This is, to my mind, a serious omission, not only because it makes it impossible for the lhereditary aspect to be considered in awarding soldiers' pensions, but also because we thereby fail to obtain the requisite data for compiling statistics in regard to the inheritance of various defects and disorders to which the soldier is liable. I would therefore suggest as a practical measure that in item No. I2 of these medical reports, where the medical officer's opinion is asked as to the " causation of these disabilities," a clause be added asking for information in regard to the question of heredity. Such a query as:-" Is there anything in the family or past history which would throw light on the origin of the present disability? " would be sufficient. The applicability to cases of epilepsy, shell-shock neurasthenia, tuberculosis, rheumatic heart affectiobs, and other conditions, is obvious. In the medical history sheets there is a special section dealing with syphilis, but naturally and even justifiably cases of aneurism, premature arterio-sclerosis, locomotor ataxy and such conditions are usually attributed by the kind-hearted medical officer to the exciting causes incidental to active service rather than to the underlying predisposing cause, as it scarcely seems fair that a brave soldier should be unduly penalised on account of an early youthful indiscretion.
Major Darwin has pointed out the advisability when allotting pensions, of distinguishing between disablement due to injuries actually acquired in the firing line, and disablements primarily due to pre-war tendencies and disabilities, on the ground that the former constitute a more selected class of individuals and therefore presumnably of higher eugenic value as parents of the next generation. He suggests that these should have higher pensions or better allowances for children. May I point out that such a distinction has already been made in awarding gold arm-stripes, which are only given to wounded soldiers. Tlhe glamour of these gold stripes tends to enhance the soldier's matrimonial value, and the President's interpolation that they might almost be named " Eugenic stripes " is a very happy one.
I hope that the War Pensions Committee will seriously consider Major Darwin's suggestion to increase the amount of the allowances for children, even should this involve a corresponding diminution in the individual pensions. Not only should

EUGENICS {REVIEW.
notices in regard to " encumbrances " be anathematised, as Major Darwin advocates, but also all other artificial handicaps and restrictions tending to penalise parenthood-more particularly in the case of our discharged soldiers and sailors. Let us hope that the attractive glamour of the gold stripe, the regimental badge and the breast ribbon, in association with an adequate pension proportional to the disability, will more or less fully compensate for the reduced earning power of our fighting men who have suffered in their country's cause.
MR. NEWTON CRANE deprecated the idea that the troops of the various foreign expeditionary forces would return home at the close of the War to become a charge upon the country. He was confident that they would resolve themselves into their former social and commercial elements, without disturbing normal conditions, and that they would resume their places in the community to the full extent of their powers. He did not agree that the liberal pensions which had been granted to discharged soldiers after the American Civil War were detrimental to them. Such scandals as had occurred were the result of temporary political competition, which had now ceased. The American idea was that pensions were not solely, or even to any great extent, to afford the recipients of them means of support, except those who were broken in the wars, but were an expression of the appreciation by the nation of the valour, patriotism and self-sacrifice of those who volunteered to defend its liberties. It was for this purpose that the American pension was, practically, an hereditary grant, to be enjoyed by the widow and the children of the soldier after his death. He advocated a liberal pension to those who should be mustered out at the close of this War, special extra grants being made in case of total or partial disability and where earning capacity had thereby become lost or impaired. He did not sympathise with the view that our returned soldiers would become wastrels or idlers, content to live upon their pensions, or that they would, by reason of what the country gave them, unfairly compete in their former occupations with less favoured wage-earners. At the same time, he earnestly advocated the energetic pressure upon the Government of the views advocated by Major I)arwin, in connection with further allowances for children in imposing income tax. He drew attention, also, to the need of providing homes in which the rearing of larger families should be possible. At the present time in certain populous parts of London the apartment houses
devoted to working men provided only two, or at the most three, rooms for a family. If the numbers of the family increased the tenant was served with a notice to quit. He had either to take less advantageous quarters upon upper floors in the same building, or to seek a home in the slums in a house occupied by several families, where the social conditions and the physical

THE DISABLED SAILOR AND SOLDIER, ETC.

I7

surroundings were repulsive. The result was a denial of parenthood, and a restriction of the growth of the best class of the population. A working man had only that day spoken to him of the disability under which his class now laboured, and had besought him to advocate the grant by the State of an allowance of an annual bounty of, say, twenty pounds per child during the period of family growth. With that view the speaker concurred.
COLONEL HILLS, 'who disclaimed any special knowledge or experience on the subject, wished to raise two points. Firstly, as regards the reduction in the rate of pension as a man either improved in health or his earning capacity increased. He was of opinion that this is an unsound principle, tending to deter men from doing their best to get back to remunerative work, and that it would be far better to settle a fixed rate not subject to any alteration.
Secondly, as regards the training of convalescent or partially disabled men in trades. He was of opinion that to ensure success there must be some measure of compulsion in this. It will otherwise not be possible to overcome the deep-seated physical inertia which is the inevitable concomitant of the very strenuous conditions of active service followed by the complete relaxation from all physical labour in hospital.

