JAMES SHIELDS
B.A., Genetics Unit, Institute of Psychiatry, Maudsley Hospital, London, SEs
Twins Brought up Apart

T HE PRESENT PAPER, based on a talk given at a symposium on Genetics in Psychiatry, held at the Maudsley Hospital
in October 1956, takes the form of an informal discussion of the provisional findings in an investigation at present in progress into uniovular (i.e. genetically identical) twins brought up in different homes. At that time the series consisted of thirty-eight pairs.*
The literature Up till now the largest single series of such twins to have been investigated is exactly half the size of the present material. The results of the classical investigation of Newman, Freeman and Holzingerel are well known. Briefly, they found that their nineteen pairs of separated identical twins (mostly adults) resembled one another in intelligence rather more closely than fraternal twins, but not quite so closely as identical twins brought up together and still attending school. Their findings as regards personality were inconclusive, though the case histories when they touch on this subject are of interest still. When expressing themselves separately on the significance of their findings, it is interesting that the three authors differ somewhat in their emphasis. According to Woodworth,17 the psychologist (Freeman) considers the study showed that "human nature may be improved or debased to a degree that many have thought impossible". The statistician (Holzinger) points out that "relatively great environmental differences must be present to produce a noticeable effect";-while the biologist (Newman) confesses to have been "much more impressed with the very great intra-pair similarities after the twins
* In December 1957 forty-one uniovular twins brought
up apart have been investigated, and there is some further relevant information on another five uniovular and ten binovular pairs. The separated uniovular pairs are now being compared with a matched control series of uniovular twins brought up together.

had been exposed to all sorts of environmental differences", than he was with the differences
between them. Barbara Burks,2'8 whose work on foster
children is well known, has investigated five pairs of twins brought up apart: one of them is probably binovular. Only one case has been reported fully, the others having been left incomplete when she died. In the first pair she brings out clearly the nature both of the similarities and of the differences, and in most of them she is able to show plausible relationships between minor personality traits and differences in the twins' experiences. One of Burks's twins was for a while in a State Mental Hospital, her twin partner not requiring psychiatric treatment. Unfortunately, the nature of her complaint is unclear.
Cases of schizophrenia occurring in both members of a pair of uniovular twins brought up apart have been reported, together with the evidence on which the diagnosis is based, by Kallmann8 and by Craike and Slater.4* An instance of concordance for manic-depressive psychosis in uniovular twins brought up apart is given by Stenstedt.18 There have been other single case reports, mostly on psychological lines, of twins brought up apart, for example, those of Muller,10 Saudek,`2 Gardner and Newman,5 Schwesinger18 and Yoshimasu.18 One of Lange's9 concordant criminal twin pairs was separated, but not till the age of eight. Gladys Schwesinger's Mexican pair is interesting, not only for its story but for the different interpretations that can be put on it. Very briefly, these girls, last observed when one of them died at eighteen, had for some four years shown pretty severe behaviour problems of a silmilar kind. They were institutionalized, first
* Since this talk was given, another such case has come
to light at the Maudsley Hospital and has been investigated in this Unit.

"I5
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1958, 50, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

separately, then together. One was a little more about themselves and including a personality

tense than the other. This one got in with a test kindly devised for us by Professor H. J.

group of adolescents who took drugs, and she Eysenck who also advised on intelligence

was found dead one day from morphine testing. In cases where the twins came together

injections. The surviving twin, who had remained one twin could be interviewed on his own while

out of trouble for a few months after this, had the other did an intelligence test. The main

the kinder mother. The author's conclusion, object was of course to obtain a history and an

apparently underestimating the four years of assessment of the personality of each twin,

instability of this twin, is to stress the importance supplementing information obtained from the

for temperamental stability of "love, permissive- twins on interview with that from outside

ness, relaxation and emotional security in sources where necessary. Several pairs spent the

mother-child relationships", as exemplified by best part of a day here.

the mother of this twin.

Women appear to volunteer for this kind of

An opposite danger in interpretation is seen research more readily than men; we have twenty-

in Yoshimasu's case. Here one of the twins, five female and only thirteen male pairs, a

brought up by neglectful foster-parents, becomes number of the men indeed having been induced

a persistent criminal; the other, brought up by to participate by their wives or parents. (We

a good mother and later by a religious step- cannot afford to be too particular about ob-

mother, leads a blameless life as a parson. The taining a completely random sample of twins

author draws the obvious moral; but when it brought up apart.) We have only four pairs

comes to psychiatric classification both twins, under the age of twenty. The remainder are in

are put down as weak-willed psychopaths! their thirties, forties or fifties and are on the

We shall look forward with interest to the whole older than Newman's twins. They come

contribution which Scandinavian workers are from all parts of the country.

making to the study of twins brought up apart. Twenty-five were separated during the first

Dr. Juel-Nielsen6,7 of Copenhagen is making an year of life, most of them soon after birth-

intensive investigation of about a dozen pairs, indeed one was taken from his mother before his

and a small series is also under investigation by twin brother had been born; six were separated

Professor Husen's department in Stockholm.6 during the second year, and four between the

ages of two and four years. The proportion of

The present twins and how they were separated early separations is as high as in Newman's

Our present material consists of twins brought series. I thought it worth while also to include

up apart who sent their names in to the B.B.C. three pairs that were not separated till seven,

following a television programme in 1953, in eight or nine years of age to see how significant

which a special appeal was made for such twins age at separation might be. For similar reasons I

to come forward. Up to the present thirty-eight included two pairs that had been parted for the

uniovular pairs, including two from other supposedly all-important first five years and

sources, have been investigated, most of them then reunited. There were a few others who

completely.

were reunited shortly before leaving school. Our

I ought perhaps to say briefly how I have series includes two pairs that have never met,

investigated the twins. The great majority I have and one where we were able to bring the twins

interviewed personally, but we have asked together for the first time at the age of thirty-six;

colleagues to investigate twins in Scotland, one of these women had had no idea she was a

Germany and Chile. Ovularity diagnosis includes twin until she heard from us; the other had no

full blood grouping, finger prints and P.T.C. idea whether her twin was a brother or a sister

testing. I was prepared when need be to see the and whether alive or dead. This pair was

twins in their homes, but the majority came- remarkably alike in personality and I am glad

mostly together-to the Maudsley Hospital. to say they were overjoyed at meeting. Five

Before being seen, the twins were asked to other pairs did not meet till their late teens or

complete a booklet giving some information mid-twenties. The others had varying degrees

i i6

TWINS BROUGHT UP APART

of contact during childhood. They all, however, own, though a twin who was brought up as an

came from different homes.

only child was apt to feel lonely when he knew

The reasons for these twins being parted were he had brothers and sisters; their respective

various. Illegitimacy accounts for six pairs, the families (when known to one another) generally

death of the mother for eight. The most frequent accepted the situation too. This was particularly

reason was that the mother was ill, pregnant so when one twin was brought up by the mother,

again or considered unable to look after both the other by a maternal grandmother or maternal

twins, one of whom might have been particularly aunt. There were, however, seven or eight cases

delicate. There were eighteen such cases; often where there was disagreement over the custody

a grandmother who was maternal in both senses or upbringing of the child, for instance, between

of the word, or a childless aunt, was an import- a paternal relative and the mother or between a

ant factor here in addition to the mother's stepmother and a maternal aunt. The influence

indisposition, or-as happened in a further of these differences of view was generally

three cases-to father's unemployxnent. In two reflected in some aspect of the twins' behaviour.

cases the children were removed from home by Judging by later mental health, the separation of

the Poor Law authorities. In one case the father one twin from the mother does not appear to

sold one twin to settle his debts. This twin has have been a traumatic experience for that twin,

lived in Chile all her life where she has married either by reason of deprivation of breast-feeding

a Frenchman; her sister came to Denmark or by the change ofmother-figure in later infancy

during childhood, and has now married an or very early childhood. Reunion with the

Englishman. Geographical separation ranges family when it occurred during childhood some-

from this pair down to a pair of boys who live times gave rise to difficulties in adjustment,

next door to one another, brought up by aunts mostly temporary ones. Attachment between the

who are sisters.

twins in adult life varied considerably in

In twelve cases the twins were brought up in closeness.

families that were unrelated to one other. In the

remainder they were brought up by different Intelligence

branches of the same family, in twenty cases one Two short tests of intelligence were administered

twin staying with his own mother. Their families to the twins, the Dominoes, which is a non-

differed widely in family structure and in verbal test somewhat similar to the Matrices,

personality of the foster parents.

and the Synonyms section of the Mill Hill

There are advantages in having a varied Vocabulary Scale. On the Dominoes the intra-

material like this because of the possibility it class correlation coefficient between the twins

offers for making internal comparisons. The less was 077; on the Mill Hill Vocabulary it was

extreme separations are as interesting in their 074. This is very slightly higher than the cor-

way as the others, since here a greater number relation of 064 found by Newman for Binet

of environmental variables are controlled. Cases I.Q. The difference, if reliable, is possibly due

involving a wide degree of social and cultural to the fact that some of Newman's pairs had

separation are, of course, extremely valuable. If widely different educations. Thus, even when

in spite of many differences of this kind the brought up apart, identical twins tend to

twins are nevertheless alike in some respects we resemble one another in intelligence more

may have enough evidence to convince even the closely than ordinary siblings brought up

biggest sceptic of the importance of heredity; together (r=05). Identical twins reared together

but they would undoubtedly show major differ- have been reported in some investigations to

ences in other respects, and how could we tell have a correlation for intelligence as high as 09.

which factors in the environment had caused However, Blewettl who tested a series of twin

them?

school-children, which we also investigated in

The separation of these particular twins the Genetics Unit here,14 found a correlation

worked out fairly well in most cases. The between identical twins of only 076 on the factor

children accepted their respective homes as their score derived from a battery of intelligence tests.

I'7

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In five of the present pairs one twin had a in importance and often relate to very ordinary

moderate educational advantage and did a good qualities. There were ten such pairs.

deal better on both intelligence tests. The size of Lastly, there are seven pairs where differ-

family in which the twins were brought up did ences are very marked and similarities relatively

not seem to have any direct bearing on in- minor. Some of these I shall mention later.

telligence. There was a tendency for the more In addition to history and personal ob-

intelligent twin to be the one who volunteered servation, we have the objective results of the

for the research.

self-rating questionnaire. This gives two scores,

derived from factor analysis, the one showing

Personality

the degree of extraversion-introversion and the

Our main interest was in personality resem- other the degree of neuroticism. The inter-twin

blances and differences. How much alike were correlation for extraversion of 0-60, that for

these twins, brought up as they were by different neuroticism 0-52. Thus, the clinical findings and

mothers and with no, or relatively little, contact the psychometric tests give one another some

with their twin partners? And how are differ- support in their claims that twins brought up

ences between the twins related to their respective apart show significant personality resemblances.

environments ?

How do these results compare with our

In order to answer these questions we have to findings concerning uniovular twins brought up

make some attempt to assess the overall resem- together? It is difficult to answer this definitely,

blance of each pair. Judging from their histories for no comparable study has yet been made of

and from the impression they made on interview, normal adult twins. It is possible we shall

there were some pairs who showed a very close eventually be able to investigate a matched

similarity in important respects-for example, control group of such twins who responded to

in one pair both twins were of superior intel- the same B.B.C. programme from which we

ligence, were active as teachers and writers and obtained most of our present material. How-

possessed a considerable degree of organizing ever, to judge by experience gained with twins

ability; in another, both members of the pair where one has had a neurotic illness and with

had been advised to enter mental hospital for normal twin school-children,"' I do not think

symptoms of anxiety and depression; another there is a very great deal of difference. Thus, in

pair was strikingly alike in the twins' liability his paper read to the British Association, Dr.

to tempers, another in their lack of energy, and Slaterl5 found seven out of thirty-two uniovular

so on. I have classified the material into four pairs showing very marked differences in degree

groups. In the group showing the closest resem- of neurosis.

blance I have included pairs where there were

striking resemblances such as these and differ- Nature of resemblance

ences only of a very minor kind. Into this group An important point, and one on which the study

there fall six of the thirty-eight pairs. I do not of twins should be able to throw some light, is

recall ever having come across any pair of whether some aspects of personality are more

binovular twins brought up together who were determined genetically than others. Our material

as alike as any of these six pairs.

can no doubt be analysed more carefully from

My next group consists of pairs with striking this point of view than I have so far been able

resemblances as above but with fairly important to do but my impression is that the question is

differences too, the differences not (on my a difficult one to answer definitely. It is under-

assessment) as marked as the similarities. standable that, since persons differ widely in

Binovular pairs as alike as this are not very their genes, they should also differ in the par-

common. Among our separated uniovular twins ticular aspects of personality that for them seem

I classified fifteen as belonging to this to be genetically determined. If one asks the

group.

twins themselves in what way they are most

In the third group are pairs where the simi- alike they will often say something like this:

larities and differences are about evenly balanced "In our mannerisms, our voices, the way we

i i8

TWINS BROUGHT UP APART

think, in our tastes and interests". From personal similar social careers. One pair of men gravitated

observation I would agree that similarities in independently to jobs as checkers of stock in a

gesture and mannerisms are often striking, even motor factory-they thought this work suited

in twins who have had little or no contact. One them best. It was not an unusual occupation for

pair of male twins aged forty-nine who did not the twin to take up who lived in the industrial

meet till they were ten or eleven, and saw each Midlands, but more surprising in his twin

other only about once a fortnight during brother who was brought up in the country by

adolescence, have met only very rarely since the the village hairdresser. In another pair each

age of twenty-four when Jim left Durham to showed a decline in social status, though they

come to London during the depression. They differed initially quite a lot in this respect.

have the same way of tapping the table to Before the war the one twin was a head porter

emphasise a point, of flicking their fingers when of a big hotel. His twin brother owned a

stuck for a word and of nodding their heads jewellery shop employing four assistants. The

energetically in approval. Sometimes similarity one is now night porter earning less than he

in speech related not only to tone of voice but used to collect in tips, the other has sold his shop

to the kind of thing the twins thought it import- and repairs watches with no assistance other

ant to say and the way they said it. Twins are than his wife's. The decline was partly due to

also generally much alike in their degree of the similarity of their natures, which were

shyness and sociability. The following case perhaps somewhat rigid and schizoid.

illustrates some of these points. These women Sometimes one is tempted to see a basic

of thirty-five were parted at birth and have not similarity manifesting itself in different ways. In

met since the age of three. I interviewed both in one pair each twin reports a change in person-

their homes. Both were awkward in manner at ality: "All of a sudden" (writes one twin from

first, remaining standing for quite a few minutes. Canada) "I began to get confidence in myself. I

Both were talkative on the subject of their became a leader in church work and worked

shyness. They both mentioned spontaneously hard and enjoyed myself... ." She also dyed

their interest in sport as children and the fact her hair and gave her age as eight years younger.

that they still like watching football matches. Her twin sister from Lancashire writes: "It has

They are fond of reading and music. When been somewhat difficult to give a true analysis

asked what music they liked the one said she of my character due to the fact that I have

was very fond of Tchaikovsky's first piano considerably slowed down in every way during

concerto but liked the Messiah best of all. Her the last two years....." She has also been

twin sister said she liked Rachmaninov's second troubled greatly by sleeplessness. It may well be

piano concerto. A copy of the Messiah was on that these twins share a cyclothymic constitution.

the top of her pile of music.

In another pair, both twins are troubled by

Similarity in interests and in sociability also considerable anxiety and restlessness. The one

show themselves in three pairs where a twin who is excessively houseproud, does not like to go

was active in an organization such as the Towns- out more than she can help, and smokes thirty

women's Guild or the Women's Rural Institute or more cigarettes a day. Her twin sister is

had volunteered for the research. It was found slap-dash in manner. Anxiety drives her from

that her twin partner had practically the same the house, generally to the pub where she says

social interests and abilities. Conversely there she spends all the money she can get. Early

are two or three pairs where both twins des- training and the contrasted personalities of their

cribed their bashfulness or their dislike of husbands may have had something to do with

company or their lack of confidence in very the opposite direction their anxiety took.

similar terms. There are two pairs where both

are liable to outbursts of temper and two where Personality differences and the environment

an extreme placidity of temperament is out- This leads us on to differences. The extent of the

standing.

environmental differences between the twins'

These similarities often lead twins into rather homes varied rather widely from pair to pair.

I9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

So I thought it worth while to see how degree Soon after, he was discharged from the Army

and kind of separation might be related to the on what were probably psychiatric grounds;

extent of personality resemblance. I rated and at the age of thirty-seven he was treated in

environmental differences on a points system, a neurosis centre for hysteria. He is chronically

adding up all scorable data for each pair, more anxious and sensitive than his twin who

including age at separation, amount of contact, was not subjected to these unfortunate

and sociological and psychological differences experiences.

between the homes. The total scores ranged from Another case is that of a girl whose mother

five to nineteen points' difference. These overall was unreliable and inconsistent and probably

scores seemed to be related to the extent of preferred Doris's younger brother. Doris sucked

personality resemblance in only a random way: a dummy till she was five, was unhappy at

all four personality groups averaged between school and walked in her sleep till fifteen. At

10 and 11 points of difference on the environ- twenty-seven she attended a psychiatrist who

mental scale. Taking age at separation and diagnosed a neurotic depression. Her uniovular

degree of contact only, there certainly appeared twin has manifested no obvious neurotic

to be no relation between separation and tendencies.

personality resemblance. The most similar group The three cases where the twin from the

contained pairs who did not meet till seventeen, poorer home was actually less "neurotic" than

twenty-four and thirty-six. The pairs brought the other in a way go to prove the point. Two

up together for the first five years showed quite of them were cases where the twins were not

as marked differences as those who were parted separated till seven and eight, and by that time

at birth. However, taking sociologicaland psycho- one was already more anxious or hysterical

logical differences only, there is at least a than the other. The other case is of a lad whose

suggestion that the more unlike the environment, slowness, awkwardness, obstinacy and inability

the more unlike the personality. The strikingly to hold ajob were attributable to his epileptic fits.

similar pairs averaged 4-3 points of difference, There were a further three cases where child-

the most unlike pairs 6 points. In other words, hood experiences seemed to be related to

kind of separation mattered more than degree of psychiatric troubles in later life, though there

separation. Further analysis of the case histories was no clear evidence that one twin was the

seems to bear this out.

more neurotic child. One of these is the Danish

twin mentioned earlier. She bad a psychopathic

Poorness of home and neurotic traits

father and her early life was very unsettled. She

In twenty-two pairs it was possible to say that was thrown on her own resources in Denmark

one home was poorer than the other psycho- while her twin lived a protected existence in

logically. In twelve of these pairs one twin could Chile. Though happily settled in England now,

be regarded as having been more neurotic as a the Danish twin led a troubled life when

child; in nine of these it was the child from the younger, and was at one time treated in hospital

poorer home who was more neurotic. In some where a diagnosis of neurosis was made. Both

of them the neurotic tendencies may have been twins have cyclothymic and hysterical traits, but

only slight and temporary, but in others, though these have not led the Chilean twin into so much

minor, they persisted into adult life. Thus, Janet difficulty.

was brought up by an obsessional father and These cases appear to lend some support to

a mother who was a demanding invalid. She bit views relating certain psychiatric troubles to

her nails as a child while her twin did not, and poor early home life. However, to preserve our

as an adult she is more anxious and obsessional. perspective we must not forget the seven pairs

But in others the neurotic tendencies are very where factors predisposing to neurosis were

marked. Alf was neglected till he was two and present in the home of one twin but where there

then brought up by a cruel and nagging step- were no associated differences between the twins

mother. As a boy he had many fears, used to in neurotic behaviour, either as a child or an

sulk, tried to run away and eventually did so. adult.

120

TWINS BROUGHT UP APART

Social and multiple factors Early background can be presumed to have
influenced other traits besides neurotic ones, for example those of a social kind.
One twin was brought up in a country district by a schoolmaster who was a local Justice of the Peace. She in turn married a schoolmaster and has been active in local Red Cross and other voluntary work. Her twin sister who was brought up in a London working-class home shows a number of resemblances in personality, but she
has not devoted herself in the same way to public affairs. She married a meat salesman.
Social class differences were not marked in our series, but even so there was a tendency for the twins who were brought up in slightly better off circumstances to marry someone who was correspondingly better off. The character of the spouse was also a factor which could sometimes be seen to influence the lives of the twins.
Where the twins were brought up or came later on to live in different parts of the country, one could generally notice corresponding differences in behaviour. Jim, referred to earlier as
having left Durham as a young man, has more difficulty in making friends in the South than has twin brother, Walter, who has remained in the mining village where he was brought up.
Jim also has a duodenal ulcer, but Walter has
one of these too. Another case shows the interaction of social
with other factors. Allegedly as the consequence
of an accident in which he had concussion, Joe suffered throughout childhood and early adult life from a severe stammer. He took readily to the agricultural work which was found for him by the Children's Home in which he was brought up. He married a woman who had taken pity on him, and she, and perhaps the relatively isolated rural life he has led, have protected him from developing some of the characteristics of his twin, Ted. The latter was brought up in a different Children's Home. He had no stammer
and readily fell in with a gang of youths. He ran
away to the town and was involved in some minor delinquencies. His sex life has been irregular. In manner he is very different from Joe. He tells tall stories in an exaggerated way,
and in an effort to impress he boasted he had
been in prison-which was not in fact true.

As in this case so in others, it seems to be a combination of factors, not all operating from early childhood, which leads to differences between twins. Except in the case of the epileptic lads, physical factors did not seem to be very important on their own. But in at least three of the pairs showing the biggest psychiatric differences the more neurotic twin, in addition to having to deal with greater psychological stress, was the weaker of the pair at birth and had more severe illnesses in childhood. Unless I am just reading my own opinions into the material, it seems to me that it supports a multi-dimensional approach to the problems of personality.
Methods of upbringing One of the most commonly observed differences between the families of these twins occurs where one of them is brought up by a grandmother or a much older aunt, as an only child, often in slightly better financial circumstances and perhaps in the country, while the other is brought up in a town as one of a larger family. Parallel with these differences in age of parent and family structure are quite marked differences in methods of bringing up children-differences in strictness and leniency of discipline, for example, or in the extent to which the child is protected from the environment or encouraged to be independent. It might be thought that these differences would make for differences between the twins in such traits as reserve and anxiety. So far, the material has not shown any very clear-cut tendencies of this kind. The strongest suggestion is that where greater protectiveness is combined with being an only child (and perhaps at the same time with having a much more old-fashioned person as a mother) the result is the rather greater quietness or reserve of that twin. This was so in seven cases. In one case the twin subjected to these influences was the less reserved, while in five cases twins with this difference in background did not seem to differ in quietness or reserve at all.
From the material as a whole one gains the impression that the personality of the mother and her methods of child rearing can vary quite a considerable degree without fundamentally altering the personality of the child.
A good example of this is the case of Jill D.

121

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and Veronica S. These twins were adopted when
they were three months old by unrelated women of similar social status in the same town. Both were brought up to all intents as only children, though Jill had a much older foster brother.
The girls are now 8j and by quite a long way the youngest in the series. It was possible in this case to interview and test the parents and to
observe the twins in their home settings. Mrs. D. describes herself as being a noisy type. She has
many social interests, including political ones. She is a more dominant woman than Mrs. S. and Jill has come in for more spankings. She believes that children should be treated as puppies right from the beginning to know who is boss. Jill was taught her letters before she went to school and has been sent to ballet classes. She has also been taught to fend more for herself. Attempts were made to prevent her from becoming friendly with Veronica by sending her to a different school, and in order to stress the differences between them Mrs. D. has had Jill's hair permed. Mr. D., a steel worker, is quiet and patient.
The S. family is very different from the D's. Mr. S. is lively but inclined to be irritable, while Mrs. S. presents a marked contrast to Mrs. D. She is quiet, very placid and with no social interests. She has no decided views on the upbringing of children and is perhaps rather too much inclined to let events take their own course. She thinks she may have spoiled
Veronica by letting her have too much of her own way; and there has not been so much educational or cultural stimulation in Veronica's
home. These twins came to our notice through the school teacher who saw them when they first went to the same school at the age of five.
They did not at this time know that they were twins, but they immediately gravitated towards one another, were never apart, wanted to sit at the same desk and progressed at the same rate. One is reminded of the findings with identical twin cattle who are reported to be able to find each other after they have been reared apart and to like to drink together. From observation and from independent accounts from their parents, the girls are very much alike in personality, and are certainly not at all cow-like! They are lacking in shyness, are active in social activities both in

and out of school. They have lively gestures, are inquisitive and rather crave excitement. They are perhaps inclined to bully other children and are determined to get their own way, but seem happy and present no serious problem. They show an equal fondness for reading and music. Many similarities in mannerisms and gestures were noted. When together Jill takes the lead and Veronica lacks confidence compared with her twin. This is the sort of difference often found in twins brought up together, though it is certainly tempting to say in this case that Jill is the leader because she has been given more encouragement. Veronica's lack of confidence, for example in doing the tests, may partly be due to the fact that she happens to be in a higher class at school where perhaps too much is being demanded of her. Both twins however, are of above average intelligence. Basically, I think all observers would agree, they are very much alike in personality. It can perhaps be said that the parents, who are very fond of the girls, have in their own ways given them a chance to develop normally and happily, and that being identical twins they have developed along similar lines.
Conclusions I have tried to give you a general survey of these thirty-eight pairs of twins that I have been fortunate enough to be able to investigate, concentrating particularly on their personality resemblance and on some of the presumptive causes of difference between them. As I pointed out at the beginning, the study is not quite complete and the conclusions so far must be regarded as tentative. Moreover, without more detailed exposition of the case histories than I have been able to give in the course of a talk, I would not expect you necessarily to accept my
deductions from them as being correct-in my discussion of earlier work on the subject I showed how easily the investigator's own bias can influence the interpretation he puts on his results. Iwill, however, be bold enough to risk one conclusion. I think I shall be able to show with reasonable objectivity that uniovular twins fairly often show quite striking similarity in important aspects of personality, even when they have been brought up from an early age apart from each other, and by mothers of different character.

122

TWINS BROUGHT UP APART

The traditional method of twin research, where uniovular pairs brought up together are compared with binovular pairs brought up together, has been criticized on the grounds that uniovular twins are too much of a special case for this method of genetical investigation to be of much value, at any rate so far as psychology is concerned. These critics incline to the view that if identical twins are alike in personality, it is probably because they have been treated alike in a number of subtle ways by the same mother, both on account of her particular psychological make-up and because of social attitudes towards twins; further-so this view goes-the twins will for various reasons have influenced one another in their behaviour, they will have "identified" with one another. Our material shows that uniovular twins can be alike without the operation of these subtle intra-familial or intertwin relationships. If nothing else, it goes some way towards vindicating some of the presuppositions of twin research.
Those critics who say that environmental differences between binovular twins brought up together are too large for them to be of any use for genetical research are generally the very ones who also say that the environmental differences between identical twins brought up apart are not as a rule extreme or their separation early enough for any deductions to be justifiably drawn from them concerning heredity. If my analysis of these separated twins is correct, early age of separation is not always such a vital point as those critics have sometimes suggested. However, it must be agreed that in some respects the social differences between the families in which most of our twins were brought up were not very larg9. It would, therefore, be unwise when we come to evaluate the final results, to claim that genetical factors would show up as clearly if the environments of the twins were radically different.
Acknowledgments I should like to thank the producers of the B.B.C. television programme, Science in the

Making, for access to their list of twins; all those colleagues, whether at the Maudsley, elsewhere in Great Britain, or overseas, who have assisted me in collecting information about the twins; and the twins themselves for their generous co-operation in the research.
REFERENCES
1 Blewett, D. B. An experimental study of the inheritance of intelligence. 1954. J. ment. Sci. 100, 922-933.
2 Burks, Barbara S. A study of twins reared apart under different types of family relationship. In: Studies in Personality contributed in Honour ofLewis M. Terman. New York, 1942. McGraw-Hill (pp. 35-70).
3 Burks, Barbara S. and Roe, Anne. Studies of identical twins reared apart. 1949. Psychological Monographs, general and applied. 63 (5),1-62.
4 Craike, W. H. and Slater, E. Folie a deux in uniovular twins reared apart. 1945. Brain, 68, 213-221.
5 Gardner, Ivy C. and Newman, H. H. Mental and physical traits of identical twins reared apart: Twins Lois and Louise. 1940. J. Hered., 31, 119-126.
6 Juel-Nielsen, N. 1957. Personal communication. 7 Juel-Nielsen, N. and Mogensen, A. Uniovular twins
brought up apart: Preliminary report of a psychia-
tric-psychological study. 1957. Acta. genet. et stat med., 7, 430-433. 8 Kallmann, F. J. The Genetics of Schizophrenia. New York, 1938. Augustin. 9 Lange, J. Crime as Destiny. London, 1929. Allen and Unwin. 10 Muller, H. J. Mental traits and heredity. 1925. J. Hered. 16, 433-448. 11 Newman, H. H., Freeman, F. N. and Holzinger, K. J. Twins: a Study of Heredity and Environment. Chicago, 1937. University of Chicago Press. 12 Saudek, R. A British pair of identical twins reared apart. 1934. Character and Personality, 3, 17-39. 13 Schwesinger, Gladys. The effect of differential parentchild relation on identical twin resemblance in personality. 1952. Acta. genet. med. et gemellol., 1, 40 47. 14 Shields, J. Personality differences and neurotic traits in normal twin school-children. 1954. Eugen. Rev., 45, 213-245. 15 Slater, E. and Shields, J. Twins in psychological medicine. 1955. Paper read to the British Association and reported in: Nature, 176, 532-533. 16 Stenstedt, A. A Study in manic-depressive Psychosis. 1952. Acta. Psychiat. Kbh. Suppl. 79. 17 Woodworth, R. S. Heredity and Environment. 1941. Bulletin 47, Social Science Research Council, New York. 18 Yoshimasu, S. Psychopathie und Kriminalitat, 1941. Psychiatria et Neurologia Japonica, 45, 455-531. (In Japanese with German Summary.)

1 23

