WAR AND THE STATURE OF THE POPULATION.
By H. H. O'FARRELL.
THE oft-repeated statement that the height of the French population fell off by one or more inches as a result of the Napoleonic wars appears to have gained currency from a passage in Sir Archibald Alison's once popular History of Europe, chapter lxxiv. He cites as his authority D'Angeville's " Essai sur la
statistique de la population Francaise," published in I837, PP. 72
and 84. The book is in the British Museum, press-mark, 576, L.I4.
Alison's name is a by-word for inaccuracy, and in this instance he has not belied his reputation for blundering. He appears to have only known the book at second-hand; at any rate he leads off with a wrong reference. The passages to which he refers are at pages 59 and 64, not 72 and 84. He cites two tables from D'Angeville. Only one of these is concerned with the average heights of the population, as shown by the statistics of recruiting. The other, to which I will refer later, is simply a table of the minimum standards of height for the army, as prescribed by the military authorities from time to time. The table of heights is a comparative table of the heights of conscripts for the years I804 and 18i0 in different deipartements of France, and certainly shows some falling off in the latter year. Alisodfs comment is: " The learned author ascribes to the same cause (the Napoleonic wars) the continued lowering of the standard in the next generation." This remark he attempts to justify by a lengthy quotation from D'Angeville, which is plainly irrelevant, as it does not refer specifically to the question of height, but to the rejections for all causes (pour causes physiques de toute nature ") during the period under review. It is also evident that D'Angeville did not regard the results as due to the actual losses in killed and wounded so much as to the absence of the best part of the population on prolonged campaigns in foreign countries (" les grandes guerres

WAR AND THE STATURE OF THE POPULATION.

219

de l'Europe entrainaient la population valide hors du territoire "). He regards the evil as purely temporary and likely to be speedily cured in the peace which had followed the events of i8i5. Moreover, Alison's comment on the table that "it speaks volumes as to the cruel effect of the wars of Napoleon on the well-being of mankind " is absurd in view of D'Angeville's caution as to the figures, of which Alison seems to have been aware, but characteristically failed to take into consideration. D'Angeville distinctly points out that the figures of i8io cannot be compared with those of I804, because a portion of the recruits of i8io had only reached the age of i8 when they were called up, whereas those of I804 were aged from 20 years and three months to 21 years and three months. He says: " The difference is especially noticeable in those poor and mountainous dipartements where the population attains its full stature only slowly. This may be seen in the following examples:-
(Here follows the table quoted by Alison). "These facts seem to show that the proper age for military service is not less than the full twenty years and continues even up to twenty-one. If the latter figure be adopted the result is a more virile military population, and a class in reserve for extraordinary occasions."
It is characteristic of Alison that he takes his references exclusively from the parts of D'Angeville's book where he speaks only incidentally of stature, and entirely ignores the section, beginning at p. 47, in which the author deals specifically and at considerable length with the heights of the population. The whole of this portion is so interesting that I have thought it desirable to translate it as an appendix to this note. D'Angeville is, no doubt, mistaken in the causes he assigns for the great diversity of height of the inhabitants of the different provinces of France; he did not realise the extremely composite nature of the
French population, and that it was a question of race' and
not of education or nurture, or of rural or urban populations. Bui the statistics are interesting in themselves, and he seems to see
I France was peopled by at least three primitive races (i) the Nordic, tall and blond; (2) the Mediterranean or Iberian, short and dark, and (3) the Alpine, or so-called Keltic, stocky and intermediate in colouring. See Chalmers Mitchell, Evolution and the War, p. 5I, and the map at p. 63.

220 EUGENICS REVIEW.
that the lowering of the standard was not a result of the wars of Napoleon, since it prevailed from the beginning, and that it was due to the desire to recruit from warlike populations, whose average height, like that of the Japanese or the Gurkhas, was low. But this standard, had, as D'Angeville points out, little effect on the average height of the recruits. In I8I8 the standard was I'570 metres, and in I830 it had fallen to IP540. The average height of the recruits from I825 to I829 was I656 metres, and in 1830 to I833 it was IP653 metres-a difference of only 3 millimetres, or less than i/8th of an inch. If Alison had read this portion of D'Angeville's work he would hardly, I think, have ventured to quote the other of the two tables to which I have referred, a simple record of the variations of the legal standard from year to year, as affording any indication of the average stature of the French recruit of the periods to which the figures relate.
APPENDIX.
The Statistics of the French Population. (Published, 1837). A. dAngveville. (Translation).
Page 47. Height of Recruits.-The mean height of the recruits I825-29was iu656 metres; for the army the mean height was IP670, a difference of I4 millimetres. This would be equivalent to a difference of 20 millimetres if we take into account only recruits who had finished their third term of service, for the new levies were formed partly of men who had not had time to grow to their full height. Would it not be useful, in order to ascertain in what parts of France the population grew most slowly in stature, to have a record of the heights, at the time of their discharge, of all those who had finished their military service?
The mean heights of the contingents of I830-33 was iP653. The modification introduced by the laws passed in this period had little effect on the mean height of the recruits. At the period of the great wars of the Empire the minimum height was fixed at 1544 metres. One knows what the armies so constituted were able to do. Why have we not returned to this standard or that of I 550 which seems the most rational? If we look at this question from the point of view of the number of recruitables we see that the result to be expected is more considerable than is

WAR AND THE STATURE OF THE POPULATION.

221

indicated by the report of the War Office issued to the Chambers
in I835. Under the Restoration, in order to obtain 6o,ooo men with a
minimum standard of 1-570, some 20,000 men were rejected for failing to come up to the standard. In the years following the revolution of July, 8o,ooo men were obtained with rejections of only 14,672.
In the report above alluded to, it is stated that the lowering of the minimum from 1570 to I540 only resulted in an addition of 7,804 men. The figure is obtained by deducting the I2,7II exemptions from the 20,515 of 18I8-28; but the difference in number of the contingents, which was 20,000 more in I830 is ignored.
An examination of Table III. col. 42 shows that there was an enormous difference in the rejection in the different depacrtements. In order to get I,OOO recruits 8I8 recruits had to be rejected in Haute-Vienne, down to 4I 8 in Tarn, and only 41 I in Creuse. These figures concern only the ten dtpartements which had the most unfavourable results. The average of the ten dipartements which showed the lowest rejections was I22; in Doubs the number was only 73.
(The author proceeds to advocate a low minimum in order to avoid skimming off the cream of the population).
Of the 32 departements of the north not .one is amongst those which furnished the largest number of exemptions; and what is more astonishing not one is found among those of the second series. The first conclusion to be drawn from these facts is that
those di.partements where the urban population is the most intense
are those which have also the tallest men. This result is confirmed
by the small number of reformes (men subsequently discharged from the army) for want of height presented by the majority of the dipartements washed by the Mediterraneaui, which have as is well known a considerable urban population.
It is in the France of the Midi, and especially in the centre of the kingdom that one finds the largest number of small men.
The departements of the Haute-Vienne, of Cov6ze, Charente,
Dordogne and Lot, which are all contiguous, make up an agglomeration where the height of the population is least. It is

222 EUGENICS REVIEW.
also the part of France which consumes the largest quantity of Spanish chestnuts, viz: I,436,ooo hectolitres out of a total of 2,700,000 for the whole of France. It is also remarkable that it is the part of France where one finds primary education the least wide-spread and invaliding for scurvy and scrofula the most common; all indications of a great deficiency of vigour.
Table III. (pp. 322-323). (The table is too long and detailed to be set out in full, but the following is a summary). Columns 37 to 4I.-The average height of recruits during the years I825-29 amounts to r656 metres. For every I,000 there were rejected for want of height 335. The average height during the years I830-33 was i653 metres. For every I,000, I84 were rejected for want of height. Columns 43 to 45.-Those rejected for other causes than want of height were in 1825-29, 765; and in I830-33, 569.
H. H. O'F.

