CORRESPONDEN CE
MR. HERBERT BREWER writes: The admission thirty years I have been advocating voluntary by Madeleine Simms that much ill health sterilization as the most effective means of comresults from unnecessary abortion, invites bating that evil. My judgement in this has contrast with other widely publicized assertions recently been vindicated by the testimony of on behalf of her organization that abortion Dr. Chandrasekhar, one of the world's foremost induced by doctors is safe and harmless, no more demographers. to be feared than having your tonsils out. The On the basis of extensive Indian experience, harmful sequelae of abortion are especially he has declared that voluntary sterilization by serious for the younger women. As Asherman vasectomy is by far the best answer to the has pointed out (Proc. Ist World Congress on problem of fertility control. "This," he affirmed, Fertility and Sterility). development of the hypo- "was true although the methods tried included plastic organs of the young female, which com- the birth control pill and the much-publicized pleted pregnancy tends to normalize, is prone intra uterine coil.... The advantage ofvoluntary to undergo permanent arrest as the result of sterilization is that it solves the problem, once abortion, to the great detriment of health and for all, for those couples who have had from maternal efficiency. In this connection, what two to four children and do not want any more carries more weight than the ipse dixit of for health, economic, or other reasons" (New Madeleine Simms is the testimony of Dr. E. York Times, 4th April 1965). If we followed the Sjovall, a leading Swedish gynaecologist with Indian example in providing readily available extensive experience ofabortion, who stated, "an facilities for vasectomy for similar cases here, abortion will always be a dangerous and un- that could go far to obviate a large number of biological method, for the sharp severance of illegal abortions, which, it is generally agreed, all the processes in the bodyofa pregnant woman mainly concern married women. Unlike induced will often result in long lasting ill health" (Rep. abortion, and at a small fraction of its cost, 4th Int. Conf. Planned Parenthood, 1953, p. 85). voluntary sterilization by vasectomy provides a
It is both absurd and unfair to represent me harmless, certain and foolproof solution, without as a defender of unwanted parenthood. For over destroying life or impairing health.
56

