FAMILY ENDOWMENT
I1.-A PrOsal for ConAructve Eenics in &Atlaud
By EVA MI HUBBACK, M'A, and M. E GREEN
(An Address given to the Eugenics Society, March 14th, 1933.)
T HE case for family allowances is the competitive struggle works, there is an often put as though it concerned only unmistakable tendency for it to bring the those sections of the community more able and vigorous types to the top.
where our failure to make any direct pro- Professor McDougall's second contenvision for the maintenance of the next tion-that the higher grades of society were generation results in actual privation; and contributing much less than their share to the most active propaganda has been in the growth of the population-received favour of State-paid allowances confined to startling confirmation in Dr. Stevenson's' the working classes-in the popular use of analysis of the I9II Census; and by 1921 the term. Whatever the eugenic results of the birth rate of the upper and professional such a scheme might be, the motives of its classes had fallen to nearly half that
advocates have not been primarily eugenic. recorded for unskilled labourers-98 per
It is rather interesting, then, to remember thousand married men, as compared with that in the history of the movement the first 178. Moreover, the statistics indicate not application.of family allowances was made only a relative, but an absolute infertility. in a section not of the wage-earning, but of Dr. R. A. Fisher has pointed out that, for
the salaried classes nearly two centuries parents with 4300 a year or over, the
ago, when John Wesley introduced them current supply of children is not sufficient into the remuneration of his ministers; and to replace more than one-half of the that what was probably the first public parental generation. exposition of the principle was given in a There can be little doubt, we think, that paper entitled " A Practical Eugenic Sug- the dangerously low birth rate in the gestion," read by Professor McDougall salaried occupations is very largely due to
before the Sociological Society in I904. voluntary restriction, and that the motive The actual scheme proposed by Mc- in a great majority of cases is economic.
Dougall for the higher grades of the Civil Parents in these classes have rising stanService may seem rather fantastic to-day, dards of comfort for themselves, and are but the biological assumptions on which it ambitious for their children; and there are rested have not only stood the test of time. many who would gladly have more than but have been strengthened by the trend of one or two children, if they did not know events. Since the beginning of the century that by doing so they would not be able to the processes of selection which led the give the ones who are already there so good early eugenists to maintain that the upper a start in the competitive struggle. But and middle classes were likely to contain there is, as Dr. Fisher has shown, another proportionately more innate ability than and more far-reaching result of the relative the strata below them, have been economic advantages given to children born made more effective through increased in small families; such children have a educational opportunities and through greater chance of rising in the social scale, the diminished importance of hereditary and their mating with the sons or daughters wealth. The new device of the intelligence of successful parents links together in a kind test has confirmed the prima facie belief of suicide pact the hereditary factors of that, however wastefully and imperfectly infertility with those making for success.
c 33

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A scheme of family allowances which whole cost of maintenance. In practice this

would distribute the cost of rearing the next means that they must be graded roughly

generation so as to equalize the economic according to income.

position of parents and non-parents, and of

children in small families with those in THE NATIONAL SCHEME

larger ones, seems to be the only means To devise a national scheme, either State-

open to us to preserve the qualities of paid or on an insurance basis, under these

eugenic value in the salaried and profes- conditions presents difficulties. If the birth

sional classes.

rate and the length of dependency were

The economic case for family allowances approximately the same throughout the

starts from a criticism of a system of distri- social scale, the same percentage tax im-

bution which makes no specific provision posed on all incomes would yield the same

for the replacement of the human capital percentage allowance per child; and no

of the country. The children of one genera- injustice would arise, because the higher

tion are expected to be maintained out of the share of the national income which the

allowances (absolutely) in the higher-paid
classes would be financed by these classes

fathers of the previous one can claim in themselves through their larger tax contri-

virtue of their work-and this share is no butions. But to allow for differences in

greater when it has to be redistributed birth rate, and still more for differences in

among a dozen people than when it is the period of education in each income

destined for a single one. So we have a group, the tax would have to be carefully misfit felt in every grade of society between graded. Even so, the psychological prob-

an inelastic income and an expenditure swollen for a time by the needs of a dependent family. The standard of life in each group is set by the majority who are either

lem would remain; it would never be easy to persuade the uneducated voter, used to regard taxation for social services primarily as a means of reducing inequalities in

childless or whose children are earning for wealth, that it was just for the State to pay

themselves. If this is to be maintained his employer £2 a week for each child, while

during the period of child-dependency, it only paid him 6s.

some measure must be adopted which will The resentment against such inequalfty

secure a bulge in the family income to corre- would perhaps be less if a three-party

spond to this temporary bulge in expenditure. This can be effected by the payment

system of social insurance were adopted in which the contribution of the State was the

of an allowance to the parent during the same for all citizens, while the contributions

dependency of each child.

of the employers and the workers were pro-

Three methods of financing such allow- portionate to the salary or the wage. In

ances have been suggested. They might be any case, the cry would go up that the State

paid for by the State out of taxation, or by was stereotyping a class structure that was

a system of social insurance as are health and unemployment benefits; or they might

not obviously and indisputably based on the social value of the services rendered. In

be provided by a redistribution of the fact, where State schemes have been intro-

salaries bill among groups of workers in duced in New South Wales and New

particular occupations. Any one of these Zealand, the benefits have been confined to

methods could be applied to the salaried the lower-paid workers.

classes. But if our aim is to wipe out in- For these reasons, and because we are

equalities caused solely by varying family accustomed to take our reforms in this

responsibilities (whether we think of them country in small doses to begin with, it

as operating over a period in the life-time seems likely that we shall start with

of a single individual or at the same time occupational schemes covering groups of

between two individuals), then the allow- workers who accept roughly the same

ances must cover as nearly as possible the sort of standards for the rearing and

FAMILY ENDOWMENT-1N ENGLAND

35

education of their children. This has the In administration the scheme is a fore-

obvious disadvantage that such schemes can runner of the continental Equalization

only cover part of the field, and that they Pools; the cost of the allowances is raised

cannot easily be extended to self-employers by a charge on each circuit based on the

such as doctors and solicitors. But if we number of ministers and on its financial

want something done soon-and we do- strength. By distributing the cost of the

this is the most promising line of approach. allowances in this way, the scheme ensures

We could begin with those professions in that no circuit has any financial reasons for

which a high degree of organization, con- preferring the appointment of childless

tinuity of employment, and recognized ministers.

scales of salary would make administration More recently family allowances have

a comparatively simple matter. Among been paid by four dioceses in the Church of

these the Church, the teaching profession, England-Lichfield, St. Edmundsbury and

and the Civil Service may be singled out as Ipswich, Southwark, and York. In the two

three occupations in which standards of latter an allowance is also made for the

education are high relative to remunera- wife. The system might be extended dio-

tion, and where consequently the need for cese by diocese as funds became available,

family allowances is acute.

or it might be applied over the whole

Church by a tax on clerical incomes, ana-

A SCHEME FOR THE CHURCH

logous to the contributions now enforced for

Let us take the Church first. In 193I a widows' pensions.

Committee of the Church Assembly pointed out that there were 6,ooo benefices in the

TEACHERS-PRACTICE AND POSSIBILITY

Church of England with an income of less In the teaching profession a working

than £4oo a year. In other denominations, model has been set up by the only academic

though the inequality between incomes is institution in the country devoted solely to

not so great, the average is probably no the study and teaching of economic prin-

higher. Such stipends must entail great ciples. At the London School of Economics

hardship on the younger married men who there has been in operation for seven years

have children to provide for. The vicarage a system of educational allowances paid in

and manses have traditionally produced a addition to the basic salary. £30 is allowed

large proportion of men and women who in respect of each child from birth to I3

have served in positions of responsibility, years of age, and £6o from 13 to 22, pro-

and it is important that the clergy should vided that the child is at a place of education

not be forced by prudential motives either regarded by the authorities as satisfactory.

to limit the size of their families unduly, or The cost of the allowances last year worked

to deprive their children of the educational out at 3*7 per cent. of the salaries bill.

opportunities which they could use with There is a special case for the introduc-

advantage. Here, where funds are so tion of family allowances in the teaching

limited, the argument that a higher stan- profession as a whole, because it appears to

dard of life would be secured if a small be the only possible solution to the problem

proportion of the salaries bill were used in of equal pay between men and women,

family allowances, has special force.

which would not either depress still further

The Churches have already made a the standard of the married men, or put

beginning. The system started by John upon the Exchequer and the local autho-

Wesley in the Methodist Church has been rities the burden of raising the additional

extended and continued to the present day. five million pounds which, it is estimated,

The scale is now a minimum of eight would be necessary to bring the women's

guineas a year for each child up to I8 years scale up to the men's.

of age, with an additional allowance of £12 The recent ' cuts ' have fallen specially

for each of the last six years of education. hardly on the men with young families, and

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the depression of their standard of living is IN EKPIRE PUBLIC SERVICES

likely to react on the status and attractive- When we turn to the Civil Service, we

ness of the profession as a whole. At the find very much the same problems, point-

time of the I92I Census of every ioo men ing to the same solution-the resentment

in the teaching profession, 66 had no chil- of the women at a lower scale of pay which

dren under i6 years of age, and of the does not correspond in any real way to

remaining 34, only 17 had two or more chil- differences in need, the dissatisfaction of

dren. It is unlikely that any increase in the family men with the comparatively low

salary possible in the next few years will standard of life that the Service affords

be sufficient to afford a reasonable standard them, and the need for the State to use its

of living to the men who at the time have resources in the most economical way

family responsibilities, unless part of it, at possible. Family allowances are already

least, is concentrated on relieving the finan- paid in the public services of Australia, of

cial burden of child dependency. A very the Irish Free State and of every other

small increase in the salaries bill will give European country except our own, Turkey,

fairly substantial allowances. In the case and Russia. We can surely ask the State

of elementary teachers, for example, an to set an example to other employers in

addition of 3 per cent. would yield an allow- adopting a measure which should prove a

ance of about I2 per cent. of the salary per valuable contribution both to the problem of

child; in the case of the secondary teachers, maintaining the best qualities of the race

where the cost would be greater because of and of providing a favourable environment

the smaller proportion of women, an addi- for the rearing of its future citizens.

tion of 4 2 per cent. would yield the same proportionate allowance.
In either case the cost would be much less
than the all-round restoration of the recent io per cent. cuts.

Further information on schemes already in operation or proposed for salaried occupations may be obtained from the literature of the Family Endowment Society, 52 Romney Street,
S.W.I.

Eugenics Review, VoL XXV, No. 1.

