REVIEWS OF BOOKS
have not found such drastic effects as those described by the author quoted, although Barnett's point remains valid, namely that early environment is important to the development of behaviour. The matter of the specific signals used by the mother to recall her infant is also in dispute among workers in this field. Despite this, however, the book as a whole remains a good up-to-date introduction for the layman to a subject in which he is often misled by popular literature.
Secondly, how far does this book go towards equating the behaviour of animals and humans? Wherever possible, relevant observations on the behaviour of man are included and commented on. Barnett's approach is a very valuable one because he emphasizes especially the cases where man is not comparable with animals as well as pointing out the similarities. Here again popular literature tends to be misleading. There are cases of the same word being used in relation to animals and humans but with different meanings, and the author is not being over-fussy when he draws attention to the lack of comparability between the two cases. He points out that not only should one be cautious in interpreting from animals to humans, but also vice versa, and again this is a useful warning.
The chapter "Sources of human behaviour" is perhaps a little misleading. The sources referred to are evolutionary, and Barnett himself admits gorillas and chimpanzees are not human ancestors. Perhaps a more useful approach would have been to examine the physiological sources in more detail and depth.
The claim of the dust cover that "this book is a fundamental new study of the ways in which animals and men behave" is something of an exaggeration, but the author's comments on both human and animal behaviour are well worth reading, both by biology students at about the level of the sixth form, and by the layman.
Y. SPENCER-BOOTH
BIOLOGY
Kalmus, H. (Editor). Regulation and Control in Living Systems. London and New York,
1966. Wiley. Pp. viii + 468. Price 90s.
WHEN WIENER produced his Cybernetics in 1948, the exciting new subject promised much in the advancement of understanding of biological control systems by application of two difficult branches of mathematics, concerned with (a) statistical analysis of information flow, (b) mathematical analysis of automatically regulating systems containing feedback loops. Twenty years after, although there have been a few spectacular examples of analysis, we still have essentially no change in the position, expressed as follows.
There are many biological systems which are clearly examples of information flow, as in nervous systems, or of feedback arcs, as in homeostasis and population control. Biologists continue to use commonsense and simple experimental analysis (thereby not utilizing much of the vast potential data), and do not use the advanced mathematical techniques. For example in Chapter 2 of this symposium we find a clear account of the use of Laplace transforms in the analysis of transfer functions of feedback systems; this method has been well known for thirty years but as yet there are almost no examples of its application to any biological system. The exceptions, concerned with the human eye, are analyses conducted by
engineers, often with surprisingly few biologically signiflcant results, and in the example
analysed in most detail, human eye movement, "the analysis of this kind of system is beyond the scope of this book". In fact, the chapters written by biologists on cellular regulation (Lewis), circadian rhythms (Kalmus), endocrine systems (Brown-Grant), plant growth (Bell), animal development (Newth), honeybee colonies (Free), insect mimicry (Blest) and animal populations (Wynne-Edwards) are non-mathematical reviews in which self-regulating
183

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
systems are analysed by common sense. The reason is that mathematical analysis (even non-linear) is not applicable until the type of system has been exposed by simpler methods first.
This volume of contributions, admirably edited and produced (although the professional indexer has obviously struggled over such diverse material as stilboestrol, James Watt, property tenure and wrongdoing) serves a useful purpose in cementing the marriage of biology and control theory: it is sad that so little fruit is borne.
ADRIAN HORRIDGE
PSYCHOLOGY
Comfort, Alex. The Anxiety Makers. London, 1967. Nelson. Pp. 208. Price 30s.
ANXIETY HAS BEEN described as one of the diseases of civilization. Perhaps one should widen this description and refer to it as one of the diseases of human kind. It seems that we have been conditioned to pay in advance for pleasure by an uneasy conscience. Dr. Comfort in his witty and iconoclastic way blames the medical profession, past and present, to a great extent for support of the accepted morality of the time. His thesis is that to buttress conventional morality doctors have laboured to create anxiety, thus enabling fear to be the sanction. How much better (he implies) to enlighten and inform; and thereby to allow reason and common sense to lead to intelligent modes of conduct.
An example par excellence of such an attitude was that of William Acton (at least in his writings on reproduction), whose views may be summarized-"muscular manhood is the reward of being sufficiently and strenuously anxious" and this anxiety is carried over from the need for pre-marital continence to the utmost restraint within marriage. The anxiety produced by the preceding, however, is nothing compared with that which had to be produced to guard against masturbation. Illustrations are given of fearsome restraint appliances designed to make self-manipulation impossible (both male and female) and these from catalogues dated 1904 and even 1930.
A whole host of bogies was raised as being the possible result of constipation starting principally with the misunderstanding and misquotation of the work of the great Dr. Abernethy, the misunderstanding being apparently fostered to puff the publications and products of a bookseller and quack apothecary of the time. (The parallels with the wronglydirected advertising experts, who are the present-day anxiety makers even more potent than the doctors, can clearly be seen.)
Another characteristic of imposed morality is to resist anything that can reduce the penalties of opposing it, as when sexual freedom was confined in the past by "God's Little Allies", the gonococcus and the spirochaete. For example, at the beginning of the 1914-18 war, attempts were made to prevent both the adequate dissemination of prophylactic techniques and also the necessity for efficient and adequate after-treatment. These attempts were apparently only lessened when it was realized that the men were prepared to welcome venereal disease infection and thus avoid further combatant service.
The author's sombre conclusion is that one can end up wondering if one is anxietymaking over the dangers of expressing sane anxiety.
REFERENCES
Hunter, John. Treatise on Venereal Disease. 1786.
Cobler, John. The Reluctant Surgeon. Heinemann, 1960.
D. ROBERTSON-RITCHIE
184

