HEREDITARY BLINDNESS
The Report of the Prevention of Blindness Committee By J. MYLES BICKERTON, F.R.C.S. (En,.)

EUGENISTS will be very gratified by heredity would be able to form an opinion as

the findings of the Prevention of Blind- to the hereditary nature of the disease

ness Committee of the Union of Coun- without a pedigree" (my italics). The

ties Associations for the Blind dated April consultant, it goes on to say, would notfbe

I933. The recommendations of this Com- justified in giving advice against parent-

mittee often lead to immediate action, and hood " unless his opinion on the disease qua

they are read widely in the right quarters. disease is reinforced by the evidence of a

The members of this Committee consist of pedigree "-which should contain all the

persons who have to do with the care, cure, relevant information and apply, as strictly

or education of the blind, and who have only as possible, the principles set out in Appendix

the interests of the blind at heart. Its funds I to the Report. " It is, however, possible

are charitable.

for an ophthalmologist, in consultation with

The material about to follow consists of a genetic expert, to state for any individual

extracts that I have selected.

whose family history has been carefully

The Report opens with some " General investigated, the degree of risk of blindness

Observations." It says: " A mass of data in succeeding generations which parenthood

has been collected by individual ophthal- would involve." Further: " Hereditary

mologists, but the correlation of the data blindness, in common with other inherited

is a matter for the genetic expert who has tendencies, is inherited not only through

already done a good deal of work on it."

persons actually suffering from it, but also

" It is hoped that in the future Public (and in some diseases predominantly) through

Health Departments may be willing to persons who, though not themselves affected,

undertake a certain amount of investigation are nevertheless carriers of the taint.

of cases which come before them in the course Abstention from parenthood by blind per-

of their work, with a view to submitting sons who are the subject of hereditary eye

them to scientific analysis by a genetic disease is not therefore of itself sufficient.

expert." . . . " We can point to cases in An intermarriage of blind persons should

which the marriage of one man or woman always be approached with caution, and it

suffering from, say, retinitis pigmentosa, may be said that parenthood of persons

has resulted in some forty cases of blindness suffering from inheritable blindness is in-

in subsequent generations. All will agree advisable unless the ophthalmologist is

that such a possibility is intolerable, but we prepared to say that the risk is so slight as

have no idea what proportion of the total to be negligible."

number of persons suffering from some such Here follows a " Classification of the main

disease has' married with no ill result to their hereditary eye diseases," some causing blind-

descendants."

ness (a), and less serious ones causing grave

Proceeding then to discuss its new form visual defects (b).

for the certification of blindness (Appendix (a) Retinitis pigmentosa.

II) the Committee writes as follows: " This

Hereditary optic atrophy (Leber).

form of report will in certain cases indicate

Anophthalmos.

the possibility of hereditary disease which

Familial macular degeneration.

requires further investigation, but neither

Microphthalmos.

the ophthalmologist nor the specialist in

Oxycephaly.

i67

i68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(b) Albinism. Aniridia.
Cataract (congenital and lamellar). Coloboma of the iris.
Congenital night-blindness. Ectopia lentis. Familial degeneration of the cornea.
Glioma of the retina. Buphthalmos (slight hereditary ten-
dency).
Myopia is mentioned in a special paragraph. "The fact that the liability to myopia may be accentuated in the children of myopic parents is admitted."
Under the heading " Transmission of Disease: The View of the Eugenist " appears the following interesting statement:
" The transmission of disease may be considered purely from a eugenic point of view, regardless of all other considerations whatsoever. From this point of view, a eugenist would probably urge that ascertained facts would justify the following conclusions:
(a) Any man or woman who has had aniridia, congenital cataract, glioma of the retina, hereditary opacity of the cornea or ectopia lentis, microphthalmos, retinitis pigmentosa, and of whom either parent has been similarly affected, is likely to transmit the defect and should abstain from parenthood.
(b) Any normal parents who have more than one child affected with any one of the above-mentioned diseases, or with buphthalmos or total colour blindness, should have no more children, and such children as they have should abstain from parenthood-whether they themselves be affected or not. Even if the parenthood of such children does not lead at once to the manifest reproduction of the disease, it inevitably adds to the latent defect in the population, which becomes manifest when two people carrying such latent defect marry and have children.
(c) If in all stocks in which Leber's Disease (hereditary optic atrophy) has occurred more than once, the sisters of affected
males were to abstain from parenthood, the disease would be almost exterminated, except for sporadic cases of no genetic significance. In general, there is no risk to the descendants of men who are suffer-

ing from Leber's Disease; the cases in which they transmit the disease are very rare, but should be borne in mind, and if one such case in a family has occurred, all other affected members of that stock should be regarded as liable to transmit."
The Committee sums up the present position with five recommendations under the heading " General Conclusions." Here it points out that as a Committee it cannot subscribe to all the limitations on parenthood proposed by eugenists, if only for the reason that some of the diseases do not cause certifiable blindness.
However, they would like to see (i) more complete statistics, and (2) better certification of the blind. (Both of these steps were urged by me in letters to the Joint Committee of London Ophthalmological Hospitals, the Ministry of Health, and the Council of British Ophthalmologists in 1930 and I93I, and in an article sent to the British Medical Journal in I93I, printed in I932.) And they state their conclusions as follows:
From the point of view of the causation of blindness, the most important inheritable diseases which have to be considered are retinitis pigmentosa and Leber's Disease.
If a member of a stock in which there is definitely inheritable disease causing blindness, even if the disease is not manifest in his or her case, marries, he or she should be strongly urged to consult an ophthalmologist, who, with the assistance of a pedigree, would advise as to abstention from parenthood. This statement need not apply to males in a stock carrying Leber's Disease, except in the very exceptional families in which males have been known to transmit.
Unless there is medical evidence to show that the case does not fall within the hereditary class, a blind person contemplating marriage should seek the advice of a competent ophthalmologist before marriage, in view of the complex nature of the problem and the serious handicap imposed upon the children of persons suffering from
inheritable eye disease. The ophthalmologist will no doubt obtain a pedigree and, if necessary, consult a genetic expert.
The Report is excellent and is a real justification for eugenics; it is a very fair resume of the facts and the members of the Committee are to be congratulated on

HEREDITARY BLINDNESS

I69

making such a difficult subject clear and in the street is eugenically minded and needs

understandable. It is quite possible that the no compulsion; only the mentally deficient

work of the Eugenics Society has hastened require this.

and assisted the findings of this Committee. Under the heading " General Conclusions,"

It will be at once apparent that the work of the Committee, as I have pointed out,

the Eugenics Society must continue; this stresses the importance of securing more

Report shows that only the most serious and complete statistics and better Certification

obvious dysgenic factors have been dealt with. of the Blind. There are important genetical

The Committee points out that it is reasons for these measures. For instance, it

presenting the report of a Prevention of is possible there are one million persons in

Blindness Committee and not the report of a Great Britain who are blind in one eye. Now

Committee for the Prevention of Eye Disease, a person who is blind in one eye from an and that it has considered the question from inherited defect might have, say, four children

the medical and not the social aspect. It each blind in one eye, or possibly four chil-

states that albinism, aniridia, congenital dren two of whom are blind in both eyes.

cataracts, ectopia lentis, congenital degenera- We eugenists stress the fact that every child

tion of the cornea, glioma of the retina, and has the right to be born fit in fit surround-

buphthalmos, " would not, in all probability, ings: we respect the rights of the unborn child.

cause certifiable blindness."

From my work at four large hospitals in

I should have preferred the statement, the poorest parts of London I have been led

"might not, possibly, cause certifiable blind- to the conclusion that only about one in five

ness.'' I have seen many persons certifiably of the blind are registered. The certification

blind with these diseases. They are, terrible of a blind person is nobody's business. The 'afflictions and always cause some degree of blind person cannot be responsible, for blindness. I can imagine the acute anxiety obvious reasons, and he often objects to of any of the members of the Committee certification; the surgeons at the clinics are
viewing their offspring for the first time, if often loath to mention the subject, in the

any of these diseases were " in the family." rare event of their thinking about it or

In my opinion death is preferable to most of knowing the necessary standards and pro-

them and their victims are terribly handi- cedure. The Public Authorities in London

capped in the struggle of life, and find and many other places do not pay an themselves shut off from hosts of occupa- adequate fee for the examination, and often

tions and recreations. Employers employ them with diffidence. The treatment of glioma of the retina is mutilating, and the death of a child with this disease is some-
times frightful. In 25 per cent. of cases the disease is bilateral, and excision of both eyes to save the life of the child may be necessary.

no fee at all, as the work is not considered important, apparently. The British Medical Association has said it is not part of the duty of the surgeons of voluntary hospitals to undertake this work. Hence the Com-
mittee's recommendations on this matter. It is to be hoped that, as funds permit, the

The remarks with regard to myopia are so excellent work of the Prevention of Blindshort that perhaps the seriousness of this ness Committee will be extended. Indeed,

disease might not be appreciated. About 20 the Committee is working on parallel lines

per cent. of our registered blind are blind with the Eugenics Society, and I consider

through myopia, which is a hereditary
condition not yet fully understood. In addi-
tion to the blind, immense numbers of persons have very defective vision due to the
higher degrees of myopia. Many people suffering therefrom do wish to avoid infficting a similar handicap on their children

that the data which will be assembled when its recommendations are adopted will have
considerable value. There is more public sympathy for the blind than for the mentally deficient. The Report, which deserves to be widely read and studied, may be obtained from The Secretary, Prevention of Blindness

when the risk is explained to them. The man Committee, 66 Victoria Street, London, S.W. i.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 3.

