THE PROBLEMS OF QUANTITY AND QUALITY IN THE BRITISH POPULATION*

By R. C. K. ENSOR

IF I ask what justification there is for my tellectual facets, happened to include among

addressing, on this subject, a body, so them an interest in population, doubtless

many of whose members have far more
special knowledge than I, the answer is, I suppose, that I speak as a member of the
Royal Commission which reported a year ago. During the five years of the Commission's
life I was one of only two members who never missed a meeting; and (which I suspect may have been equally rare) I never shirked reading any document which came officially before us. So I may claim perhaps to have

some money might be found for that subject
even now. But it looks, I fear, as though he does not.
Now that is a misfortune not only for the Commission but for the nation. There is no field in which we can less afford to neglect the factor of time, or in which the unretrieved more quickly becomes the irretrievable. Let me give you by way of an opening example the following illustration of what

been a diligent member. The Royal Commission worked hard, but

I mean. If you compare the British population for

in two respects it was unlucky. Appointed in the decade I87I-8I with that for the decade war-time it was not far in its second year when I93I-4I (that is, sixty years later) you will

the war ended. There followed the great find that the population at this later date was

post-war spate of births, which marked the
years I946-7-8, and gave many of the public a totally false impression that the population problem was solving itself. Following this we
reported in I949, and within a very short
while of our doing so occurred our second misfortune, the national financial crisis, which involved the devaluation of the pound. I say nothing about that crisis or its handling,

6o per cent more than at the earlier. Sixty per cent over sixty years; a crude average growth of i per cent per year; nothing to grumble about, you may say. No, but look a little deeper. The number of births in the earlier decade actually exceeded by roughly 3 million the number of births sixty years
later. See what that means. The children born I93I-4I will be the men and women

excepting this-that it obviously entailed on the Government and its departments a policy
of immediate economy, and that when that

aged 20-30 in the decade immediately before us, the fifties of this century. On them we shall have to depend for our main fighting

happens the omens are not good for any man-power if war breaks out; on them, too,

proposals involving new expenditure. The
Royal Commission had not been extravagant in that way ; it always kept the Treasury well before its eyes ; but without some amount of
expenditure little can be done. So, in fact, nothing has been done; and there is a real
danger that the entire labour of the Commission may for an indefinite time be thrown
away. Something in such cases depends on personality; and if our present Chancellor of the Exchequer, a man with many brilliant in-

we must depend for the physically strongest and mentally most adaptable elements in the occupations of peace. And we shall
actually have 3 million less of them than Victorian Britain had in the last decade of
the nineteenth century.
What I want you to appreciate is the certainty and unalterability of facts like those. The account is closed; this deficiency of young adults, which confronts us, is inevitable. It results from something that happened years ago-something that West-

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May 23rd, 1950.

minster and Whitehall scarcely noticed. The only thing that theoretically could repair it

I28

PROBLEMS OF QUANTITY AND QUALITY IN BRITISH POPULATION i29

now would be an immigration of 3 million
young foreign adults; which is not a practical possibility.
If you ask how, in spite of it, there was
that 6o per cent increase in the total population, an important part of the answer is that in I947 the people over 65 were four times as numerous as in I87I. Now I should be loth
to suggest (being one of them myself) that
people over 65 have no uses. But for the
mainstay purposes of the nation, whether production in peace-time or defence in war-
time, I am afraid that nearly all of them must be rated as passengers, not crew. Therefore their enormous increase between the two periods, so far from mitigating the loss of those 3 million young adults, actually makes it worse, since there is a much larger burden for the fewer shoulders to carry.
Well, take all that as a digression. It is one, but I have thrown it thus forward
deliberately. I want no one in this room to suppose me talking at random if I say that
any major statesman who acquiesces without protest in the shelving of these problems will commit a major wrong against the nation. Before the Royal Commission reported, statesmen had the excuse of ignorance; now they have not.
Let us come back to the Royal Commission. It had at least one feature that no Royal Commission has ever had before. Besides its main membership it had attached to it three advisory committees-statistical, biological and medical, and economic. Only the chairmen of these committees were
members of the Commission. This arrangement was perhaps inevitable. A Royal Commissioner is somewhat like a juryman; till the verdict is given he is more or less constrained to silence. But to go to an eminent biological or statistical authority-a man who very likely is a university teacher of his subject-and to ask him to serve you on terms of keeping his mouth shut for five years would plainly not be practical. At the same
time we wanted from some of those people more than a mere giving of evidence, and the committee system seemed a way of getting it. Incidentally, members of this Society were well represented, its president

being chairman of the statistical committee
and its secretary a prominent member of the
biological and medical. But although this system may have been,
as I have said, inevitable, and although the
members of our three main committees were
in each case extremely eminent, the working of the system as a whole was not, I think,
unreservedly a success. There was, you see, no contact between us (the Commissioners)
and the committees, except through their
chairmen. We did not hold joint meetings, and if we had they would have been too big
to be useful. In some cases we knew that a
committee's membership were far from
unanimous, but their chairmen were norm-
ally and naturally reluctant to lay bare to us the sources and the extent of their differences.
In one case a committee, reporting on a subject upon which some of the Commissioners were certainly entitled to opinions of their own, made or seemed to make the claim that, since they (the committee) were the experts in their sphere, we (the Commission) must accept without question whatever they chose to say about it. Here, something like a
head-on clash was only averted by the tact of the chairman. Another weakness was that whereas the Commission, being the only body concerned with all sides of the subject, might frequently, perhaps, have suggested a profitable line for exploration by one of the committees, it had no means of informally discussing it with that committee in the first place. Consequently suggestions from the Commission to the committees tended to be rare and of small importance.
I mention these difficulties of the Commission, because you must appreciate that in spite of some strokes of signal good fortune (and, in particular, the services of an admirable staff) we did not work under ideal conditions. And we always knew that public and Parliamentary opinion was none too friendly towards us. True, the only big request that we made to the Government of the day was granted. That was our request to be allowed
to take a sample family census. It was an absolutely necessary census; our inquiry would have been a very poor affair without it; but it did cost a good deal of public

130 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

money, and I should like here to pay an
emphatic tribute to the intelligence of the Treasury officials and the courage of the then
Chancellor of the Exchequer which in war-
time enabled us to get it. Even so it was
hampered by a most serious limit-the filling
up of the census papers had to be voluntary.
This was necessary to get the project past the
House of Commons. In the alternative there was only too much reason to fear that the
back-bench ignoramuses of that body would have come into action against us with such
claptrap about " snooping " and " prying," as had already prevented the fertility census of I9II from being later repeated; and in
the commotion we should have lost our census altogether. Nevertheless this voluntary limitation added very considerably to the difficulty of drawing deductions from the results attained-how considerably even our
statisticians only fully found out when they
got down to analysing the figures. Our terms of reference empowered us to
study " the present population trends " in Great Britain, their causes and their probable consequences, and to make recommendations
as to how its future trend might be influenced in the national interest. These terms were
wide, and had the great merit of pre-judging very little. Under them we had broadly two problems to examine-quantity and quality. Neither was pre-judged. In regard to quantity members of the Royal Commission
were at first very much at variance. Several were inclined to say offhand that our island was full enough already; some even toyed with the William Morris idea of a Britain much less populous and more idyllic than at present. Others, including myself, took quite a different view. But eventually we reached a kind of loose concordat on the footing that we should not aim lower than to stabilize our existing population. How then was stability to be ascertained ? The answer, as the Commission came to see it, is set out in Mr. W. A. B. Hopkin's memorandum on " The measurement of Reproductivity," printed as
an appendix to the report. The conception known as the net reproduction rate, as developed by the late Dr. R. R. Kuczynski, and generally relied on before the war, is

there discarded, for reasons shown; and
reliance is placed instead on a different con-
cept-average family size. Important data for measuring family size in this country had
already been supplied by the special fertility
census of I9II; but the omission to repeat this census since had left them, so to say,
hanging in the air. Hence the urgent need
for the family census which the Commission
eventually took; which made it possible to
calculate average family size down to the date of its taking. This " sample census of
families," based on a IO per cent sample of all
the women in the population of Great Britain, was taken in January and February I946. As has been said, it was on a voluntary basis,
and though most of the women who were asked to fill in papers did so, a certain proportion did not. Now if these abstainers had been a random sample of the whole their
abstention would have made no difference, but late in the day, unfortunately, it became certain that they were not. Elaborate and difficult inquiries and calculations had therefore to be made to reduce as far as possible the margin of error. Some margin must even so remain, and to that extent the sample census suffers; but nevertheless its showings have a very high value.
The superior convenience of the average size of family. concept can be illustrated in connection with the spate of births during the years I946-7-8. Here the net reproduction rate could merely record the situation,
say for each of the ten years from I938 onwards, and give you some measure of the
fluctuation between the different years.
Average size of family, on the other hand, helps you to judge whether a spate of births
means that parents are actually having more
children than they otherwise would have had, or whether it is merely a case where by a combination of postponements and anticipations a number of births which would anyhow have taken place have been crowded into particular years, while the ultimate average size of families will not be increased.
We cannot for some years, of course, give a final answer to this, because most of the I946-7-8 parents could still have more children if they liked. But we know that the

PROBLEMS OF QUANTITY AND QUALITY IN BRITISH POPULATION I3I

war did not directly and at the time increase that 2-4 is an average for all families, includ-

average size of family; what it did was to ing those where for physical reasons the

lower considerably the average age at which marriage is sterile, or where through marrying

people married ; and although that reduction late or an unfortunate first confinement the

in age at marriage may eventually have parents cannot have their full quota of

some influence in increasing average family children. If an average of 2-4 is to be main-

size, it is not likely to be large if the married tained the parents who are fully able to

couples in question retain the same general must have not 2-4 children but more like

attitude towards parenthood as their pre- 4. That figure has some other recommenda-

decessors.

tions, since it is the lowest within which it is

What then has the attitude of their pre- possible for each boy to have a brother and

decessors been ? The answer is that average each girl a sister. But it is a long way from

family size, which in the mid-Victorian the one-child and two-child families which

period was about 5.5, began falling from I877 prevailed during the inter-war period in

onwards, was a little below 3.5 in the first virtually all classes.

decade of this century, and fell to 2-2 for May I make one further comment about

the couples married in the half-decade I925-9. targets. Surely the important thing is not

At this last level it has since been stationary, that the population as a whole should replace

and the evidence points to its still being so. itself but that the population of efficient age

And how far does this figure 2-2 go towards should do so-say those from i9 to 65. Is it

replacement ? The answer will be affected not a little ludicrous that we should think to

by two other factors-the future marriage- improve our figures by the expected fall in

rate and future death-rate. The marriage- the death-rate, when we know that the bulk

rate cannot rise much because it is so of the fall affects the aged ? In many ways

high already. The death-rate, on the other it may be most desirable that people who

hand, after falling rapidly since igoo, seems would formerly have died at 70 should live

likely not merely to retain its low level but to be 8o, and those who would have died at

to go on falling at the same rate for another 75 live to be 85. But, as I have already said,

thirty years. If it does, the figure 2-2 repre- such people, however much they may be

sents 94 per cent of replacement, while if cherished, are in most cases no addition to

it only remains where it is the figure 2-2 the nation's strength but a tax on it. And

will represent only go per cent of replace- the tax is going to be a heavy one. In I948

ment. Striking a mean, we may say that the cost to the Exchequer of retirement

replacement would be achieved if the present pensions was f238 million. But for I978,

average family size, 2-2, were raised to 2-4. even if (which is most unlikely) there is no

That is, if on the average every ten married further fall in the death-rate and no further

couples had twenty-four children instead of, rise in the scale of pensions, the estimated

as at present, twenty-two, the quantitative cost on the same basis is £50I million; that

problem of replacement would be solved. is an increase of much more than double over

Stating the matter thus it may seem so thirty years. Do not forget that the figure

short a step to replacement that we really for I948 is itself a high one. I told you

need do little, if anything, about it. But it earlier that in the previous year the number

is not so short as it looks. The fall of the of people over 65 was four times what it

figure down to 2-2 has undoubtedly been due had been in I87I, though the population as

to the spread of deliberate family limitation. a whole was less than double.

This spread has not been complete and, There is another point which makes it

humanly speaking, will go further. There are impossible, I think, to justify a tepid attitude

still considerable probabilities of further towards the problem of quantity. The

shrinkage, for even to-day fourth and later replacement calculation based on an average

children still constitute about one-fifth of all family size of 2-4 assumes that there will be

the births. Again it must be remembered no net emigration. Yet not only has there

132 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

already been much emigration since the war to the Dominions and ourselves receive

but it is most desirable that it should con- foreign settlers here, rather than that too

tinue. During the past three centuries it has many foreigners should go direct to the

been the sustained volume of emigration Dominions, whose smaller populations will

from this country which has procured for the be less able to absorb and assimilate them

English language, the British faith in repre- than ours would be. Serious obstacles, how-

sentative government, the British cult of ever, have been put in the way of settling

liberty and the rule of law, the great place foreigners here since the war, notably by

which they have to-day in the world. People certain trade unions.

often talk of the invisible ties which, despite If then we agree that this country's figure

our differences, connect us with the United for average family size needs raising, how can

States, and those which have enabled the we hope to raise it ? The Commission

inhabitants of Canada, Australia and New rejected any idea of doing so by restricting

Zealand to build up new and distinct nations the spread of contraceptive knowledge. It

without ceasing to regardthis island as in a wanted people, if they have more children,

sense their Mother Country. Well, the to have them voluntarily. Why then do they

greatest of those invisible ties, perhaps, has not ? Why did 8i per cent of the couples

been continuing immigration. It is because married in I925 have no more than three

in any given decade down to I930 so many children and 42 per cent no more than

British families have had sons or daughters one ?

settled in those overseas countries, with per- If you start asking people that question

sonal postal intercourse flowing regularly about themselves they will commonly give

between there and here, that the Common- you any of a dozen reasons, more or less

wealth could become a reality, and also that fanciful-often any rather than the right one.

we have been able to avoid for I36 years any But there can be little doubt that the main

clash with ever-growing America.

motive is economic. And it is very important

I said " down to I930," because in the to understand how it operates. It operates

'thirties, as a result of the world economic within classes rather than between them, and

crisis of I929-33, the current was temporarily is perhaps more felt within the better-off

reversed; and whereas in the sixty years classes than within the worse-off. People are

before I93I our emigrants exceeded our deterred from parentage not because all

immigrants by an average of 56,ooo a year, parents are poorer than all non-parents-for

in the nine years I93I-9 our immigrants obviously they are not-but because all

exceeded our emigrants by an average of parents are poorer than all non-parents in the

6o,ooo a year. This was due to the specially same class. At all income levels (except

heavy incidence of the world economic crisis possibly the millionaires at one end and what

upon primary producers; which caused used to be called the paupers at the other)

many who had gone overseas in the 'twenties parentage is an economic and social handi-

to come back again in the 'thirties. There is cap, steeply increasing with every additional

no such backwash now. The war has led all child.

parties in the Dominions, except the How far can the handicap be measured ?

Afrikaners, to desire a greatly enlarged annual That was the subject of a most interesting

intake of settlers; and the end of the war study made for the Royal Commission by its

found an exceptional number of British brilliant research assistant, Mr. J. Hajnal,

anxious to settle there. But unless our and Professor A. M. Henderson, which was

average family size rises very appreciably the published only recently in volume V of the

process can hardly continue. Meanwhile it papers of the Royal Commission. The raw

has been recognized by all recent British material was provided by (i) a large number

Governments that whereas the Common- of working-class budgets, (2) I,360 middle-

wealth as a whole needs population it is class budgets-both collected just before the

preferable that we should send British settlers war, and therefore wrong for to-day as

PROBLEMS OF QUANTITY AND QUALITY IN BRITISH POPULATION I33

regards absolute figures, but not in the main, effect except at or near the bottom of the

it may be presumed, as regards relations income scale. To say that is not to deny between figures. I shall not attempt here to them value but to define that value, which pilot you through it ; but there are two tables, lies in their rescuing low-income families

XII and XIII, to which I would refer you, from being forced by parentage below the as illustrating what I said just now. These poverty line. But it seems improbable that
are tables dealing with clothing. At each of they will influence the artisan birth-rate and

the income levels recorded the showing is certain that they cannot affect the profes-

the same; the amount spent per head on sional one-even if the Treasury had not

clothes falls with each additional child. clinched the matter by its delightful policy Particularly noticeable is the drop in the of charging income tax upon them. It is at

expenditure on adult clothing, i.e. in what the parents can afford to spend on themselves. In the middle-class range parents of two children spend on their own clothes only
two-thirds what is spent by childless couples; in the working-class ranges the proportion is much the same. But clothing is only one example among many. Parents do not only go shabby because they are parents, they are forced into deprivations all round. Just

this point that the quality aspect of population comes in. If quantity were all that we had to think about, we might solve our
problem by merely bribing those lowest in the income scale to have large families. But if there is also a real problem of quality we
cannot find our solution on those lines. Let me first state the quality problem as
experience seems to suggest it. Few people who consider the subject without bias will

before the war the social surveys carried out doubt, I think, the broad fact that human

at York, Bristol and Birmingham showed stocks vary very widely in respect of their that the incidence of the poverty line heritages of natural ability. Can we doubt depended mainly on size of family; working- also that with the increased opening of

class families with more than a certain num- opportunity to talent the members of the

ber of dependent children fell almost auto- abler stocks are more and more finding their

matically below it. In the other classes way upwards into the higher strata of parentage means being deprived of things society ? The process began not later than
which the other members of the class take for the Renaissance; it went further in the

granted-all the normal luxuries and many of the normal conveniences which those others enjoy. To have children, but above all to have more than two children, places the
parent in a position of devastating economic and social inferiority as against people who in respect of upbringing, outlook and gross income are his or her natural equals. In the
most literal sense it is " imprudent " to be a parent; and the result is that at almost all

seventeenth century; it was greatly stimulated from I750 onwards by the industrial revolution, and in the nineteenth century
also by the immense widening of the educational field. To-day the nation's egalitarian policies do not merely provide " ladders " of opportunity, but we toothcomb the whole school population in our endeavour to find able children to climb them. That in itself is just, right, and, so to say, inevitable; but

social levels the prudent persons tend to have to what can it lead if not to the ever-increas-

the smallest families. If, as we have just ing segregation of inherited ability towards

seen, the national interest requires that average family size should be raised, how can we expect to raise it, unless we do something to lessen the handicap against parentage ?
Well, what can we do ? A little reflection will show that since the handicap operates

the top in the higher-income levels ? And what then, if- the people at those levels continue to show the lowest average size of
family, a size far and away too low for replacement ? Must it not mean that the nation's abler stocks will come to an end,

not between classes but within them, and and it will have only the less able ones left

within all of them, flat-rate reliefs, like the to draw upon? And if you consider how present family allowances, can produce no much the greatness and prosperity of Great

c

I34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Britain has been due to her exceptional fer- though I have not exact figures, that both

tility in great men, ought not this danger of the roll of scholars elected the year before

her able stocks being sterilized to be taken me and that elected the year after me would

most seriously by statesmen ?

show even worse results.

Observe, I am merely stating a case, not The difficulty is on the other side of the

proving it. It cannot all be " proved " case-to show whether, as a result of what

to-day in the strict sense. Nevertheless the happens at the top, the reservoir of able

presuppositions on which it rests are each so stock in the nation is being seriously or

strong that no one who cares for the future measurably depleted. On the Royal Com-

of the country can ignore it. After all, mission we received a good deal of evidence

practical men, whether in business or poli- about this, and in particular a set of memor-

tics, have constantly to act on assumptions; anda, which you will find in that volume V

and you will not often find a stronger set of of the Commission's Papers, to which I

assumptions than those to which I have just referred just now. The set starts with a

directed your attention. The Royal Com- memorandum by Sir Godfrey Thomson,

mission recognized this; it laid down, there- whom most of us honour greatly for his work

fore, that any policy for increasing the in this field; then there is a comment by

population should aim to increase it not at Professor R. A. Fisher, then two comments

one level only but at all; and, as a corollary, by Professor J. B. S. Haldane, then one by

in addition to the flat-rate allowances to help Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts; then a memoran-

parents in the lowest income groups, it dum by Dr. E. 0. Lewis, and a long one by Sir

proposed to help parents in the higher ones Cyril Burt; and lastly, a further memorandum

by remissions of income tax proportionate to by Sir Godfrey Thomson, dealing with the

their incomes. These remissions could in results of the Scottish intelligence survey

themselves, apart from their population made in I947, a full account of which,

aspect, be justified as equitable on the entitled The Trend of Scottish Intelligence,

ground of taxable capacity.

was published by the Scottish Council for

It cannot as yet be proved that the con- Research in Education last year.

tinual progress of ability towards the top of Now I have read these men's names to

society, combined since I877 with its increas- you because I think you will recognize that

ing sterility when it gets there, has resulted in they are those of scientists eminent in this

any lowering of the nation's ability. One sphere-men, too, with very different views

part of the case, the withering away at the on many things; and I for one was struck by

top, is probably familiar to you all, but I will the remarkable degree of agreement between

give you an illustration from my own them-only broken by Professor Haldane,

experience. In I890 I had the luck to be one and by him only in the second of his two

of twelve boys elected scholars at Win- comments, written some years after the first.

chester. One of them, for reasons that I will What does seem to be otherwise generally

not go into, vanished early from my ken; so accepted is that there is a negative correla-

leave him out and leave me out and con- tion-which Sir Godfrey Thomson estimated

centrate your attention on the remaining at - o025-between degree of intelligence and

ten. They represented a high average of size of family. Put in non-mathematical

ability, the Winchester scholarship being terms that means that the abler children

then, as it is now, about the hardest to come from the smaller families; not invari-

obtain. They all came of age in either I900 ably but to an extent which can be measured

or I9OI, and none of them died young. Six and which is far too high to be explained by

of the ten, including one of European chance. A negative correlation of o025

reputation, died without having any children would mean that about 6o per cent of the

at all; and the other four produced ten families are in agreement with the tendency,

children. The bare replacement figure for while 40 per cent are not.

the ten men is, of course, twenty. I believe, In Scotland in I932 an intelligence test

PROBLEMS OF QUANTITY AND QUALITY IN BRITISH POPULATION I35

was taken of all the eleven-year-olds in the Of the first I will merely say that our

schools, and the negative correlation between financial demands were deliberately kept low.

intelligence and size of family was shown by French experience suggests that more, per-

it. Fifteen years later, in I947, a similar haps much more, may eventually be needed

testing was carried out, and the same nega- to bring about any sufficient increases in

tive correlation was shown by it. Only, family size. But, even apart from the present

whereas such a persistent association of financial stringency, there is much to be said

intelligence with small families might have for beginning modestly. Our figures may be

been reflected after fifteen years in a lower taken generally as minima. Of the second I

average of intelligence all round, in point of would say, that while everything there

fact the average in I947 was higher. How recommended may be justified in itself, I am

do we account for that? Possibly, I think, by less confident about its producing much effect

changes of environment. The Scottish chil- on family size. In Sweden, where the problem

dren of I947 were taller, heavier and healthier has been tackled on those lines, the result

than in I932, besides being more accustomed seems to be an improved welfare State, but

to do intelligence tests. Up to a point these not, as yet, an improved family size.

factors might very well offset and disguise a And, lastly, there is the third heading-

fall in inherited intelligence without ulti- provision for better Governmental study of

mately counteracting it.

population problems. Here we put forward a

The Royal Commission-rightly, I think- carefully considered plan. We recommended

did not attempt to adjudicate these issues. that a particular Minister, the Lord President

But it drew emphatic attention to their of the Council, should be given a special

importance and strongly recommended that responsibility for population. But we did

further research into them should be " gener- not suggest setting up a new department.

ously " and " actively " encouraged by the We recommended instead using that useful,

Government. I venture to throw up this though perhaps little-known body, the

recommendation of the Commission as by Inter-Departmental Committee on Social

no means its least important one.

and Economic Research, which should be

What were our other recommendations ? given the necessary power and finance, and

They fall broadly under three heads: (i) be required to appoint a subcommittee to

Monetary help to parents-increased (and carry out the actual work.

untaxed) children's allowances for the lower- A year has passed and none of that has

income levels, together with a sliding scale been done. But as regards the all-important

of tax relief at the higher ones; (2) A long third part I gather that behind the scenes

list of social welfare aids to parentage, discussion has been active. Indeed, if

ranging from painless confinements and rumour speaks true, the proposed alternative

longer nursing to priorities for housing, to our scheme is not to do nothing but to do

rebates for rents, nurseries, home helps and a good deal more. If so, more power to the

many other things; (3) A provision for better discussion. Only I never forgot the ancient

and more continuous Govemmental study of Greek proverb, that the best is sometimes the

population questions.

enemy of the good.

uenic Review, VoL XII, No. 8

