SOCIAL BIOLOGY
The Address at the Inauguration of the New Chair

T HE first English Professor of Social brute creation. The far-reaching implica-

Biology, Professor Lancelot Hog- tions of the change in outlook which Dar-

ben, delivered his inaugural lecture win's doctrine had brought about were be-

at the London School of Economics and coming more apparent in our time, because

Political Science on the afternoon of October biologists were now undertaking the

23rd, a lecture that sparkled with com- analysis of the characteristics of conscious

pressed epigrams directed sometimes at the behaviour in animals, and the behaviourist

Socialist and sometimes at the ' Die-hard,' school of psychologists was applying the

at the rationalist and the Christian, at social new methods to man himself.

worker or at pure biologist, and even at

ourselves, the eugenists, with, of course, ANTS AND ANTIQUARIANS

equal thrusts at those who doubt the animal Man was an animal as the ant was an

nature of man. Indeed, his rapier glanced animal, and he had a natural history of his

among all mankind and left his hearers sure own as the ant had a natural history of its

that, whatever else might characterize the own. The biologist as a biologist confined

new Chair, it would lack neither intellectual his attention to those characteristics which

brightness nor literary grace. The follow- ants and antiquarians had in common, while

ing summary but poorly illustrates these the sociologist confined his inquiries to cer-

characteristic qualities.

tain characteristics which distinguished men

and women from ants and all other animals.

THE DESCENT OF MAN

Their respective fields of investigation over-

Darwin's Descent of Alan, said Professor lapped in the attempt to define what charac-

Hogben, was a challenge to the complacent teristics of human society were determined

dualism which had permitted utilitarian by those characteristics which men share

science and humanistic philosophy to pursue with all other animals, and what characteris-

an independent course from the days of the tics of human society were referable to

schoolmen to the middle of the nineteenth characteristics which distinguish men as one

century. To-day it was evident that the species of animal from all other species of

social sciences could no longer progress animals.

within the framework of a philosophical We must be prepared to recognize that

tradition brought into being by the condi- issues which made the first claim on the

tions of the city state and nurtured from attention of men like Huxley, Galton and

Abelard to Kant in servile association with Spencer were no longer topical. The mis-

the requirements of apologetics. Economic guided opposition of the churches compelled

science had already severed its moorings to biologists of Darwin's generation to con-

moral philosophy, and there was a growing centrate on emphasizing the characteristics

disposition among the other branches of which we shared with other animals. Social

social science to do the same.

biology had now to undertake the task of

To-day the application of scientific method defining in biologically significant terms the

to the study of human society was philoso- characteristics which distinguish man as one

phically guaranteed by the generally species of animal from all other species of

accepted conclusion that millionaires and animals. The work of physiologists like

metaphysicians, statesmen and seventh-day Sherrington and Pavlov was opening the

adventists were products of the same secular way to a biological interpretation of those

agencies as had fashioned the rest of the peculiarities which are most diagnostic of

249

250 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the human species. A well-balanced view of the social classes which has accompanied the

the role respectively played by inheritance decline in the birth rate as a conundrum

and social tradition in determining the rather than a catastrophe. We had inade-

differences which distinguished different quate scientific evidence to justify the belief

social groups would only be possible when that extensive genetic differences distin-

the biological study of behaviour and the guished the social classes. If we had such

methods of the geneticist could be brought knowledge it would be necessary to ascertain

into working harmony.

how such differences were transmitted before

RESEARCH AND PROPAGANDA

justifying the belief that a temporary disparity in fertility would necessarily produce

The great danger lay in undue haste to significant social consequences. The German

establish conclusions which could be made and Swedish data suggested that contracep-

the basis of legislation. The genetic basis tive practice was rapidly spreading to all

of occupational and racial stratification in sections of the community; so that differen-

human societies was a problem which called tial fertility might be a problem which

for discipline, detachment, and restraint. would solve itself without legislative inter-

Nothing could make the exercise of these ference.

wholesome virtues more difficult than to On the other hand, if this transpired to be

bring issues which were still problematical the case, it was possible that European com-

to scientists before the forum of political munities would be faced with a rapid decline

controversy. Much research directed to in general population, which would create a

elucidating genetic variations in human com- new constellation of social problems for

munities had been vitiated by a failure to legislative treatment. The decline in the

envisage the complexity of the problem. A birth rate brought us face to face with the

genuinely scientific analysis of genetic varia- fact that human society was entering upon

tion in human society would have to be sus- what Mr. J. B. S. Haldane had called the

tained by the recognition that human society era of biological invention; and the institu-

is an unique biological phenomenon, inas- tion of a chair of social biology was an im-

much as the family is a unit for the plicit recognition of the impending change.

cumulative communication of old and new environmental stimuli, as well as a group

The rapid progress now being made in physiology made it likely that in the near

delimited by genetic affinity. The preeminent need of the moment was investigation rather than propaganda. The first task

future human society would be in a position to regulate the reproductive process to an extent and in ways hitherto unimagined and

of the social biologist was not to advocate unimaginable.

the sterilization of the unfit, but to undertake the sterilization of the instruments of research before operating on the body politic.
In our own generation the population problem embraced a variety of issues in which the sociologist and the biologist had a common interest. A clear appreciation of the biological issues necessitated the prosecution of research into the physiology of reproduction, the genetic basis of human behaviour, and the incidence of changes in fertilitv. The analvsis of this intricate problem would not be facilitated bv an unduly
alarmist attitude. The scePtical inquirer
might approach the differential fertility of

In many directions it would be necessary for the social biologist to co-operate with pure sociology in ascertaining the significant factors which operate in determining the growth of human populations. On the other hand, social biology could not develop fruitfully if it isolated itself from the methods of experimental inquiry. By the very complexity of the genetic problem social biology was committed to create a framework of biological research and teaching in which a new type of social psychology could develop. For the same reason it was entrusted with the experimental analysis of aspects of the physiology of reproduction too long neglected by medical science.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 4.

