FAMILY SERVICE UNITS FOR PROBLEM FAMILIES

By DAVID JONES
Secretary, Family Service Units

A NUMBER of terms are used to amount may be wasted on drink; not that

describe the families with which drunkenness or alcoholism are usually a

Family Service Units is working- problem, but a great deal can be spent on

problem families, social problem group, drink short of drunkenness. Mis-spending

derelict families, unsatisfactory households, on cigarettes is as serious, as much as LI

etc. Although they all no doubt mean or £2 disappearing from quite small incomes

roughly the same thing, it may well be that in that way when both husband and wife

to regard them as interchangeable only adds are smokers. Money is lost at the " dogs "

confusion. In particular, it may be pre- and wasted on cinemas, comics, children's

mature to regard the terms " social problem pocket money, prepared foods, etc. These

group " and " problem families " as com- families are a prey to various forms of

pletely synonymous.

commercial exploitation.

Membership of the "social problem As a result of this mis-spending they are

group " would seem to be determined largely constantly in debt and in arrears with their

by the presence of subnormal or abnormal payments for rent, clothing clubs, gas,

individuals, particularly mental defectives, electricity, insurances, hire purchase, etc.

in a family. By " problem families " on the They run up " tick " at shops. In an

other hand, Family Service Units denotes attempt to balance their budget they resort

families exhibiting certain kinds of attitudes to borrowing from neighbours and friends,

and behaviour. No account is taken of the to pawning clothing and bedding (the pro-

causes of their conditions, of the type of verbial phenomena of father's suit coming

treatment they require, or of the probable out on Friday and going back again on

results of treatment. I do not propose to Monday) and to the money-lender-usually

define the problem family but will instead an unlicensed money-lender, who charges an

outline the conditions they exhibit.

exorbitant and quite illegal rate of interest.

When they receive their weekly income most

Problem Family Conditions

of it is used to repay debts, leaving the

Their lives are characterized by dirt, dis- family a totally inadequate amount on

integration and disorder. They are often which to manage, and the round of borrow-

shiftless, apathetic and irresponsible to an ing has to start once again. Many families

almost incredible degree. Here, indeed, are live on next week's money.

found " conditions of life at their worst." Their sleeping habits are bad. They sleep

Financial mismanagement is rife. The many to a room and many to a bed; in winter

husband often retains a disproportionate often huddling together owing to lack of

share of the income. One man with a wife bedding. Sheets are rare, blankets usually

and five children, I5 to 4 years old, earning scanty; and sometimes old clothes are the

a wage Of £5 IOS. a week, gave his wife £2 15s. only bedding. They go to bed late and in-

with which to keep him, herself, and the five evitably get up late. As a result, they are bad

children-and most likely expected her to time-keepers at work, the children do not get

provide him with fares and cigarettes at the to school, the mother starts her work when

end of the week. Such situations are by no the day is half done. What sleep they have is

means uncommon. The family income is disturbed with vermin-fleas and bugs-with

often grossly mis-spent. An excessive which many of their homes are infested.

171

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Their meals are irregular. Owing to their poverty and financial mismanagement they have insufficient food. They have little idea of food values and what food they do have is lacking in nourishment. Some of their homes have no proper cooking facilities and often they are devoid of utensils. Even if they have the means they often do not know how to prepare appetizing meals. Sometimes they have no table, and seldom are there sufficient chairs, crockery or cutlery for the whole family. The staple diet of tea, bread, margarine, cheap cake and chips is taken at odd times and standing up.
Clothing is poor in quality and inadequate in quantity. Neither the parents nor the children have any underclothing, night clothing or change of clothing; and such as they have is rarely washed or mended. Usually they have only one pair of shoes or boots and wear these until they cannot be repaired.
The most serious consequences of these conditions is their effect on the children, who are dirty and verminous. The bad feeding, sleeping and clothing habits cause bad health. Skin diseases and illnesses are prevalent and often untreated. But as serious as the physical, is the emotional or psychological neglect. Discipline is absent or varies erratically between over-indulgence and over-harshness. Disobedience and wildness are the inevitable result and often very young children are out of the parents' control. Their school attendance is irregular; through lack of training their habits are often insanitary; they exhibit behaviour problems. Among these families juvenile delinquency is common. Deliberate cruelty is rare but child neglect in this broad sense is nearly always present.
The presence of any one of these characteristics does not make a problem family, nor are they all found in every problem family. But in any problem family it is usual to find many of these characteristics inextricably interwoven and each augmenting the others.
Causes of Unsatisfactory Conditions
Problem family conditions are not the

result of any one cause. Environmental and
material factors-bad housing, overcrowd-
ing, poverty, lack of home equipment-can
make any decent standards almost un-
attainable. A number of factors, to some extent at
least outside the control of the family, are
often important in bringing about a deteriora-
tion in conditions. The temporary or permanent absence of one or other of the parents
from the home owing to death, divorce,
separation or working away can lead to disastrous consequences for the family. Illhealth or incapacity are most important
causes: in the father they mean irregular employment or a life on relief; in the mother they mean she is unable to care for the
family or the home properly. Misfortune of
one kind and another, particularly when associated with other factors, can sometimes start a decline into bad conditions.
Many families, however, have to face adverse material circumstances, while most families suffer misfortune at some time or other, yet they do not allow their conditions to become like those of the problem family. It does seem that something more is required to bring about such conditions and, through contact with individual families, one comes to realize that there is usually some factor, personal to the family or the parents, which is important in bringing about their conditions.
Backwardness, used here to cover anything from dullness to actual mental deficiency, leads to incapability. So often the parents just do not know how to bring up children, how to organize their lives, how to spend their money wisely. Weakness of character is important. The members of these families often express the best of intentions, frequently quite sincerely, but they rarely live up to their intentions. In any situation you can only rely on them taking the line of least resistance. Temperamental instability, used
here to cover anything from minor maladjustment to actual neurotic and psychotic states, leads the family from one crisis to another in their affairs and sometimes to complete disintegration. Marital disharmony is prevalent in these families. When it is

FAMILY SERVICE UNITS FOR PROBLEM FAMILIES

realized that they are often facing very munity centres, through Press, radio and

difficult circumstances, the effect of lack of cinema, through publicity. The standards

co-operation or antagonism between the of a considerable section of the community

parents can be imagined.

need to be raised. Behaviour and attitudes

In any particular instance the causation is typical of the problem family are still

complex, and no one cause is usually sufficient common among a much wider section of the

to bring about the problem family. Gener- community.

ally both environmental or material factors Problem families, however, fail to utilize

and personal factors are present ; and factors or benefit from such facilities as exist at

from both these classes converge to bring present; and the immediate effect of general

about the conditions found in these families. social improvement is not to eradicate them

The members of problem families are often but to disclose them more clearly as a

no more inadequate than many people minority who do not benefit from such

managing fairly well and presenting no measures. To take simple examples: so

problem. The circumstances in which they often one finds that the family fail to act

are placed, however, are difficult, circum- on, or even obtain, the medical advice and

stances that would often test the most treatment available to them. Benefits are

capable. The parents being below-standard not claimed and they do not utilize the

physically and/or mentally are just unable various services that exist to help those in

to cope with their problems, and conditions trouble. They do not become members of

consequently decline. Declining conditions clubs and most social effort passes them by.

in turn have an adverse effect on their This situation arises because so much of

ability to grapple with their increasing the problem in problem families is due to

difficulties resulting in yet further decline. personal deficiencies which are untouched by

The family is caught in a vicious circle from large-scale social change. Problem families

which it is almost impossible for it to must be approached family by family-the

extricate itself unaided. The deterioration individualizing approach of social casework

in conditions is closely related to the number is essential. But with these families some-

of children in the family. Although ,he thing more is required than can normally be

parents may be incompetent with none or provided by a caseworking agency. Such

only one or two children, it is not until there services exist for everybody and the necessary

are three, four or more that their inadequacy time and detailed attention cannot be given

results in serious deterioration in standards. the abnormal families. Yet, if normal family

The mother, her health and vitality already life is to be restored, extra help must be

sapped, is unable to deal properly with her given. It is with such an experimental

growing burdens and becomes increasingly development of social casework to meet the

discouraged, apathetic and indifferent to her problems presented by the problem family

failures.

that Family Service Units is concerned.

A Special Service
Since there is no one cause there is no panacea. If problem family conditions are to be eradicated a total approach is necessary. General social improvement has already achieved a great deal and conditions which were once widespread are now confined to a few substandard families. Education has a vital part to play, both in the more formal sense of school education and the nursery school and, in a wider sense, of social education through clubs and com-

The Work of the Units
The families assisted are referred to the Units, in the main, by other social working organizations, both statutory and voluntary -Health Visitors, School Care Committees, Hospital Almoners, Housing Managers, Probation Officers, Family Welfare Association Workers, etc., who have come across the families in the course of their own work and feel they would benefit from the specialized type of service provided by the Units. Overlapping is avoided and families within the

174 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

scope of other organizations are referred to health, relief, education-and each tackling

them.

a limited aspect of the problem or the family,

Since families do not apply from a con- make little progress towards its general

scious realization of failure, but are referred improvement. Different workers or organi-

by others who consider that intensive work zations may in fact be following different or

is needed, the offer of help comes from the even contradictory policies. An example is

Unit to the family. Nor has the worker any that of a woman with two children, where an

official powers or authority and the family official concerned with relief was urging her

can at any time ask him to withdraw.

to go to work and support herself and the

It is therefore imperative to gain the whole- children, while a health visitor, who was also

hearted voluntary co-operation of the family, calling, was insisting that she stay at home

and the approach is thus necessarily one of and look after the children. In a number of

friendship. Friendship is, in fact, the instances we have found one set of workers

foundation of the work of the Units-a attempting to remove the children from their

friendship without condescension or aloof- home or keep them away, while another set

ness, neither forced nor superficial. Friend- were striving either to keep them at home or

ship must be maintained by the worker in return them to their home.

the face of apathy, or even active resistance, No one symptom or member of the family

and yet it must never be allowed to degene- can be singled out and treated in isolation

rate into sentimentality. The friendship is if the whole welfare of the family is to be

a controlled, a professional one ; a friendship improved. The family must be approached

with a purpose. The worker is there to as an integrated whole, and every aspect of

assist the family towards independence and their often complex problems dealt with as

self-respect. This purpose must, as far as far as necessary.

possible, be made clear in the relationship The specific means to deal comprehen-

and must in any case be kept in the forefront sively with all the problems of the family

of the worker's mind. While friendly con- obviously cannot, and need not, be concen-

tact is easily made, a purposeful relationship trated in any one body. One organization

necessitates the overcoming of resistance to or worker must, however, accept respon-

the worker's function or his suggested plans sibility for the whole welfare of the family.

and the gaining of an active co-operation. When specialist treatment or particular

Ill-will, repeated failure or even deteriora- services are necessary it then becomes the

tion must be met as part of the problem, and worker's duty to obtain them. Not only

not merely condemned as " sin " or used as must the treatment be both possible and

a reason for writing the family off as " hope- practicable, but the worker must ensure it is

less." Patient and understanding goodwill applied, despite failure on the part of the

is essential if the members of the family are family or others concerned. When the

to believe that their welfare is important to treatment is unsuccessful an alternative

the worker, that they are accepted as they must be found. Whatever happens, the

are, and that, with the worker's assistance, worker must regard himself as responsible

improvement in their conditions is both for the welfare of the family. The rehabili-

possible and desirable. The family must be tation of problem families demands an

inspired to change, then shown the way and adaptable and imaginative service, which can

supported through times of crisis until re- cope effectively with all the complexities of

habilitation is effected.

family life without the limitations of red

In the relationship the worker's own faith tape or orthodoxy.

is the dynamic. The worker must believe in Work based on these principles is very

the possibility of regeneration, however intensive. Intensive in the amount of time

apparently hopeless the family.

devoted to each family, in the closeness of

The majority of problem families are the relationship entered into, and in the

known to many social services-housing, amount of assistance provided. Only in

FAMILY SERVICE UNITS FOR PROBLEM FAMILIES

I75

intensive casework over a prolonged period can sufficient impact be made to change the
habits of years or deal with the intractable problems presented by the problem family.
The majority of families need close contact
over many months, home visits often exceed-
ing twice weekly and, at times of special
activity, families are visited daily.
The friendly relationship between the
worker and the family does not grow in a vacuum: it is established and developed in
the process of working with the family in a
practical attempt to overcome their problems. All the many facilities that exist to
help those in difficulties are mobilized to meet the problems presented by a particular
family. The co-operation of other bodies concerned with any aspect of the family is sought and an attempt made to work out with them a practicable and consistent
policy. Such co-operation is normally ensured by close and continuing consultation
between the Unit and any other workers concerned, although at times Special Case Conferences between all the workers interested in a particular family or families may be
necessary.
Existing services are utilized to the full and the families' own powers used in the most
valuable way. If possible, the environment is adjusted to assist improvement. Where specialist help, e.g. psychiatric treatment, is required, it must be obtained. Material
assistance is usually necessary so that the family may have the means to live decently. The Units, however, are not relief-giving bodies and normally such needs are met from existing sources. The value of material assistance lies in its use as a tactic in the
whole process or rehabilitation. The same considerations apply to the manual and practical work performed by the Units. Mis-spending is tackled by detailed budgeting of income and expenditure with the mother. Children and adults are escorted to schools, clinics, offices, etc., in order to ensure full and proper use of existing facilities. Improved living habits are inculcated by practical help with children and with domestic duties, including shopping and cooking; by repairing, scrubbing and decora-

ting. A child's head might be disinfested
with the mother, for instance, as a means of driving home the necessity for greater care
in this respect and of showing the mother the
way to do the job herself. Such work not
only provides a form of assistance not ob-
tainable in other ways, but its educational and psychological effects, and the stimulus
given to the family to make the required
effort themselves, are of great importance. Although assistance can do much to help
problem families and individuals, it has its
maximum impact only in the medium of the friendly relationship and when used as a
reinforcement of changes in attitude and
habits effected in that relationship.
The members of these problem families are
childish, immature, frightened people: life has been too much for them and they take
refuge in apathy and indifference. The only way they can deal with a difficulty is to ignore it. If they are in rent arrears they lose the rent book; if they have an unpleasant job to do they " forget it."
The relationship with the worker gives the family security in which, with the help and encouragement of the worker, they can face their problems and inadequacies and thus begin to meet them. The worker assists by clarifying their difficulties and desires and
presenting to them the real situation in
which they are placed. Assistance is offered as a means by which they can advance-in
a sense, the worker offers him or herself. Because of the confidence and trust that the
family places in- the worker, advice can be given and suggestions made which will be acted on. In the relationship a more definitely didactic function is also performed.
Where ignorance is so common, social
education in all branches of family welfare and home management is an urgent need; and, in the medium of the relationship and in the home, this can be imparted naturally and almost unconsciously and related practically to the day-to-day concerns of living. Social education can also be illustrated and
reinforced by actual manual and practical
work.
These methods are not of routine application to all problem families. What is done,

I76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and how much, depends on the capabilities years. The father had had infantile paralysis

of the parents and the situation in each which had left him with a pronounced limp.

family. Diagnosis, evaluation of treatment, He also suffered from stomach trouble. He

assessment of individuals, planning of work was frequently unemployed and often

must proceed simultaneously. In some in- earned a meagre living rag-gathering. An

stances a wide variety of help is required, official described him as " a lazy, drunken

involving material assistance, practical work, lout." The mother was dirty, under-

specialist treatment and prolonged super- nourished and painfully thin. Her clothing

vision and constant education for better and that of the child was scanty and

standards of home and child care. In other ragged, and both their heads were infested

cases the tonic effect of real friendliness, with lice and covered in sores. The mother

combined with guidance and minor forms of was incapable in the home and spent a

help, is sufficient to arouse the family from large proportion of the family income on

apathy and enable them to overcome their cigarettes. They were in debt and there were

difficulties largely by their own efforts.

£&2 rent arrears. An eviction order had, in

fact, been made and they were to be put out

The Brown Family

in three days' time. Both parents were

The Brown family illustrates the type of completely overwhelmed by the situation

help provided by the Units. When we first and were sunk in apathy and despair: they

met them they were living in two very were doing nothing to remedy the position

dilapidated rooms over a woodyard. A or to find alternative accommodation.

rickety staircase led directly into the living- The parents were obviously most inade-

room, which was furnished with a small table quate; but both expressed a desire to improve

and two chairs. A wall cupboard had been their conditions and, after a searching inter-

pulled down and used for firewood. On the view with them, intensive assistance was

table amid a debris of broken biscuits, a tin given. The parents were stimulated to find

of milk, some margarine in its paper, a loaf accommodation and, with Unit assistance,

and some sugar, were a dirty cup and a plate, managed to obtain a room with an aunt who

two forks and a knife. Apart from this, the had a house of her own. Their furniture was

total cooking and feeding equipment of the disinfested and repaired; and the Unit moved

family consisted of a saucepan, a frying-pan, them into their new quarters by handcart.

a teapot and a tin jug. There was no light- The father had been unable to help with this

ing-apart from candles-and any cooking as he had been encouraged to find work and

had to be done over an open fire. A small had, in fact, started the morning the removal

scullery with a sink led off the living-room, was done. The room was thoroughly cleaned

but the waste pipe was blocked and the sink before the furniture was moved in, and with

unusable. A lavatory opened on to this a double bed loaned by the aunt it looked

scullery; this also was broken and, when fairly adequately furnished. The accommo-

flushed, flooded into the woodyard below. dation was a great improvement, for the

The other room was used as a bedroom. It house was in good condition and situated in

contained only a single bed, and the iron quite a pleasant area; there was electric light,

frame and wire spring of this were broken a gas stove, a bath and running hot water.

and propped up with a stool. The bedding The mother and child were sent to a

consisted of an old torn mattress and two hospital and the child was admitted as an

thin blankets, and was made up with -old in-patient, while the mother had her head

clothes and coats.

shaved and attended as an out-patient. A

The family was not typical of those dealt grant of clothing was made to the parents,

with by the Units for it was both very young it being pointed out to them that in future

and very small, consisting only of the father, they would have to meet these needs by their

aged 23 years, the mother, 22 years, and an own efforts. When the child was discharged

illegitimate daughter of the mother, aged 24 from hospital another organization made a

FAMILY SERVICE UNITS FOR PROBLEM FAMILIES

I77

grant of clothing; and the mother started to temporary or insufficient, and there seems no

take her to a clinic regularly, arranged for alternative but to split up the family and

welfare foods, etc. With the father working, make the best possible arrangements for the

the family's financial position was improved children. Where it is felt that the harmful

and the Unit commenced collecting savings effects of placing them in an institution and

from them each week. Debts were paid off; separating them from their families is out-

and with the savings a fireguard, a cot and, weighed by the harmful effects of the home,

later, a double bed were bought.

the Unit might well recommend such a course

Both parents were friendly and co- to the appropriate authority. The decision

operative and responded well. Advice and to take such action, however, is a difficult

suggestions were acted on and conditions one as often, even in the worst cases, there is

improved. The father, in fact, responded a strong bond of affection between the

rather quicker than the mother, to such an parents and the children.

extent that he started to criticize her At the other extreme are those families

" shoddy habits " and poor cooking ability. where help has enabled them to take their

There were mutual recriminations and the place as normal, self-respecting members of

marital relationship deteroriated.

the community within a comparatively short

The whole situation was therefore dis- time. The reasons for such " successes "

cussed with the parents, and an attempt was cannot be tabulated, but the absence of

made to get them to understand each other serious temperamental instability in at least

better, to make allowances for each other, one of the parents, the possibility of favour-

and to realize that if they were to deal with able material circumstances, and the estab-

their problems they would have to work lishment of a good caseworking relationship

together. A woman worker was also intro- are certainly important. With other families

duced, who called regularly to give the it is possible to improve their habits and

mother advice and instruction in purchasing, standards and they seem able to maintain

cooking, household management, child care, such improvement unaided; but their con-

etc., and regular budgeting of income and ditions are still not wholly satisfactory,

expenditure was instituted. Gradually the although they may be making the best

situation improved and the mother started adjustment they are capable of in the

to take a real interest in the home, to plan circumstances.

a daily and weekly routine, and to develop a The remainder need some form of con-

pride in the child.

tinuing care if improved standards are to be

That was some time ago now. Conditions maintained. Some will need only occasional

have improved further since then and the contact in a crisis, while a few require fairly

improvement has been maintained. Their regular supervision for long periods-perhaps

material situation is a great deal better and years in some instances. Even in these

the parents have regained self-respect and extreme cases the support given is justified

pride. There is good reason to believe that in terms of children saved from needless

they will be able to manage their own affairs suffering and given a better start in life.

in the future as a fairly normal and inde- But although much can be done to re-

pendent family.

generate those families who have lived, often

for years, in conditions of squalor and degra-

Results

dation, the most fruitful line of approach is

As yet, generalization regarding the results undoubtedly the prevention of deterioration.

of treatment is perhaps premature, though Instances can be cited where disintegration

it can be said that by these methods some was avoided by timely aid, and Family

improvement can usually be effected, even in Service Units hope to develop this preven-

difficult cases. In a few, particularly those tative aspect of its service. In order to

with low mentality allied with tempera- provide a sound basis for such development,

mental instability, the improvement is either Family Service Units also aims to study the

I78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

causes which lead to this appalling disintegration of family life. The need for such research is stressed by all who have worked with or written about problem families.
Organization
Family Service Units is a new national voluntary organization, established to develop the work with " Problem Families " successfully pioneered in Liverpool and Manchester. At present there are three Units in operation -in Liverpool, in London, and in Manchester.
The Units consist of teams of whole-time family caseworkers-both men and women -based on Hostel Centres conveniently placed to the areas in which the work is being done. Most of the workers are resident and accommodation is provided for students and visitors. The Centres, which are staffed at all times, are used extensively in the work. They provide not only office, interviewing and storage space and a residence for workers, but are friendly Centres adaptable to whatever purpose might seem constructive for those assisted. Children and adults are constantly calling and many were entertained for meals, some actually being resident for short periods.
Each worker, under the supervision of the Fieldwork Organizer, is responsible for work with from twelve to twenty-five cases at any one time, depending on the nature of the cases. He or she must use initiative to meet the families' changing needs. Hours of work are inevitably long and irregular. The work makes great demands on the workers, and tenacity, cheerfulness and resourcefulness are needed to overcome the frequent setbacks and disappointments.
Is It Worth It ?
Owing to the comparatively small caseloads handled by each worker the service is inevitably expensive. Apart from any humanitarian considerations, however, successful work results in financial saving, as illustrated by the following examples and figures:
(a) Father, mother and four boys referred for assistance because of child neglect and the

danger of the children having to be removed. Intensive work by the Unit was very successful and conditions have since been maintained at a high level. If these four children had been removed the cost of their maintenance would have been between £6oo and L700 a year, and the expense would probably have continued for several years.
(b) Five children were removed from home owing to the appalling conditions. Their care cost the Local Authority approxi-
mately jI6 a week. Considerable assistance
was given by the Unit, conditions improved and the children returned home. The family have since been able to maintain normal standards without assistance.
It costs £164 Ios. a year to keep a man or
woman in prison; £209 2s. 2d. to keep a
young person in Borstal. T-he cost of maintaining a child at an Approved School might be as much as £300 a year. These figures represent only part of the cost of Problem Families to the community. Costly social, educational and health services are misused. Time, money and energy are wasted in piecemeal efforts to mitigate the effects of their anti-social behaviour. They act as centres of infection, physical and moral, to decent families who are their neighbours.
What Charles Booth said of the " submerged tenth " at the end of the last century remains true of the problem family to-day:
It seems time that we should find some means to carry voluntarily on our shoulders the burthen which otherwise we have to carry
involuntarily around our necks.
In the British Social Hygiene Council's Occasional Paper No. 2 Dr. C. Frazer Brockington stated that the problem family " is a common source from which springs much of the evil we seek to prevent "; while Dr. C. P. Blacker wrote that " it wiU increasingly pre-occupy those responsible for the country's social and educational services." The Under-Secretary of State for Home Affairs recently admitted in the House of Commons that " there was a gap on the mechanism of the social services for dealing with such cases." The Women's Group on Public Welfare in their survey, The Neglected Child and His Family, recommend the provision of " an extended specialized casework

FAMILY SERVICE UNITS FOR PROBLEM FAMILIES

179

service." Family Service Units provide such
a service. It is not suggested that Family Service
Units is the complete answer, either to below standard living conditions or even to the individual problem family. It is felt, how-

ever, that the Units have an essential contribution to make.
For the well-being of both the individual families, and the community as a whole, a concentrated attack should be made on this serious social problem.

POPULATION STUDIES

A Quarterly Journal of Demography

Vol. III. No. 2

Editor: D. V. GLASS CONTENTS

September 1949

A. HENDERSON. The Cost of Children. Part I.
M. GOTTLIEB. Optimum Population. Foreign Trade and World Economy.
YOU POH SENG. Practical Problems in Sampling for Social and Demographic Inquiries in
Undeveloped Countries.
D. A. PERCIVAL. Some Features of a Peasant Population in the Middle East. J. W. B. DOUGLAS and GRISELDA ROWNTREE. Supplementary Maternal and Child Health
Services. Part I: Postnatal Care. Part II: Nurseries.
NOTICE. United Nations Seminar on Social Welfare.

Subscription: 30s. net per volume. Single Parts Ios. net
Published for the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE
by the CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS, 200 EUSTON RoAD, LONDON, N.W.i

Eugenics Review, Vol XL No. 4

