HEREDITY AND EUGENICS.
By R. RUGGLES GATES, PH.D., F.L.S.
THE cen-traal problem of evolution is still.the nature and causes of variation, while the practic-al problems of eugenics centre about hereditty. Variation in past ages has al.ready endowed the human race with an almost infin,ite variety of types and characters, many of the latter alternative in their inheritance. We have only to compare those we know best with their re,l.a,tives and ancestors to realise how minute are the resemblances and differences, which may be handed on to descendants and colliateral lines. These are no doub.t chiefly a matter of biological inheritance, though sim-ilarity of environment may play a part in certain cases. Probably in no other species of animal or plant does the number of differences between individuals approach the number to be observed in man. This is to be expected because of the mental and physical complexity of the human organism, but ilt does not imply greater intrinsic vari.albility than iin, other animals or plants.
Before proceedinig further, it ma.y be well to point ou-t that whereas heredity was formerly defined or measured by the degree of resemblance between. parents and offspring, this treatment of the subject will no longer suffice. Thus Brooks (igo6) s,ays: " So far as the word is used inductively in biology, heredity i's the resemblance of child to pa.renit, of offspring to ancestor, while th,e diff-erence between parent and child is called variation." Tihe study of alternative inheritance, which appears to be' the most usual form of heredii1ty, hkas made it -necessary to revise such a defi.nition of herTedity, as well as out outlook with regard -to its incidence. It has now become a commonplace of observation that the differences between organisms, as well as their resemblances, are often inherited. If a tall is crossed with a dwarf variety, we know that usually the second geneiration will inherit tallness and dwarfness-the grandparental diffe.rentiating characters-in a definite proportion,, and that certain of the tall indi-
virduals wil.l go on transmitting dwarfness. We may even cross two white
varieties of plants or two albino animals, externally alike, and obtain c,oloured offsprring. Yet we know that the colour in this case is not the result of v.ariation. One of 'the necessa.ry elements in its production has beer. inherited from each parent, though neiithher possesses both. In such
instances invisible (prob.ably nuclear) 'differences have been inherited
whi,ch, when combined, produce a striking externalised difference. Hence it is. necessary, in speaking of inheritance, to recognise tha-t both simila.rities and differences may be inherited, the one quite as truly as the other. Somre of the differences which appear in offspring may, then, be the result of variation, but many of them will be the result of inheritance.
The Mendelian differences appear to have originated in the first instance as mutations,1 probably through an alteration in one a-rea of a.
1 This subject is discussed elsewhere (Gates, 1915, Chap. IX.).

194 EUGENICS REVIEW.
chromosome. That they are inherited as Mendelian factors results, then, from the manner of distribution of the chromosomes in the reduction divisions. It may be that some of the fundamental resemblances between related organisms are inherited in a different way. Since in experimental breeding it is only possible to study directly the inheritance of differences, evidence concerning the process of inheritance of resemblances must necessarily be indirect and closely wrapped up with development itself.
The biological characters or differences observable in the human race and for the most part inherited, include not merely the more striking racial divergencies, but also the innumerable structural and mental or temperamnental differences that we see in the individuals of any population, however " pure " the race. Colour of hair and eyes, height and size of various parts of the body (for there is soime evid.ence that these are independently inherited for different parts or segments), conformation of the head, and features, size and shape of eyes, ears, no-se, mouth, hands and feet-there is good reaason to believe that the element of inheritance enters largely into the perpetuation of -a host of such differences, as well as others more minute. Everyone can cite, from his own experience, cases of such essentially physiological traits as longevity and early baldness' or grayness " running in families." Differences in reactions to serums and to various diseases, as well as other eviide-nce, indicates the existence of corresponding chemical and constitutional differences between ind;ividuals. The inheritance of such differences is now commonly recognised. Only a few years ago, in the Law Courts, 'the disposa.l of a large estate turned upon a peculiar conformation of the ear occurring in the father and the supposed son.2
A considerable body of detailed evidence concerning heredity in man has accumulated in recent years. It is not my purpose to attempt anythin.g like a complete citation. of this work here, but it may be of interest to enumerate some of the studies which have been made on t¢his subject. For our knowledge of the inheritance both of normal an.d abnorm-al traits in man must always form the chief ba.sis for eugenic action.
1 In an interesting study of the inheritance of baldness, by Dorothy Osborn (I916), she tabulated the results for 22 families and reached definite conclusions. Baldness is found to be a sex-limited trait, being inherited as a dominant character from father to son. In the woman it acts as a recessive, and may be transmitted as such, only appearing as baldness when present in the duplex condition. This explains the greater rarity of baldness in women.
It is interesting to note in this connection that Duerden (19I8, I919) has shown that in crosses between the North African and South African ostrich, the bald spot of the former behaves as a simple dominant character not sex-linked. In the chicks the head is covered with bristly down, but in the North African birds this
gradually falls out during the first few months and is not replaced by feathers.
2 On the other hand, a case is cited (Jenks, r196), with some evidence of
authenticity, in which a girl of Swedish ancestry whose ancestors of both sexes had been accustomed for manv generations to wear earrings, was born with a hole in the proper position in each ear-lobe. That such cases of inheritance of a mutilation are admittedly rare does not necestarily prove that they are nonexistent.

HEREDITY AND EUGENICS.

195

PHYSICAL CHARACTERS.
Two of the earliest subjects studied in connection wi-th human heredity were naturally enough stature and eye-colour. Galton dealt with these traits in his Natural Inheritance. I have pointed out elsewhere
(1914) that Galton was a believer both in continuity and discontinuity in variation, and also in alternative as well as blended inheritance. His point of view with rega;rd to the inheritance of these two characters may be well illustrated by a quotation from Natural Inheritance (p. 138): " Stature and eye-colour are not different as qualities, but gthey are more contrasted in hereditary behaviour than. perhaps any other common qualities. Paren-ts of different staitures usually transmit a blended heritage to 'their children, but parents of different eye-colour usually transmit an
alternative heritage." He -also remarks (p. I39): "The blending in
stature is dlue to its being the aggregate of the quasi-independent inheritance of many separate parts, while eye-colour appears to be much less various in its origin." Instead of Galton's con-ception of particulate in, heritance we now -think in terms of such abstractions as multiple allelomorphs. But this conclusion of his concerning stature has been substantiated by Davenport (I9I7), who concludes from a considerable aggregation of carefully analysed data that the correlation between " knee height " and " pubic arch minus knee hieight," or length of thigh, is only 24 per cent. Knee height includes height of ankle, which is an independent variable. The correlation between the supra-pubic and sub-pubic portions -of stature is found to, be 30 per cent., and striking differences in the relative lengths of these portions of the body occur in different races of man. Thus Eskimo, Mongoloids and some Amexrican Indian tribes have a long trunk and sshort legs, while the Australian Aborigines and some negro groups have a short trunk and long legs. Of the supra-pubic region, the supra-sternal Or head and neck, and sub-sternal or trunk portion are independent variables as regards length, with a correlation between them of only 9 per cent.
Thus while inherited general growth factors, such as differences in the amoun,t of secretion of various glands, are concerned in determining the adult stature as a whole, other factors coinitrol independently the length of the various segments that go to make up stature. Hence an individual may be tall because of the presence of gene.ral growth factors, or because he happens to have inherited length i,n each segment of his stature. Of the four segments that combine to form the total stature, any individual may be relatively long in soome and short in others. It is a common experience, that ceTtain families have predominantly long ttrunks and short legs, while others may have short, stocky trunks combined with long or short legs. A child may happen to inherit all the rellatively long or short segment-lengths of its two parents, and may thus be considerably taller or shorter than either parent.
As regards dwarfs, they may be achondroplastic-having shocrt legs and long trunk-or ateliotic, with normal proportions and reduced size (miniatures). The former condition frequently skips a. generation and its heredity is uncertain, but it appears to be connected with derangements

I96 EUGENICS REVIEW.
of t;he internal secretions. A number of pedigrees of both types of dwarfs
are described in the Treasury of Humani Inheritance (Pearson). Ateliosis
appears to correspond more nearly to many of the dwarf varieties of
plants and animals, though Davenport concludes that it is due to
dominant inhibiting factors. A well-known pedigree of this type of
dwarfism occurs in two families in the Tyrol which have intermarried, and
Pearson suggests that it may here be inherited as a recessive from an ancestral stock. Davenport is inclined to conclude that " in both ateliosis
and achondroplasia there are multiple dominant (growth-inhibiting)
factors, whose actions are al.so often obscured by opposing epigenetic
growth facto.rs, and whic.h are probably of a different sort in ateliosis than
in achondroplasia, for achondroplasia affects chiefly or exclusively the
appendages."
The d,ata of inheritance of gigantism include some interesting cases in
-the tall Scotch population, of North Carolina and Kentucky. It is conclu,ded that excessively tall 'stature is the result of inherited excessive aotivity of 'the pituitary glan,d, the factors for tallness being mostly
recesisiive, due to absen,ce of inhibition to prolonged growth. It is clear
that gigantism and dwarfism are not merely the extreme terms in, a single series, but they are conditioned in inheritance by entirely different physio-
loglcal and developmental processes.
The Menddlian studies of eye-colour up to 1912 were 'summa,rised by Hurst (1912) in this journal, an!d are too well-known to require comment
here. Pearson and ot-hers 'have a,lso studied some of the more detailed diifferen'ces in eye pigmentation, which are important for a complete
analysis. A recent paper (Boas, I9I9) presents statistics of eye-colour which, it is claimed, do not support the Mendelian contention that two blue-eyed individuals have only blue-eyed offspring. But the writer
admits that in collecting ith-ese data persons with a certain amount of brown in their eyes 'may have been classed a.s blue-eyed. Hurst has
summarised the studies on hair and skin-colour in man, and added some observations of his own. The main, points with regard to hair-colour are:
(i) That the shades of colour appear -to be continuous from white (albin,o)
hai,r to jet black; (2) the reds form a sep.arate series du'e to a lipochrome,
while ithie brown is a melanin pigment; and (3) the generalisation of
the Davenports that (with rare exceptions) children never have darkeir hair than their darker parent. This " non-transgressibility of the upper limit" applies also to 'skin-colouir or complexion in -the white -races. Davenport (1913), from a study of mulatto, families in Bermuda, Jamaica and the United' States, concluded that there are probably two segregating Mendeli-an factors for black, and 'that other negroid features, such as kinky hair and thick lips, segregate independently. The same woul.d appear to
be true foor mental characters, since mulattoes sometimes display high intellectual ability, but never pure negroes so far as is known.
The monograph o.nalibinism in man, 'by Pearson, Nettleship and Usher
(1911-13) is a very elaborate and detailed treatment, which wvill serve as
a basis for all future studies on this subject. It gives not only an
elaborately illustrated description of the external features and the his-
.tology of skin and eye pigmentation in.albinotic individuals, but also

HEREDITY AND EUGENICS.

197

deals with the history of the subject. Pure albini.sm i's a recessive
character,1 but the condition, exists iin varying degrees and it,s inheritance,
like that of so many human qualities, frequently shows complications. Complete albinism occurs in both white and coloured races of man. Pearson divides albinotics into six classes. Several cases of white spotting in negroes, similar to the classical types seen in paintings of the x8th
century, have -been de-scribed in modern times. The evidence certamily,
as Pearson (1913) contends, favours the hypothesis that spotting arises de novo where a white-black cross or mixed race is ciossed back with a pure white or black. In other wo.rds, spotting may be considered to arise in certain cases as a somatic segregation, repulsion or dilution effect, and not to be due to an inherited invisible spotting factor. Striping in various flowers is generally believed to have originated in the same way. A similar ca.se oc;curs in certain Oenothera hybrids (Gates, 1915). When Oe. rubricalyx having dark red buds is crossed with Oe. grandiflora having green buds, the Fl is paler red. If this Fl generation is crossed back with Oe. grantdiflora, the colouir is further diluted, becoming very pale; a-nd itn some families the pattern breaks up into spo-ts, a condition which is inherited. Once the spoitted condition has arisen, it appears then
to be fairly stable. Cases of human albinotic spotting are on record which have been transmitted for two to five generations (Stannus, 1913). The
condition of spotting has in some way become stabilised in the germpl.asm, and should therefore probably be looked upon as a mutation following crossing. Moreover, the spotting in man often follows a characteristic pattern, beginning as a blaze in the forehead, with spotting of the arms, the back largely bl.ack, as well as the extremities. Curiously enough,
photographs of the Honduras pi.ebald (Pearson, 1913) seem to show an
extension of some of the coiloured spots as the child develops. The sporadic mranrer in which spotting appears in all such cases remains to be accounted for. The Honduras piebald had five siblings, all normal mulattoes. His mother combined Mexican and negro blood, while the father was a pure negro.
Another interesting case first recorded by Simpson and Castle (19I3) originated -as a novelty-a spotted woman born from ordinary mulatto parents in Louisiana in I853. No case of spotting had previously been kn,own in tthat part of the country. She marr.ied a normal black negro
and their children numbered I5, eight spotted like the mother, and seven
normal, but v.arying in depth of colour as i.s usual in mulattoes. Three of -the normal children an.d three spotted maarried normal negro mates. The normals had in all seven children, all normal. The spotted had in all nine spotted and two normal. This indicates that all the spotted
indivi,duals, male and female, behave as heterozygotes, and that complete
segregation occurs between spotting and non-spotting. The fact that spotting appears rarely and sporadically among the innumerable mulatto crosses -tells strongly against it being the result of an inherited spotting factoT.

2 A recent case in which two oomplete albino " white " parents had an albino son is illustrated by Davenport (I9I6).

98i EUGENICS REVIEW.
The Pearson monograph includes also a study of peculiarities of vision such as night-blin,dness, as well as the haix, of albinotics, and also albinism in various animals. Complete albinoes wi.th pink eyes are known to occur in " pure " races of man, just as they occur in many mammals,
birds and plants (white petals). The monograph above mentioned also inchudes a study of seasonal variation iin animals that are white in winter,
such as Lepus variabilis in Scotland. Crosses of white and black Pekinese dogs also are believed to furnish evidence, of th-e de novo origin. of spotting and blends. It is well known, of course, that in certain breeds,
as the Dalmatian, particular -types of spotting have become a fixed characteristic of the breed. Numerous Mendelian studies of spotting in mammals have been made in recent years, especially in rabbits and mice, and complicated theories of the inheritance of spotting have been formulated. The subject is complex and far from settled, but whereas the evidence indicates, I think, the sporadic de novo origin of spotting in ma:n, it does not follow that the same is necessarily true for dogs. In
some breeds spotting has already attai-ned the status of a germinal factor, and the regularity with which white-black crosses of Pekinese yield definite patterns, would seem to indicate another mode of hereditary behaviour, i.e., that a spotting or pattern factor is present.
Civilisation has often been credited with the production of the numeTous congenital deformities thait appear in man. But vanious studies, such as -that of Stannus (1914) on the Ban'tus of Nyasaland, show that the same abnormalities continue to appear, probably with equal frequency, in native races, even though the more marked of them are ruthlessly eliminated by infanticide. It is evidenit that the conditions of civilisation tend rather to preserve th-an to originate abnormalities, and that natural selection in native races, as in wi,ld animals, tends to elimin.ate individuals possessing characters which place them at a disadvantage in the struggle for existence.
Another innocuous felarture whose inheritance is well known is lefthandedness, which 'the results of Jordan (I9II) and of Hurst (I912) indicate i,s inherited as a simple Mend;lian recessive character, at least in some famitlies. It bears some resemblance as a character to reversed symmetry in certain Gastropods. This reversal has been shown by Conklin to begin in development with the cleavage of the egg, but imt inheritance is unknown. Ambidextrous individuals in man appear to
have inherited left-handedness and acqui.red dexteri,ty wi,th the right hand. There are apparent exceptions, however (see Compton, 1912, where a number of references will be found), as in a fam.ily quoted by D. J. Cunningham in The Journal of the Anthropological Institute, XXXII., 1902, froM Aime Per6, where a left-handed mother and a right-handed father had
eighit sons and six daughters, all left-handed. If the father were heterozygous, ,this result would be possible, though very improbable, wiith left-handedness remaining recessive. It would seem more p.robable thaat In isuch a case the dominance has been reversed.
The manner of clasping the hands, whether 'right-handed or lefthanded, i.e., with the right thumb over the left or vice versa, although characteristic enough for ,the individual, apparently bears no irelation to

HEREDITY AND EUGENICS.

I99

right- or left-handedness. It does not follow any known rule of inherntance, but appears nevertheless to be partially inherited, for when. bth parents show a right- or left-handed clasp the majority of the chi.ldren will be of the same type. Statistics show that en masse the two methods usually occur with equal frequency, buft neither condition breeds true. COmptOn (19I2) has studied th,e right- and left-handed seedlings (as regards t'he manner of folding of -the first leaf), which occur in various cereals, but the condition is not inherited. Thus the seeds from a lefthanded (LH) plan,t piroduce the same ratio of LH an-d RH plants as do the seeds from -a right-handed (RH) plant. In two-rowed barley this ratio LH/RH was shown to be constant for three generations, and tiherefore inherited. In a total of I9,I65 seedlings the percentage of LH seedlings = 58. 362. Seeds planted from the odd and even rows separately also gave the same preponderance of left-handed plants. Six-rowed barley gave a similar excess of LH plants. In oats, however, there is regularly an excess of RH plants (LH=44.88 per cent.). This difference may have some connection with the fact that the leaf-bla.des of barley " am generally slightly twisted into a .right-h-anded screw, while in oats the toTsion is in the reverse direction." In maize, again, there is no inheritance of left-handedness or right-handedness as such, but the seeds in odd rows give an excess of RH, those from even rows an equal excess of LH seedlings. The ratios weTe 54.22 per cent. and 46. i6 per cent. LH respectively. Thus the total numbers of LH and RH seedlings from a cob are
practically equ.a.l. Compton suggests that the differencesbetween rows in this regard may perha.ps be accounted for by unequal piressure on the
embryos. In any case it is a relief to find something which is definitely not inherited. The question of the limits of human inheritance will be discussed later.
In i9o8 a list of normal and abnormal features in man whose inherit-
ance had been .studied was published by Hurst, and Bateson (I909) devoted a chapter to this subject. Davenport (1912) also considered many cases, an.d Biometrika contains masses of statistical data on the inheritance of various features. Abnormalities are frequently inherited as dominants, and they probably originated as mutations. Such are hexadactyly
brachyd!c.tylv, " lobster claw," some forms of cataract, keratosis, con-
genital stationary night-blin-dness, and many others. Brittleness of bones or osteopsathyrosis (Conard and Daveinport, 1915) is a remarkable congenital weakness which appears to be inherited as a dominant character. In one recorded case a boy suffered at least I2 fractures of his limbs beefore reaching the age of three years, being born with both thighs broken. Later this extreme liability to fracture began to diminish, but that it may still nemain a serious defect in the adult is shown by the fact that the mere tension of ithe muscles or weight of the body, as in dancing, may be sufficient to cau.se a fracture. Twins may be born in families having the peculiarity, one showing the defect and the other normal.
In the mountains of Georgia a family is found (Stuckey, I9I6), some of whose members for four generations have had constricted eyelids. The sight is normal, yet owing to this constriction it is necessary for them to

200 EUGENICS REVIEW.
avert their heads in order to, see. The manner of inheritance indicates a segregating dominant charactter.
Another peculiar case, of hereditary nose bleed, is recorded (Lane, I9I6), members of a family in Maine showing the trait through three generations. It is not, lik-e haemophilia, sex-linked. It manifests itself by spontaneous Needing at the nose almost daily, beginning at the period of adolescence and continuing until i8 or 20. Individuals showing it are vigorous in hea,l-th and grow rapidly, ofte.n feeling discomfort if the bleeding does not take place.
Diseases such as haemophi.lia, Gower's disease and colour-blindness are well known to be sex-limited in their inheritance, but with complica-tions in the last instan,ce. Among recessive conditions are alkaptonuria an.d albinism. The most extensive pedigrees of cataract have been those collected by Nettleship (ct. Bateson, I909). They show that various forms of cataract are usually transmitted as dominants. The indications of the de novo origin of hereditary congenital cataract are clearly substantiated by the pedigree of a f.amily whose history its described by Danforth (I9I4).
Among family peculiarities which are known to be inherited, one of the most no-table is the large lower lip and prognathous jaw of the Hapsburgs. B.ateson (I909) first suggested that this peculiarity was. a Mendelian domiinant, and H.aecker (I9I i), from a study of numerous portraits, confirms this conclus,ion. The peculiarity dates back at least to Duke ETns,t the Iron, who 'died in 1424, and it has been handed down, continuously to the present time, hence for a period of probably more than 500 years, or I; to 20 generations. The condition is less marked in the vomnen, and Haecker interprets i,t as the result of the loss of an inhbibiting factor which normally regulates in Europeans the development of the lower lip and jaw. At Ile-ast one other sporadic case of prognathism is Lnown to me, but I am not aware of -any o'ther data concerning its inheritance. In this case the father has the peculiarity slightly, while one of four children has it in an extreme degree. This type of prognathism suggests a mild form of the condition seen in the bull-dog-a variation which also occurs in cattle, foxes and other mammals.
The Jewish racial physiognomy, which has been characteristic for over 2,000 years, is believed by Salaman (I9i i) to show in marriages wit.h Gentiles incomplete or variable dominance, and segregation. Thus from such marriages 328 children were classed as Gentile in facial expression, 26 as Jew, and eight intermediate. The subject is one which invites more detailed study. Salaman points out 'two other inherited peculiarities of the Jewish race: (i) Amaurotic family idiocy, a disease whose victilms die in early childhood and which is known only in Jews; (2) absence of alcoholism.
As our knowledge of the physiological controls of development in the human individual increases, a deeper analysis of many physical characters will become possible. Various abnormalities in man, such as brittle bones and blue scleroti,cs, are already believed to be due to an hereditary inferiority of mesenchyme. And the gla.nds of internal -secretion, 'such -as ithe pituitary, pineal and thy.roid, are already known to control growth -and to produce, by their presence in excess or defect,

HEREDITY AND EUGENICS.

201

various characteristic conditioxns of the features or the limbs. Inherited
differences inithese glands may thus account for a whole series of changes, not only in physical conformation. but in temperament as well.1
A remarkable feature of human, inheritance, which is observed also
and made use of in horse and caule breeding (Hover, i9I6), is the occurrence of " prepotency." Although an undoubted fact, prepotency has not yet received a satisfaotory biological explanation. It i.s believed
to be increased by inbreeding, and differences in vigour or energy a*e also
believed to be involved (Popenoe, I9i6). Mere dominance does not appear
to bee sufficient to explain it, and the interactions of factors may be con-
cerned. The term should be used with gre.at care, as no case of individual
prepotency has yet been proved. Perhaps the most striking case in man
is to be found in the offspring of th,e Mormon, Brigham Young (see Journal of Heredity, January, I9I6). In a photograph of some ii of his daughters by eight different wives, each one seems to have been stamped,
as it were, with the father's own image, though the resemblance is stronger in some cases than in others. This is particularly striking as regards the strong, firm mouth, the ears, and the nose. But all are said, by one who
knew the family, to be also musical, amiable, adaptable, genuine, sincere, warm-hearted, generous, attractive, magnetic and sympathetic, and tem-
peramenital yet reasonable. Moreover, all were goo'd mimics and -excellent cooks and housewives, having also ,their fatheir's voice and temper.ament. This remarkable catalogue of qualities its very well substantiated by an
accompanying photograph, which shows a group of motherly, kind-hearted women with remarkable similarity of features, although the mother's influence is also dlear in the differences which appear between half-sisters. This resemblance is perpetuated in the grand-children, especially the girls, and may be partly at-tributable to assortative mating.
Another aspect of he'redi.ty which I have not touched upon hepe is the vexed question of functional inheritance, which has been fully discussed
by MacBride (1g97) i.n an earlier number of this journal.

1 For a discussion of the racial differences in man in relation to internal secretions, see, Keith, " The Differentiation of Mankind into Racial Types," Presidential Address, Anthropological Seotion, British Association, Bournemouth,
I9I9.

