THE TREATMENT OF ANCESTRY IN MODERN BIOGRAPHIES

By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.HIST.S.

W HEN speaking at the Society's methods are almost universally followed.

Reception last November, on Sir Eleven of the biographies give a fairly full

Francis Galton's influence in genea- account of the earlier male line, twelve more

logical and biographical studies, I observed make some reference to it, in the remaining

that the old fashion of dismissing ancestors nine the ancestry previous to the grandfather

as of no account had largely died out in is ignored. It is only fair to say that in most

recent years.* At the time I was merely con- of the last-named cases such ancestry would

veying my own general impression, but I be very difficult to trace, and only in one or

have since studied various biographies of two instances does it seem to have been

leading men which have appeared during the deliberately omitted. The family, then, in

present century, for the purpose of obtaining the narrower sense of the word, is decidedly

more exact data on this matter. The bio- present to the minds of nearly all the bio-

graphies have been on the whole a selection graphers, but only eight out of the thirty-

at random, but all the subjects have been two give any account of remoter ancestry

men of considerable note.

other than in the direct male line.

The list in alphabetical order is as follows:

Birkenhead, Bonar Law, Bryce, Chamber- GRANDPARENTS AND PARENTS

lain, Cromer, William Crookes, Curzon, Glad- The attitude adopted towards the grand-

stone, Goschen, Harcourt, Joseph Hooker, parents presents features of special interest.

Irving, Kelvin, Kitchener, Labouchere, It is obvious that the paternal grandfather

Lecky, Lister, Lloyd George, John Morley, will usually assume the most attention. Of

Florence Nightingale, Parnell, Redmond, the thirty-two biographies, nine give a fairly

Rhodes, Lord Roberts, Theodore Roosevelt, detailed account of this progenitor, in thir-

Rosebery, Salisbury, Arthur Sullivan- teen more he is mentioned, in ten he is ignored.

twenty-eight in all, which should be a suffici- His wife, of course, does not fare so well, the

ent number for the purpose. Two biographies paternal grandmother receives a full account

each have been consulted in the cases of Lister, in five cases only, is just mentioned in seven

Pamell, Rhodes and Roosevelt, so the total more, is ignored altogether in twenty-one.

number of separate biographies in the survey Turning to the maternal grandfather we

is thirty-two. As might be expected, the find that the attention given to him does not

treatment of ancestry in these biographies compare so very unfavourably with that

differs very widely, but a certain average given to his opposite number on the paternal

train of thought may be traced, to which side. He receives a full account in seven

reference will be made later.

cases, is mentioned in eleven more, ignored

REMOTE ANCESTORS
In considering direct ancestry, three main divisions may be made, viz. the parents, the grandparents and the remoter progenitors. To take these in the reverse order, very few
of the biographies make mention of remoter ancestry other than that in the direct male line. In other words, traditional genealogical

in the remaining fourteen. His wife fares very badly. There are only three full
accounts of the maternal grandmother, she is mentioned in five other biographies, and is completely ignored in twenty-four-i.e. in three-quarters of the whole number. It is
evident that from the data supplied in modern biographical works, we can hardly ever form an opinion on the characteristics

* EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1934, P. 255.

of the grandparents as a whole.

29

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The parents, in the opinion of biographers, Adams mansion built on the site on which for

stand in a very different position. In almost nigh on eight centuries had stood the home

every instance there is at least some attempt of an unbroken line of Curzons, he spent his

at a characterization of the father, indeed boyhood." The unbroken line is literally

in only one case is this altogether absent. Of the only reference to ancestry, other than

the remaining thirty-one, I would classify the bare names above.

fifteen as good accounts, twelve as fair, and Lord Zetland is at least passive and nega-

four as slight. Quite clearly the actual tive, but Mrs. Millin is active in her opinions.

eminence or otherwise of the father plays a " The meaning of Rhodes's ancestry," she

part, in addition to the attitude adopted by tells us, " lies in its very lack of meaning.

the biographers. With regard to the mother, It proves merely that men like Rhodes come

accounts of one kind or another are given in independent of their begetting and also of

nineteen cases, and of these nine may be their land. For greatness is a sort of genius,

classified as good character sketches. In a quality, not an accident or an achievement,

twelve instances nothing more than the a gift and not an inheritance." A very pass-

mother's name is given; in one she is ig- ing reference to the existence of the father

nored altogether.

follows. Mrs. Millin's fantastic views are

not shared by Mr. Basil Williams, who, in his

THE " TYPICAL " BIOGRAPHER

Life of Rhodes, gives a good account of the

The general train of thought before re- paternal ancestry, though he is uninforma-

ferred to may now be considered. The typical tive as to the maternal.

biographer would seem to have in mind Biographies with scant ancestral details

something very much like the following: are those of John Morley, Bonar Law, Irving,

" I must say something about the father and Sullivan, Crookes, Kitchener and Cromer,

will look him up. I will add remarks about but, except in the case of the last two, further

the mother. I will not bother much about the details would no doubt have been difficult to

grandparents, unless indeed one or more of obtain. Cromer's Life is by Lord Zetland,

them was a striking character. I will say which accounts for the inadequacy on this

something about the family (i.e. the direct point; he is, however, moved to give rather

male line ancestry) if its general history is more detail than he did in the case of Curzon.

interesting." In other words the typical Cromer's ancestry was actually, of course,

biographer is usually interested in history of the most remarkable interest in almost

not infrequently in a somewhat narrow every direction. Biographies that may be

genealogy, but rarely in biology or in prob- regarded as very fair from our point of view,

lems of heredity. If he himself has the though not much actual interest in heredity

interest he is inclined to think that it will is evinced, are those of Gladstone, Kelvin,

not be shared by his readers.

Lister, Florence Nightingale, Lord Roberts,

Redmond, and Theodore Roosevelt.

INADEQUATE GENEALOGIES

To turn to individual biographies-two THE FEW EXCEPTIONS

stand out for their striking inadequacy in There remains the first class, those bio-

this connection: Lord Zetland's Life of graphies with a detailed account of ancestry,

Lord Curzon, and Mrs. Sarah MuP's recently and an evident appreciation of the im-

published Life of Cecil Rhodes. The com- portance of heredity. To the excellence in

mencement of the former may be quoted: these respects of Mr. Garvin's Life of Joseph

" George Nathaniel Curzon, eldest son of Chamberlain I paid a tribute in this REVIEW

Rev. Alfred Nathaniel Holden Curzon, 4th for April I933 (page 50). Almost if not

Baron Scarsdale, and of Blanche, daughter of quite equal is Mr. Leonard Huxley's Life of

John Pocklington Senhouse of Netherall, was Joseph Hooker, which likewise traces ancestry

born at Kedleston in Derbyshire on Jan. ii, in every possible direction. Nearly as ade-

I859. Here within the walls of the stately quate also are Lord Crewe's Life of Rosebery,

THE -TREATMENT OF ANCESTRY IN MODERN BIOGRAPHIES 3I

and Mr. A. G. Gardiner's of William Harcourt; in both cases, of course, the opportunities for genealogical research were mani-
fold. A most interesting study is contained in Mr. J. H. Edwards' Memoir of Mr. Lloyd George, the only biography of a living man
included in this survey. There are good accounts of all the grandparents and more particularly of the grandmothers, both, it
may be mentioned, women of strong character. The Life of Lord Birkenhead, by his son, is specially notable for the attention paid to the influence on his character of his gipsy grandmother; but there is a complete absence of information about the mother and her relatives. This last fault is not attribu-
table either to Mr. Barry O'Brien's or to Mr. St. John Ervine's biography of Parnell, both
full of interesting details of the ancestry, on both sides, of the Irish leader.
In the remaining three biographies the
opinions of the writers, two of them women,
on the subject of heredity are clearly expressed, and may be quoted in full. Lady Gwendolin Cecil in her life of her father, remarks: " Robert, Lord Salisbury was the third member of his family to occupy the position of First Minister of the Crown. The many generations that separated him from his predecessors deprive the repetition, it is
to be feared, of any scientific value and reduces it to a coincidence, assisted at the most by a consciousness of tradition. Actually the most suggestive facts in the family history emphasize the influence of the mother, rather than of the father, upon the hereditary
transmission of talent." As a statement of the Galtonian position this could hardly be bettered.
Mrs. W. E. H. Lecky in the life of her husband opens as follows: " The parentage of remarkable men always has an exceptional interest, whether they can trace all their characteristics to it or whether the transcendent faculty which distinguishes them appears to be a freak of Nature independent of heredity. There are instances where an
eminent man seems to emerge out of commonplace surroundings, while there are yet distinctive elements in his remote ancestry
which throw some light on his performance,

and are worth recording." One sentence smacks too much of Mrs. Millin, but Mrs. Lecky subsequently gives a most admirable
account of her husband's ancestry.
Lastly, Mr. H. A. L. Fisher prefaces a firstrate study of the forefathers of James Bryce in these words: " The origin of genius and exceptional talent is one of the mysteries of life. We cannot tell how or why it arises, how it will be sustained, or at what intervals it will manifest itself, but that some stocks are more continuously effective than others is one of the commonplaces of observation." Mr. Fisher is very right, but it is to be feared that, in the ordinary use of the word, knowledge of these facts is not as yet a commonplace.
BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARIES
A word may now be added as to general biographical dictionaries. The scope of these quite clearly limits the amount of reference to ancestry, but details of such in the earlier dictionaries are almost entirely wanting; the name of the father is given, but very rarely that of the mother. This is notably the case in Michand's Dictionnaire de Biographie Universelle, published in the middle of last century. Appleton's Cyclopaedia of American Biography, which came out somewhat later, did connect up relatives in the male line, but totally omitted to refer to those on the maternal side. I am not aware how far Sir Leslie Stephen was directly influenced by Galton, but certain it is that the Diction-
ary o/ National Biography, for the scope of
which Stephen was responsible, was in this respect, as in most others, a great improvement on its predecessors. The mother and her parentage are practically always mentioned, and references are invariably made to immediate relatives of note, on the maternal as well as the paternal side. This excellent example has not been followed by the American Dictionary of National Biography, now in progress, which in this respect is no improvement on Appleton, rather, indeed, the reverse. I am informed by a prominent American eugenist that he had urged the Editors to be less sparing of ancestral detail, but in vain. Galton is a prophet who seems,

32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in this respect, to have had most honour in his own country.
THE INFLUENCE OF GALTON
How far Galton has influenced individual biographers this study leaves a rather open question. His name is not actually mentioned in any of those which have been passed under review; but Lady Gwendolin Cecil, Mrs. W. E. H. Lecky, Mr. A. G. Gardiner, Lord Crewe, Mr. J. H. Edwards, Mr. St. John Ervine, Mr. H. A. L. Fisher, and most especially Mr. Leonard Huxley and

Mr. J. L. Garvin must certainly be reckoned among his disciples. Mrs. Sarah Millin stands
alone as quite definitely in an opposite camp, though Lord Zetland might perhaps be prepared to join her. The others would seem to
come under the heading of the typical biographer previously defined, not actually hostile to Galton's theories, but not specially
influenced by them. It is hoped to elucidate this matter further
by a parallel study of biographies which appeared between I830 and I870, the period
immediately preceding the publication of Hereditary Genius.

geia Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 1

