MIGRATION AND THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH*

By BRINLEY THOMAS, M.A., Ph.D.

N -view of the effects of the second World immigrants, and they wanted to be sure that

War on the economic and strategic posi- those who did come were willing to go into

tion of Britain it is suggested in several quarters that mass emigration to other parts
of the Commonwealth is now desirable. The question may be analysed under three
headings:

agriculture and stay there. It was Britain
that was pushing Empire settlement. The Government as well as a number of enthusiastic voluntary societies were doing all they could to keep up the old tradition by which the mother country had always been the

(a) emigration and the post-war crisis of blood donor of the Empire. The fact that

economic adjustment;

there was a great deal of unemployment here

(b) emigration and Commonwealth was an additional reason.

security;

But to-day the position has changed both

(c) emigration and the probable long-run in Britain and in other parts of the Common-

economic condition of Britain.

wealth. Though we have full employment

Emigration and the Economic Crisist
The other day many people must have
been surprised to hear the result of a public opinion poll taken in this country on the topic of emigration. Six out of every ten persons over 2i and under 30 said they wanted to emigrate. Some people would doubt the validity of this result; but even if you reduce the figure by half you still get
30 per cent of the people in their twenties
saying that they do not want to stay in this country. And we have other evidence, too. It has been officially stated that there are
235,000 with their names down to go to Australia, and I suppose there are hundreds
of thousands in the queues for Canada, South Africa and New Zealand.
Why has there been this sudden renewal of interest in emigration since the war ? Before the war it was very different. Conditions
were so disturbed in the thirties that i2o,ooo
more people migrated from the Dominions to this country than went out from here. Between the wars the Dominions were not
very keen on having a large number of

the difficulties of' life in this country have
made some people-probably young exservicemen-frustrated and restless. There is the fear that austerity is going to last for
years, and the conviction that things are much more normal in Australia or Canada. Even though the young man with a wife and
small children realizes that houses are as scarce in the Dominions as they are at home, he feels he can put up with temporary difficulties more cheerfully if he knows that before long he will be sure of a better house and wider opportunities of a job. He reads that the Dominions are crying out for industrial workers and technicians. And this is a point which makes the outlook very different from what it was before the war. In every Dominion the emphasis is now on industrial development. Canada, with her great natural resources, anticipates years of steady
expansion. The discovery of new gold fields in the Orange Free State has opened up a
prospect of brisk industrial growth in South
Africa; while Australia and New Zealand have programmes of development which will call for hundreds of thousands of new urban

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May workers.

25th, 1948.

The position then seems to be that there

t I am indebted to the B.B.C. for permission to reproduce in this section some passages from a talk which I broadcast on May 2ISt, I948.

are a large number in this country whoeither because they are fed-up or just adven-

127

128 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

turous-want to go and live overseas, and the Dominions are anxious to have them. The snag is that there are hardly any ships available to take the emigrants. The British Government agrees that it is a good thing to let the Dominions have settlers from here so long as they are a good cross-section of our people. But here we come to the first difficulty. This country is up against a serious economic crisis and is desperately short of certain grades of workers. We shall not be able to pay our way until we have reshuffled our labour so that there is enough in industries such as coal, textiles and agricultureenough to earn for us the food and raw materials we must get from abroad. Now the trouble is that the Dominions are keen on having men from some of the very occupations that are suffering from a shortage in this country. For example, Australia, when announcing the scheme for free and assisted passages, said she wanted welders, sheet metal and foundry workers, textile and clothing operatives, boot factory workers, machinists in the clothing, textile, printing, canvas and leather trades-as well as doctors, dentists and nurses. One cannot help wondering how we can hope to get on our feet quickly if, say, 30 per cent of the men and women in our most undermanned industries are to go overseas.
It is a pity that just at present Britain and the Dominions seem to be competing for a limited supply of key workers; and I would like to suggest that this side of the emigration question-its effect on our uphill struggle to overcome the economic effects of the warneeds to be looked at very carefully. Now that the mother country is suffering from a bad attack of anemia, can she afford to be the blood donor of the Commonwealth? Perhaps there is somethingtin the idea that what we need most at this time is more immigration of suitable workers from Europe - men who, because they are foreigners, will not mind going to work straight away in the industries where the need for labour is greatest.
Migration and Defence
The strategic argument has strongly influenced the Dominions in favour of a vigor-

ous long-term programme of immigration; and, from what we know of the ideas of the
British Chiefs of Staff, they, too, are con-
vinced that the formidable defence problems
of an atomic age can be successfully overcome only by redistributing the population and economic potential of the Common-
wealth. At the meetings between the Prime Ministers of Great Britain and the Dominions
held in London in April-May I946 far-reach-
ing plans affecting the future pattern of the Commonwealth's man-power and resources
were put forward by the Chiefs of Staff.
Reporting these meetings, The Times (April 27th, I946) said:
It has been evident during the discussions that the main burden of Commonwealth defence, whether regarded independently or as part.of a future United Nations security organization, would still fall, for many years to come, on this country. Industrial and scientific resources, as well as skilled manpower, are largely concentrated in Britain, the most vulnerable target to atomic weapons of any of the Great Powers to whom the task of maintaining security will fall. The Commonwealth, on the other hand, is the most widely dispersed of the world's political groups, and offers incomparable opportunities for the redistribution of vulnerable industries and stocks, and for the posting and training of military, naval and air formations. The prospect opened up by such an idea has been before the minds of Commonwealth leaders for some time, but only now are some of its economic and political aspects being fully appreciated.
So far as the layman can see, the Chiefs of Staff have logic on their side. The British Commonwealth and Empire represents a consilderable aggregation of power, and the experience of two World Wars proves that its capacity for concerted action is far greater than would appear from the loose links that bind it together in peace-time. While political power within this family of nations is being progressively decentralized, it becomes more and more of an anachronism that so much of the economic potential should be located in its most vulnerable corner. A
strategy for defence must postulate total war, and so the military planner cannot avoid drawing up schemes having far-reaching economic, political and sociological implications. In the past Britain could feel reasonably safe by spending enough on the

MIGRATION AND THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

I29

upkeep of her navy, without even the trouble of having military conscription. She could prepare for all contingencies without interfering with the freedom of her citizens to live as they wanted to. But by now the revolution in the art of war has robbed our island of the advantage for defence which she used to possess. By herself Britain will in future lack the necessary power of initiative: her safety therefore depends much more than ever before on the combined strength of the group of countries with which she has a special affinity. The imperial strategist argues that the only way in which the combined strength of this group can be increased is by moving a substantial part of the man-power and industries of the centre to the extremities. Logically the conclusion seems inescapable. You cannot produce the necessary deterrent effect on a potential aggressor and expect to leave the shape and course of peace-time life unaffected. It is argued that part of the price of a maximum degree of security in an atomic age must, therefore, be planned migration with all its inevitable economic and social disturbance.
There are broadly two ways in which such a strategic dispersal could be carried out: either by transplanting over a period of years, say, ten million people comprising a cross-section of the whole community or by large-scale promotion of spontaneous emigration. I shall assume the latter as the more practicable possibility.
"The Lost Generation"
Emigration, like war casualties, bears most heavily on the youth of a country, and the effects are felt for many a decade. Who can measure what Britain suffered in vitality between I919 and I939 as a result of " the lost generation " ? What will be the probable consequences in the next thirty years if she is to lose through emigration a good proportion of those who are in the prime of life ?
Let us first consider how the population of Britain would have developed had it not been for the war of I9I4-I8. Thanks to the demographic research done under the auspices of the League of Nations, a good deal of light has been thrown on this subject. The United

Kingdom had a population of about
46,o85,000 in I9I4. It is estimated that the
military casualties were 744,000, that there was an excess of 402,ooo deaths of civilians over the age of one, and that 709,000 less babies were born than there would have been otherwise.* The military deaths were equal to 5 per cent of the male working population. Prodigious though these were, it is significant that the loss through the deficit of births was almost equally heavy, and by I93I this showed itself in a sharp shrinkage of boys and girls in the age group I5-I7. An indication of the effect on the most active part of the working population may be seen by comparing the actual with the " expected " population in i926. In that year the size of the male age group 25-49 in England and Wales was 9 per cent less than it would have been but for the war, and in the age group 30-34 the reduction was as much as I5 per cent. The economic implications of this loss were considerable, though they were masked by the refusal of inter-war Governments to accept the Keynesian remedy for unemployment. Moreover, the extent of the surplus of women over men in the population as a whole was nearly IO per cent. While isolating one factor-war losses-one must not forget that over a period its influence is overshadowed by that of declining fertility. It is estimated that by I94I the population of England and Wales would have been I *I million more than it was, had it not been for World War I; if, at the same time, the fertility and mortality rates existing before that war had continued, it would have meant an addition of another 5-7 million to the population of I94I.
In the second World War Britain's losses
are estimated at a total of 398,ooo, of whom 290,000 were in the Armed Forces, 62,ooo
were civilians, and 45,000 men of the Merchant Navy.t It is very difficult to suggest a figure for the deficit of births, but it is probable that it was proportionately much
* F. W. Notestein and others: The Future Population
of Europe and the Soviet Union, League of Nations,
Geneva, 1944, p. 75. t International Committee for the Study of European
Questions: The Results of the War of 1939-45 as regards the Populatioht of Germany and of the Allied Countries of Europe, I946.

130 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

less than in the first World War. The immediate future will reveal gaps in the age groups 30-49 as a result of the deaths of these 335,000 men mostly in their youth. Moreover the low birth-rate of the thirties will soon be having its impact on the numbers in the lower age groups. The number of young men for call-up to the Services at the beginning of I949 will be about 350,ooo, and by the middle of I950 it will be 300,000. This will
be a sharp fall fro;n the figure of 4I7,000
for I939. Assuming no net migration, it is expected that the population of England and Wales by I959 (4I,903,000) win have the following age-composition: one-fifth will be 20-34, 27.7 per cent 35-49, I9-9 per cent 45-64, and 12-4 per cent 65 and over. Only 43 out of every hundred will belong to the economically most productive group aged
20-49.

Demographic Consequences of Emigration

This prospect is depressing enough, but it
allows for no loss by migration. Let us now suppose that a policy of promoting largescale emigration to the Dominions is put into force. To obtain an idea of the probable ages of the emigrants we may glance at the experi-
ence of Empire settlement in the twenties. The age-composition of British adult emigrants in i928 was as follows:

Age Group I8-20 ...
2I-25 ...
26-30 ...
31-45 ... Over 45 Not stated

...
...
...
...
... ...

Males Females

per cent per cent

... 137
.* 30°5

97
206

... 21*0 2I*2

... 24-9 ... 97 ... 0'2

32.3 i6-o 0'2

100.0 100.0

Totals

... 57,786 45,758

No less than go per cent of the men and 84 per cent of the women emigrating from the United Kingdom in I928 were between the ages of i8 and 45 ; 65 per cent of the men and 52 per cent of the women were between i8 and 30 years of age. It is reasonable to
assume that the same would be true of spon-
taneous emigration in the next few years. Let us take a simple hypothetical case,
based on Projection No. 5 for England and

Wales, given in the recent P.E.P. book on Population Policy.* Suppose that from England and Wales in I949 200,000 men and 200,000 women aged 20-24 emigrated (we assume an even spread within the age group); then suppose that in I954 this same outflow is repeated, while 2oo,ooo men and 200,000 women aged 25-29 also go overseas. We suppose that no immigration takes place. Allowing for the expected death-rate among these emigrants if they remained here, we can calculate the expected deficit in the age group 25-34 in I959 attributable to emigration. According to the projection, assuming no net migration, there would be 2,85I,000 males and 2,823,000 females aged 25-34 in I959. Given the volume of migration here assumed, the figures would be 2,259,000 males and 2,230,000 females. In other words there would be 2I per cent less people aged 25-34 than there would have been but for emigration. To complete the picture one would have to estimate the consequent deficit of births and then recalculate the agecomposition of the whole population for 1959. It is clear that mass emigration of young people is bound to add to the weight of older dependants to be carried by a shrinking body of active producers.
Some Economic Consequences
When men move overseas there is a tendency for money to go with them. A constant leakage of capital would be very harmful to a country whose major task in the coming years is to increase substantially the supply of its own savings for use in this country. The inevitable efflux of technicians and managers would have a detrimental effect on this country's efficiency. The burden of debt a head would increase and the overhead costs of social capital would also become heavier. Those who recommend mass emigration from Britain should study the object-lessons in the record of the depressed areas of this country between the wars. That dismal episode is too well known to be repeated here. If Britain becomes the depressed area of the Commonwealth, prematurely aged, struggling
* I am indebted to the authors for supplying the
figures.

MIGRATION AND THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

under a crippling load of debt and too poor to rebuild her obsolete capital equipment, she will be of no use either to the Commonwealth or to Western Union. She will have to abdicate the leadership of the Western European democracies and live on the charity of the English-speaking world. It is not much comfort to John Bull to have to become a chronic invalid in order that his children overseas should live happily ever after.
Weakness of the Security Argument
Perhaps the defence argument proves too much. If, because of atomic bombs, it would be a good thing for ten million of us to go, then it would be an even better thing if the whole lot of us were to go. It is most important to ensure that Britain isa healthy economic unit after you have reduced her population; this is out of the question if mass emigration takes place spontaneously. In view of her past economic status, Britain cannot help remaining a pivotal link in the Commonwealth chain. Strength in war implies a surplus over the bare necessities as well as the substantial productive capacity required to sustain the engines of modern war. If Britain is to count at all she cannot afford to become much smaller than she is at present.
Finally, the military planners, in restricting themselves to Commonwealth defence, are taking too small a canvas. Our destiny appears to be bound up with that of the United States, the British Commonwealth and Western Europe regarded as one large group of like-minded nations. In that wider context it is by no means obvious that a wise defence policy requires a mass exodus from this island.
Racial Discrimination in the Dominions
Long before 19I4 the Dominions had been doing their best to exclude aliens of Asiatic origin. Various Canadian Acts between I885 and I904 raised the head tax on Chinese
immigrants from $50 to $500, but neverthe-
less the number of Chinese people recorded in the Canadian censuses increased from 4,383 in i88i to 46,5I9 in I93I, with 58 per

cent of them in British Columbia. The Chinese Immigration Act of I923 put a stop to the influx; the only persons of Chinese origin or descent who were allowed to land in Canada were members of the diplomatic corps and their suites and servants, children of Chinese residents in Canada who had left the country for educational or similar pur-
poses, merchants and students, and persons in transit. The last two classes had to have
passports issued by the Government of
China and endorsed by a Canadian Immigration Officer. An influx from Japan started about i896, and by I93I over 23,000 people from that country were living in the Dominion, nearly all of them in British Columbia. This movement, too, was reduced practically to zero after I929.
Chinese people began to enter Australia during the gold rush of I85I, and by I859 42,000 of them had arrived. At first the authorities instituted the head tax, and their attempts to stop the influx were greatly helped by the exhaustion of alluvial gold. The Immigration Restriction Act of I9OI introduced the famous " dictation test," which classified as a " prohibited " immigrant " any person ... who when an officer ... dictates to him not less than fifty words in any European language fails to write them out in that language in the presence of the officer." In deference to a protest by the Japanese Government that this provision discriminated against citizens of Japan, the words " any European language " were altered in I905 to " any prescribed language," with the proviso that no prescribed language could be used until it had been laid before both Houses of Parliament for thirty days, and both Houses had passed a resolution approving it. The test has been applied not only as an instrument of racial discrimination but also to keep out politically undesirable aliens. In I934 a politicalradical from Czechoslovakia-who happened to be a good linguist-was given a passage in Scottish Gaelic; but this went too far, for the High Court decided that this ancient tongue was not " an European language."
The Dominions were highly successful in excluding Asiatic migrants. In I934 out of

I32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

873,000 Japanese who lived outside their To promote a redistribution of the white

homeland there were only 2,8oo in Aus- population of the Commonwealth while

tralasia and 2I,OOO in Canada, making about acquiescing in the maintenance of barriers

3 per cent.* The Chinese living abroad against citizens of India and Pakistan would

numbered about eight million, and the four surely be a risky undertaking. A long-term

British Dominions together contained only policy whose sole justification is security

65,000 of them.t

might simply accentuate racial conflict and

create further insecurity. The population of

The Threat to the Cohesion of the Common- the sub-continent of India is increasing at

wealth

the rate of five million a year, and the next

Let us suppose that we took the plunge
and undertook to pay a heavy insurance premium in the form of an annual outflow of
young emigrants but that the receiving nations continued to keep their doors closed
to people of Asiatic origin. If the Dominions of India and Pakistan remain in the Commonwealth, we shall then have the spectacle of certain members of the Commonwealth refusing to admit the citizens of other mem-
bers; or, if some of them are allowed in, they may be obliged to occupy an inferior status. The acute problem of the Indians in South Africa is an example of the inflammable material lying at hand. The wellknown formula of I926, enshrined in the

few decades will probably see the death-rate declining faster than the birth-rate. A similar phase of expanding population is to be expected in Japan and China. As the pressure of these teeming millions on the
means of subsistence becomes more intense, the Asiatic countries are likely to denounce the "closed door" policy of the white nations as an intolerable injustice. Those
who are interested in the solidarity of the British Commonwealth and Empire should think twice about the implications of a migration policy based on a colour bar, particularly in view of the prominent place given to racial equality in the creed of the Soviet Union.

Statute of Westminster of I93i, describes the United Kingdom and the Dominions as " autonomous communities within the
British Empire, equal in status, in no way subordinate one to another in any aspect of
their domestic or external relations, though united by a common allegiance to the Crown, and freely associated as members of the British Commonwealth of Nations." Migration policy is essentially a branch of international relations. What is to happen if His
Majesty's Ministers in Australia advise him to adopt an immigration policy which excludes nationals of the Dominion of India,

The Long-run Economic Prospect
I come now to the long-run questionwhether, in view of the ravages of two World Wars and the unfavourable circumstances now facing her, Britain can hope to maintain 50 million people at anything like the old standard of living ? Can she possibly achieve the export trade that will be required? Is this island now in the throes of a long-term crisis which was developing between the wars and has been much heightened by the last war, the only way out of which is largescale emigration ?

while His Majesty's Ministers in India are I have recently been re-reading that excel-

advising him to apply a retaliatory policy? lent series of articles on " Reconstruction in

Can the British genius for compromise Europe" published by the Manchester

negotiate this particular hurdle ? This poses Guardian three years after the end of the

a peculiar dilemma for the United Kingdom, first World War. In a striking contribution

without whose man-power the four on population the late Lord Keynes gave

Dominions cannot realize their objectives. reasons for thinking that the Malthusian

Devil had returned to haunt this country.

* "Japanese Emigration," International Labour Writing in i922, he said:

Review, Nov. 1936.

t Industrial and Labour Information, Oct.-Dec.,

For many years to come, regardless of what the

I934, p. 52.

birth-rate may be from now onwards, upwards of

MIGRATION AND THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

250,000 new labourers will enter the labour before the war she was importing twice as

market annually in excess of those going out of it. To maintain this growing body of labour at
the same standard of life as before, we require not only growing markets but a growing capital

much as she exported. By I960 the population of the U.S.A. will probably have increased by 20 million compared with I94o.*

equipment. In order to keep .our heads above Quantitatively America's food imports may

water, the material capital must grow as fast as soon be as considerable as Britain's. The

the material labour supply, which means new
savings at the rate of £4ormillion to L500
million per annum. Whether we can reckon on

same process is starting in Australia and other countries which used to be primary

the continuance of this, in view of the change in producers. The traditional form of inter-

many of the circumstances which, during the national trade-the exchange of manufac-

nineteenth century, were specially favourable to saving is at least doubtful.... Indeed, the
problem of population is going to be not merely

tured goods for food and raw materials-will become progressively less significant.

an economist's problem, but is in the near future 2. As a result of the work of the Inter-

the greatest of all political questions.

national Emergency Food Council we are

So far as the inter-war period was con- witnessing a remarkable essay in the prin-

cerned I do not think the prognosis could be ciple of " fair shares " applied to food alloca-

regarded as one of the most successful of tions. Thanks to the magnificent work of

Keynes's essays in persuasion. It is true that Sir John Boyd Orr, it is becoming recognized

our difficulties became apparent in our failure that subsistence for the hungry peoples of

to export enough. By I938 the volume of our the world must become a first charge on

imports was 25 per cent more than in I9I3, world food resources. It is a sad irony that

but the volume of our exports was down by this new development in international

two-fifths. On the other hand the terms of socialization is going to involve serious diffi-

trade moved in our favour. The average culties for insular socialism in Britain. Fair

price we paid for our imports was about the shares in world food allocations means dear

same in I938 as it was in I9I3, while the price food for the people of Britain.

obtained for our exports was 40 per cent 3. The third fact is that the responsiveness

higher.* As one of the world's great markets of food supply to price changes may be dif-

we reaped rich benefits from the cheap food ferent from what it used to be. When coun-

available to us.

tries like Australia, Canada and the Argen-

But the question now is whether, at long tine are industrialized, the farmer will be

last, the Malthusian Devil has now come back getting a higher average price than hitherto.

for good. Sir Charles Arden-Close is one of Now if he does not continue to get a high

those who think this is so.

price abroad he will either sell more on his

home market or consume more himself, e.g.

The Outlook for Food

feeding grain to livestock rather than

I cannot deny that there are some very marketing the grain itself.

important facts about food which must com- 4. The industrialization of poor countries,

mand our attention.

e.g. India, will bring into play a force tending

I. First, the rapid advance of industrializa- to reduce supply for the market when prices

tion in primary producing countries will mean rise. It is well known that poor peasants,

a greater domestic demand for foodstuffs in when the price of their crops increases,'often

these countries in future. Let us remember find it advantageous to sell less in the

what has already happened in the U.S.A. market and consume more themselves. The

America's food imports doubled in volume in prospect in Asia is far from encouraging.

the quarter of a century up to I939, and her Before the war, Burma, Siam and Indo-

food exports declined. At the beginning of China exported 7 million long tons of rice

this century the United States exported every year; in I946 this had fallen to

twice as much food as she imported. Just 4i million tons. This is having a grave effect

* See G. D. A. MacDougall, " Britain's Foreign on India, South China and Malaya, which

Trade Problem," Economic Journal, March 1947, p. 78.

* Ibid., pp. IOI-2.

134 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

used to take most of this surplus. The " Migration," a subject in which many

population of the sub-continent of India members of our Society take an interest. But

increased by 83 million in the two decades I have had the opportunity of studying a

i921-4i, and the impact of new ideas of recent review article by him entitled " Does

hygiene and sanitation will lead to an even Our Migration Policy Make Sense ? " and I

higher rate of increase.

venture to send the following remarks in

Mass Emigration is No Remedy For these reasons there can be no doubt
that the era of cheap food for the British

the hope that the chairman may permit them to be read, and that I may in this way contribute to the discussion.

people is over. Are we then to infer that
emigration is the only remedy ? If we are to rely for food on our own soil, then, of course,

Very briefly, Professor Thomas's article is to the effect that certain of our industries, such as tinplate, hosiery, cotton, clothing,

drastic depopulation is inevitable. More of paper, and so on, are short of man-power, and certain foods should certainly be grown in the man-power shortage is chronic. Another this country; but the problem is far too big factor in the national situation is " anxiety

to be overcome in this way. If we must ex- over the coming decline in our numbers."

pect the terms of trade to be permanently And, thirdly, " the problem of defence has

against us, that is simply an additional been revolutionized by the atomic bomb,"

powerful argument in favour of a redistribu- and " this island has become extremely

tion of the labour supply of this country. vulnerable." He says that if we encourage

Figures of density per square mile are not conclusive. Once we turn our backs on the

emigration " the age-composition of' the population by I97I wiul be even more lop-

most economical use of our own resources sided than the present estimate promises it

our decline will be certain. We must con- will be." He urges that, apart from con-

trive to use our resources to produce and siderations of defence, far from encouraging

sell things in which we have special advantages. In this way Britain can obtain more food per unit of effort than by growing a very costly additional amount at home.
I conclude that to help overcome the
immediate post-war economic crisis what Britain needs is immigration rather than
emigration. On a long view there would perhaps be a net gain in a moderate volume of

emigration, we should, apparently during the next few years, aim at a big scheme of immigration.
Now, at the present time, Britain has a
larger population than it has ever had in the whole of its history, and our numbers are still increasing. The " alarm " spoken of was partly caused by forecasts which have been proved to be incorrect. But, unless our

emigration (a good cross-section by agegroup) to the Dominions if this would lead to

population is to go on increasing for ever, there must come a time when a maximum is

an increase in our supplies of food and if the Dominions would agree to take over a fair proportioar of our national debt and defence expenditure. But I do not mean by this the mass emigration which would be required to put body into the military ideas of strategic

reached, and. this may be, perhaps, in ten or twenty years. Meanwhile, if there is a manpower shortage the causes may be various, such as our special population structure, in-
cluding the large excess in numbers of women over men, maladjustments in the labour

dispersal. Britain must no doubt put up with a lower average standard of living in

situation, and defects of output. If we are not to expand indefinitely we must make up our

future; but it need not imply depopulation. DISCUSSION

minds to put up with an increasing average
age over a certain period. The Government can deal with adjustment problems.

Sir Charles Arden-Close writes: I much Professor Thomas does not mention the

regret that I am unable to attend the annual most important element in the problem,

meeting, and that I shall not be present when namely the food situation. If we refer to the

Professor Brinley Thomas reads his paper on Economic Survey for I948 we shall find

MIGRATION AND THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH

135

authoritative information about this vital " scattering " of the population of the

element. In the list giving the Expenditure Commonwealth is usually held to be desir-

on Imports in 1947 the actual cost of imported able, and a redistribution of numbers be-

food and supplies for agriculture is given as tween Britain and the Dominions would

[750 million; next to this, but [200 million strengthen the structure as a whole. And it

lower, comes the cost of raw materials and is maintained by some that the present great

supplies for industry; the other purchases density of population in this island is not

are much smaller. Now, the raw materials conducive to healthy social life.

and supplies for industry are required largely We might contemplate a reduction of

to enable us to export goods to other coun- numbers to be spread over a good many

tries, in order that we may have money years-a generation, for instance. Professor

enough to buy food. And so we get back Thomas has indicated twenty-five years for

again to food.

the evolution of a strategic reduction, and we

With regard to supplies for industry, one shall not quarrel over the exact length of

of our needs is, of course, a full complement such a period. If we could combine this

of workers. The Economic Survey reports policy with a policy of agricultural expansion

that, during I947, industry was provided at home we should have a plan which would

with foreign workers to the number of 95,000, re-establish this country in a secure position.

with additional women workers, and workers Dr. G. C. L. Bertram writes: Having

whose retirement had been postponed. These listened to Professor Brinley Thomas's

measures were required to enable us to pro- admirably talk, I had to leave to catch a

duce more goods for the export drive, which train before the discussion was under

was needed for the purchase of food and raw way. Consequently I write these few re-

materials. It all serves to show the straits marks some hours later.

to which we are reduced to get food enough, Though so lucidly expounded, proper

for we are the largest importers of food in the assimilation of the content of the argument

whole world. Sir Stafford Cripps has said requires the printed words, which no doubt

that the key to the British situation is the we shall, fortunately, soon be seeing in the

food question.

EUGENICS REVIEW. A point which I feel

There is one very direct way of dealing needs further stressing is that, before con-

with this, our chief, difficulty, and that is to clusions on such a problem as migration

increase our home production of food by within the Commonwealth can be fairly

encouraging British agriculture, and this drawn, the aims must be defined, and the

would appear to be the policy of the Govern- criteria set in an order of priority. Is the aim,

ment. Let us suppose-and it is not a very for example, minimum vulnerability in war

extravagant supposition-that we could for the people in the United Kingdom, or for

increase our home-grown supplies from 39 the greatest possible number of Common-

per cent to 50 per cent of our needs. By wealth citizens; is the aim the highest possible

so doing we should reduce our imports of standard of living and availability of food in

food and, in terms of the I947 expenditure, the United Kingdom in peace, or the greatest

we should save [137 million per annum on protection for the people of these islands

payments for food from abroad.

from starvation in war; is the aim an

As to emigration, there are many good advance show of armed strength enough to

reasons for desiring a reduction in the size dissuade the war-maker from his purpose, or

of our population. Such a reduction would the maximum degree of Commonwealth

make the food situation easier in peace-time. resilience once a war has started; should the

In the atomic war of the future, which in our political, cultural and industrial needs of the

beleaguered condition will be even more Dominions continue to be subservient to the

severe on our supplies than were the two economic needs of the United Kingdom ? All

recent world wars, a reduction might save these and other considerations should,

us from semi-starvation. Strategically a theoretically, be put in an order of priority,

I36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and each given a particular relative weight, before the integration can be made which must be the precursor of conclusion. The optimal distribution of Commonwealth population will vary greatly in accordance with these priorities and weightings. The United King-
dom's economic problems must not be held as inexorable guides to population policy. If
strategic considerations were held throughout the Commonwealth to warrant absolute priority, the whole economic regime of the
component nations might be modified and
merged in a way as yet uncontemplated.

Meanwhile variations in environmental influences will affect the individual man and woman just as they do members of other species of animals. The contents of the morning paper and shortages of food, whether nutritionally real or comparatively by past standards, turn thoughts and steps
towards the friendly lands of plenty. Migration is in our minds as my wife and I give water to our family at breakfast, because each child has drunk his whole milk allocation on the previous day.

The Life, Letters, and Labours of
FRANCIS GALTON
by KARL PEARSON

VOLUME I: Birth I822 to Marriage 1853. With 5 pedigree plates, 72 Photographs,

frontispiece, and 2 text figures. VOLUME II: Letters and Labours of Middle Life.

With 50 plates and many text figures. VOLUME IIIA: Letters and Labours of Later

Life. With 4 plates (3 in colour) and many text figures. VOLUME IIIB: Character-

isation of Galton, especially by his Family Letters. With I8 plates, many sketches,

and an Index.

Complete, £3 3s. net

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Eugenics Review, Vol. XI, Not 8

