THE EUGENICS REVIEW
The genetic analysis of the metabolism of, and reactions to, the various drugs of relevance to psychiatry is considered a promising field, particularly if it leads to the discovery of further genetic polymorphisms. Cytogenetic prospects in relation to mental deficiency are discussed, and it is thought that minor chromosomal aberrations may still be found to excess in psychiatric populations. There is mention of fascinating work on the tissue culture of schizophrenia-prone brain cells.
The need for international standardization and co-operation is stressed: standardization in classification and methods of recording data; co-operation in studying the rare but revealing situation.
It would have been useful to have some references, and interesting to have an account of who is doing what, but no doubt this would have detracted from the general overview. As it is, it provides a short and stimulating account of what the experts think.
JOHN PRICE
Tienari, Pekka. On Intrapair Differences in Male Twins, with Special Reference to Dominance-
Submissiveness. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, Supplementum 188, Vo. 42. Copenhagen, 1966. Munksgaard. Pp. 166. Price, Dan. kr. 25.00.
CHICKS HAVE THEIR pecking order, monkeys their social hierarchy. In man, nowhere is the development of patterns of social dominance seen more clearly than in the miniature community of a pair of twins. Galton noticed the tendency for one of identical twins habitually to take the lead. Subsequent observers have been impressed by similar divisions of role. Psychiatric differences between twins are sometimes found to be related to which twin was the dominant partner. Thus, in psychopathic behaviour the dominant twin may be the one likely to be the more severely affected, in schizophrenia the more submissive. While it would be rash to attribute such disorders in the main to differences in social relationships, it clearly is of importance to learn what we can about the development and effects of dominance-submissiveness. In unrelated persons divisions of this kind may be based in part on genetically influenced traits such as intelligence and an extravertedtemperament. In the special instance of identical twins the environmental and purely social components are highlighted.
It is therefore a most useful task which Dr. Pekka Tienari has performed in reporting in considerable detail the interrelationships between various aspects of dominance-submissiveness and other differences in the early and later lives of a large, representative series of adult twins. The starting material of this investigation, as of Tienari's previous study of psychiatric illnesses, consisted of all male twins born in Finland between 1920 and 1929. The main conclusions are derived from a group of eighty identical pairs, comprising all those available in an area containing almost half the population of Finland. Findings, on the whole similar, are also reported on forty-six identical pairs from other parts of the country, selected mainly on account of suspected alcoholism or psychiatric or psychosomatic disorder, and a group of forty-five fraternal pairs. Systematic inquiries were made as to birth order, birth weight, schooling, achievement of independence, current social status, personal characteristics and many other variables. A large battery of psychological tests was also administered but the results of these are harder to evaluate. Findings are given for every pair and every variable in the form of which twin, A or B, was the heavier, the more disturbed on interview, etc. Distinction is made between which twin was dominant in the sense of being the stronger physically, which was dominant in their mutual relationship ("Who was boss?"), and which twin was the spokesman for the pair in their external relations with the outside world. Most of the information was derived from two or three different informants, with less inconsistency than might have been expected. It was also
56

REVIEWS OF BOOKS
perhaps surprising that differences could be detected in so many pairs. Thus, all eighty pairs in the main group could be rated according to physical strength and psychic dominance, and all but one on the "spokesman" variable. Other investigators have not always found such a consistent division, especially in male pairs, many twins having answered "it varied" or "can't say". Nevertheless, good supporting data are given, indicating what each twin, and often what a parent, had said about who took the lead and how. Information is also given, case by case, on the relative social achievement of the twins, and there are descriptions of personalities and symptoms in all pairs, not already reported in the previous monograph, in which one twin was classified as "more disturbed" than the other. Among the many tables is a correlation matrix giving the correlation of each of twenty-six variables on which a factor analysis was carried out with each of the twenty-five others. There is therefore a mass of information which can be used by others. It must be remembered, however, that the study relates to male pairs only. The situation with female pairs may well be different.
The findings support the view that the polar division of twins into a dominant and a submissive partner is more closely related to later differences than any of the other early variables studied. Of the three aspects of dominance, leadership in their mutual relationship ("psychic dominance") was of central importance. It was the first to come out in the factor analysis, it was highly correlated with the other two aspects of dominance, physical strength and the role of the spokesman, which were not themselves so closely related. Psychic dominance had more and closer connections with later differences. For example, the leader twin in childhood tended to remain the leader in youth; he achieved a higher social standing than his twin in forty-six pairs, as compared with eighteen pairs in which the more submissive twin did better; and he was psychologically less disturbed (interview data) in fortyseven cases, compared with eight in which the submissive twin was less disturbed. These ratios of 46: 18 and 47: 8 are higher than those obtained by comparing variables such as birth weight or school achievement with social status and psychological disturbance. The physical strength variable, itself closely related to birth weight, was thought to have a distinctive relation to achievement of independence, the stronger twin tending to be the first to leave home and get married. The most distinctive characteristic of the spokesman twin seems to have been his liveliness and quicker temper in childhood; having been the childhood spokesman did not relate to any of the adult variables more closely than did "Spsychic dominance".
What factors decide which twin becomes the dominant one? The association between
birth weight and "'psychic dominance" was significant, though not quite so strong as reported by other investigators. Birth order, on the other hand, was also significantly related to dominance, the first-born taking the lead, possibly for social or emotional reasons. This tendency has not been found, or not to the same extent, in previous systematic studies. Perhaps more stress is laid in Finland on being the first-born of males. Parental attitudes to the twins are likely to be relevant, but these are not reported as they were no doubt difficult to assess reliably. School achievement was closely related to which twin took
the lead.
Too much stress should not be laid on dominance-submissiveness. Tienari himself points out that it is not the only cause of intrapair difference. There may be a danger of creating a stereotype of a dominant and a submissive twin, the one consistently weaker physically, less intelligent, more neurotic and socially inferior. That this is not the case can be seen from the material provided. Out of the eighty twins in the principal group, there were only twenty-two in which the same twin was heavier born, and physically stronger, and the leader in their mutual relationship, and the spokesman of the pair and better in school achievement. (The twenty-two pairs include a few in which no difference could be detected
57

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
on one of these variables. In all but one the "superior" twin was also first-born). In only eight of the twenty-two was the "superior" twin clearly and consistently higher in social achievement and less disturbed on interview and tests than his brother.
The possible psychiatric significance of dominance-submissiveness in twins can also be assessed by means of these twenty-two pairs which I have singled out. Tienari, in his earlier study, noted that the neurotic and the schizophrenic twin in psychiatrically discordant pairs tended to be the submissive partner. Pollin and his colleagues at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, found in their group of identical twins discordant for schizophrenia that the future schizophrenic was, among other things, consistently the smaller at birth, the more submissive and the poorer at school. Submissive and dependent attitudes have been considered as factors which in males may lead to problems in identification that could be of aetiological significance. If this were so generally, one might expect to find considerably more psychiatric abnormality in the "inferior" high risk twin of the selected twenty-two pairs than in the series as a whole. Using Tienari's five-way classification and diagnoses there is, however, only rather little difference between the high risk and low risk twins from these pairs; and moreover the frequency of disturbance of different degree is similar in both "inferior" and "superior" twin to what was found in the total unselected group of eighty pairs (Table 1). Fourteen of the twenty-two pairs fall into the same category, which again is very similar to the forty-eight out of the eighty in the whole material.
TABLE 1
Identical twins differing consistently in birth weight, dominance (all aspects) and school achievement (22 pairs) Observed

Degree of disturbance I Normal II Deviating personality III Neurosis IV Psychopathy V Psychosis

Expected*
10 8
22 2

"Inferior" "Superior" twins twins 10 11 57 43
31

Total 22 22 22
* To nearest whole number, on basis of total 80 unselected identical pairs.

The contribution of dominance-submissiveness as such to psychiatric disturbance is thus seen to be rather small.
What significance does the peculiar psychological situation of twins have for genetic studies based on twins? This is a question which Tienari himself does not discuss here. In so far as the trait under investigation is influenced by which twin takes the lead, a tendency for twins in particular to differ in dominance will result in their resemblance being less great than it might otherwise have been. The same tendency would hold, though probably to a lesser extent, with fraternal as with identical pairs. The resemblance found would therefore underestimate the effect of heredity. An example where this may have occurred was seen in the reviewer's study of twins brought up apart who surprisingly turned out to be slightly more alike In extraversion than the control group of twins brought up together. Among the latter it could be shown that the twin who took the lead as a child was more extraverted on the test as an adult. Tienari similarly finds an association between Affiliation and Self-assertion as measured by his tests and childhood leadership.
The present monograph should be studied closely and with profit by anyone investigating twins where the twin relationship is likely to be a matter of importance.
JAMES SHIELDS

58

