CONSTITUTION-MENTAL DISEASE AND PSYCHOANALYSIS
By EMANUEL MILLER, M.A., F.R.C.P., D.P.M.

T HERE is no intention in this paper of of a constitutional substrate, and sometimes

opening the controversy of inheritance make character as a whole a product of those

and environment, nature versus environmental forces which impinge upon

nurture. This issue is no longer currency the human organism from birth itself to

in the biological sciences to-day. It is simply maturity, and even those intra-uterine forces

my duty to restate the issue in a new form which are in a sense environmental however to make a few not very startling statements biologically primitive these may be. How-

or arguments in favour of integrating what ever, Freud has never concerned himself

we know of genetics in regard to mental ill- with the distribution of constitutional factors

ness and what we know of the effects of amongst the various types of neurosis and

nurture and environment with a view to psychosis nor with the measure in which they

coming to some sober conclusions as to the operate in these groups. Neither has he per-

range of our powers of altering neurotic mitted himself to consider what prognostic

reactions and even modifying unfavourable qualifications are to be made, nor whether

character traits.

cases for psychoanalytic treatment should

This is but a circuitous way of asking, be selected where constitution or inheritance

"does genetic research invalidate the claims is clearly displayed in family history. Never-

of psychoanalysis, or mutatis mutandis, theless, both he and his followers have from

do the discoveries of psychoanalysis put time to time stressed differences in psycho-

limits on the effects both good and bad of logical development which militate against a

inherited factors ? "

successful treatment. Such considerations

Furthermore there is, to be sure, no finality are unfortunately not made much of, but if

regarding present-day genetic theory on the we examine psychoanalytic theory it is a

one hand or psychoanalytic theory on the matter of some moment to ask why the

other. Geneticists, for example, are not mental institutions he speaks of have these

decided upon the issue of uni- or multi- overwhelming effects in some, yet do not

factorial causes of mental illness as constitu- effectively limit normal development in the

tional substrates, nor can psychoanalysts vast majority of persons.

say with finality what parts of the psychic Before entering into a detailed discussion

institutions are concerned with the mainten- of psychoanalysis as a technique, as well as

ance of healthy homeostasis or most respons- a theory of mental development, we ought to

ible for psychic distortions. " The problems clarify certain genetic basic terms and con-

of genetic theory" is not our subject sider, however briefly, those predispositional

to-night ; but we must examine some aspects forces which are likely to alter the mental

of psychoanalysis, because it is in a way the development other than genetic onesactively attacking party with theories of namely germinal factors in the life history of

character and neurosis from which the the ovum and spermatozoa of the parents,

problems of predisposition cannot be dis- then embryonic factors which operate after

sociated.

fertilization has been accomplished, and even

For although Freud himself, 'particularly later feetal factors operating after the eighth

in his early papers, admitted quite clearly the week of gestation to the time of labour.

constitutional soil upon which his neurotics True genetic factors are pregerminal and

grew, there are aspects of psychoanalytical operate as for example in Huntington's

theory which sometimes suggest the presence Chorea, Amaurotic Idiocy and some forms of

202

CONSTITUTION-MENTAL DISEASE AND PSYCHOANALYSIS 203

imbecility. Substantiation of these factors is I should like to pursue the argument in

obtainable from family histories, and par- several stages, starting with genetic data first,

ticularly from twin studies. With this sub- then considering constitution as a general

ject I do not intend to deal beyond stating concept, and then dealing with those efforts

that there is increasing evidence for support- to see endowment in terms of personality

ing the view that not only psychosis but patterns upon which environmental stresses

neurosis is preconditioned as to form if not are alleged to work.

to content by such factors. But what I While we have no means of proving how

should like to stress here, and it may appear the genes operate in transmitting qualities

a hypothesis worthy of careful research for which make for endowment or inadequacies

confirmation, is that genetic endowments do in Man we have ample evidence of twin

not necessarily exert their influence at birth studies made by Lange, Hardy, and Rosanoff,

as a complete datum for the mental life Kallman and Slater, that in monozygotes

which is to follow, but they exert their there is a strong tendency to concordance of

influence in the process of maturation, nay, characteristics and of proneness to mental

more, they may not become operative until disorder when these are noted in the blood

certain life situations are to be met. Some of relatives.

these life situations are obligatory and not For example, Kallman's figures show that

facultative, such as the period of weaning, amongst the relatives of patients with

walking, talking, puberty, and the recessional schizophrenia the incidence of schizophrenia

phase of the climacteric. If I may be allowed for brother and sisters is I4.3 per cent, for

to use a musical analogy. The orchestra fraternal twins with the same constitutional

assembled to play a symphony does not similarity as any brother or sister I4.7 per

necessarily operate as a whole. Many cent, for identical twins 85.8 per cent.

instruments are potential, awaiting the call However much we stress the alleged effects of

of the maestro when a particular theme is subtle environmental differences in upbring-

developed and needs, say, brass and drums ing, these figures are striking confirmation of

which stand expectantly for the maestro's genetic causation.

call. In some the total score does not need Nevertheless there is still the I5 per cent

either brass or percussion. These absences left unaccounted for, and there are cases

may, to revert to genetics, represent defi- quoted by Hobbs in I94I in which pro-

ciencies. The calling up of instruments nounced differences in monozygotic twins

represents the rendering of kinetic what has was noted in the course of their life studies.

hitherto been only potential. A given phase We do not know what special event led to the

of life therefore needs certain genetic quali- divergent development. And even, as animal

ties, their absence will occasion failure at experiments show, a susceptible animal needs

thos,e points. Further, failure may come a very special experience to suffer an

about because the genetic anomalies are such emotional breakdown.

as to make breakdown possible under The greatest difficulty arises when we deal

minimal cultural stimuli or biochemical and not with psychotic cases and family histories

bacterial assaults. But we can add that the but with neurosis. Here the problem of

assault may come about by what can be styled assessing concordance arises. Difficult

massive or minimal assaults coming suddenly though it may be at times to place a patient

or acting over long periods of time by attrition. in psychotic category without prolonged

Nevertheless, it would appear that genetic follow-up, as in examples where early

potentialities do tend to come about at depressive and obsessional states pass over

ordered moments in maturation or during into clear schizophrenia, it is still more

the periods of greatest cultural pressure. I difficult to categorize the neuroses and

shall deal with the point of the relation of deviations of character. The claim to have

maturation to psychoanalytic theory later defined the so-called dimensions of per-

in the paper.

sonality is qualified by the fine shades of

E

204 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

difference which separate say one hysteric from another, and anxiety hysteria from
anxiety simplex. With character differences the difficulties of defining concordance and discordance is greater still. In the absence of psychopathological data I do not see how we can do it.
Nevertheless observers such as Klages claim to define the massive qualities or undertones or Anlagen which are the basic fabric on which experimental patterns are woven. Slater as well as Eysenck have, however, shown fairly regular personality patterns which require the stresses of life to convert into the neuroses.
I formed the same conclusion in observation of children in which the temperamental peculiarities of a group of children were
statistically related to type of neurotic behaviour disorder. This inquiry was checked up by obtaining rulings as to the intensity of
temperamental traits from the psychological tester, the social workers' enquiries from
parents and my own observations of the
children during play activities (I933). As a
result of therapy, both individual and social, the overt neurotic symptoms were in many
cases cured or modified, but the basic temperament traits remained unchanged on
retesting and reassessment. It is not un-
reasonable to conclude that some fundamental pattern of behaviour equivalent to
teinperament was unaltered. Is it unnatural to
suppose that, were further stresses to occur resulting in behaviour disorders or neurosis, the
earlytype ofreaction would reappearwith perhaps the supervention of modifications based
upon the nature of the new stress, and for the
activation of unresolved emotional conflict?
Constitution in the sense that we can use the term for medicine, and particularly for psychiatry, represents the idiosyncratic aspects of inborn qualities. For, as an early French clinician, Rostan, wrote in i822, " It is rare for a perfect balance to exist in all
systems of the animal economy. This complete harmony has never existed outside the imagination of the ancients. One system seems always to predominate over another or the rest. Thus are imprints made upon
our physical and moral constitution."

In modern terms we can accept Nicola
Pende's definition of constitution as the
"morphological, physiological and psychological resultant of the properties of all the
cellular and humoral elements of the body, and of the combination of these in a special cellular state having a balancing and functional output of its own, a given capacity for adaptation and a mode of reaction to its environmental stimuli."
It will be generally agreed that this state
is determined by heredity, with the possible addition of nocuous effect upon the germ cells of parents of certain poisons, in nutritional impoverishment and later upon the fertilized ovum, causing malformation in gestation.
Following this, temperament may be
defined as the humoral aspect of constitution. Where a constitution is said to be anomal-
ous we mean variation from a normal type which is determined by the statistical method of serial frequency curves. Varia-
tions in stature, for example, were found by
Quetelet to conform with the 'law of Gaussthe binomial law-that the distribution of the individual variations in an ethnic group, for example, is determined by conditions which lead to a uniform deviation of the individuals on the two sides of the average
central value of the curves. Anomaly in constitution has no clinical
value if it is a single feature, there may be extreme localised variants which in no way imperil life or health. And this is as true in the
mental field as in the field of morphology.
What matters is the constellation of anomalies. These anomalies in the psychological field would be represented by those dispositional traits which under stress produce neurotic symptoms which become in some
way incapacitating. They tend to recur together. To bring this concept into line with normal behaviour we should test for traits which have a wide distribution in a
population but which shew a tendency to constellate when viewed in the light of such seiected members of the population as have neurotic or psychotic symptoms. Such a correlation has proved of value in the hands of Eysenck and his co-workers and was also disclosed by Dr. Slater.

CONSTITUTION-MENTAL DISEASE AND PSYCHOANALYSIS 205

If we regard these traits whether
advantageous or disadvantageous as endow-
ments, it is within the frame of such endowments that many things are possible. We
shall return to this point as to what can
happen with an endowment when considering
the contribution that psychoanalysis has made to trace the variability which can take place within a field of endowment. For
endowment defines limits, but it cannot stop variability within the boundary. The external world determines in what way within the
limits development takes its course, or whether an inadequacy ab initio makes the pursuit of a course impossible with the regressive results which psychoanalysis has
made clear to us. At this point we might fruitfully step back
and consider what we know of the dynamics of temperament as seen in the light of hormone studies and their relation to varieties of behaviour and its biological maturation.
From classical times the hormones of the
body-now loosely equated with endocrine function-have been regarded as causally related to the differences of temperament seen in man. These hormones are to be regarded not as stimuli to behaviour, nor as organisers of the overt response, but merely as facilitating agents which increase the reactivity of specific neuro-muscular systems
to stimulation.
This process has even been shewn by the
work of Coghill and Sawyer on successive behavioural stages in amblystoma. Proper enzyme concentrations have been shewn to be necessary to the attainment of a functional condition, and in the ontogeny of behaviour increasingly morphologic differentiation and rising enzyme level go hand in hand, neither being effective in the absence of the other. We can argue, therefore, that even in very early development stages patterns of behaviour are internally determined although they may be called uplaterto perform special adaptations as a result of environmental stimuli. Nevertheless the behaviour takes place under environmental stresses within a predetermined biological tramework.

It is still more important that these powers
of reaction are subject to developmental necessities-the response to a hormone being
different at succeeding stages of an organism's development. The attainment of puberty is not a sudden transformation but a slow process of maturation in which as Professor
Beach states " various en'docrine somatic
and behavioural features of sexuality make their internal appearance at widely separated stages in the developmental scheme." It is, therefore, quite possible that despite the
inevitable march of developmental events
stresses can delay or even present this approach to mature integration with behavioural results. Indeed the whole field of this subject is covered and documented in Beach's volume "Hormones and Behaviour."
It is my contention that genetic endow-
ment or inadequacy is not a datum at birth but a dynamic process of unfolding in the process of maturation and even during the period of mental decline.
The various functions appear serially
throughout life but naturally make their most dramatic appearance during the early
years of life. The passage from breast feeding to weaning follows the maturation from
sucking to biting. Then the capacity to sit up and then to walk are both genetic and behavioural; and as behavioural these
capacities make more varied contacts with
external stimuli which not only evoke them but condition them in a variety of ways which we #call experience. Speech is perhaps not solely a maturation of cortical pre-
potencies but a still more complex process of integration of various cortical zones. Thence
we step to puberty, which stretches over
years, and which perhaps involves many more growth gradients than do the earlier
stages cited. It is not surprising that the possibility of breakdown is greater at this stage because of this wide call on integration processes of the body as a whole. Inherited inadequacies assert themselves and become visible in the varieties of morphological deviations that appear at this time.
Nevertheless, despite this predestined framework which howbeit betrays degrees of

206 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
flexibility called forth by environmental relations and the outer life of environmental needs, the maturation points are not deter- adjustment. Between infancy and puberty mined solely by the constitution at each of lies a vast learning period-the social maturathese phases; the culture closes in upon the tion by contact with others and the final human organism not only in incubating settlement if possible of the moral nature of capacities but in restricting them. The the child. suckling process is hall-marked as it were by The permutations and combinations of the nurtural techniques laid down by the object relations are made possible by endowmother who is but a vehicle of passing modes ment, and experiences can be regarded as the of nurture in our culture, but by the social woof and weft within the frame of endowinheritance in more primitive social groups. ment. With a Smooth unfolding of the So with the control of the sphincters which, maturation processes the human organism as animal life shows, undergoes maturation is adequately endowed with powers to meet in ways which are biologically necessary or varying environmental demands, if one were life preserving. But in man these controls to view such demands as those which nature have great cultural significance and press herself would impose. But the demands hard upon a recalcitrant infant loath to mate upon the human subject are those of yield up such pleasures as these functions social inheritance which embodies the culture afford. All object relations are part of a and the particular demands of parents who learning process which is given a bias by the represent more than the culture which they parental care imposing upon a preordained convey. They also convey their own genetic pattern which has only a limited plasticity. qualities which may be at variance with the Psychoanalysis has been particularly con- genetic qualities of their children. There is cerned with the innate forces and their not only the culture clash of the generations, education, with the lagging behind of the but the clash of temperament. Psychochild of nature subject to the schooling analysts have admitted that there are which would mould it into a child of nurture. quantitative differences of endowment. They Walking is a natural part of maturation but hold, and Anna Freud has stated, that theit brings with it environmental oppor- capacity to accept frustration and to posttunities to explore wider horizons and at the pone is not the nuclear problem of child life same to suffer the insults of the environ- but the battle between life furthering or ment, the interpersonal ones. The emergence erotic needs and destructive impulses. This of speech while as already stated the result of surely is admission of a datum line from prepotencies, is largely a cultural product. which further development takes place by It makes not only for the expressing of needs fusion and defusion. The handling of the in culture symbols and responding to child by mother and by father will aid and cultural demands, but it makes for con- abet these fusion and defusion processes by ceptualisation so that experience is handled education imparted with the bonus of in a new way. The particular, which is of limited gratifications, love and security. the essence of instinctual life of adjustment, But where there are temperamental clashes, gives way to generalisation. This transition hardships, too eager demands for social makes possible the postponement of gratifi- maturation on the part of the parents, there cation, the development of foresight until are rejections, ejections, projection which tax the highest levels of the intellectual life of the endowed as well as the under-endowed to contemplation is reached. The delaying the breaking point. Psychoanalysis and action of intelligence, which helps with indeed common experience itself shows how memory to look back as well as to look flexible the subject is, or what inflexible forward, is to my mind the very nucleus of demands can do to limit even this flexibility.
that ego development which psychoanalysis It may well be that abnormal experiences rightly regards as the process which makes can be as great a tax as lack of endowment, for control over both the inner life of internal so that actual experience itself can produce

CONSTITUTION-MENTAL DISEASE AND PSYCHOANALYSIS 207

the defects which are seen in the unendowed
enjoying favourable experience. Thus
psychosis like states as well as neurosis
may appear in the absence of genetic predisposition. Experience in short might well imitate the conditions which a genetic pattern imposes by itself.
Psychoanalysis claims to be able by its
technique to modify the tensions set up between the various psychical institutions and there is evidence that it has done so in many instances. Nevetherless, the results
are extremely variable. In simple uncomplicated cases of anxiety cures are not always achieved; even where significant processes lay revealed the condition either
remains unchanged or the appearance of
alternative symptoms appear not only in the analytical situation which can be explained,
but after treatment has lapsed. Indeed spontaneous remissions occur even
in the absence of significant changes in the ambient life of the subject. Oscillations of
mood occur for no known reason although well rounded explanations of a psychopathological nature are put forward. Like
causes are unearthed to explain psychosomatic disorders which have a familial incidence.
Yet like causes are found to operate in say
an obsessional who develops an ulcer and
another who presents a florid and intolerable
obsession. One patient waxes fat with anxiety and another will waste away. I contend that we must frankly face the fact that while variability is widely possible within an endowment, the endowment will determine the persistence of an inadequate adjustment to life needs within a given cultural setting.
Psychoanalysis is au fond a process of deconditioning of very complex cultural inclusions so that the patient is able to dislodge himself from falsely emphasised training processes, identifications and projections, freeing himself from phantasy gratifications for more sober yet more
adequate requirements. But wherein lies this capacity to liberate oneself or not to do so ? This flexibility lies in the way in which the essential maturation processes have been

freed from unnecessary cultural loads applied
with too great an emphasis by nurture. But
the vast majority carry this load patiently enough evoking from their internal relations a balance of personality which we call
character which is not only serviceable enough, but acceptable to group life. But
some cannot evolve such patterns alone but,
while retaining a relative fixative of personality traits, overflow into neurosis. We should be able during say the early period of analysis to decide whether the mental
economics are such as to allow for redistribution of forces or whether they are so
depleted as to bring them near bankruptcy, unless we give them a loan of moral support. I think that a proper history of the subject
and of his blood relations will help us to decide whether we can embark upon the
adventure of redistributing energies by
analytic procedures or whether we must rest satified with more sober methods of
support and social readjustment. It is not the place here to deal with the economics of long treatment or the worthwhileness of the person in question as a social asset or liability. We must ask ourselves-" is this in the nature of a research project designed to disclose the pattern of a life and its vicissitudes, or can we hold out real hope of cure
by what must be conceded is the most fundamental way of altering the variability or indeed of taking advantage of the possible variability of the person under our care ? " There is no advance which has been so revealing of human nature on the experiental level as is psychoanalysis, but while we have evidence of genetic processes and the handicaps they entail in psychosis and neurosis we would be doing psychotherapy an injustice if we did not realise its area of maximum
utility and its frontiers. In the final reduction it is very doubtful
whether we will be able to adjudicate between all that nature gives and all that nurture achieves, but well planned researches may bring us nearer to a solution if by carefully statistically checked observation we note the frequency with which certain arrests of maturation stages are associated with poor endowment, what cases show relentless

208 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

persistence of abnormalities, and what
statistically normal children and adolescents
develop the personality disorders which psychoanalysis suggests they might well do
when subject to the types of stresses which
psychoanalysis regards as necessary for
deviation from the norm.
Psychoanalysis is tending to throw the area of conflict farther and farther back into the early weeks and months of life when
genetic aspects of the instinctual life appear to be dominant. If, as it is claimed, the
experiential factors of psychosis are established at so early and homogeneous a phase, what hope can there be of modification ? But if the child outlives this phase and reaches some later period of maturation, it still has to meet the world with further
emerging genetic peculiarities and short-
comings. Until psychoanalysis can give us a truly
psychobiological picture of the structure of the Ego in terms say, of the field vectors in
Kurt Lewin's sense, we shall not I think be able to decide how much psychotherapy has really achieved and how it achieves it.
In his book on Responsibility and Mental Disease, Henry Maudsley quotes Sir Thomas Brown, who says:
" Bless not thyself only that thou weren't born in Athens; but amongst thy multiplied acknowledgements, lift up one hand to heaven that thou wert born of
honest parents, that modesty, humility and

veracity lay in the same egg and came into the world with thee. From such foundations then mayst be happy in a vertuous precocity, and make an early and long walk in goodness; so mayst thou more naturally, feel the contrariety of vice unto nature and resist some by the antidote of thy temper."
Maudsley adds " when will man learn by the study of the operation of natural laws of which he is the head, that by studying these laws and by deliberate conformity to them he may become the conscious framer of his own destiny ?"
But I venture to add that these laws of man's nature are contained not only in the relentless process of heredity, but in those of his own experience which he can in some measure modify in as much as they are made by him and by a social inheritance which must always be subject to change.
REFERENCES
Beach. F. A. Hormones and Behaviour, 1948. Eysenck, H. J. Dimensions of Personality, I944. Freud, S. Collected Papers, Vol. I. Kallman, F. J. Congres Internat. de Psychiatry, Vol. 6.
1950.
Klages, F. The Science of Character, 1929. Kretschmer, E. Physique and Character, 1936. Lange, J. Crime as Destiny, 1931. Miller, E. Temperamental Differences in Behaviour
Disorders of Children. Brit. Jour. of Education.
I934.
Pende, N. Le Debolezza dela Constituzione. Shelden, W. H. Varieties of Temperament. 1942.
Slater and Slater. J. Neur and Neuro surgical Psychiatry 7, 49, 1944.
Van de Waal. Psychoanalysis and Heredity. Int
journal of Psy. Anal. 1949.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
Edited by Warder C. Allee, the University of Florida. Zn the Janua. 1951 numbr: ONTOGENETIC CHANGE IN THE ANTIGENIC SPECIFICITY OF THE CHICK SPLEEN. By JAms D. ENERT. CRITICAL STAGES OF HAIR DEVELOPMENT AND PIGMENTATION IN THE MOUSE.
By HERAN B. CHASE, H RoLD RAUCH, and VsatGmA W. SmTH. STUDIES ON THE INORGANIC REQUIREMENTS OF TETRAHrMENA. By G. W. KIDDER, VsRomuN C. DEWEY and R. E
PARKs, Jr. THE CONCENTRATION OF RIBOFLAVIN IN THE TISSUES OF THE EMBRYOS, LARVAE, JUVENILES AND ADULTS
OF THE FROG, RANA PIPIENS PIPIENS. By MAx BURTON FERGUSON. NITIATION OF CELL DIVISION IN THE ARBACIA EGG BY INJURY SUBSTANCES. By DRUSILLA HARDING.
PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGr is published quarterly in January, April, July and October
Susbscription $1o per volume Singic copies $S Canadian postage 20c. Foreign postage ooc. THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO
Eugnics Review, VoL XLTTT No. 4

