STERILIZATION IN THE EMPIRE

An Account of the Working of the Alberta Act

By HILDA F. POCOCK

T HE Canadian province of Alberta is of the Act, and so enable sterilization

the only place in the British Empire patients to have treatment in the General

where voluntary sterilization of aments Hospitals, all operations being done from

(mental defectives) is the law of the land. I had the pleasure last year of meeting the Minister of Agriculture and Health, the Hon. George Hoadley, at his headquarters in Edmonton, and of hearing from him the history of the passing of the Bill.
He is himself a farmer, and was struck, in the course of his business, with the importance of the laws of inheritance as

these psychopathic wards. Operations are performed in two cities, Edmonton for the northern part of the province, and Calgary for the southern. The Committee that
administers this Act is composed of a doctor of science, the head of the State University at Edmonton, two doctors of medicine, and a lady who represents the Farmers' Wives' Association-a particularly able and active

applied to stock raising. Taking that woman.

application further to the human being, he came to the conclusion that in a new THE ACT IN OPERATION

country, with a population of moderate size When an individual is recommended as a

in healthy surroundings, some definite step suitable candidate for sterilization by the

should be taken to prevent the weakening head of a Mental Defective Training School,

of the race by the production of sub-normal a social worker investigates the family

individuals. Just at this time (1925), the history and home conditions and makes her

Royal Commission on Mental Hygiene was report. An independent doctor, who is not

sitting in British Columbia, and the find- a Government official, is then called in; he

ings of their report impressed him so much sees the patient alone and considers both

that he came to the conclusion that their reports. If he is in agreement, the patient

recommendation for the sterilization of cer- (or the person responsible for him or her)

tain atnents was one to be followed up. After asks for the operation in writing, the request

a fairly stiff fight the Sexual Sterilization being signed before witnesses. This is sent

Act* was passed by the Parliament in with the three reports to the Board for con-

Edmonton and ratified by the Lieutenant- sideration, and forwarded to the Minister of

Governor in Council. It has now been in Health, who consults the State legal

force for the past four years, and some of its authority; the patient is then sent to the

fiercest opponents are giving it their support nearest hospital and operated upon free of

because of the care with which it is being charge. After operation, patients are sent

administered. So far ioo cases have been either to their homes, or to situations where

found suitable to undergo sterilization. they are under observation. If, however,

Supplementing this Act, an amendment they are young people whose parents or

to the Mental Diseases Act was passed, in guardians ask for the operation but do not

which, by proclamation, the Ministry of wish them to go to the training schools,

Health can make a ward in any hospital a special arrangements can be made. The

"psychopathic ward " within the meaning Board ascertains that the training and home

conditions are satisfactory, and after

*The essential clauses of this were given on pp. I07-8 of the EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. XX, No. 2, JUI V 1928.

thorough investigation the patient is sent direct to the General Hospital and the opera-

I27

I28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tion is done from the psychopathic ward. a Sterilization Act,* close to the State Farm

Dr. Malcolm R. Bow, Deputy Medical for Epileptics, and was able to get into

Officer of Health, kindly supplied the fol- direct communication with the authorities

rowing analysis of the cases which have been administering the Public Act I929, No. 28I,

approved and operated on up to date.

which was passed in I923, but not put into

It is interesting to note that the report on active operation until its amendment in

seventeen cases is that there is an improve- I929. This Act defines the State policy as

ment physical and mental, with satisfactory follows:

adjustment. All sterilized cases are returned to the community under guardianship.

(Section I) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the State to prevent the procrea-

I also met Dr. O'Callahan, who does all tion and increase in number of feeble-

the operations on cases sent to him in Cal- minded, insane and epileptic persons, idiots,

gary. He told me that he uses the same imbeciles, moral degenerates,. and sexual

operative technique as that employed in California.
Mr. Hoadley, in a recent letter to me, expresses the following opinion:
I hope that the new Health Ministry [English] will again give some consideration to an Act such as was introduced and defeated last summer. Every day and

perverts, likely to become a menace to society or wards of the State. The provisions of this Act are to be liberally construed to accomplish this purpose.
Dr. Dixon, Medical Superintendent of the Michigan Home and Training School, Lapeer, Mich., writes that although the Act dates from I923, by far the greater

every week and every month should force majority of the operations have been done

on a people considering their financial in the last three years, as it took some time

present and their future the question of the to educate the public in this matter. All

increase of pauper and mentally defective the operations are performed in the Home

population (the two are so closely associated) as a matter of national importance.

and Training School, Lapeer, by a surgeon, Dr. Randall, appointed by the Court. He

EXPERIENCE IN MICHIGAN

is not a local doctor, nor an official of the Training School.

On my return journey I stayed in

Northern Michigan, which is one of the twenty-four of the United States operating

* According to Social Aspects of Mental Hygiene, published by the American Academy of Political and Social Science, May I930, p. 29.

ALBERTA STERILIZATIONS
Number of cases presented to the Board ... ... ... *Number of cases approved by the Board ... ... ...
Number of operations ... ... ... ... ... Follow-up reports on file ... ... ... ... ...

Male.
... 23
... 22
... I4 ... 5

Female.
83
79 66
27

These reports are divided as follows: Reports received when patient is under institutional care . Report received when patient in gaol ... ... ... ...

3 I

RReeppoorrtt rreecceeiivveedd wwhheennpaptaiteinetntininowSnalhvoatmieonorAwrimthyreHloatmieves ...... 5 2I2

Results with respect to operations are:
Improved physically, mentally, and with satisfactory adjustment 2 Physically well, but with no mental change ... ... ... 3 Fair physically, fair mentally ... ... ... ... ...

I5
IO
2

* Including twenty-one cases approved, but not yet completed.

Total.
io6
IOI
8o 32
I } 32
2266
17 1 I3 - 32 2J

STERILIZATION IN THE EMPIRE

I29

Dr. Dixon tells me the total number of a number of girls who have married and,

cases operated on up to September I93I with no children to interfere with the

is 6o6. The greatest per cent. of the cases economic efficiency or complicate their

sterilized are high-grade feeble-minded who have the opportunity of living outside the.
institution. The idiots and lower-grade imbeciles are
looked upon as custodial cases and segregated within the institution, but occasion-

lives, they have been able to come up to a fair standard of living. The problem of illegitimacy is of course a prominent factor.
We use all the legal methods of approach, though by far the greater majority of our cases are sterilized on the order of the Court. We discuss the situation with the parents

ally the parents of such patients desire to and encourage them to initiate proceedings.

have them home from time to time, and We have had very little active or persistent

they are sterilized as a matter of protection. opposition, though some of our parents are

There are also several cases which are reluctant to take the step because of their

not in the feeble-minded group, according to the test, but there has been a definite reason for each of them.

church affiliations. The operation used in the simple steriliza-
tion of female patients in this institution is salpingectomy. Dr. Randall removes a

i. A sexual pervert, a man who has section of the Fallopian tube a little over an

served time in a reformatory for rape.

inch long just at its point of entrance into

2. An epileptic girl.

the uterus. The other end is ligated and

3. A post-encephalitis case.

embedded in the broad ligament.

4. A sex delinquent whose family is

defective, and who had had one feebleminded child.

THE USE OF CASTRATION

5. The daughter (born in the institution) of a feeble-minded woman who had had several illegitimate children.
6. A girl of I4 who was a serious problem in the community. She was extremely

In Michigan certain other cases can also
be treated by order of the Court. The Probate Judge can order an operation on certain people with criminal tendencies-

promiscuous, and was sent with a court castration, instead of sterilization, in some

order for sterilization and return to the cases. A young man, for instance, who was

community upon recovery.

found lying in wait for a school-mistress was

The following table summarizes the
reports on these 6o6 cases after extended trial periods away from the institution, but under supervision:
Male. F~emale. Tot&l.

ordered by the Court to be castrated in a State Hospital. After the operation he went home, and now works quietly and happily on the farm with his mother. Before the operation this young man was quite unmanage-

-Discharged ... ... 33 i8i 214 able. Approximately twenty such cases have

On parole

... ... 38 85 123 been dealt with since I925.

Still in the institution ... 66 I84 250 Dr. Dixon's analysis of his cases raises

Eloped ... ... 4... 15 I9 the important issue of the dangers of

promiscuity and the spread of venereal

I4I 465 6o6 disease by sterilized persons when dis-

charged. I glean from his paragraphs a

NON-EUGENIC ADVANTAGES

corroboration of the practical experience of

Dr. Dixon also writes: We have no specific basis for selection
when dealing with the definitely feebleminded group, and now sterilize practically all who leave here, whether discharged or for vacations and parole. We look at it not wholly as a eugenic measure, but as an aid to the individual adjustment. We have had

other States-that sterilized persons, contrary to the anticipations of the theoretical sociologist, prove to be markedly less promiscuous than they were before the operation. Since sterilization leaves the physiological functions unimpaired, we must conclude that this is due to the psychological effect of the operation. This is

D

I30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

equally patent in the Report of the Royal Commission of British Columbia (p.CC.27), where Dr. Butler (Sonoma State Home for
the Feeble-minded, California) states: " There have been no ill-effects of any nature from the operation, but in fact just
the reverse; better physical and mental

condition, especially with the insane. " Answering from his experience one of the theoretical objections against sterilization, that it might increase prostitution and venereal disease, Dr. Butler says: " From observation at all our institutions we are decidedly of the opinion that it does not."

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

Eugenics in South Africa

series of free public lectures on eugenics

THE Race Welfare Society opened a Women's Welfare Centre in Johannesburg on February 2nd, I932. This is the first institution of its kind in South Africa. Its

and its practical applications, given by members of the Race Welfare Society during the last two years.
H. B. FANTHAM, Chairman.

aim is race improvement, and it caters for the less prosperous mothers who need information on spacing children wisely and
on the restriction of child-bearing where disease or poverty render further pregnan-
cies undesirable. It thus functions as a birth-control clinic and, at the same time, serves as a clearing-house to general hospitals for women with gymecological troubles needing surgical or medical intervention, which they would otherwise be unable to obtain. The sympathy of the medical profession has been enlisted and a panel of qualified medical men and women attend two afternoons weekly. Every woman is seen privately by a doctor, and
a trained nurse is in constant attendance. No charge is made for advice and instruc-
tion, and appliances are supplied at cost price to those who can pay, and are given
free to really needy deserving cases. During the first three months of its
existence, ioo women have availed them-
selves of the facilities of the Centre, a result which shows the need of such an institution and is considered satisfactory.
The Centre also serves for training doctors and nurses, with a view to extending the work to rural areas, where need for knowledge of birth control is great.
Public interest has been stimulated by a

Elections to the Society

THE following have been elected Fellows (starred) and Members of the Eugenics Society during the past quarter:

Miss M. Ashdown. Prof. Dr. L. Benedek. *Sir Basil Blackett,
K.C.B. (Life Fellow.) Mrs. Douglas Cockerell. Dr. Gladys M. Cox. Mrs. Fuller.
*J. D. Garrett, Esq. *F. Golla, Esq.
*The Rev. J. C. Hardwick.
E. F. Warren Hastings, Esq. Miss E. H. Hawes. Miss M. Jackson. *J. F. Peart, Esq.

Mrs. Rideal.

Miss L. Roe.

*The Rt. Hon. Sir Leslie

Scott, K.C.M.G., K.C.

*Lady Simson,

Mrs. Skinner.

**AE..

H. Snell, Esq. Gerald Stanley,

Esq.

J. Patric L. Stevenson,

Esq.

R. J. Whitwell, Esq.

Miss Dorothy Wolff

(re-elected).

*The Rev. Dr. J. F.

Worsley-Boden.

A (lift to the Library
THE Hon. Librarian wishes to express her grateful thanks to the Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff, who has presented to the Society the following volumes from the library of her deceased uncle, St. George Lane Fox-Pitt:
Sharpey-Schafer, E. The Endocrine Organs, 2 vols., I926-Part I, The thyroid, the parathyroids and the suprarenal capsules; Part II, The pituitary, the pineal, the alimentary, the pancreas and the sex glands. (London, I926. Longmans, Green and Co.)

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 2.

