EUGENICAL REFORM-

1. Of the House of Lords

By F. C. S. SCHILLER, M.A., D.Sc., F.B.A.

Address delivered to the Society on November 2Ist, I928, at the Rooms of the Royal Society.

W HY should eugenists concern What is wanted in a Second Chamber is the

themselves with reforming the unpartisan judgment of disinterested ability

Lords? Because the House of on the legislative efforts of the Commons,

Lords cries out for reform. Moreover, with and outbursts of youthful energy should

a little goodwill, it is very easy to reform, at occasionally be appropriate, and even wel-

all events on paper. The House of Commons, come, in an effective Second Chamber.

on the other hand, though it also greatly More serious divergences of opinion are

stands in need of reform, no one in his likely to arise when we inquire upon what

senses would dream of reforming. Nothing principles the Second Chamber should be

short of a Mussolini could reform the House differentiated from the First. It should

of Commons, and take away its baubles. clearly be something distinctive. If we

The House of Lords is our Second Cham- admit that the First Chamber, in any coun-

ber, and people sometimes are perverse try that still prides itself on being called a

enough to ask why we should have a Second democracy, must be elected by popular

Chamber. The answer is easy. A single clamour tempered by electoral trickery,

all-powerful Chamber is too dangerous, espe- more or less misguided by journalistic

cially if one thinks how it is elected. It stunts, and mobilized by subventions from

leaves the life and property of everyone, a well-filled party war-chest, and then by

and the whole prosperity of the country, at colunting heads, regardless of their size,

the mercy of a chance majority, which may shape or contents, whether dolichocephalic

not even claim to represent a majority of the or brachycephalic, whether swelled or not,

electorate. A Second Chamber is as useful whether empty or full of fads, it follows that

and as necessary as a Court of Appeal.

mere numbers cannot form the right basis

If, however, a Second Chamber has the for election to the Upper House.

same function in politics as a Court of A territorial basis naturally commends

Appeal in law, it would seem to be reason- itself to States whose organization is more or

able to give a little thought to its composi- less federal. A property qualification has

tion. Now, though it is generally admitted often been imposed on the electorate for the

by those who see the need for a Second Second Chamber, but looks prejudicially un-

Chamber that it should be something of a democratic, and if it were successful, would

Senate, replete with the ripe experience and merely duplicate, in an invidious form, the

mellow wisdom of the aged, not all would plutocratic influence which is at present

contend that it need imitate the Court of exercised, unobtrusively and far more effec-

Appeal in all respects. It need not, for tively, by employers of labour and sub-

example, approximate to its highly octoge- scribers to party funds.

narian composition; nor need it be filled That a Second Chamber may fitly be com-

entirely with unhorsed or forcibly-elevated posed in part of representatives of various

politicians, retired governors, veteran gene- important interests and institutions, is

rals and admirals, superannuated civil beginning to be understood, though in our

servants, pensioned headmasters and pro- House of Lords room has as yet been found

fessors, ex-directors of industry, eclipsed only for a few bishops and law lords. This

actors, extinct movie-stars, and the like. principle, however, is both expedient and

237

238 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

just; for democratic institutions do not every animal and plant, what they severally

guarantee that all who should be represented are, and determines what can be made of

will be. Many important interests, upon them, and yet when the question of its politi-

which the country's prosperity is vitally cal import arises the political philosopher

dependent, may never be able to obtain par- does not think it need be ' seriously con-

liamentary representation at all. There is no sidered ' ! It is almost incredible how

constituency, for example, in which doctors fatuously and wickedly unscientific were

and schoolmasters are numerous enough to the advanced liberal thinkers of the nine-

elect their representative, and the City of teenth century!

London is probably the only constituency in We, on the other hand, feel bound to con-

the country which is disposed to lend an sider seriously the value of a hereditary

attentive ear to the voice of the banker. And Second Chamber, and to reform the House

how is science or philosophy ever to obtain a of Lords in a truly scientific way. And

hearing? But by authorizing the interests we should consider this matter seriously in

to which it is socially desirable to listen to the light of the principles of scientific

depute representatives to the Second Cham- eugenics.

ber, a very strong and valuable Upper To begin with, let us take for granted, as

House could theoretically be composed. Un- a matter of common notoriety, that the

fortunately this method has nowhere been House of Lords needs reform. Paradoxi-

adopted to an adequate extent, although a cally enough, however, it is the Conserva-

late eminent philosopher used half seriously tives who desire to reform it; or rather some

to contend that th only reform needed by of them, to wit that section of them which

the House of Lords was that all the Bishops still respects the old aristocratic values and

should be given seats in it ! They might ideals, whereas the merely plutocratic sec-

then periodically resign en masse whenever tion, believing as it does in the control of

the Commons refused to pass their Prayer masses of voters by large employers and

Book or any similar fruit of their collective vote-catching ' stunts,' is indifferent.

wisdom.

Again, the Liberals and Socialists prefer to

THE HEREDITARY PRINCIPLE
There remains, however, one principle which in former days was taken as a matter of course, and is still in being; but it is treated by our political theorists as beneath contempt and hardly worth a mention. I mean, of course, the hereditary principle. Even the late Professor Henry Sidgwick, certainly the sanest and most reasonable of our political theorists, polishes it off in a single paragraph of his ' Metapolitics.' He

leave the House of Lords as it is, from fear that any change will strengthen it. It suits their book to leave it in the condition of a survival of recognized absurdity, and they would resent any reform that might make it useful and effective. Science, however, is not restricted in its vision to the ignoble trickeries of party-spirit, and it ought to consider impartially how, if hereditary ability exists, it can best be utilized by the commonwealth.

treats it as merely " a survival from an THE STOCK-NOT THE MAN

earlier stage of social development," and Now that hereditary ability exists, I prothinks " it can hardly be counted among the pose to take for granted, or at any rate, not

methods requiring to be seriously con- to prove at length. It is just as inherent

sidered. "* Remarks like these painfully in certain stocks as feeble-mindedness or a reveal how little understanding even the best tendency to sundry diseases and defects is in philosophers show of the discoveries of certain others. So it should not be con-

modern science. Here, for example, is the sidered profanity to speak of noble lords

great outstanding fact of Heredity, which in the same breath with noble horses and makes every man, woman and child, nay noble dogs and quixotry to try to develop

* Elements of Politics, p. 543.

hereditary excellence in legislators also.

EUGENICAL REFORM

239

Moreover, such excellence, being inherent geniture, therefore, is not the best that

in the stock, in the germ plasm as the bio- could be devised. This is not, of course, to

logists say, may crop up in all its mem- say that it is wholly bad; it may even be

bers, whether male or female, whether first- relatively good. It may be better, for

born or younger sons. It may also be latent example, than the commoner custom of

in those of its members who may appear dividing the family property equally among

to be quite ordinary folk. They may not all the children of the rich. For if it be

show much ability themselves, and yet granted that those who make fortunes tend

may transmit it to their descendants like any to be able, and also that the education of

other ' mendelizing ' quality. It is clear, rich, men's children tends to fail to imbue

therefore, that the unit of heredity is not the them with the ideal of shunning delights

individual but the stock: ability comes out and living laborious days, it follows that

in the individual because it lurks in the wealth is a great danger to the family which

stock. acquires it, and threatens it with biological

It follows from these scientific facts that ruin, if it cannot be neutralized by educa-

our traditional method of selecting here- tion. Moreover, the effect of a system of

ditary ability is not wholly rational. There equal division will be to corrupt all the des-

is, however, nothing absurd in the main idea cendants of the successful, whereas the sys-

which underlies the House of Lords. It is tem of primogeniture will corrupt only the

right enough to select those who have shown eldest sons, and may actually tend to

conspicuous ability (in whatever pursuit or stimulate the ambitions and to improve the

accomplishment that a society approves and prospects of the rest of the family. Ac-

delights to honour) for promotion into a here- cordingly, the achievements of the cadets of

ditary house of legislators. This method noble families fill many of the brightest

has, indeed, the weakness that if social pages of history, and it has often been re-

ideals are wrong and corrupt, the wrong marked that primogeniture makes only one

qualities will lead to honour and promotion; fool, or rather wastrel, in a family.

but all methods of social promotion whatsoever share in this weakness. If the fount of honour is corrupted its waters will poison the community. Moreover, it has always been customary among political philosophers of all schools, to shirk this difficulty and to evade consideration of the problem how the sovereign, whether monarch or people, may have brought home to him the error of his ways, and be taught to mend them. To solve this problem, science would presumably employ the same technique as it does elsewhere to detect the truth and to correct
popular error. Here also the process would be gradual, but in the end science would meet with a measure of success.

ELECTIVE PEERAGES
Still, the present system of primogeniture is capable of being bettered. So soon as the social problem is seen to be that of recognizing and exploiting the hereditary ability of a stock, it is easy to see that better ways of bringing it out can be devised. Much more may be done to make it more likely that the stock will be represented in the House of Lords by its worthiest members.
In the first place it is the stock, and not a person, that should be ennobled with a peerage. Our present practice may indeed be said to recognize this principle after a fashion, in making the honour hereditary,

PRIMOGENITURE

but it does nothing to ensure that the descendants of the new peer will conserve and con-

On the other hand, it can be seen at once tinue to display the ability which won the

that it is not rational to act on the assump- peerage. Really, the old Chinese practice

tion that the ability inherent in a stock will of ennobling the ancestors of a man who had

necessarily and invariably be concentrated rendered distinguished service was far more

in the eldest son. Our system of primo- rational.

240 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Next, the succession to the peerage should against the ruin of the family fortunes by

be rationalized, to increase the probability prodigal and spendthrift holders of the title,

that the stock will contribute its ablest and if one at least of the family seats formed

member to the House of Lords. So when part of the endowment this would preserve

the first holder of the peerage dies, let his its local ties, and save the country from the

children and grandchildren meet together aesthetic losses which it now sustains by the

and choose the one whom they regard as his break-up of ancient collections and the con-

worthiest successor. If it was considered version of the stately homes of its nobility

desirable to enlarge the constituency, e.g., into schools and lunatic asylums.

on account of the ability shown and distinc- About the initial endowment there would

tion achieved by other relatives of the usually be no difficulty. For the rich men

first peer, his brothers, sisters, and cousins who obtain titles in return for their ' public

might be included in the electorate, or even services ' in endowing the war-chest of the

be rendered eligible themselves.

dominant party have long been accustomed

Of course, to be an elector to a peerage to make settlements for this very purpose,

would be a social distinction, to which, with and the only difference would be that these

the growth of eugenical sentiment, a grow- endowments would henceforth benefit not

ing importance would be attached, and the merely their eldest son and his progeny, but

electorate of the House of Lords would soon whichever proved to be the worthiest of their

come to be regarded as a real eugenical descendants. In course of time, moreover,

nobility. On the other hand, the commis- the endowment fund of the peerage would

sion of an offence, or even persistent failure be augmented by legacies; it would be the

through several generations to attain distinc- natural destination of the property of maiden

tion, might lead to disfranchisement or to aunts and bachelor uncles throughout the

the lapsing of a peerage. It is also evident whole family or clan, and as the holder

that the same person might be an elector to of the title would only have a life interest

a number of peerages and that, if he came of in it, it would naturally and properly escape

an ancient stock which had laudably inter- from the operation of the devastating death

married with others of the eugenical duties which are at present proving so des-

nobility, he would certainly be an elector tructive to the maintenance of family tradi-

to many peerages.

tions. Even if the first holder were not

ENDOWMENT OR DEGENERATION
Moreover, inasmuch as the British public, though essentially and admirably snobbish, has little respect for knowledge, learning, expertness, or distinction of any sort unless it is adequately backed up by wealth, it would further be expedient to endow these
eugenical peerages, in order to ensure that their holders would always be able to support their dignity, and so should not be forced, as at present, to have recourse to the eugenically reprehensible, and often biologically ruinous, expedient of marrying

wealthy enough to provide an adequate en-
dowment at first, such a one would speedily grow up, especially if wealthier relatives
were eager to recognize the honour done to the family and were allowed to subscribe to it, being enrolled in return among the electors to that peerage. So it can hardly be
doubted that within a short time all the peerages would be adequately and perman,ently endowed, and secured against the danger that a prodigal son might any day find himself compelled to sell the family seat and to dispose of its heirlooms.

heiresses, for as Galton showed, heiresses THE SPUR OF AMBITION

are apt to be the last effort of a degenerating Lastly, it is obvious how greatly the

and expiring stock. As moreover nowadays existence of a well-endowed peerage in

the heiresses are mostly American, the peer- the family would stimulate ambition in all

age is rapidly being Americanized. This de- its members. They would be impelled

vice would also be an effective protection to use every effort to distinguish themselves,

EUGENICAL REFORM

24I

in the hope of qualifying for the family turmoil and deceptions of a General Elec-

honours, and with a good prospect of win- tion. Historians are agreed that such was

ning further honours in their own right, probably the original composition of the

even if, by reason of bad luck or family Roman Senate, the greatest council and the

jealousies, the old ones eluded them. And most successful governing body the world

so our reformed House of Lords would con- has ever seen. The ' Conscript Fathers '

tribute powerfully to the solution of the of Rome were the elders and representatives

great problem over which education has of the noble gentes, and each gens was a

everywhere failed throughout the ages, viz., patrilinear clan claiming descent from a

how to provide the children of the rich and common ancestor. The only innovation we

powerful with adequate incentives to de- have ventured to introduce into the com-

velop their abilities, and to make the best position of the gens has been to include in it,

of themselves. At present it can hardly in accordance with our greater knowledge of

be doubted that there is much ability the nature of heredity, the female members

diffused among the aristocratic classes of along with the males. The historical omens,

every civilized community; but most of it therefore, are favourable to the eugenical

remains uncultivated and unstimulated, and reform of the House of Lords.

is unused or wasted, simply because the A further advantage would be that its in-

actual institutions of society do not pro- troduction might be gradual and largely

vide sufficient motives for exertion and voluntary. In the first instance it would

attractive careers for the descendants of the only be the new creations that would be based

able who have distinguished themselves. So upon the constitution of a gens. The old

what with the fatuous organization of peerages need not be affected in their

society which practically imposes sterility tenure. But their holders would be in-

on aspirants to social promotion, and its vited to come into the scheme if they were

pathetic inability to utilize a great part of deemed worthy; and if it were found to

the ability that exists, it is no wonder that involve the concessions indicated in the

the affairs of nations are conducted with as matter of taxation, it can hardly be doubted

little wisdom as ever.

that all who were qualified-and they would

surely be a large number-would be eager to

OUR 'CONSCRIPT FATHERS'
These proposals may perhaps sound more fantastic, when thus lightly sketched, than they would seem if the details were filled in with tedious particularity. But they are in no sense utopian. I must insist that

join the ranks of the new eugenical nobility. The rest, who would be merely the decadent dregs of the old aristocracy, might safely be left to die out in the course of nature, though it would also, of course, become easy to deprive them of their seats in the renovated House of Lords.

their underlying idea is perfectly practicable. Indeed it has been carried into effect with signal success. For, properly regarded, the idea is merely that the hereditary ability of the community should be organized in hereditary clans, each privileged to depute its worthiest member to a

Whether the reformed House of Lords should be wholly hereditary in its composition after this fashion, may be left an open question. It might be expedient, and would not be unreasonable, to supplement the hereditary element by Life Peers, who did not wish to found a gens, by men of distinction

senate as its contribution to the collective wisdom of the community, in order that there may be formed an effective and respected Second Chamber, capable of exercising an intelligent control over the transient impulses of the mob and of the ephemeral governments that emerge from the

who had grown old in the public services, by representatives of institutions and activities which form important and valuable features in national life, by the Agents-General and notable residents from the Dominions.
Certainly, the present university representa-
tion in the Commons should be transferred

242 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to the Lords and increased so as to allow of minority representation. On the whole it may be suggested that not more than onethird or one-half of the House of Lords should be drawn from the eugenical nobility, while the rest could be made up as suggested above. A very able, attractive, respected, and powerful Upper House would be the result; even without any enlargement of its present powers it would easily outshine the Commons.
THE DECLINE OF THE COMMONS
It would consequently arouse the latter's jealousy. But it would be a fatal mistake on this account to bolster up the Commons. The House of Commons in these days, like the ' democracy ' from which it springs, is visibly declining in wisdom, intelligence, and competence. It abounds in anomalies, inconveniences, and absurdities, such as that a nationally important statesman may be thrown out of politics by the whim of a local electorate for merely local reasons. Its legislative procedure is incredibly cumbrous, inefficient, and inept, and its results are so ridiculous and unintelligible that even the invariable beneficiaries of its law-making, the lawyers, are moved to frequent complaints. It stifles the voice of minorities, and habitually over-represents majorities, and the vice of misrepresentation has grown so chronic in its system that it can no longer be trusted to represent the majority even of the voters. It cannot be reformed save by reforming the whole nation at a blow, and this is not a practical proposition in this country.
It must therefore be left alone; but its power for mischief may be circumscribed. There is nothing to be said in its favour, save that it is still, in theory, the seat of power. As a governing body it is farcical, and in point of fact it has lost most of its power to the Cabinet and the Civil
Service, and has been reduced to a mob
that obeys the crack of the Whips, and lives in constant fear of a premature dissolution. If it were not artificially bolstered up and privileged, it would speedily lose the best

part of its personnel. Its ablest members
would leave it for the greater dignity and security of the House of Lords, if Ministers were allowed to address either House irre-
spective of where their seats were,* as in most European countries, and the greater freedom of choice thus accorded to the Prime Minister to fill up offices in the most suitable
way would probably lead to the construction
of better Ministries. They would be recruited in growing measure from the reformed House of Lords.

SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES

Nor would the consequences of reforming

the House of Lords be merely political.

They would extend to many activities of

social life, and affect many institutions.

They would engender new ideals and revive

decaying morals in ways the present House

of Lords would never dream of doing. At

present the only ideal to which the House

of Lords can be said to minister is that of

Snobbishness. Now snobbishness is by no

means an unmitigated evil. It is a great

principle of social cohesion and in some ways

a valuable factor in civilization; for the

imitation of the manners of a superior class

by the inferior leads to a general levelling up

of manners. It has therefore great esthetic

value, and it is moreover a fact that for

many purposes esthetics can perform the

functions of ethics, and manners take the

place of morals.

0

Still it can hardly be contended that in the

past the House of Lords has been a great

moralizing influence. Such familiar utter-

ances of proverbial wisdom as ' drunk as a

Lord ' do not seem to indicate that the moral

influence of the House of Lords was ever

exemplary; nor would a study of legal bio-

graphies suggest that ' as sober as a judge '

was always undiluted praise: still we may

admire the judicial ingenuity with which

many Law Lords have contrived to hit the

mean between drunkenness and sobriety.

* This simple little reform should also commend itself alike to the Liberal and to the Labour party, because they would no longer have to create numbers of otherwise unsuitable peers in order to make their voices heard in the Second Chamber.

EUGENICAL REFORM

243

In the reformed House of Lords there that is needed. It would impose on the

would be reason to believe that all this would individual the salutary restraint of a social

be changed. The individual Lord would organization larger than the evanescent

no longer be raised aloft in a region where family and less remote than the community

he could go as he pleased, but would be at large. The chances are that both the

firmly set in the social tissue of his clan, organization and the sentiment of society

which would exercise constant supervision would grow more and more aristocratic.

and pressure upon him, conserve his form, and prevent him from going to pieces. So

EFFECT ON EUGENICS

the public opinion of the clan would keep its members in order and stimulate them to exertion and rivalry in well doing. And,
of course, snobbishness would ensure that the example set by the House of Lords would spread far down the social scale.

What is even more important from a eugenist's point of view, they would also grow more and more eugenical. And this might prove to be the beginnUng of the solution of the greatest problem the science of
eugenics has to face, that of positive

eugenics, that of actually improving the

MODERN ANCESTOR WORSHIP

existing composition of the human race.

So would the influence of the clan or gens. Compared with this, any proposal for nega-

The clans which possessed nominations to tive eugenics is child's play. Any intelli-

the House of Lords would not be the only gent person can perceive the folly of our

ones that would organize themselves, and present methods of recruiting society, and

pride themselves on their descent, and in- foresee that unless they are arrested in time

terest themselves in their distinguished they must lead to the biological ruin of the

relatives. Strong clan feelings would societies which tolerate them and possibly

grow up throughout the social order, and of the whole human race. Any one also can

counteract the centrifugal tendencies of the see in what ways they may be arrested and

individual.

what must be changed. The necessary

Moreover, these feelings could be reforms are clearly indicated, and would be

trusted to strengthen an ancient and invalu- easier to enforce than a number of social

able institution, the family in the nar- interferences with the habits of individuals

rower sense, which seems at present to be that have often proved successful. It is

drifting on to the rocks, and to rescue it also becoming plain that these changes are

from the dangers that threaten it. In large relatively urgent, and may be forced upon

sections of modern society the family seems all societies which are desirous of prosper-

to be not so much breaking up as petering ing, and even of surviving, in a relatively

out. It is losing its inherent connection short time. To urge only the most obvious

with marriage, which is itself coming to be point, it is ruinously expensive to breed

regarded merely as a temporary association large masses of lunacy, feeble-mindedness,

for mutual amusement, as in decaying and disease. Lastly, the dangers which

Rome. Now this is a very serious situation, negative eugenics aim at averting could be

for experience shows that the only really staved off effectively in quite a few genera-

stable civilizations, the only ones which tions. But even the most energetic and

have endured without eclipse, have been effective campaign of negative eugenics

based on the family. The family, moreover, would improve the composition of the race

in both the outstanding cases of an endur- only relatively and not positively. It would

ing civilization, both in China and in Japan, weed out the unfit, but it would not raise

has been held together by the spiritual sanc- the standard of fitness, nor increase the

tion of ancestor-worship. What we need numbers of the fit, save insofar as there

is something similar, a modern scientific would be more room for rearing the flowers

equivalent for ancestor-worship. And the of humanity after the elimination of the

institution of a gens might be the very thing weeds.

244 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

STARTING POSITIVE EUGENICS

human race and not merely to perpetuate the

On the other hand, positively to improve status quo, and willingness to abstain not

the human race is a stupendously difficult only from scattering the seeds of weeds

undertaking. It will not only demand the about the face of the earth, but also from

painless extinction of bad stocks whose overcrowding it with inferior types, in order

existence is only a curse to themselves and that there may be room enough for the

others. It will demand from the biological noblest.

6lite unremitting efforts, sustained for many Moreover this great undertaking which is

generations, to rise above themselves to eugenics will manifestly have to start from

heights of physical, mental, and moral the present state of human life, from the

development never yet attained and hardly actual conditions of human physique, human

dreamt of. And there can be little doubt nature and human sentiment, and to trans-

that the training required to achieve this form them gradually into something better

development will not only be long, but also and higher. Assuredly this will be no easy

severe. It will require an asceticism and a matter. It will also be slow, because only

heroism equal to any that has ever been three or four generations can be reared in a

achieved in the past, though more rational century. But it must not be pronounced

and more scientific alike in its aims, prin- impossible. For to do so would not only

ciples, and methods. Lastly, it will demand be to renounce the ambition of rising above

from the average man willingness to co- our present nature, but to confess our in-

operate with this lofty enterprise, willing- trinsic inferiority to the Miocene apes who

ness to subordinate himself to a social order overcame the most terrific obstacles in order

which has a definite aim, to improve the to turn themselves into men!

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 4.

