SIR ROBERT PLATT, Bt.
M. Sc., M. D ., P. R. C. P., Professor of Medicine at the University of Manchester
Inherited Disease in Man*

T HAT MAN'S OWN actions may now determine his future destiny and further evolution is a statement which has been forcibly
put by your President, Sir Julian Huxley, and there must be few who would dissent from it. This is not to say that we can see into the future; indeed, you may well hold that man's very existence is more in peril than it has ever been before: the point is that it now depends on man himself much more than on factors which were previously out ofhis control; plague, famine and overpopulation. The means are known even if they are not being put to use. It is still just possible that some virus epidemic may get the upper hand, or that we may fall victims to some new bacteria brought to us from another planet, but apart from these unlikely possibilities, the control of epidemic disease has reached a very high degree of efficiency. Combined action on the technology of food production and the prevention of over-population by birth control, would leave war as the only likely cause of major human disaster, and whether to wage war is a decision of man himself, closely linked though it may be with questions of food and population.
Assuming that man will have the wisdom, and I confess that it is a major assumption, to avert these disasters, the future development of human individuals will still depend, as always, on their heredity and their environment, and it is the function of the Eugenics Society to keep the genetic factors constantly under review and to be aware of ways by which in a genetic sense the race may be improved. It may sometimes be the duty of such a society to advise Governments on action to be taken: much more often it will depend for its success on the spread of knowledge and enlightenment and on the influence of public opinion.
* The Galton Lecture, delivered in London on February 8th, 1961.

There has always been a high degree of select-
ive breeding in man, as Darwin himself pointed out, and certain characters, because they influence sexual selection and therefore mating and reproduction, have a higher survival value than others. For the purpose of statistical analysis it is a convenient fiction to speak of the human race as mating at random but in fact its mating is very far from random. Given the premise that there is a high degree of selection in human mating, there are boundless possibilities of eugenic improvement by influencing this selection by one means or another, to favour the mating of those who in the widest sense are the best endowed members of the human race. On this question Galton9 had something to say about the dysgenic tendencies of the Catholic church which had made its best scholars celibate and therefore sterile, and had burnt at the stake or cast into prison the free-thinkers and the Huguenots. To this record we may now add its failure to discourage the indiscriminate breeding of some of the lowest elements in our social structure: " the servile, the indifferent and the stupid" as Galton called them. It is of course very difficult to lay down standards of eugenic value and this is a matter which has received consideration from the Council of this Society and is discussed at some length in Dr. Blacker's Galton Lecture of 19454. There are five standards, he says, as to the merits of which nearly everyone will agree. They are (1) Sound physical
health and good physique; (2) Inteliigence; (3)
Social usefulness with the moral qualities which make a good citizen; (4) Freedom from genetic taints, i.e. from the likelihood of carrying
familial disease and defect; and (5) It is desirable that human beings should be members of a big united and well adjusted family, and be fond of their children. I have diverged in my wording a little from the original in Blacker's lecture.

77 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1961, 53, 2.
ER-B

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

As a physician interested in genetics, and I can that the rarer the disease the more likely are we

claim to be nothing more, I am only going to dis- to find consanguinity in the parents.

cuss number four from this list-the question of

the hereditary transmission of disease. There will Galactosaemia

always be some uncontrollable factors in human As my first example of a single recessive gene

disease as long as mutations take place in disorder, I will take galactosaemia, not because

human chromosomes, but recent years have it is common or statistically important, or

greatly enriched our knowledge of how inherited probably even known to many of you, but

disease may be predicted, prevented, modified because it illustrates some of the points which I

or treated. What I intend to do in this lecture wish to make about hereditary disease. In galac-

is to select certain human diseases which depend tosaemia, the infant lacks an enzyme called

either partly or wholly on heredity, not because galactose-l-phosphate uridyl transferase (or

they are necessarily common or important-at transferase for short) which is essential to the

any rate in a statistical sense-but because they metabolism of galactose, which is part of the

illustrate principles and show some of the lactose molecule, the sugar normaUly present in

directions from which further advances may milk. Inability to use this sugar leads to an

come. accumulation of galactose in the form of galac-

tose-l-phosphate in the blood, the liver and

Recessive Gene Disorders

other tissues, and this in turn interferes with the

I start with a consideration of one or two utilization of glucose. What matters is that the

diseases due to the action of single recessive infant fails to thrive and death often takes place

genes, in other words, diseases whose heredi- in infancy from gross disorder of the liver. If

tary behaviour is precisely that of the dwarf peas the infant survives, mental and physical develop-

in Mendel's classical experiment. As we would ment is retarded, and cataract may lead to

expect, these diseases tend to occur in several members of a sibship, that is, amongst brothers
and sisters, whose parents are apparently quite normal. The parents do in fact both carry the deleterious gene but because it behaves as a recessive and the corresponding gene on their opposite chromosome is normal the parents appear to be normal people. It is only the unfortunate child (statistically one child in four) who inherits the gene in double dosage who is affected. Many of the disorders carried in this way are serious ones and the affected members do not commonly grow up to produce children of their own: some of the genes in every affected generation are therefore eliminated. Most of these

blindness. If the disorder is recognized without delay soon after birth, and the infant is brought up on a diet completely free from galactose, in other words from milk and milk products, a remarkable and dramatic improvement takes
place and growth and development may be
normal. Although the parents of children with
galactosaemia are apparently normal, in fact careful testing of the ability of their red cells to utilize galactose shows that they, and a proportion of the siblings of the affected chil-
dren, have the defect in a very mild form. Their ability to deal with galactose is slightly impaired. In other words, although the disease only occurs in the recessive homozygote, the heterozygotes can be detected.

diseases are therefore rare, but complete elimi- Now I want to consider what are the results nation of a recessive gene is a slow process of research on a disease like this from a eugenic because the gene is passed on in the apparently point of view. The first stage of knowledge is

normal heterozygote, and selection against the that the disease must be identified and its

gene may be balanced by new mutations. All mechanism-the metabolic defect-discovered

rare recessive genes are of course commoner in and defined; its genealogy is studied and it is

the offspring of cousin marriages because found to behave as a Mendelian recessive. At this

cousins have a one in eight chance of being stage of knowledge, parents who have had one

heterozygous for any recessive gene inherited such child will want to know the likelihood of
from a common grandparent. A corollary is having another. The genetic counsellor can

78

INHERITED DISEASE IN MAN

tell them that the likelihood is one in four. Intelligent parents may say "If we have normal children what is the likelihood that they will in
due course hand on the disease to their children ?"
The answer is that as the disease is extremely rare,
if they marry someone unrelated to them the
chances are so small as to be negligible, but of course a cousin-marriage would increase the
dangers. In the next stage of knowledge we learn how to discover the heterozygotes. If this knowledge only applies to a few very rare diseases it is unlikely that engaged couples are going to come to biochemical departments for a series of elaborate tests to see whether they are carriers of galactosaemia or phenylketonuria, cystinuria, or some such other rare metabolic disorder, but when a large number of such
diseases have been brought to this level of knowledge, and can be tested for by comparatively simple chromatographic or other methods of examining the urine, there may come a time in
the foreseeable future when engaged couples, especially if they are cousins, are put through a series of biochemical tests, each of which may reveal them to be carriers of some defect, but so long as the same recessive defect is not carried by both, there will be no harm in the mating. The detection of the heterozygotes in inherited recessive disorders is one of the ways in which the prevention of these diseases may become a practical possibility of the future.
Another stage of knowledge may be reached, and I will deal with this in a few minutes, in which it may be possible to detect, during intrauterine development, the foetus which has inherited the disease and so the pregnancy could be terminated before the child was viable, but this would not yet be the case in galactosaemia. Finally, a cure for the metabolic disorder may be found, as is practically the case already in galactosaemia, and if the cure is complete and simple, such as the avoidance of a certain food or possibly at a later stage of knowledge, the replacement of the missing enzyme, then the disease virtually ceases to be a disease at all, and no longer matters. The discovery by Schwarz and his colleagues that the abnormality of galactosaemia can be detected in the infant's red cells means that it can be diagnosed by examining the blood from the umbilical cord

within a few minutes of the infant's birth. This is of great importance where one child of the marriage has already been affected. An interesting discussion of the subject of galactosaemia is to be found in Harris's'll recent book, Human
Biochemical Genetics.
Haemophilia
I want to take two more examples of singlegene recessive disorders. The first is haemophilia because it is sex-linked, that is, it is
conveyed on one of the sex chromosomes. The study of the various forms of sex-linkage in man is one in which I have recently been much interested but I shall confine myself to recessive genes on the X chromosome, of which haemophilia is one. The genetic facts are probably well known to most of you. The female, having two X chromosomes, does not suffer from the disease because if she carries the gene only on one of her chromosomes, her other normal chromosome will counteract its effects. But the male, having no other X chromosome, but only a small Y chromosome, suffers from haemophilia even though he only carries the gene in single dosage. Thus a woman who carries this disease, even though she mates with a perfectly normal husband, will pass it on to half her sons while half her daughters will be carriers capable of passing it on in turn to half their sons. The daughters of Queen Victoria are, of course, the classical example of the female carrier. Now this has very special implications for the genetic counsellor and at the first stage of knowledge, when the genetics are understood, we may be confronted with a young woman who says that her uncle died of haemophilia and what are the chances of her passing it on to her sons if she marries a normal male. The first question to ask her is whether this uncle was a paternal or a maternal uncle. If he was the brother of her father she is in no danger whatever because it is clear that her father has not inherited the gene, otherwise he would have had haemophilia. We can use the same argument in the present Royal family, for if King Edward VII had inherited the haemophilic gene he would have
been a bleeder, and as he wasn't, the disease is now eliminated from our present Royal family. (Unless one of the males married a distant

79

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cousin who was a carrier.) To return to the altogether, although the carrier danger in half hypothetical young lady who comes to consult the daughters would of course remain.*

us, if the haemophilic uncle was her mother's brother, then her mother has a 50 per cent chance Heterozygote Advantage

of being a carrier. If the mother is a carrier, 50 per cent of her daughters will be carriers, so this girl, to whom we are talking, has a 25 per cent chance of being a carrier. If she is a carrier
half her sons will be affected and so the chance
of a son of hers having haemophilia is one in eight. But at the second stage of knowledge, which is now perhaps emerging, delicate tests of blood clotting may become available which will tell us whether this young lady is a carrier or not. This would greatly increase the accuracy of our genetic prognosis. We can still go one

Lastly, before we leave the single-gene effects, I want to speak of balanced polymorphism and heterozygote advantage. Some of the disorders due to recessive genes are not as rare as
one would expect, and geneticists have wondered why they have not been eliminated by natural selection. In animals cases are known in which a heterozygote carrying a deleterious gene is for some reason more likely to survive and to breed than the normal homozygote who does not
carry the gene at all, a state of affairs known as heterozygote-advantage.

stage further biologically if we wish. In some Scandinavian countries likelihood of serious inherited disease constitutes legal grounds for
the termination of pregnancy. The situation in
this country would have been clarified if a Bill recently before Parliament had become law.
Now should this young lady decide to marry

Sickle-cell Anaemia
The case which has so far been most clearly demonstrated in man, is the interesting case of sickle-cell anaemia which may be known to many of you. This is a disorder due to the inheritance of an abnormal type of haemoglobin in the red cells of the blood. It is very common in

and become pregnant, it is possible to puncture certain parts of Africa and in some districts

the uterus with a fine needle in the fourth as many as five per cent or more of children

month of pregnancy, a procedure which can be are born with a double dose of this abnormal

carried out with a high degree of safety though haemoglobin and they tend to die young of a

not, it mlust be confessed with complete safety. severe anaemia. It has been shown by Allison2

From an examination of cells in the amniotic fluid obtained from this puncture, it is possible
to determine the sex of the foetus, and should it be a boy, there being a 50 per cent chance of
haemophilia, thepregnancycould beterminated18. Still another interesting possibility arises for the

that the heterozygotes for this gene, those who only carry the abnormal haemoglobin in single dose, are very much more immune from malignant malaria, which is common in these districts, than are the completely normal population. Thus the heterozygote has survived relative to the normal homozygote, in spite of the continual

future. Sex is determined by the male; the ovum loss of genes from the population through the

carries a single X chromosome, the sperm either children who die young of anaemia. This is one

an X or a Y, thus determining the sex of the of many examples of nature's way of continuing

embryo. Attempts have been made, though not the race without regard for individual suffering.

very successfully so far, to separate the sperms The eugenic point which I want to make from

carrying the X from those carrying the Y chromosome, by differential centrifugation of the semen of bullsl3. Should some such method

this interesting situation is that as soon as malaria is eliminated, as it is rapidly being eliminated from all parts of the world at the

become available and applicable to the human case, it would be possible by artificial insemination from the husband's semen treated in this way, for the carriers of haemophilia to have only daughters and thus avoid the disease

* For completeness I should say that authentic female haemophilics are now known to exist as the result of the mating of a haemophilic male with a carrier female, an occurrence unlikely until recently, for in the past the haemophilic male rarely lived to maturity. In other words a good deal of progress, though not yet enough, has been made in the treatment of haemophilia.

80

INHERITED DISEASE IN MAN

present time, this state of affairs will gradually positive. The incompatibility situation occurs

right itself by the process of natural selection. when the mother is negative and the father and

The unfortunate homozygotes will die off; foetus are positive, that is in about 8 per cent of

the heterozygote will now have no advantage, marriages. It is more likely to happen in a

and so the gene wil gradually become rarer and second or third pregnancy, and more likely

rarer in these African populations. Sickle-cell if the father is homozygous for his positive

anaemia is a case where the heterozygote can rhesus factor. The accumulated knowledge

be quite easily detected, and as enlightenment of the last 20 years or so has first of all made it

spreads through these African peoples, it should possible to predict whether such a situation may

be possible to discourage the mating of hetero- possibly arise in any given marriage. Secondly

zygotes. This desirable improvement will, how- we can discover from the mother's blood during

ever, have the adverse effect of slowing down pregnancy whether she is producing antibodies

the rate of elimination of the gene from the and in what strength. Thirdly, we can tell

population.

towards the end of the pregnancy, again by

Blood Group Antigens
It is likely that many other cases of poly-
morphism exist, even the human blood groups probably have selective value. There is some evidence that people with group A are more prone to cancer of the stomach and pernicious
anaemia for instance whereas those with group 0 are more prone to duodenal ulcerl"5. The blood groups are of course only detectable by the methods of serology, that is, by the antibody reactions to which they give rise. They are bound up with the process of immunity. Vogel, Pettenkofer and Helmbold22 have recently pointed out a resemblance between certain antigens of the ABO blood-group system and antigens of some bacteria and viruses, and they put up the ingenious hypothesis that group 0 subjects may have shown a poor resistance to plague, and group A subjects to smallpox. This, they think, may partly account for the
varying distribution of these blood groups in different parts of the world. It is clear that the genetic factors which determined survival in the
past may be very different in a future freed from
major epidemic disease.

puncture of the uterus and examination of the amniotic fluid, whether the child is being adversely affected. If so, premature labour may be induced and result in a living child where continuance of the pregnancy to full term would
have had fatal results upon the foetus. Fourthly early diagnosis, in fact anticipation of the situation, can prepare the way for immediate
exchange transfusion at birth so that the more
serious effects of the haemolytic disease may still be prevented, and fifthly, if a serious incom-
patibility situation has already developed, one or both parents can be sterilized.
Finally there are already methods for detecting some of the blood groups of sperms10. If the father were heterozygous and differential separation of sperms by blood group became practicable, the incompatibility situation could be avoided altogether by artificial insemination. Although something like 8 per cent of marriages in this country are potentially dangerous from the point of view of rhesus incompatibility, haemolytic disease of the newborn only appears in the offspring of a small proportion of them. There are several reasons for this. One interesting recent discovery is that if the ABO groups of the

The Rhesus Factor

foetus are also incompatible with those of the

Most of you must be aware of the severe mother, she rarely if ever produces rhesus

anaemia which may develop in newly born antibodies6. This may be because any foetal

infants, or may kill the foetus before birth, when red cells finding their way into the mother's

the child's blood group, inherited from his father, circulation are destroyed too promptly for

is incompatible with the mother's, and the antibody formation to be stimulated.

mother developes antibodies towards it. The

blood group usually concerned is the so-called Chromosome Abnormalites

rhesus factor, for which about 15 per cent of the At this stage I was going to say something

population are negative and the remainder about the interesting chromosome abnormalities

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which have recently been shown to be the cause with other features known as mongolism, have

of congenital disorders in man, but if I say much recently been shown to have a small extra

on this subject there is going to be insufficient chromosome. These chromosome abnormali-

time to say something about the commoner ties may occur at various stages in the develop-

illnesses in which hereditary factors are import- ment of the germ cells. They are thus genetic in

ant, and I know that Dr. C. E. Ford, who is a origin but not necessarily transmitted to other

pioneer in the study ofhuman chromosomes, has members of the family.

recently given the Darwin lecture on this subject
to your Society. As some of you will not have
heard or have read that lecture and may not be
as yet in the picture as far as chromosome abnormalities are concerned, I will just say that the study of human chromosomes has been
made practicable by new methods of culturing cells from bone marrow, skin and blood, and
that it is now known that they number 46 or 23 pairs and not 24 pairs as was thought for very
many years, but it is also fully established that
some individuals have only 45 chromosomes instead of 46, whereas others have 47. In fact, there are some with even greater or smaller numbers, and others in whom some cells have one number and other cells another, so that they are in fact mosaics. The best established cases are cases of so-called Turner's syndrome in which the individual seems to grow up normally as a girl until the age of puberty when she fails to develop secondary sexual characteristics, such as menstruation and breast development. Examination of such cases has shown that they have no ovarian tissue and that the vagina and
uterus are rudimentary. Nevertheless modern medicine by oestrogen therapy can make these girls develop and they may become happily married although they are of necessity sterile. Examination of the chromosomes of these people show that they lack one of the sex
chromosomes, so that in fact they are neither male nor female. They have one X chromosome but neither a second X to go with it, as in a normal female, nor a Y to go with it as in the normal male. Other cases (so-called Klinefelter's syndrome) are boys, apparently, who may grow normally until the age of puberty, when it is found that their sexual development is retarded and they tend to develop enlargement of the breasts. Some, but not all, of these have been shown to have two X chromosomes and a Y

Mendelian Dominant Gene Disorders
A certain number of well-defined hereditary disorders are conveyed as Mendelian dominants; for instance achondroplasic dwarfism, the little people whose limbs are much shorter than
those of normal persons, and some other disorders of bony structure. A seriously deleteri-
ous dominant gene against which severe selective pressure is being asserted will be rapidly elimin-
ated from the gene pool and therefore such dis-
orders that we know are conveyed in a dominant
manner, are usually either comparatively harmless to survival or else they do not manifest themselves until late in life after the reproductive age. An individual suffering from an abnormality due to a single dominant gene will of course
convey it to approximately half his offspring, assuming that his spouse is normal. No very difficult matters of genetic counselling arise unless it is a disorder which manifests itself late in life like Huntington's chorea, in which a
serious deterioration of cerebral function sets in in the late thirties or early forties. Persons
who have a parent so affected may want to know if they are going to develop it themselves, and whether they can transmit it to their offspring. At the present time the question can only be answered on a statistical basis until the early stages of the disease begin to show themselves, but there have been attempts to show by electroencephalography that those who are going to develop the disease have a greater tendency to abnormal waves than those who have been lucky enough not to inherit the gene from their
affected parent14. If these methods can be developed to a greater degree of accuracy they may be of real value, though the psychological effect of knowing that one is going to develop mental deterioration at the age of forty cannot be a very healthy one.

chromosome and thus to have 47 chromosomes Tuberculosis and Diabetes

in all. Cases of retarded mental development, And now we must turn to some commoner

O82

INHERITED DISEASE IN MAN

conditions in which inheritance is more compli-
cated. In many of these there is simply an inherited tendency combined with a very strong
environmental factor. Tuberculosis, for instance,
cannot occur unless an individual is exposed to infection from the tubercle bacillus. In this sense tuberculosis is entirely an environmental
disease. It has long been known that it tends to occur in families but then one might very properly observe that persons brought up in a
family like the Brontes, where their siblings are dying of tuberculosis, are dangerously exposed to infection by the tubercle bacillus, and this of course is true. The answer as to whether there is also a hereditary factor which makes certain people more likely to succumb to an infection by the bacillus, can best be determined by the study of identical as compared with nonidentical twins. Galton was the first to use this method to distinguish the effects of nature and of nurture, as he put it. Non-identical twins are genetically as different as any other brothers or sisters, whereas identical twins have identical genes, and careful twin studies have shown that where one twin is affected by tuberculosis, the chance of his co-twin being so affected is significantly greater if the twins are identical2l. Thus although nobody doubts the essential part played by environment in this disease, there is also a hereditary liability. The same can be said of diabetes; some interesting studies on inheritance of diabetes have been made, but they have never led to clear-cut results in a Mendelian sense. All that one can say, and say with some
assurance, is that people with diabetes are more
likely to have diabetic relatives than people without diabetes, and that it occurs more often in twin pairs if they are identical'2 but diabetes
does not behave in an ordinary Mendelian fashion, probably because it is only a tendency which is inherited, and an environmental factor is necessary in addition, and possibly because the
combined inheritance of several genes is necessary. That environmental factors are important
in diabetes has been proved many times and in many ways, for instance by the fact that diabetes is much commoner in populations who live on rich diets in luxury and becomes rarer in times of war and famine. The problem of control or elimination of diseases like tuberculosis and

diabetes is clearly one for preventive medicine and therapeutics rather than eugenics.
Multi-factorial Characteristics
There is also clear evidence that many human characteristics are multi-factorial, that is, they are produced by the combined effect of a large number of inherited characters. Ordinary graded characters such as height and intelligence are of this kind, and there is no sharp dividing line from the highly intelligent person whom we may call a genius down to the clever, through the normal to the rather dull, and finally to the mentally backward. The distribution of intelligence in the population follows a fairly normal Gaussian curve and it just depends where we are on the curve as to whether we are highly intelligent or mentally deficient. Children are likely to inherit a similar pattern of genes from their parents and so the children of two intelligent parents are likely to have more than average intelligence, and the children of dull parents are likely to be dull. But we know from the study of single gene disorders such as phenylketonuria that there are some specific causes of mental deficiency which have nothing to do with the ordinary distribution of intelligence in the population, and Fraser Roberts, in his Galton Lecture for 195219 clearly showed that there were two types of mental deficiency, those who were simply at the dull end of the curve and those who had inherited some specifically abnormal gene, or who had developed mental deficiency through some environmental factor such as brain injury.
High Blood Pressure
At the present time there is some discussion'7 as to the nature of high blood pressure which is a common disorder in middle life and accounts for the premature death at fifty to sixty, and sometimes earlier, of a significant number of the population. Nobody doubts at all that some cases of high blood pressure are due to environmental causes, for instance acquired disease of the kidneys, and that a few are due to the inheritance of some rare congenital disorder such as polycystic disease of the kidneys. Nobody doubts that normal blood pressure, which varies from hour to hour and from individual to individual,

83

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is determined by a large number of factors themselves into a bimodal distribution between

operating together, and that as in the case of those who have a normal blood pressure and

height and intelligence, there is probably an those who have a high one. Using the figures for

inherited tendency to be on either the high or blood pressure of siblings of patients with high

the low side of the curve. Pickering and Fraser blood pressure from the figures published by

Roberts and their colleagues believe that the Pickering and by S0bye I showed that if we

disorder or disease which we call essential hyper- confined ourselves to certain age groups at

tension, that is the ordinary kind of high blood which essential hypertension is common, a

pressure which can become dangerous in the clearly bimodal curve was obtained. (Figure 1).

fifty-year-olds, is nothing more than an exaggeration of the normal. These just happen to be,

0

according to their belief, the people who have

unfortunately inherited the tendency to a higher

pressure, just as some people are six feet tall

instead of being five feet seven or eight. Most

physicians, however, who see patients with

extremely high blood pressure quite outside any

normal range, believe that they are dealing with a group of patients who have some specific

20

disorder, and there is very strong evidence to

show that this is inherited and carried down

from generation to generation, with such frequency that the inherited factor might even be a

110 120 10 '10 I50160 170 180 190 2 210 220 230 240 250
115 125 135 145 155 165 17 185 195 205 215 225 235 245 255

Mendelian dominant gene. Geneticists are loth

_ Hg

to admit the possibility of a dominant gene causing a disorder as common as high blood

FIGURE 1

pressure in the human race but they sometimes Pickeringl6 has tried to explain this as being due

forget that the mortality from high blood pressure is not appreciable until after the reproductive period of life is over, and thus it probably does not affect the number of offspring. The pressure of selection against high blood pressure therefore will be low, and until the last three or four generations comparatively few people lived to the post-reproductive age. If those who inherit this abnormal pressure are only a comparatively

to error in blood pressure recording, namely that the people taking the blood pressures had been influenced by an unconscious desire to put them into categories of high and normal, so I am at
present working on my own cases. These are selected only because their blood pressures are so high as to require treatment and supervision. I have divided them into two groups, the first group I call hereditary hypertension, either

small number of the population, say five or ten because one or both parents died prematurely

per cent, their effect on the distribution curve and was known to have high blood pressure, or

will only be to cause a slight deviation to one because they died prematurely of other causes

side, and will be insufficient to show whether and one or more of the siblings has a high blood

they are a separate group or the tail end of a pressure. In other words the familial nature of

continuous distribution.

the high blood pressure in this group is quite

An approach towards a solution of the prob- clear. These make up almost a half of the sixty-

lem can be made by studying the siblings of eight cases so far classified. Of the remainder,

patients with high blood pressure. If the about a half (or 25 per cent of the total) are

Pickering school is right, the siblings will show a clearly secondary to kidney disease or other

continuous distribution in the upper ranges of causes and have no familial tendency, and in the

the curve of blood pressure in the population, remaining 25 per cent the family data are insuffi-

but if an inherited disorder with a dominant cient for classification. Thus the influence of

transmission is concerned, the siblings will divide heredity in high blood pressure is very strong

84

INHERITED DISEASE IN MAN

indeed. I have now examined eighty-two of the somes of some cancer cells, and it would seem

siblings in these cases. Taking those between that cancer is probably a disorder of the process

forty-five and sixty-five, that is old enough to of cell reproduction, which is most commonly

have developed hypertension, you will see that associated with ageing tissues: in fact the curve

the sibs in the cases of hereditary hypertension of cancer incidence shows that it gets commoner

and those of secondary hypertension are behav- the older you get, though of course people

ing very differently, and the former are tending get rarer, and statistical allowances have to be

to show a bimodal distribution (Figure 2). made for that fact3 but if we all lived to be 100 or

more, our chances of dying of cancer would

10

NON-HEREDITARY (15 cases)

probably be very high indeed. Although animal

experiment shows strong familial tendencies,

the practical answer for the human subject is

that no important genetic factor can be impli-

cated in the great majority of cases. There are,

however, a few instances of cancer in specific

sites like tumours of the retina and tumours of

H(E43REDcIasTeAsR)Y

the bowels secondary to familial polyposis, and certain cases of cancer of the oesophagus, in

which the hereditary factor is quite clear, but for

the rest there is very little evidence. There is a

slightly increased tendency for the sisters and

mothers of patients with cancer of the breast to

67 94 10 I I 125131 111 151 166 17 191+ have had cancer on that site, but no generally increased incidence in these families. The

possibility that this specific cancer is conveyed

FIGURE 2

by the milk and not by a genetic mechanism,

MEAN BLOOD PRESSURES (LOGARITHMICALLY ARRANGED) as was shown by Bittner in certain strains of

mice has not been excluded for the human

This work is incomplete at the present time and I subject15.

do not wish to draw any conclusions except

that the hereditary factor in high blood pressure Longevity

is very important, and that it is usually a clear Finally, longevity itself, although obviously

case of transmission from one generation to the multifactorial, and greatly influenced by environ-

next and that whether unifactorial or multi- ment, depends on heredity to a large extent.

factorial, natural selection has so far failed to It is common knowledge that there are families

eliminate this common hereditary disorder, and in which several members of a sibship live to be

we must remember that natural selection may more than ninety years old7.

work with organized gene systems rather than

with simple discrete genes8. The failure of natural Conclusion

selection to eliminate high blood pressure as a Returning now to my introduction, until

cause of death in middle age must be either recently it has been man's environment rathier

because it only kills in the post-reproductive age, than his heredity which determined whetlher his

or else because hypertensive people have some life was to be short or long, but with the conquest

survival value which compensates for their of poverty, squalor, dirt, under-nutrition, famine,

shorter life span.

plague and other epidemic disease in the Western

Cancer

world, hereditary factors in human health and happiness are now of great importance. To a few

You will no doubt be interested to know examples only have I had time to refer. I have

whether heredity is important in xancer. There not, for instance, had time to speak of the im-

are undoubted abnormalities in the chromo- portant hereditary aspects of mental illness.

8ER-ID

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Environmental disease has always seemed to be something that there was at least a sporting chance of avoiding, or of recovering from, and long before there were any effective remedies
against epidemics of infectious diseases, there
were charms and talismans and things in which men and women put their faith; they varied from prayer to the glass of sack which Dr. Nathaniel Hodges used to take before going out to see his patients in the London plague. (He escaped the plague, by the way, but died in a debtors' prison.) But hereditary disease, especially when it was congenital, bringing death or deformity to little children, has always seemed particularly cruel and undeserved, and something against which man was impotent. "There is no armour against fate", wrote James Shirley, who died in the year after the great plague. I must confess that I see little in the ruthless statistics of hereditary disease to substantiate belief in a benign providence deeply concerned with the welfare of the individual. Indeed the state of balanced polymorphism, which is probably widespread in the animal world, in which the unfortunate individual suffers so that the race may continue, seems to be strongly on the side of T. H. Huxley.
"Man ... has the power of preventing many kinds of suffering", wrote Francis Galton. "I conceive it to fall well within his province to replace Natural Selection by other processes ... more merciful and not less effective. . ."
What I have tried to show you to-day is that we have begun, though only just begun, to enter an age in which the armour against fate is being forged by man himself.

REFERENCES 1. Aird, I., Bentall, H. H. and Roberts, J. A. F. 1953.
Brit. med. J., 1, 799. 2. Allison, A. C. 1954. Brit. med. J., 1,290. 3. Armitage, P. and Doll, R. 1954. Brit. J. Cancer, 8, 1. 4. Blacker, C. P. 1950. Eugenics in Retrospect and
Prospect. The Galton Lecture 1945. 2nd Edition. Cassell. 5. Clarke, C. A. 1959. Gastroenterologia. 92, 99. 6. Clarke, C. A., Finn, R., McConnell, R. B. and Sheppard, P. M. 1958. Int. Arch. Allergy. N. Y. 13,380. 7. Comfort, A. 1956. The Biology of Senescence. Routledge & Kegan Paul. Pp. 121-122. 8. Dobzhahsky, T. 1959. See Natural Selection in Human Populations. Pergamon Press. 9. Galton, F. 1869. Hereditary Genius. (2nd Edition, 1892.) 10. Gullbring, B. 1957. Acta med. Scand., 159, 169, 11. Harris, H. 1959. Human Biochemical Genetics. Cambridge University Press. 12. Harvald, B. and Hauge, M. 1958. Acta genet., 8, 287. 13. Lindahl, P. E. 1958, Acta Agricult. Scand., 8,226. 14. Patterson, R. M. 1948. Am. J. Psychiat., 104, 786. 15. Penrose, L. S., Mackenzie, H. J. and Kam, M. N. 1948. Ann. Eugen., 14, 234. 16. Pickering, G. W. (See Platt). 17. Platt, R. 1959. Lancet. 2, 55. 18. Riis, P. and Fuchs, F. 1960. Lancet, 2, 180. 19. Roberts, J. A. F. 1952. Fugen. Rev. 44, 71. 20. Schwarz, V., Golberg, L., Komrower, G. M. and Holzel, A. 1956. Biochem. J., 62, 34. 21. Verschuer, 0. F. von. 1957. Acta genet., 7, 21. 22. Vogel, F., Pettenkofer, H. J. and Helmbold, W. 1960. Acta genet., 10, 267.

86

