STATISTICAL STUDIES IN
GENETICS AND HUMAN
INHERITANCE

THE |
- ANNALS OF EUGENICS

Edited by R. A. Fisher, F.R.S.

will continue, until further notice,

to be published in quarterly parts,

without reduction in size or
increase in price.

Subscriptions, in advance, 50/- per volume. Four

quarterly parts obtainable separately at 15/- each

from the Galton Laboratory, c/o Rothamsted
Experimental Station, Harpenden, Herts.

@ ANATOMY -  ®@ Journals of The Wistar
® ANTHROPOLOGY _—i™*titute of Anatomy
and Biology merit your
@ MORPHOLOGY careful examination.
@ NEUROLOGY °
@ NUTRITION
@® PHYSIOLOGY
@ ZOOLOGY

@ Contributed to and
edited by outstanding
scientists in the respective fields.

Authoritative ! Informative !

Invaluable to the scientist
and research worker.

For further information, address

The Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology

WoopLAND AVENUE and THIRTY-SIXTH STREET
PHILADELPHIA, Pa.

 

   

    
 
 

 
 

ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY

The Membership Subscription now covers the
receipt of the following :

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL. Quarterly.

Economic History. -Amnual,

Statistical Bulletin on Economic Conditions in
Great Britain.

Reviews, Recent Periodicals and New Books.
By joining the Society, all these varied publications,

enabling the reader to keep abreast with the developments of economic science, can be obtained for
£1.1.0 a year.

The privileges of membership also include the
right to subscribe at reduced prices to books published under the Society’s auspices.

Application for membership should be addressed to :

The Secretary, Royal Economic Society,
4 Portugal Street, Kingsway, London, W.C.2

Annual Subscription &1.1.0.
Life Composition £10.10.0.

 

YOUR BABY’S
FIRST YEAR

By
Dr. Marie Stopes

5s. net, postage 6d.

“ This stimulating and sometimes
provocative book is addressed to
mothets of moderate means and
contains much useful advice.”

| — LANCET.

PUTNAM & CO. LTD.
42 Gt. Russell Street, London, W.C.1
12 | THE EUGENICS REVIEW

temporarily favourable factors (more marriageable women, a higher number of married
couples, and probably a lower average age at
marriage), what is the effect ? The answer is
a birth rate as low as 13°2 per 1,000 population or 13 per cent below that for 1938 when
the adjusted net reproduction rate was 0°84.
So close are we to the turning point that, if
the favourable elements had not been
present, or if the number of births in 1941 had
been reduced by less than ro per cent, the
total population of England and Wales would,
for the first time in our history, have declined.

In the absence of more detailed official
statistics we cannot attempt more elaborate
calculations—but broadly speaking, we suggest that there are in the situation we have
described no grounds for optimism. Ina
demographic position favourable to a higher
birth rate we find, underneath the surface, a
serious and continuous fall in reproduction.
Moreover, the loss in unborn casualties to
the end of 1941 exceeds by Ioo per cent the
number of civilians killed by enemy action
from the air.

 

| CBC.
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL

SocreTY AND CLINIC FOUNDED By Dr. Marie STOPES IN 1921

The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control _
Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the only free clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first
with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births,
spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy

in sterile women, and general marital help.

THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT
Library, Museum and Clinics open daily, 10-6 (except Sats.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct.

TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION
First Thursday each month

| Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,

106 Whitfield Street, W.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1
18 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Most thriving British enterprises look to
an expanding market, to higher sales, larger
premises, and development generally. Such
expectations are mainly based on creating
new “ lines ”’ and securing a fair share of an
increasing number of potential customers.

It is a platitude in business that ‘ You.

can’t stand still.’’ What is going to be the
effect of having to look toa declining number
of customers on the home market ?
the war we had the spectacle of some of our
export industries steadily losing ground. It
is readily understandable that these were
hardly happy hunting grounds for our men
of enterprise or those who were seeking to
develop new markets.

Since we became involved in war we have
had the experiences of curtailed supplies, reduced civil production, the inevitable prospect

SCIENTIFIC

Before °

of diminishing trade. No one, provided the
war effort is accelerated, complains of these
things, but the psychological effect of being
** concentrated,’ or in other words, of working for a diminishing market, is hardly
exhilarating.

A falling population would presumably
have similar if less pronounced results. Is
this a case of showing up inherent but unnecessary defects in our economic structure ?
Rather it is introducing a depressing element
into any form of industrial and commercial
or financial system, which we should strive
our utmost to avoid.

In conclusion, therefore, provided we do
not ignore the other factors involved, there
seems to be every justification in using economic arguments in support of a policy of
population stability.

BOOKS

in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE
supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.
FOREIGN BOOKS not in stock obtained under Licence.

A visit to this Department is respectfully suzzested.
Please write for LISTS, mentioning interests

H..K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,

Phone: EUSton 4282 (5 lines)

 

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXIV, No. 1.
28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

these Clinics has been particularly important,
but is somewhat reduced during the last year
owing to the urgent demand for women in
munitions. The majority of the mothers
coming now stress the urgency of contracep
tion to enable them to carry on with their

munition work for the country. Neverthe
less, particularly in Cardiff, the number of:

childless women who come in order to rectify
sterility is surprising in the present war
conditions.

The leaflet Some New Concepis and Laws
an Human Biology is available for those who
do not realize this aspect of our work and
will be sent on application to the Head
  
   
   
   
 
 
      

Articles appearing in forthcoming issues :

Stanford University.

C. Giese, Stanford University.

English fgets: CAMBRIDGE

ON THE KILLING ACTION OF OPTICALLY ISOMERIC NICOTINES IN RELATION
PROBLEMS OF EVOLUTION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN ANIMALS. By G. F. Gauss and
N. P. Smaracpova, Institute of Zodélogy, University of Moscow.

THE PRODUCTION OF DUPLICITAS CRUCIATA AND MULTIPLE HEADS BY REGENERATION
IN EUPLANARIA TIGRINA. By Rosert H. Sizser and Vixtor HamsBurcer, Washington University.

Edited by W. C. Ate, Professor of Zodlogy, The University of Chicago
Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press.

quarters, Mothers’ Clinics, 108 Whitfield
Street, London, W.t1. H. V. Roe.

Correction

In Mr. K. L. Little’s article on “ Racial
Mixture in Great Britain,’ in the EUGENICS
REVIEW for January 1942, Table No. VI,
“Cathcart Nursery Sample” should be
“Cathcart-Murray Sample.”

Elections to the Society :

THE following have been elected Members of
the Society during the past quarter :

Mrs. Aaron. Dr. B. M. Slizynski.
J. W. McFeeters, Esq. M.D.

7.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

REACTIVITIES OF COLPODA DUODENARIA TO ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS. II. FACTORS |
INFLUENCING THE FORMATION OF RESTING CYSTS. By C. V. Taytor and A. G. R. STRICKLAND,

ty
RETARDATION OF EARLY CLEAVAGE OF URECHIS BY ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT. By Arrnur

TO

. Published
Subscription : 35s. 2d. per year.

UNIVERSITY PRESS
38

to what degree the anthropometry of the infected
miners could be differentiated from a normal
population on the basis of various weight, chest,
stature, etc., measurements and ratios. Before this
differentiation could be attempted, it was necessary
to restrict the sample to men who had been
equally exposed to the risk of contracting the
disease, and a period of fifteen years colliery work
was adopted as a suitable qualification.

The conclusion at which the investigators
arrived, according to their data, is that there is a
slight correlation between an anthropometric type
and susceptibility to pneumoconiosis, but it is not
possible to forecast with any degree of accuracy
that one particular examinee is more likely than
another to develop the disease.

K. L. LItte.

Social Forces

October 1941, Vol. 20, No. 1.—Some aspects of
village demography.—By-T. Lynn Smith.—Smith
shows that the rural non-farm group of the U.S.A.
1930 census—persons living neither on farms nor
in incorporated communities with populations over
2,500—is not demographically identical with the
“‘ village population ’’ of the U.S.A. (apparently
defined as persons living in communities of less
than 2,500). The village has a slight deficiency of
children, a marked deficiency of young adults and
a very large excess of old people; it has a larger
proportion of females (especially adults) than
either the farm or the non-farm rural groups; and
a very large excess of widowed and divorced
females, ‘‘ probably from the surrounding farms.”

The changing pattern of destitution in urban areas.
—By J. W. Riley.—Since 1913 the New York
Times publishes annually details of the “‘ hundred
neediest cases’ in New York City, selected by
leading charity organizations. Analysis shows that
improvements in health and social services, the
falling birth rate and other factors have changed
the pattern of destitution between 1913 and 1940.
Tuberculosis was a factor in 23 per cent’of cases
in 1913-14, but only in 8 per cent in 1935-39, and
“‘ excess of children ’’ fell from 28 per cent to II per

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cent, while old age rose from 5 per cent to 21 per
cent of cases.

Ethnic groups tn Connecticut indusiry.—By
Samuel Koenig.—British-Americans hold 33°5 per
cent of the ‘‘ executive” positions of Connecticut
industry, Jews 20:4 per cent, Irish 16-3 per cent
and Germans 12:2 per cent; but Jews are numerous only among the small concerns. Among
important concerns the proportion of Jews is “ very
insignificant,” and British-Americans predominate
in the most remunerative fields and positions.
Apart from them “ those groups which have been
here longest or have become more acculturated
have reached a higher level in the occupational
ladder’ in industry. Among foremen 32-3 per
cent are Irish, followed by British-Americans
(22-7 per cent), Italians (12-6 per cent) and
Germans (11°6 per cent). Italians form 23:6 per
cent of the total population, but 30:4 per cent of all
engaged in industry; 49-2 per cent of unskilled
workers, 33°5 per cent of the semi-skilled and 21 per
cent of the skilled workers are Italian. Among the
unskilled the next largest group are the Irish (19
per cent); among the semi-skilled, the Poles and
the Irish; among the skilled, the Irish, BritishAmericans and the Swedes. Like the Italians,
Poles, Swedes, Lithuanians and Ukrainians are
“‘ over-represented ”’ in industry; while BritishAmericans and Jews (10-9 per cent of the population but 3:8 per cent of those engaged in
industry) are ‘‘ under-represented.”’ (All figures
for 1937.)

Occupation and education in a democracy.—By
J. B. Knox.—A study of the careers, social status
and fathers’ occupations of Harvard male graduates of 1880-81, 1894-95, IQII-I2 and 1924-25.
The proportion of sons entering professions was
consistently higher than that of fathers ; business
attracted more sons of ‘higher social status ”’
than did professions ; professions received a larger
proportion of sons of “‘ low social status’’ and sent
a larger proportion of their own ‘ upper class ”
into business ; and Harvard acted as a channel of
social advancement for sons of working-class
origin, a large majority of whom entered professions,

F. L.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

“ For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation in different countries, more particularly in the
several] parts of His Majesty’s Dominions, and in the United States.”
President: The Rt. Hon. S. M. BRUCE, C.H., M.C.
Chairman of the Executive Committee : The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.
Honorary Secretaries : C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C.

Annual Subscription = - .

One Guinea

Address: 28 Essex Street, London, W.C.2
