CHANGES IN FAMILY LIFE
The Questionnaire of the London School of Economics

SINCE certain irresponsible sections of an invitation to those who are interested in

the daily Press tried to create a sensa- assisting sociological studies, to answer

tion by attacking this questionnaire, whatever questions they like, and to return

readers may be interested to know the their forms in such a way as to ensure

principal facts about it.

complete anonymity.

The London School of Economics wished, This Society was invited to comment on

as part of its ordinary work, to establish the details of the questions, an invitation it

certain ' norms ' for the English family, gladly accepted since the inquiry promised

and especially to discover how far its con- to throw much light on many of the problems

stitution and habits had changed during the of eugenic research. It will indicate, for

last two generations or so. It was decided instance, what interchange between social

to adopt the questionnaire method of inves- classes has taken and is taking place; how

tigation, since it had been successfully far mating was and is affected by such factors

employed, for the same purposes, in several as parental influence, social tradition, and

foreign studies, and is in this country a the like; the extent of involuntary infertility

normal practice in the study of disease. and of voluntary restriction of births; the

The questions to be asked in this case, how- inheritance of longevity and fertility; and

ever, were about the normal activities of much more. In so far, too, as the other more

normal people.

strictly sociological questions widen our

The B.B.C. was approached and, realiz- knowledge of family life, they will inevit-

ing that the inquiry was of cultural value and public interest, agreed to devote a few brief talks to describing the objects and
value of the questionnaire, and also to do the ' donkey-work ' of distributing and collecting the forms. That is the whole
story: the enterprise has no more governmental sanction than had Father Ronald Knox when he gave (with the assistance of the B.B.C. engineers) his famous description of a revolution in London. Moreover, it can scarcely be called a "snooping,"
" amazing inquisition," an " impertinent

ably assist the human geneticist to obtain a deeper and juster view of the environ-
mental background of his material. Fellows and members of this Society
should have already been asked to reply to the questionnaire, and any who have not
received copies can obtain them direct from the B.B.C. They can rest assured that they will be serving the cause of eugenics in doing so, and will probably find the filling up of the form an interesting and not very
laborious task. It took the present writer
a little under an hour to answer most of the questions, and the remaining details were

inquiry," or a ' searching census such as supplied by the family over coffee after

no Government has dared to conduct " (see dinner.

daily Press for these descriptions), to issue

E. M.

22

