THE EUGENICS REVIEW

As may be suspected, we are brought finally subjects: Changing Sex Standards; The Woman

towards "this view of love as the individual Problem (sic!); and Birth Control. It includes

expression of the unity of all things in God" within a comparatively small compass a repre-

(p. 138) and the scientific ideal of "integrity". In sentative cross-section of (Western) public

this aspect Teilhard de Chardin naturally opinion and can be recommended to those who

receives full recognition: "Convergent Integra- still have an open mind on controversial subjects

tion" is the subject of the last eight pages of the of this sort and would like to have further

book and we are told "The Bible may still be information on which to form an opinion.

pregnant with unsuspected lessons". Teilhard, There is no index but otherwise the book is

with his vision of the future of man, is restating well presented.

the theology of St. Paul. Continuing evolution is The author of The Ability to Love is a psycho-

the expression of God's will.

logist and marriage counsellor and no doubt one

Dr. Matthews, Dean of St. Paul's, recently of his reasons for writing this book was a desire

wrote * ". . . the sceptics allege that, when to make help available for those who need it. It

thought out, religious doctrines are not mysteri- is a pity that while his motives are of the highest

ous but nonsensical" but whether this observa- he has adopted rather a breathless approach to

tion is to be considered apposite or irrelevant the subject and unfortunately no definition of

must be left to the individual taste of the reader. love is given. Perhaps he feels that a definition

C. W. USHER would literally define it. The preface consists of thirty-one lines and the word "love", one of its

SEX derivatives, or a pronoun referring to it occur no

Schur, Edwin (Editor). The Family and the Sexual Revolution. London, 1966. Allen and Unwin. Pp. xv +427. Price 40s.
Fromme, Allan. The Ability to Love. London, 1966. Allan and Unwin. Pp. x+366. Price 30s.

less than fifteen times in contexts that make it
clear that Dr. Fromme does not limit its meaning. A whole chapter is devoted to "What is love ?" without anywhere specifying what love is, although it includes a long diversion about
the use of hypnosis.

THE SEXUAL REVOLUTION seems to be However, one must not be too critical about

proceeding well but usually any review of the this since the author has drawn on his obviously

situation is written either strongly for or wide professional experience to describe the

strongly against its continued success-as if the various forms of love, to enable those who seek

pundits could affect the result. However, a book advice to clarify their own feelings and require-

which is able to juxtapose, as two of its con- ments, and thus benefit from the advice offered.

tributors, Bertrand Russell and Pius XI is rather These two books can usefully be read in

unusual.

conjunction and can be recommended as

The aim of the sociologist editor of The prescribing tolerance and understanding of

Family and the Sexual Revolution is not to be others-which one could suppose to be as useful

didactic but to present opposing views with an a basis of love as can be found.

emphasis on unconventional ones since, as he Unfortunately again there is no index. The

rightly states, conventional views are fully absence of an index even in the presence of

publicized already.

copious references diminishes the value of a

This book consists of twenty-nine extracts book, and it is to be hoped that, as time goes on,

from contemporary writers on three main fewer books will be presented without one.

* Daily Telegraph, 26th March 1966.

D. R.-R.

106

