NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.*

By NORMAN E. HIMES, Ph.D.

A " BIOLOGICAL NEW DEAL "

reformation of criminals needs qualification

W HILE the progress of eugenical
opinion in the United States, as indeed in Continental countries, is necessarily slow, there is evidence of a slowly awakening consciousness on the part of our
people that all is not well with present trends. For example, at the last annual meeting of
the American Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Professor E. A. Hooton of Harvard, a distinguished physical anthro-
pologist, declared that what the United States needed was a " biological new deal." Professor Hooton insisted that " intelligent
artificial selection should replace natural selection." " What we must avoid," he declared, " is a progressive deterioration of mankind as a result of the reckless and
copious breeding of protected inferiors. We have not the knowledge to breed supermen, but we can limit the reproduction of criminals and mental defectives. Let us cease to
delude ourselves that education, religion or other measures of social amelioration can transform base metal into gold. Public enemies must be destroyed-not reformed." The sentiment expressed in the last sentence
should not be misunderstood. It does not propose the lethal chamber for defectives; but that every feasible and legitimate resource should be employed to prevent their
birth.

in the light of recent researches. Professor Sheldon Glueck, of the Harvard Law School, showed in his 500 Criminal Careers that while
many Boards of Control and many superin-
tendents of institutions for the defective and
criminal classes had given the impression that 8o per cent. of the inmates of such institutions
were reformed, actually the reverse was the
case. Glueck showed that, far from being reformed, 8o per cent. of the inmates of the
Concord reformatory returned to criminal careers. When your correspondent reviewed that book shortly after its appearance, he hailed it as an important contribution to modem literature in the field; but was
forced to admit that Professor Glueck, following too closely in the footsteps of American sociologists who, as a group, are excessively environmentalistic in their viewpoint, had weakened his case by an unwillingness to face the hereditary implications of
defect. It is gratifying to observe, however, that
in recent months Professor Glueck, in addresses delivered in various parts of the U.S.A., has come out frankly for the sterilization of defectives. This is a great step forward. (It is not suggested that criminality, as such, is inherited; nor do I wish to convey that Professor Glueck's " conversion " was
connected with my review!)

A CRIMINOLOGIST'S VIEWS
United States criminologists are gradually coming to the view that the old faith in the
* This article by Dr. Norman Himes is the first of a series dealing with the progress of eugenics in the United States. It is inevitable that there should exist some conflicts of opinion between English and American eugenists, but it may be hoped that this series will both define these differences and show them to be reconcilable. The REVIEW is very fortunate in obtaining the co-operation of Dr. Himes to this end. He is well known to our readers as an eminent sociologist and as an-one may almost say the-historian of the eugenics and birth-control movements.

STERILIZATION OF CRIMINALS?
At a meeting of the State Association of Elementary Principals held last December in New York State the following resolution was passed urging a study of sterilization by the Legislature and Congress:
Whereas, we, as principals endeavour to bring about a closer union between schools and local social agencies and we study the effects of welfare work on the indigent child and do all within our power to preserve in him a healthy attitude of mind;
Be it resolved, that the secretary write our State and Federal legislators, urging them to give serious

21

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

study to the matter of sterilization of criminals and again in its attempts to liberalize the federal

low mentality classes with a view to future action. birth-control statutes. Early in February

Some of those present at the meeting felt the House Judiciary Committee voted I5 to 8

that it would be wiser to stress the steriliza- against reporting favourably the Pierce Bill,

tion of aments than of criminals, since the which would have legalized the dissemination

hereditary transmission of criminality is not of contraceptive information through phy-

so clear as that of mental defect. Such a view sicians and medical clinics. This is a conser-

certainly deserves weight; but, on the other vative " doctors-enabling" Bill, and is not in

hand, we need to ask ourselves whether the any way to be confused with much broader,

future stabilization of population in the earlier legislative attempts. Though Mrs.

United States so threatens our demographic Sanger is reported to have been discouraged,

future as to necessitate encouraging the she knows that time and social trends are

reproduction of those of much less than on her side. Hence she took the decision

average genetic endowment.

stoically. The fight is being continued.

The problem is, of course, to identify the Representative Pierce, a Democrat from

carriers of such defects. At present this seems Oregon, referred to the setback as " only an

practically impossible, or at least extremely incident in a long fight," adding that the

difficult. Would it not be well to earmark a measure " had gained ground decidedly all

small percentage of our funds for research over the country and in Congress too." Mrs.

along these lines? But even if there is no Sanger attributed the failure to Catholic

hereditary diathesis in this case, criminals do influences. Those who are inclined to doubt

not, as a rule, make normal and healthy the power of such pressure need to be

parents. This being the case, their reproduc- informed that America's entry into the

tion should be interdicted; but this should World Court was undoubtedly prevented by

be done only after careful study and the the flood of telegrams and letters which

classification of cases.

descended upon Senators immediately follow-

ing a demogogical plea over the radio by the

THE DEYO-BUSH BILL

Detroit priest, Father Coughlin, who always

A new sterilization bill, known as the Deyo- seems to have some ready panacea for curing

Bush Bill has been introduced into the New the world's ills.

York State Legislature at Albany for the eugenic sterilization of " men and women

****

in institutions, afflicted with hereditary
forms of insanity that are recurrent, idiocy,
imbecility, feeble-mindedness or epilepsy." New York had a sterilization statute passed
in 19I2. But this was held unconstitutional in I9I8 after approximately fifty patients had been treated. The new bill is modelled on the Virginia statute upheld in the U.S. Supreme Court in the now famous case of Buck v. Bell.
New York State will spend $30,000,000
during the coming fiscal year for mental hygiene. The cost of such work has tripled in fifteen years, while the number of patients

On February 2ISt the birth-control move. ment, led by Mrs. Margaret Sanger, held its
twenty-fifth anniversary with a public dinner
at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington. It
was sponsored by a group of approximately 500 civic leaders representing every State in the union. An announcement of the dinner
read that " With 4,000,000 families on relief and over 233,000 children born into these homes during the past year, the need for making birth-control information accessible to all classes is obvious."

has doubled in ten years.

BERMUDA BIRTH-CONTROL CLINICS

BIRTH-CONTROL LEGISLATION

According to the New York Times, the

The National Committee for Federal Govenmment of Bermuda has decided to

Legislation on Birth Control, ably led by sponsor two free contraceptive clinics as an

Mrs. Margaret Sanger, has temporarily failed experiment for one year. The problem of

NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.

over-population has lately occupied Ber- Chicago on January i6th and I7th.* The muda's legislators considerably. In the fact that this is the first time an annual middle of February Sir Thomas Astley meeting has ever been held outside of New

Cubitt, the Governor, transmitted to the York City is symbolical of the growing

chairman of the Board of Health a report of national strength of the organization. The

a special committee which has recently been League now has eighteen affiliated State

studying the advisability of birth-control leagues and over I50 clinics, many of them

measures. The result was the plan mentioned founded and maintained by State organiza-

above. Compulsory sterilization, for the time tions.

being at least, is disapproved. If the report There were addresses by Dr. Henry Pratt

of the committee is accepted by the House Fairchild, Mrs. F. Robertson Jones, the

and Assembly, the free contraceptive clinics Reverend Curtis W. Reese and others, as

will be opened in January I936.

well as a medical conference for physicians.

THE JEWISH TRADITION
For a number of years the Rabbinical Assembly of America has been giving earnest thought to the subject of birth-control and especially to the effect of the present restric-

It was affirmed at the conference that approximately a quarter of a million babies had been born to mothers on Federal relief
in one year. Hence the following resolution
was unanimously adopted:

tive legislation upon public welfare. A reso- Whereas, the cost of public relief in the U.S., is

lution has recently been passed by the now over I25 million dollars a month; and

Assembly urging Congress and State Legislatures " to permit the dissemination of

whereas, scientific research has shown that families on relief have about 50 per cent. more children than similar families not on relief, and whereas, these

contraceptive information by responsible children add to the burdens both of their already

medical agencies." The resolutions continue: over-burdened parents, and of the taxpayers;

We maintain that proper education in contra-
ception and birth-control will not destroy, but rather enhance, the spiritual values inherent in the
family and will make for the advancement of human happiness and welfare.
As Rabbis, we are deeply concerned with the preservation and extension of the human values inherent in the institution of the monogamous family. Careful study and observation have con-

therefore be it resolved that the American Birth
Control League unite with the American Eugenics Society in formulating and securing the adoption of the most effective plans for providing that, as a matter of routine, all families on relief shall be
informed where they may best obtain medical
advice in a strictly legal fashion as to the limitation of families by methods in accordance with their religious convictions.

vinced us that birth-control is a valuable method for overcoming some obstacles that prevent the proper functioning of the family under present

Many of the State leagues presented interesting reports, but space forbids our

conditions.

recording more than a few highlights. The

Jewish tradition explicitly recognizes the desira- Illinois League, which sponsors six clinics,

bility of the use of contraceptives when the health of the mother or the children is involved. It is obvious that there is an intimate connection

and which maintains in addition services in other institutions, cared for 2,206 patients

between the economic status of the family and the during the past year (I933). Of these, 643

physical and psychic health of its members.

were unable to pay for the services received.

We, therefore, regard it as a legitimate extension of this principle, completely in consonance with the spirit of Jewish tradition, to permit the use of contraceptives, on economic grounds as well,

Kentucky reports that one-half its Louisville clinic patients are on the relief rolls. Maine reported on the difficulties the workers in that

where the earning capacity of the family makes the State have encountered in founding a clinic.

postponement of child bearing or the limitation of

the number of children socially wise and necessary.

AMERICAN BIRTH CONTROL LEAGUE CONFERENCE
The fourteenth annual meeting of the American Birth Control League was held in

* A fuller report of the conference will be published in the May number of Marriage Hygiene. The report is by Mrs. Stella Hanau, formerly publications director of the American Birth Control League, now engaged in publicity work for Mrs. Sanger with the National Committee on Federal Legislation for Birth Control.

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Despite the fact that Pennsylvania has one of the most reactionary laws on birth-control of any of the American States, it has, I
believe, the most clinics. At all events, there are twenty in that State, and 4,000 patients have been cared for. In little Rhode Island,
which has two clinics, 32 per cent. of the

patients are on public relief, and 50 per cent. are advised free. New Jersey has cared for
over 9,ooo patients in its Newark centre
alone, the State being well organized by counties. New York State boasts of ten mothers' health clinics housed in welfare
centres.

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE

AUTHORS' ABSTRACTS insure accuracy, advance information, and a saving of time and costs. Since the beginning of The Wistar Institute Bibliographic
Service in r917, each contributor to the journals included in this sce has supplied an abstract of his own manuscript. This brief
summary is printed and mailed without the delay necessary to the publishing of the complete article. Subscribers to the service thus receive advance information from those best qualified to give it.

ADVANCE ABSTRACT SHEETS bearing ten or more abstracts without bibliographic references, are sent, for the present, to members of the American Association of Anatomists, to members of the American Society of Zoologists and to members of the American Institute of Nutrition, without cost, and sold to others at $3.00 per annum for all abstract sheets issued. This is a convenient means of selecting such articles as may be desired in reprint form. Prices of reprints are given on each Advance Abstract Sheet.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE CARDS bearing authors' abstracts with complete bibliographic references for all articles appearing in The Wistar Institute journals and those co-operating, $5.00 per year. Abstract cards may be obtained from the beginning of the series, June I, I9I7. Each abstract card is issued to subscribers before the complete paper appears in a journal.

ABSTRACTS IN BOOK FORM Abstracts with authors' and analytical subject indices are brought together periodically in book form. Volumes I to 7 covering the
abstracts issued from June I, 19I7, to December 31, I933, $5.oo each. Liberal discount to subscribers to the Bibliographic Service
Cards.

The Wistar Institute Bibliographic Service covers the publications listed below:

Journal of Morphology The Journal of Comparative Neurology The American Journal of Anatomy The Anatomica Record The Joal of Experimental Zodlogy American Journal of Physdal Anthropology

Joural of Cellular and Compative Phyiology The Journal of Nutrition American Anatomical Memoir Biologi u of the Mount Dsert Region Folio Anatomic Japonica (Tokyo, Japan)

EARLY SERIES

In addition to the above, bibliographic reference cards, without abstracts, may be secured for articles which have appeared in the

Journal of Morphology, from vol. I (1887) to June I, 1927 ...................... ....................... 380 titles

The Journal of Comparative Neurology, from vol. I (189I) to June x, 19I7 .......... ..............

The American Journal of Anatomy, vol. I (igoI) to June x, 1917 ..............

.......

The Anatomical Record, vol. I (I906) to June I, I9I7 ............................. The Journal of Experimental Zo6logy, vol. I (1904) to June I, 917 .............

.....464,., .
....................

The American Anatomical Memoirs .....................

.....................................

450 344
423 9

of Pt
i,t,

These cards, containing full bibliographic references, enable a subscriber to have a complete record of authors and titles with their
subject headings for all articles which have appeared in the above journals from their beginning to current issues.

The price for these Bibliographic Reference Cards is two cents for the first card of each title. Additional cards for each title may be had at one-half cent per card when ordered at the same time.

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 1

