DISEASE AND DEFECT
Some New Pedigrees from Rural England

(Charts are folded into the back of the REVIEW.)

"B OIL-WATCH' Gallows was pri- now in the workhouse, and is decidedly

marily responsible for the family feeble-minded. He married a woman whose

depicted on Chart I. He received maiden name is not known: she seems nor-

this cognomen because at one time, accord- mal, but lacking in initiative, and is also

ing to the tradition in his village of West in the workhouse. Of their six children

Coleton, he boiled his watch in a saucepan only one, Rose, is undoubtedly normal.

while holding an egg in his hand to time it. The eldest, Jessie, like her cousin of the

Since this story, with minor variations, is same name, is feeble-minded and in a certi-

usually told in every university of every fied institution. Next comes the normal

eminent professor with a reputation for ab- Rose, who married a man named Matthews

sence of mind, the boiling of watches can and is said to have quite a clean, average

scarcely be considered an infallible index of farm-labourer's cottage-the only one of

feebleness of mind. An ament, however, the family to have a home of her own.

Gallows undoubtedly was, although, like the They have two children, aged three and one,

great majority of other aments in this who are too young for their mental condition

country, he was never certified-indeed, he to be judged.

could not be, since he was born too long Maisie is feeble-minded and in a certified

before the passing of the first Mental Defi- institution; Minnie, aged twelve, is in a

ciency Act for adequate legal evidence to be children's home and is described as " not

obtained as to the state of his mind at birth bright "; Gladys, aged seven, and Jane,

or at an early age. He was the butt of aged four, are also both in the children's

the boys in the neighbouring small town of home and are thought, as far as it is possible

Barchester, and was generally recognized as to judge at their age, to be feeble-minded.

a ' village idiot ': he could probably best Thus the feeble-minded founder of this

be described as belonging to the mid-grade family has been responsible, with his un-

of the feeble-minded. He died in the work- known wife, for one simple and one feeble-

house.

minded child, and for one normal, one sub-

Of his wife nothing is known; but by her normal, and five defective grandchildren.

he begot two children whose records and Knowing nothing of " Boil-watch's " wife,

families have been traced. It is doubtful of the begetter of the illegitimate Jessie, or

whether the eldest, Matilda, could be certi- of the family of George's wife, it is impos-

fied as an ament by present standards, since sible to judge the precise genetics of this

she is self-supporting and more simple particular form of amentia; but it appa-

than feeble-minded. She is in service on a rently tends to be dominant to normal men-

farm,' where she is well looked after; and tality. Durling recent years several cases

the farmer's wife declares that she is a good have been noted of types of amentia seem-

worker when supervised. She gave birth inglv dominant to normal, and some of the

to the illegitimate child Jessie, who is feeble- other families with which we shall deal here

minded and in a certified institution.

give indications of the same phenomenon.

George Gallows, the second child of "Boil- It is an important point which had best be

watch," has never been certified, but he is discussed later.

35

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE HAVERIDGE GROUP

All of these three, therefore, may be said

The next family starts off fairly well with to be mentally, if not socially, deficient.

old Mrs. Haveridge, whose achievement in (g) Oscar died in infancy.

living to the age of eighty at least shows (io) Emily-nothing known.

vitality and is strongly suggestive of a sound

mind as well. Nothing is known of her The next child, a son, of the old Have-

kin or maiden name, nor of her husband, ridges was killed in an accident, and noth-

who is dead; but of their family of six at ing is known of him. His sister Ann has

least three are sub-normal.

a longer record. Herself sub-normal, she

The first (reading from left to right on married a sub-normal man, Walter Glutton,

Chart 11), the sub-normal Dora, married who, moreover, drinks. This is important

Thomas Snow, who cannot read or write from the economic rather than the bio-

without help. But though both are thus logical aspect, since he is only a farm

evidently lacking in certain mental abilities, labourer with an income of 32S. 6d. a week.

they may fairly be said to do their fair With luxurious tastes it would not be diffi-

share of the world's work. They have a cult to spend that amount, quite reasonably,

lorry and own a small haulier's business; on drink alone; and even one with a more

occasionally they buy a little timber, which plebeian palate could spend nearly as much

they saw and sell for firewood; and they do without becoming entitled to the label of

any other odd jobs that turn up. Their either drunkard or ' soaker.' There is,

home is a poor one, but very clean, and the therefore, nothing remarkable, in itself, in

family seems genuinely respectable. Their the fact that Glutton spends a large part of

sons would be best described as willing, but his income on alcohol. The important point

not competent; they help their father and is that farm labourers with families are evi-

do work for local farmers, and one for a dently expected to be strictly teetotal-and

time was a caddy on the golf links. The most of them are, or very nearly so. It is

individual records of the children of this pair in contrast with them that Walter Glutton

are: appears in a poor light, since, when his

(i) Sex unknown; died at ten weeks. (2) Charles, married, but with no children; nothing known of either him or his
wife.
(3) Florence, who married an unknown
man and has had three sons by him. Nothing is known of any of them.
(4) Edgar is certainly sub-normal. He
married Chloe, of whom nothing is known except that her father is ' alcoholic.' She has three children, all under four years and said to be delicate.
(5) John works on a farm.

children were small, he did not allow Ann enough money to care for them. He is also
said to have ill-treated her and them at times. (These are factors which must be taken into account when considering the mental and physical condition of the chil-
dren.) Now that the older children are
earning, conditions in the home have im-
proved; and Ann keeps the house clean and
does her best for the children. At the same time, it is not such a good home as that of the Snows'.
The children of the Gluttons have a remarkable record:

The next three, all boys, are much alike, and cannot read or write:
(6) Oliver left school at the age of fourteen and with the mental age of eleven.
(7) Roland left school at the age of four-
teen and with the mental age of nine. (8) Walter left school at the age of four-
teen and with the mental age of seven.

(i) Walter was insane and died in the asylum.
(2) Edgar is sub-normal, a heavy drinker, and grossly immoral and promiscuous. He contributes little to the home, since he spends his time and money with a neighbouring married woman of bad character and with other women.

DISEASE AND DEFECT

37

(3) Lily is normal and has married a man Gluttons'; but financial circumstances are

of whom nothing is known.

better, and drink is not such a problem.

(4) Minnie is dull and backward, and has Barrett himself drives a road-engine, helped

married a man of whom nothing is known, by his feeble-minded son Charles, and

nor are any details available of their one Selina worked in a factory until recently.

clhild. Consequently they were comparatively well-

(5) Dick was feeble-minded and was to-do. But since Edith's marriage they

killed in a road accident.

have had to support her, her husband, and

(6 and ,) Leonard and Colin are both her child. Soote is out of work, and he and

feeble-minded.

Edith are said to drink and smoke all the

(8 and 9) Douglas and Kenneth are twins money they ever get, and to live entirely on

aged eight, and both with a mental age of her people.

six; it is therefore a strong presumption If Selina and her children alone were

that they are feeble-minded.

taken into account in attempting a genetic

(io) Arnold is aged six and has a mental interpretation, one would incline to conclude

age of four-again a strong presumption of that theirs was a clear case of a dominant

feeble-mindedness.

type of amentia-since the children by both

fathers are definitely feeble-minded. The

A GENETIC CURIOSITY

description of Selina herself as only " subnormal " could plausibly be attributed to an

Returning now to the F1 generation, the over-cautious diagnosis, as could John's

immediate children of the old Haveridges, ' dull- and backwardness.' The condition of

little is known, not even the names, of the mind of her sisters and their families, how-

next two sons, (a) and (b). (a) is unmarried; ever, is far more suggestive of a factor semi-

(b) has married a woman of whom nothing is recessive to normal. It could be assumed

known, and they have two children who are that one of the two old Haveridges-prob-

said to be delicate. Both men are normal ably the man, since the old lady's age does

and self-supporting, according to reports. not suggest defect of any sort-was the

Selina, last of the children, is, like her simplex ' carrier ' of this defect, which he

sisters Ann and Dora, sub-normal. She transmitted to half his children, by pure

first gave birth, by an unknown father, to chance the daughters. Ann and Dora,

an illegitimate child, Edith, who is feeble- clearly enough, then inbred for the defect

minded and has married a sub-normal man, by marrying Snow and Glutton, heretozy-

Soote. The young couple have one gotes like themselves, and produced one

daughter, who is too young for her mental quarter normal children, one half heterozy-

condition to be judged, and whom they keep gous, and one quarter fully feeble-minded.

poorly clad and dirty.

The fact that actually there is an undue

After her affaire du cceur, Selina mar- proportion of sub-normal and definitely de-

ried Charles Barrett, who is in all proba- fective children could perhaps be explained

bilitv perfectly normal. In addition to the by the smallness of the numbers involved

illegitimate Edith, who remained with her and by the added effect of the adverse con-

mother until her marriage, they have had ditions from which the Glutton children suf-

three children:

fered. But to fit Selina into this scheme

(i) John is dull and backward. (2 and 3) Charles and Martha are both feeble-minded, and both left school at fourteen with the mental age of six.

we have to suppose that Charles Barrett, her husband, is also a heterozygote, and that the unknown father of Edith was either heterozygous or fully feeble-minded. It would indeed be a remarkable instance of

While Selina is probably a worse manager assortive mating for three heterozygous sis-

than either of her sisters, this home seems ters to mate with similar men, and for one

to be on much the same level as that of the of them to do it twice-to say nothing of the

38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fact that the daughter of that one has also concentration of defect in these remarkable

done so.

' pockets.' To Dr. Lewis and the Com-

Edith and Martha, on the far right, seem mittee this seemed one of the most alarming

to bar out the hypothesis of a sex-linked fac- revelations of their survey. But when the

tor, dominant in the male and semi-reces- mind has recovered from the shock of it, so

sive in the female; but it is possible that to speak, it appears, on the contrary, to be

the condition is in some degree sex-limited one of the most encouraging and hopeful

to the male, since those two are the only signs in the eugenic outlook. Racial decay

females in the F2 generation who are would indeed be imminent if our 300,000

definitely feeble-minded.

aments-and probably about twice that

But neglecting for the moment the gene- number of heterozygous ' carriers '-were

tic interpretation, the gross facts are that mating with normal stock and tainting

of the fifty-two individuals on this chart, the healthy blood of the nation. But

twenty-two are unknown, mostly the mates in so far as they are inbreeding they are

or young children of the persons investie genetically isolated from the rest of us, and

gated; of the thirty remaining, five are nor- are also rendered the more amenable to treat-

mal (if we include old Mrs. Haveridge) ; two ment. Moreover, they are to some extent

died as infants, and twenty-three are sub- inbreeding to their own extinction. The

normal or abnormal.

two cousin marriages on the right of Chart

III-all four normal persons-have pro-

INBREEDING FOR DEFECT

duced at least six (out of fifteen) children whose degree of defect must be at least some

As doubtless the reader has gathered, check on their fertility. Had the four

these two groups of families live in the parents lived in large towns, they would

country. In fact, they and the larger group most probably have married normal and un-

yet to be dealt with are all thickly scattered related individuals and so have broadcast

over a few square miles in a rural and iso- and perpetuated their recessive defects in-

lated district of England-one of those in- definitely.

vestigated by Dr. E. 0. Lewis when mak- These families, then, are a vivid but

ing his survey for the Mental Deficiency fair example of the actual people investi-

Committee. He emphasized how for many gated by Dr. Lewis, and of the conditions

years past the ' drift to the towns ' has been which throughout rural England are respon-

draining the countryside of all the normal sible for over i per cent. of the population

and more vigorous men and women, leaving being certifiable aments.

behind a population largely composed of

dull, ineffective, and defective individuals. These are consequently thrown back upon

THE BOTTLES AND STARS

each other and are forced, even beyond the Old Bottle died too long ago for anything

normal custom of isolated rural communi- to be known of him; but his wife, who only

ties, to intermarry and so to inbreed for died last year, was definitely feeble-minded,

defect.

though not certified. They produced a

Ruscombe, the district from which the family of five, of whom three, all girls, were

Bottles originate, is a neighbouring valley, as feeble-minded as their mother; the one

remote and wild, in which inbreeding has living son is apparently normal, and Ed-

probably always been fairly common; and ward, who is dead, is said to have been.

Easton Regis, the home centre of the Stars The first of the feeble-minded daughters,

and Youngs, lies in country of much the Cecily, first married Dickon, of whom noth-

same sort not very far away.

ing is known and who deserted her, and

It is the draining off of the healthy stocks next settled down to live with Fleshly.

and the fall in the death rate of the un- Neither is anvthing known of this man nor

healthy which has accentuated the recent of one daughter, Beatrice, except that she

DISEASE AND DEFECT

39

is in service in London. But two of their ing of two heterozygotes, for of their three

children have been properly investigated, children one is almost certainly feeble-

and both are feeble-minded. Harry George, minded, and the other two probably are.

however, having been in an institution, is

now self-supporting. He is working for a bricklayer and living in rooms, where he is

MORE COUSIN MARRIAGES

well looked after.

Let us now move back four generations

Jenny, the next daughter of the old to the founders of the Star tree, on the right.

Bottles, exemplifies the tendency of bad Both are dead, and nothing is known of

stock, if allowed or forced to inbreed, to them, but at least two of their three children

do so to its own extinction. She was feeble- are normal. The daughter (e) married

minded, and married her cousin Bottle, a Young, a shoemaker; both are normal and

cripple. She is now dead, and so is her son respectable, and their home is described as

William, who was feeble-minded and a a very good one. It is true that after two

cripple; while Winnie, her daughter, who or three normal children they produced

also was feeble-minded and a cripple, later Belinda, the mongolian imbecile with a

became insane and is now safely housed, for tubercular hip; buit without further evidence

life, in an asylum. Therefore the strain this cannot be accounted significant, since

represented by Jenny and her husband has the hereditary nature of mongolism is still

now committed suicide.

doubtful.

It would be best to leave until later Neither the next Star son (f)-now read-

the large sub-group which starts with Ann ing from right to left-nor his cousin-wife

Bottle on the left and Crust on the right, can be regarded as feeble-minded, and theirs

and to go on to son (a), a builder's labourer, looks like another marriage of heterozy-

who is rather a curious individual. Having gotes. Both their two daughters, Flower,

married a normal, but immoral, woman, he aged twenty, and Vera, aged seventeen, are

openly approves of her continuing her trade feeble-minded and both are housed in an

as a prostitute, in his own house, as it aug- institution.

ments the family income. Apart from this, Unfortunately the parents, who are

they both seem perfectly normal; the chil- " very difficult " people, consider that there

dren are not only healthy and normal, but is nothing wrong with the girls; and the

have even won prizes at local baby shows; mother has actually expressed the opinion

and the house is always kept clean and tidy. that it was quite time that Flower married.

Very little is known of the last of the She also speaks with much satisfaction of

Bottles, Edward, or of his wife and family. the fact that Leslie, the certified feeble-

Edward himself, who is dead, is said to minded son, who is aged eighteen, is engaged

have been normal, and so are his three sons, and will probably be married within the

though one of them approaches dwarf year! Leslie, when last visited, was earn-

stature. A social worker who knows the ing I4S. a week at a shirt and collar factory.

family moderately well says the fourth The last (i.e. eldest) of the children of

child, daughter (b), is " the only respect- the old Star couple is dead; so is his cousin-

-able member of the tribe." She is certainly wife, and nothing is known of them. They

-normal, and so probably is the tubercular produced eleven children. We have already

and immoral Margaret-next on the chart, dealt with the first of these, son (d), who

with the two illegitimate children.

married the Bottle daughter (c). His

With daughter (c) we link up with a new brother (g) is probably normal, and earns

defective group. The woman herself is fairly good money as a quarry labourer.

normal, though her home is dirty; she mar- Nothing is known of his wife, but she makes

ried the Star son (d), who, while little is the home a good one, clean and well kept,

known of him, does not bear a good charac- and the only fault with the place is its size.

ter in the district. This looks like the mat- There is one living-room and what ought

40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to be one bedroom, which has been divided Loud's first wife, Ann Bottle, was feeble-

into two by a wooden partition. Star and minded, lazy and slovenly, and a drinker;

his wife sleep in one of these 'rooms,' and their house was always filthy, and they were

his two younger brothers (bracketed at the often without food or money. They pro-

right of the family) in the other. Fortu- duced six children, four of whom are feeble-

nately there are no children.

minded. The first of them, Mrs. Lilly,

The next sister, Olive, is feeble-minded has made a clean and comfortable home;

and in an institution, and then come the and although she cannot read or write, she

three girls who died young of convulsions. can apparently manage money. They live

Nothing has been heard of the girl (h) in the neighbouring town of Slapperton,

since her marriage; but before that she was where Lilly works, and their income, conse-

grossly immoral and promiscuous, though quently, is better than a farm labourer's.

probably not feeble-minded.

The one eight-year-old boy, though deli-

Girl (i) is normal, but nothing more is cate and probably feeble-minded, is well

known of her, her husband, or her chil- cared for.

dren, nor of her sister (j). Lastly come the Chase, the husband of the next girl, who

two boys who live with son (g); both are is normal, is in the Navy, and only comes

tubercular and of low mentality, and one is home occasionally. She has a tiny house-

lame and deformed.

only two rooms-but she keeps it well, and

gives the children decent care. The boy

ASSORTIVE MATING

is too young for his condition to be judged; the little girl " is cross-eyed and extraordi-

This completes Chart III, except for the nary looking, but, as far as can be judged,

remarkable sub-group which starts with is normal mentally."

Ann Bottle on the left and with the man The next three children of the Louds are

Crust on the right. In this generation there all feeble-minded. Dolly is in an institu-

have been at least two marriages between tion, but whether she entered it before or

feeble-minded persons. First of all Loud after the conception of her illegitimate child

married Ann and next, on her death, Jenny (now dead) is not clear. Cedric and Hal are

Ann. This was only in I929. Previous to at the same institution, the latter in its

that Jenny Ann had been married to Crust, special school; and the youngest of the

now dead, and had borne to him four chil- family, Cecil, appears normal.

dren, all of whom have been brought up in Altogether there are 79 or 8o persons on

the Poor Law Children's Home. The this chart, and of this number-

younger children, whose mental condition
cannot yet be iudged, now live with their
mother and stepfather; Alec, who is " not
bright," is still in the situation found for him when he left school; and the feebleminded George William is in an institution. Between her two marriages Jenny Ann spent many years in the workhouse, where she

21 or 22 are not known, 23 are normal, or said to be,
27 are aments or strongly suspected of being so,
4 died young,
4 have other grave defects of physique or character.

learnt to keep things clean. Now, in her Eliminating the unknowns and including

new home, it seems that money will always the last three groups under the one heading

be short, since Loud never keeps a job long of Defective, there are twenty-three normal

and spends a good deal of what he does earn persons and thirty-five defective.

on drink. Besides being feeble-minded, he These pedigrees have all been collected

has always been a thoroughly bad character, and the individuals investigated by a welfare

not only a drinker, but grossly immoral-so agency with experienced and reliable social

those on the chart may not be his only workers; and there can be no question of

children.

the accuracy of the details. Only the re-

DISEASE AND DEFECT

4I

counting of the facts thus supplied and the as there are of physical deficiency. Hence

attempts at their interpretation are the work one pedigree may demonstrate a totally

of the present writer. All Christian and different type of inheritance from the next.

surnames have, of course, been changed, Secondly, even if we study only one pedi-

though, for the sake verisimilitude, an gree and assume that it is the same genetic

effort has been made to find pseudonyms defect which is transmitted to all indivi-

which correspond as exactly as possible with duals, we have to remember that the normal

the real names. A genuine Archibald, for strains with which they mate will differ

instance, was first re-christened Percival- genetically. A genetic factor which is

until it transpired that that was actually the 'dominant,' and causes amentia when

name of his brother! Also, since the dis- crossed with one normal cerebral or endo-

trict is one of those covered by the investi- crine type, may well be recessive or semi-

gations of the Mental Deficiency Committee, recessive on mating with another of a

which was anxious to preserve the anony- different normal physiological organization.

mity of the areas studied, towns and Some such serial combination of recessive

villages have also been re-christened.

normal + dominant defect + 'super-dominant'

normal inhibitors seems at present to

THE GENETIC INTERPRETATION

be the most hopeful hypothesis, for it is difficult even to advance a plausible theory

The number of ' unknowns ' makes it un- of multiple genes. The facts do not warrant

wise to indulge in more than the rough any more precise attempt at explanation;

summarized statistics already given for each and it seems, in our present ignorance of

of the three sets of pedigrees; but the de- the physiology of mental development,

tails are enough to show that no simple that no purely genetical hypothesis can

genetic formula of the dominant or recessive satisfactorily account for such a haphazard

type can account for the facts. To begin variety of grades and types of defect as are

with, amentia is not a clear-cut character like at present included under " amentia." We

polydactyly, nor even as well defined as can only be sure that they are in practice

musical talent. It is a generic term to cover incurable, very undesirable, and in most

our ignorance of the details; and there may cases, such as these, strongly hereditary.

be almost as many kinds of mental deficiency

E. M.

Eugenics Review, -Vol. XXII, No. 1.

Thomas SnowCannot Icad or write
without help

Dora Subnormal

N)ed Inifant
?

Chlarles N.K.
X

Florence N.K. 3 boys N.K.

?x

Son NaK.d Kle nacdn

Rdgar Subnormal
3 chi ren N ;K.

Johnl Normal (Clloc Normal

CHART1 11.

Oliver

~ ~ ~~
Roland Caninot read or write

Haveridgc Dead N.K.

II

Walter

Oscar

--alinotdied infant

II
Rmily N.K.

Walter Insane: died in
Asylum

Edgar Stubnormiial
Immoral l)rinks
?

X - M rs. llaveridgc IN.K.
bult alive at 8o

*ily
Normual
l
X

Ann Stubnormal

X--Walter Glutton Subnormal Drinks

Minnic
1). an(l 13.
Child N.K.

Dick Leonard Colin
F.M. IF.M1. F.M. ?

Douglas

Kenneth

Twinis, age S MA. a

Sonl (a) N.K.
Arnold Age 6: M.MA. 4

Son (1b) X ? N.K.
rwo cllildreni
N.K.

Ioot-

...........-.
x

Subnornial

Edjth F.M1.

Girl Too young to ju(lg

Selina Subnormal
John
). 7111( II.

X -Cnaries Barrett
Normal

Chaarles
F.M.

MIartha
F.M.

CIIART I.

Mlatilda Simple, but self-supporting
Jessie Illegitimate
F.M.

"Boil-watch"
Gallows F.MI.
Died in wvorkhose

I

Matthews

Je$ie
F.M. __
Two children aged 3 and I

HHisN.Kwv.ife

Rose Normal

George F.M. Maisic F.M.

x- IHis wife Notrmal

MIinnic

Gladys

Age I2; in Home Age 7; in HIome

Not bright "

Tliought to be

_____ - F.M.

Jane Age 4; in

1ome

Thought to be

F.M.

CHART III.

FleshlI N.K.

X

Cecily - X Dickoon F.M. N.K.

larry George

Beatrice

ltseF-sFupspe.lof-rsuMLppior.uLigngCripple N.K.

~D~~o~rF.iMs.

Jenny F.M. Dead

ffX

WFl.Ma.m
~~~~Dead

alBcoottulsei,n
Cripple
Wi'Fn.aMi.c
Insane
Cripple

Mrs. Bottlc F.M.
Died 1929

Ann F.M. Drank Dead

X |

_-_--_Giirl

__________ Girl x

F..Normal

Chase N.K.

I_____________
--x l~~~Iilly
I< N.K. Boy age 8 Probably
F.M.

Girl Normal

Boy Too young to judge

_, I
Dolly F.M. Baby Illegitimate Dead

Ii
Cedric . F.M.

? Loud F.M. Immoral
Hal F.MI.

x Jenny Ann X F.M.

Cecil Appears normal

George William I.M.

Crust N.K. Dead Alec "not bright"

i
Florence George Roy N.K. Still at school

Son (a) Apparently
iiormal

? Apparently
normal; immoral

Edwar(d Said to have been
normal Dead

l=~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I -I

-- ~~Son

Son

Children appearlealthy and normal Said to be normal Said to be normal

X Son
Normnal
but very smiiall

Datugliter (b) Normal
anid respectable;

MIargare t
-Normal hut ilr.
a(l( immiiiioral 2 illeg. children aged 8 and iS4

Dauglhter (c) INNormal

Son (()

Son (g

N;K Normal

TB.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~X

PrCohbialbdly F.F...M.

Child
Probably

AClhmiolsdt Certainly
F.M.

A cOUsifl
ND.eKa.d

Olive

A girls

F.M. D)cad .

(i at 7 dlays; X at 7

? months; I N.K., of

convulsions)

Girl (11)
iiinoral x IBaby
Too youtng to juidge

X - Son N.K
Dead

Girl (i) Nornal
1Il
ChildIren
N.K.

GiNr.lK.Ij)
?

D. and B. = dull and backward

F.M. -feeble-minded

M.A. = mental age

N.K. = nothing known

T.B. = tubercular

S,tar --X N.K.

Mrs. Star N.K.

Son (f) Normal 2 boys: both T.B. anod of low menltality ? one lamec and deformed

--x

A cousin

Girl (e)

(sister to brother's Normiial

wife) Normal

___

II

I

Flower Leslic Vera

F.. F.M. ,.FI.

_

>o2r X children
.A\l1l normal

YounXg Normal Belinda -Mongolian Imnbecile T.l3. hip

