THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION

By BARBARA S. BOSANQUET, B.A.

(EMBODYING THE PAPER READ BEFORE A MEMBERS' MEETING OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY, MARCH 21st, 1950)

"Writing and ploughing are two different talents; and he that writes well must have spent in his study that time which is necessary to be in the fields by him who will be master of the art of culti-
vating them."-JETHRo TULL (I674-I74I).

INTRODUCTION

much less by weight.* Our food problem is

N O easy generalizations can be made
about such an infinitely varied group
as the rural population of the British
Isles. Our cities have been built up by people who were originally country folk. What are those still living, or coming back to live, in the country like in comparison with country-dwellers of the past and with town-dwellers of to-day, and why are they important ? This paper seeks to clarify some aspects of the first question and to answer the
second. The field to be surveyed is vast, both in Britain and in America. Some of the studies of the physical and mental qualities of rural people in both countries will be summarized, and their implications discussed, in the hope of stimulating further research.

part of our rural population problem. If we lived in a rational world, with real free trade
and international or supra-national law it
would be possible to support our 49-odd million people-about 43 million of whom
live in towns-in comfort, with a maximum of industrial production and of food importation. But we do not live in such a world ; the " if " is too large, and sooner or later we
must face it. In the terse words of Sir Charles Arden-Close:t "We have some 49 million people to feed, and shall find it diffi-
cult to feed them."
The quality of our rural population will
become of increasing importance as the realization of this hard fact sinks in. The health, intelligence and character of the
people who deal with the soil of Britain, and all the others who make up rural society,

Food and the Rural Population
We have become so accustomed to thinking of ourselves as an industrial nation, living within an Atlantic civilization which is about three-quarters urban, that we tend to forget what this implies. Dr. Parkes reminded us in the Galton Lecture this year that our position in relation to the world food situa-

may have even more bearing on our survival
than the quality of our miners and industrial
workers, our scientists and our statesmen. The query " What is a desirable density for
Britain's population? " springs immediately to mind, and, linked with it, the question of planned immigration and emigration, but these vast issues cannot be dealt with here.

tion may become precarious, and Dr. Julian Rural Decline and Recuperation

Huxley sounded a similar warning in March.*
We are importing more than 6o per cent of our food now, though during the war it was

The exodus from the countryside of Britain reached its peak at the end of the nineteenth

less by calories (57 per cent. in I943) and * Paper read by Dr. K. G. Fenelon to the British

Association, Section F, Economics and Statistics,

* Speech at the Association of Scientific Workers, Newcastle-on-Tyne, September 1949.

March 4th, I950.

t Cf. Arden-Close (I948).

75 c

76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

century and led many to predict (especially

TABLE I

after the first world war) that our rural population would become derelict. These

PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL POPULATION IN VARIOUS COUNTRIES ENGAGED IN AGRICULTURE

jeremiads have not come true and the time is ripe for a re-appraisal of the situation. Since roughly i88o, when the importation of grain and meat from overseas impoverished British agriculture, until the I930's, the morale of
the rural community has been low. What this " rural exodus " has meant in terms of human suffering no one can tell. Since the
I930's, however, strong recuperative forces have been at work, forces starting at the

COUtflW

m0.JSA AiU m 6q2£' _ 0 3-0 40No* 1 o so c

CJS"NJjL5CtW4W) _2. J

ALAISI

-SpAw&(Jq9a) 1S6A-k '23.0

rrALV (tq3t) 47-f 3$1

-21.6

S5WQ6 (1q10)

4C-*18.4

F5"JC L1q26

204

C.Eem("19Y33)

u

915.9

( 19CADSLMAIM q30) 28.3 -L ._23.4
BELCUIASM L9;@(k) ) 2-3' _
(19) b14A,a

9.o
17.3

LL.5.A41943) *a.o

24A

" grassroots," but also strengthened from the
cities. Not only the Ministries of Agriculture, of Town and Country Planning, of Education and of Health, but also Churchmen, professional and business men and many private
organizations are working to strengthen

EsCJLAS04a/ALSS £4. 18 (.Q31)
SOUecES. CAR.-SAJVEA!e A 4t. I*U" FOPJLArOJ p.4L q136.
kU3K,z3>Uj.5aj *'EuwM*'S' fFULATto,hIYw Iu?Ueg.J
sLAU.OF MrTkxIS. 1946
1CJ*1J. f'ULATIO1J WJ MODERsJ Cp . UsfVEe5ss' OF
CJcACo PeE515.q4s.

these new forces.* The success of this process of recovery depends largely on the quality of the people who live in our country-
side.

The Past in Britain
Table II shows, very roughly, the change from rural to urban life in England and the
United States:

Other Countries

TABLE II

ROUGH PERCENTAGE OF RURAL TO TOTAL POPULATION

How long have we been an urban nation,

ik-a- i 1O Iro4Ik1 _!,O_hsWV_b_____e D

and how do we compare with the rest of the

world? The answer is that we are the most

urban nation in the world. The two charts

below will help to make this clear. Table I

shows the percentages of the total popula-

tions of various countries which are engaged

in agriculture. Crude birth-rates for I948

are also given, although this is later than

the dates of most of the agricultural per-

centages.

40-

We all know of the association of falling 30

E&&L MD3WALP-$

birth-rate with rising urbanization,t but, as we see in the figures for Czechoslovakia and
the United States, it is not a perfect correla-

b .~~~~(~$SAtMLJILJaWt£pIUS9xiZ'AesLuPW re-wL"AR).. ')~--'X ID S~ ~JIC~EaIGAL * .WDe.,]_

tion. (Both these countries have fairly high

birth-rates for I948, though they are more than two-thirds urban, but this is probably

YL Se%V.**WW0.AtV'*L45At.A46M(A4kC.WaOLCJ.S9SMU3SO(sLT*,LAbX6r, wA1..8u43;uq3AL.SuOrNIACKM"AV9AWW

IJ.OtxeAl, L&Wl

due to the post-war " boom in babies.")

The biggest change comes, as we should

* These " forces " began before the first world war.

Cf. Fordham (I9I6) and Holdenby (1913) in their

concluding chapters.

t Cf. Blacker (I947) and Chandrasekhar (I949). For
India the figures are roughly 8o per cent. engaged in

agriculture, and an estimated crude birth-rate of 45 for

the decade 193I-4I.

t

expect, in the century after I790, when the industrial revolution was in full swing. But
it is interesting to note that even before the eighteenth century, when the agricultural revolution transformed rural England, the drift from the countryside had begun. (The

THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION

77

rural population is, of course, not the same lower than urban, but to-day they are more

as the agricultural population, the propor- cautious about drawing conclusions than

tions varying widely at different periods.) they were a decade ago. They can be

As early as i662 Graunt thought that divided into those who support the theory

London needed a "continuous recruitment of selective migration, that the towns have

from the country" to keep its population taken the best, and those who think the

from being decimated by disease. " The migration has been non-selective. Before

strength of the country is driven ... to be discussing these questions in more detail, as

wasted, into towns " laments another writer to physical and mental quality, we will

of the seventeenth century.* Trevelyan briefly survey some past opinions.

(I944) ascribes this partly to the growth of industry and commerce in the seventeenth Selective Migration ?

century, partly to the better roads. He It is undoubtedly true that in certain areas

quotes Arthur Young as deploring this rural the migration has been selective. The

exodus:

Census Report for i88i states that

It is ... a fact that ... expeditious travelling depopulates the Kingdom; young men and women in the country villages fix their eyes on London.... The numbers who have seen London are increased tenfold, and of course ten times the boasts are sounded in the ears of country fools to induce them to quit their healthy clean fields for regions of dirt, stink and noise.-Farmer's Letters (Ed. 177I, p. 353).
Young implies that it is the fools who leave the countryside, an assumption with which many of us might agree, but which is disproved by much of the evidence. It is only too true that many of the intelligent and ambitious sons and daughters flocked to the towns. The bad cottages at home, bad even when compared with ancient city slums, the higher town wages and better prospects of advancement were having their effect even
then.

The industrial centres attract from the rural districts those who are comparatively strong in
mind and body; and the children born to these stronger parents are less liable to congenital deficiencies than the offspring of the comparatively feeble parents, mentally and physically, who are left behind.-i88i Census, G.R. (p. 71).
In I906 the Board of Agriculture, in its Report on the Decline in the Agricultural Population, found that the " young smart men were leaving country pursuits." Farmer witnesses to commission after commission have complained of the deterioration of their farm workers, and similar complaints are frequently heard to-day. The movement reached its peak around i88o, and is described as a " tremendous social disaster " by Trevelyan: "The vitality of the village slowly declined, as the city in a hundred ways sucked away its blood and brains."* The

The Real Issue

important inquiry into migration by Dr.

The essential question is whether the townward movement has been selective genetically; whether it has permanently lowered the level of country people's inherited ability, both mental and physical; or whether the family strains in the countryside have been strong enough to bear this " demo-
graphic hiemorrhage."t This is the funda-
mental issue and there is as yet no adequate answer. Most observers find rural ability
* Dr. Pennecuik's editor (1815).
t Tricart (1949) describes the depopulation around
Vezelay (Yonne) as " L'hemorragie demographique." The emigration has deprived the countryside of its
6lite. Those remaining are often incapable of reading: " Un appauvrissement humain, en quantit6 et en qualite."

Hill (I925) presented much evidence that the
pick of the countryside-" some of our best and youngest men " were leaving. The Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee (I929, Part IV), to which I shall refer later, found " at least a partial explanation " of the inbreeding of inferior families in the theory of selective migration. Some Amen-
can investigators, especially before the 'thirties, also supported the selective migration theory.t

* Op. cit., p. 474.

t E. G. Piutner (I9I7) concluded that the gent families were leaving the villages. Pyle

maonrdeCoilntueilnlgis-

(I9i8) thought that city environment hastened develop-

ment, and that the city children were of better stock.

See also other references in Shimberg(1929)pp. 43 and 46.

78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Non-selective Migration ?
One of the first of those who did not fully accept selective migration was Charles Booth. Although he said in his famous survey that London was " kept up in bone and sinew and energy by the country element pouring in . . . afterwards to be transformed into waste," he also thought that the countryside sent its " dregs " cityward as well as its
" cream." Davies (193I), writing of the rural
population between i87i and I928 in the most detailed survey yet made in Britain,
says:
Very probably the migration movement may
be led by the most enterprising ... natives;
... but very probably, also, it includes a large body of followers-people who move to the towns into situations found for them by their friends and relatives who have gone before-and these followers are not inherently likely to be more enterprising or of higher mental quality than those who remain.... There are also those of definitely inferior quality-the vagrants and "social wreckage of the province "-who drift
to the towns.-(p. I67).
Most American experts now seem to favour the non-selective theory of migration. Zimmerman (I930) writes that the best families and the poorest are the most likely to migrate from American farms to the cities.
Klineberg (1938) thinks that the existing
evidence does not justify broad generalizations about the selection of intelligence in population movements. Gist (I943), writing in Missouri, concludes:
If cities are selective of intelligence, sex and age, may they not likewise be selective of the emotionally unstable, the restless, the romantic, the delinquent ? It is possible also that farms and villages are more attractive than cities to persons who are emotionally stable, content,
unimaginative and home-loving.-(p. 154).
One of the doughtiest champions of the non-selective theory in England is Professor A. W. Ashby. He shows convincingly (Ashby, I935) that " too many general theories have been built on local information," and concludes that
Migration has not been sufficiently selective, except possibly in a few isolated areas, to lower the general physical or mental capacities or qualities of the rural population as compared with those of the past or the urban population of the present time.-(p. g)

PHYSICAL QUALITY
Before proceeding with an examination of more detailed studies of physical quality let us look at actual numbers. The rural population in I92I was about 8 million, and now it is somewhere around 6j million.* Professor Stamp (I949) classifies the rural population as: (i) Primary (farmers and farm workers); (2) Secondary (middlemen
and professional workers); and (3) Adven-
titious (retired people and town workers living in the country). The primary farming population is slightly larger than the secondary (counting dependants, the two groups can be roughly estimated as just over and just under 3 million each). The third group, people who live in the country but are either retired or else work in nearby towns is far smaller as yet; but in many areas it is increasing, and its influence is greater than its numbers would suggest.
Professor Stamp shows that the primary rural population (farmers and farm workers) dropped from 92 per square mile of cultivated land in I87I to 50 per square mile in I94I. The number of actual farmers has remained practically stationary (the I94i Farm Survey gives it as 2I5,900), so it is among the farmworkers that the decrease has occurred. Lord Addison (I939) writes : " Where there were I00 employed who were under 2I in I92I, there were only 73 in I93I, and the figure has become smaller since then." The average rural parish of to-day numbers 400, whereas in I87I it was 720. We must remember that this reflects, to some extent, an increased efficiency in agriculture due to mechanization. The question arises, what is a desirable density in rural areas ?
Fertility
While the main reasons for the shrinking of the rural population during the last
* See Report of the Committee on Land Utilisation in Rural Areas (I942), also Tihley (I947). The term " rural " is taken to mean, in Britain, a district termed " rural " under local government classification, though this may be inaccurate in the case of mining or sub-
urban communities. In the United States " rural " usually means a community of under 2,500, but the distinction between a farming area and a village or small-town area is usually made.

THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION

79

seventy years are, first, migration to cities and abroad, and second, the swallowing up of rural districts by urban and suburban development,* the natural rate of increase must be studied by all who are concerned with eugenics. Actually the crude figures show consistently lower figures for rural than for urban birth-rates, as we see in Table IV. We can get a more accurate picture, however, by comparing urban and rural birth-rates per thousand women of child-bearing age. This takes into consideration the fact that rural districts have many fewer women and some fewer men between the ages of 20 and 39 than urban districts.t Davies (I93I) gives a table showing the birth-rate per thousand females aged I5-45 from I870 to I92I, as follows:
Rural Urban 1870 ... ... 158i9 143-I 1921 ... ... 915 86-2
(Op. cit., p. ioi.)
The fertility-rate of rural women was thus i5 8 higher than that of urban women in I870, and 5-3 higher in I92I. In the decade between I92I-3I, according to Innes (I94I) the decrease in the birth-rate was 2I per cent for agricultural labourers as compared with 43 per cent for semi-skilled textile workers and 50 per cent for semi-skilled miners. This decrease in fertility among rural women is due partly to the average age being higher and partly to the increased urbanization of many rural districts, which undoubtedly means more use of contraceptives. +
The Federation of Women's Institutes. in their memorandum to the Scott Committee, stressed the rural housing shortage as an indirect cause of the falling birth-rate. Other
* Maps in the Report of the Committee on Land Utilisation in Rural Areas (pp. 6 and 7) demonstrate the depopulation of nearly all parts of rural England and Wales in the pre-war years. The greatest increases were around London, and near Liverpool, Manchester and Birmingham. The most disturbing map (p. 6) shows how the greater part of this expansion was made on good agricultural land.
t Cf. Ashby (I935), pp. 9-io. These differences of age and sex between the total urban and rural populations are growing smaller. See also Kiser (I942) on urban-rural fertility rates in America.
: It is to be hoped that the Family Limitation Study
of the Royal Commission on Population, published in
January I950, will be used to throw light on this
question.

reasons which would repay study are the change in " fashion " as to family size, (perhaps more marked in the remoter country districts, where families used to be the largest) and the increasing age at marriage. Further factors which affect the rural birthrate are the difficulties in arranging for the actual birth and the shortage of help in the home. There is more neighbourliness in the rural than in the urban community, but to-day the village, like the town, is feeling the shortage of " aunties " who used to be so freely available in emergencies. Home-help schemes are beginning in the rural districts, but so far are merely a drop in the bucket.
To summarize this cursory survey of rural fertility: Despite the more rapid decrease in fertility of rural women between I870 and I92I, so great was their lead in the past that they remained ahead of the urban women. In the decade between I92I-3I the rural birth-rate continued to decline, but less than half as fast as the decline among miners and textile workers. There would therefore seem to be a higher effective fertility among rural women than among urban.
Mortality
Death-rates might be regarded as a more reliable index of physical quality than birthrates. Davies* gives a table of death-rates by which he figures, for I926, a death-rate of I0 58 per thousand for urban districts, and 8*35 per thousand for rural. Martin (I949) also demonstrates from a ratio of actual deaths to expected deaths for males in I930-2, a " progressive increase in mortality with urbanization." All this would not seem to point to degeneration in the physical quality of the rural population. Figures for deaths from heart diseases, cancer, strokes, pneumonia and respiratory tuberculosis are all lower for the agricultural population than for industrial workers such as fitters and mechanics, and also clerical workers, as shown in Table III.
* Op. cit., p. 107. He has calculated death-rates on a
"standard population with a fixed age and sex distribution, because country districts contain a larger proportion of persons of the sex and ages most liable to fatal disease than the towns."

8o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE III
MORTALITY OF MALES IN THE PRINCIPAL OCCUPATIONS FROM THE MAIN CAUSES OF DEATH-ENGLAND AND WALE:S
1930-2

OccOucpcautaitoinn GGroouupp

Social
Class

Census
Population

All
Causes

Standardised Mortality Ratio among Males aged 20-65 from

--___________

___

Cerebral Bron- Respira-

Heart Cancer Vascular chitisand tory Suicide

Diseases (all sites) Lesions Pneu- Tuber-

Imonia culosis

Farmers and their relatives ... ... ... II 253,000 73 76 73 68 50 35 142
Agricultural and gar-
deners' labourers ... IV, V 4I4,000 7I 68 77 59 66 51 84

Coal hewers and getters III 405,000 I13 IO9 98 II2 128 84 85

Fitters, mechanics, tool-

makers, etc.... ... III 323,000 100

95 I02 I07

93 102

94

Road transport-motor

drivers ...

III 348,ooo 8o 75 86 66 77 78 68

Typists and other clerks,

not in the Civil Ser-

vice ... ... ... III

496,ooo 1011 O02

1O0

112

82 120 I07

All males ...

..

I,,342,000 00

00 I00 00I I 00 100 100

III

The standardised mortality ratio expresses the mortality in the occupation as a percentage of the mortality of all males from the same cause
[From figures compiled by the Institute of Social Medicine, Oxford]

In I924 an important inquiry into the health of urban and rural school children was
made by the Board of Education. Nearly
IO,OOO children in twenty-two counties were inspected, and about one-fifth were found to " suffer from impaired physique "-many of these being in the almost derelict and deserted villages in some parts of Devon, Anglesey and Lincoln; here the children were definitely below the physical standard of urban children. The final overall conclusion, however, was that the rural children are as a whole still physically ahead of the urban children,
though not so much ahead as was formerly the case. We must remember that this inquiry came at a black period in agricul-
tural history.

Dr. W. J. Martin (I949) from the records of
the medical examinations of young male recruits in I939. The first shows the contrast

TABLE IV

STATISTICAL REVIEW OF THE REGISTRAR-GENERAL FOR

ENGLAND AND WALES, I945-7 (H.M.S.O.)

Stillbirth- Infant Maternal

Birth-rate

rate

Mortality Death-

per per per rate per

I,OOO of

I,000

I,000 I,ooolive

population total births live births and still-

births

County

boroughs 2o'84 27 27

50°90 1.37

Urban

districts I9.34 27-03

42.26

I*50

Rural

districts i8'74 25.72

38.65 I*69

so At

Stillbirths and Infant Mortality-Rates
The most recent figures on physical health I have been able to find are compiled from the Statistical Review of the RegistrarGeneral* (Table IV) and from a study by
* By the kindness of the Institute of Social Medicine, Oxford. The author's thanks are due to Dr. Russell and Dr. Sutherland.

40
ao
30
cciUyy

3
2
1,
UCBAU

THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION

8i

between county boroughs (the big cities),
urban districts (towns) and rural districts for stillbirths, infant mortality and maternal
death-rate. The lower stillbirth-rate and infant mortality-rate for the rural districts are highly significant; while the slightly
higher maternal mortality-rate probably partly reflects the better clinical and hospital
care which urban mothers receive. In Table V we see what Dr. Martin calls
"statistical support for the age-old belief that the countryman is on the average superior in health and physique," and that the small-town man has an advantage over the metropolitan citizen. The rural youth of
20-2I is just over 3j lb. heavier than his city contemporary. Martin suggests that this
may be due to greater height. The rural average for height is three-tenths of an inch taller, and the chest circumference threetenths of an inch larger. The town youths have slightly smaller chests than the city youths. The most striking contrast is in eyesight. The county boroughs had io-6 per
cent fewer men with perfect vision than the rural districts. Another important contrast is in the percentage of those in medical Category i-the normal standard of health and strength; 84 per cent of boys from rural districts attained this standard and only
8i * 4 per cent from the towns and 8o per cent
from the large cities. (It is encouraging to
compare these figures, even though they deal with the first call-up, with the " C3 " results of medical tests during the I914 war, when

TABLE V THE PHYSIQUE OF YOUNG ADULT MALES W. S. MARTIN. LONDON (H.M.S.O., I949)

COU4T%1 UIBASAW URAL _ ROIUGJ4S. STRICTS ls Tr fICrs

WEAICGHfI* U

I33*ID.1O 135-9 i-0I 137+ io-iq

UE.IGCT Si 1UT433 if ooL5.,4-IooL b6 iON
0c141A*c445uErc5CaCeIsIOEN)SAF#ub~f0.IfDEC 335&Ioi30.5tA _8 iCo0-2.

«rse e.im LOm

5r

73 *2

only between 3I per cent and 55 per cent reached Category i in the final call-up in some districts.)
Discussion
I think we are safe in drawing the conclusion that the general health and vitality of the rural population is certainly equal, and perhaps superior, to that of urban people. Except in the poorest rural districts (where health statistics, taken in isolation, may be worse than the most congested towns*) the innate health is perhaps the same. The countryman's advantage may be environmental-fresh air, outdoor work, absence of noise and hurry all playing their part.
As housing and sanitary and working conditions improve in both town and country it is reasonable to suppose that the health standards of both will improve and approXimate each other. At any rate, the city is still very close to the country biologically.t It is probable that during the time of peak migration from the country around i88o there was selection in many districts. The question is whether this continued long enough to be a lasting influence, and if not whether rural society is still healthy enough both to maintain itself and to send some of its best to the cities. Far more research is needed, for during this century many new elements have appeared, such as urban unemployment in the place of agricultural unemployment, the transfer of light industry to country districts, and the changed agricultural and housing policies of the Government.
MENTAL QUAHITY
If we turn from physical quality-a fairly straightforward subject-to mental quality we enter a field where angels fear to tread.
* Cf. Morris and Titmuss (I942). They find that mortality from juvenile rheumatism increases with density of population and with poverty. The depressed rural districts returned rates as high as the worst ini the large cities. Rheumatism is known to be high among older farm people, but this may be due more to the damp walls
of overcrowded cottages than to innate causes.B. S. B.
tI Cf. Ashby (I939), pp. i8 and i9. Cf. Scotland's Changing Population (1946), especially articles by J. C. Kyd and T. B. Manson.

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

W. H. Hudson wrote in I9IO that the agricultural labourer was the " healthiest and sanest man in the land, if not also the happiest."* As we have seen, he may well be the healthiest; he is also probably saner than the
industrial labourer. Whether he is happier is a question we must leave till later.

Mental Disease

To take the least controversial points first,

let us examine the evidence on mental

disease and feeble-mindedness. First, in-

sanity: It is fairly well known that urban

rates of insanity are higher than rural.t

Standards of certification are probably dif-

ferent in cities and in rural areas. Most of

the psychoses among rural patients are

associated with physical conditions, i.e. the

senile psychoses, mental deficiency, Hunting-

ton's chorea and cerebral arteriosclerosis,

and especially the wearing-out process that

comes with old age. Urban psychoses are

associated with alcohol, drugs and syphilitic

infection. The high suicide-rate for farmers,

shown in Table III, reveals the strain under

which many of them live. It is doubtful

whether farming selects nervous types,

though this is possible to some extent and

deserves study.

In America in I9IO the commitment-rate

per IOO,OOO urban population was 86, as

compared with 4II for the rural-over

twice as high. In I933 these rates were io6

and 6o -7 for urban and rural males; and
75.8 and 4I.4 for urban and rural females.§

Professor Landis, commenting on these

figures, says that the high rates of urban

insanity may be due partly to the age factor

(rural areas having more children, who are

not affected by insanity) and by the fact that

the foreign-born, who generally have a

higher insanity rate than the native Ameri-

cans, tend to congregate in cities. The

evidence in favour of the sanity of the rural

population, in both America and England, is

fairly clear.

* A Shepherd's Life, p. 40.

t See Glass (1935). Mayer-Gross (1948) found a rate

o3f.5

ig per i,ooo
per I,00o for

for neurotics psychotics.

and

psychopaths,

and

: Cf. Dayton (1940), p. 382.

§ Landis (I948), p. iio, quoting U.S. Bureau of

Census.

Mental Deficiency
When we turn from mental disease to mental deficiency the balance is on the other side. I need not describe the investigation by Dr. Lewis, published as the Wood Report in I929. He calculated from his inquiries in three urban and three rural areas that the incidence of mental deficiency in England and Wales in I925 was 6-7 per i,ooo in urban, and I0 5 per i,ooo in rural areas.* Sir Cyril Burt (I946) estimates, on the basis of the higher rate of survival due to better care of defectives in I927, that this represents a rough increase of I *2 per I,000 for urban rates and 3 per i,ooo for rural rates over the findings of the Royal Commission in I907. Dr. Lewis in his evidence for the Royal Commission on Population, commenting on the fact that the incidence of mental defect was almost 50 per cent higher in the country than in the town, says:
In each of the six areas we investigated we found that the mentally defective were very unevenly distributed. In the rural areas many small villages had several defectives whilst in others there were none. In the towns the large majority of defectives resided in slum areas.... In parenthesis, I may add that our findings give a denial to any sweeping generalization that rusticity is synonymous with mental inferiority. The level of intelligence in some villages, judged by results obtained with group tests given to the school children, compared very favourably with that of urban populations. In these rural districts it seems that the more intelligent members have resisted the attractions of the towns and that the less intelligent and efficient members have been forced to seek occupation elsewhere.-Papers of the Royal Commission on Population, Vol. V. 1950.
Dr. Lewis stresses the importance of the borderline cases; socially and genetically the marriage of the dull girl to the dull boy is more significant than the number of idiots in any community.
In a paper read before the Eugenics Society almost exactly two years ago Dr. MayerGross (I948) reported a mental health survey in an agricultural area in the Scottish lowlands towards the end of the war. This was a district which had suffered heavily from the
* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee
(I929), Pt. II, p. 82.

THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION

83

rural exodus of the past two generations.* I will recall to you his findings which bear directly on our subject: Nine per cent of the total population were found to be " abnor-
mal," under nine diagnostic subdivisions. The rate of incidence of mental deficiency
was i5 6 per i,ooo, which is a third greater than that found by Dr. Lewis in I927. Many in this group were living under bad conditions, but were fairly content and adapted to
their low standard of life. Dr. Mayer-Gross
sounds " a sombre note of peaceful gloom " when describing the large number of borderline cases, especially among the children, and he makes an eloquent plea for better
conditions. In America, also, the evidence points to the
conclusion that rural areas have a higher proportion of mental defectives than the
cities, despite figures showing higher commitment rates for urban areas. One reason is again the age factor, mental defect showing itself in children, and the death-rates among aments being high. Landis (I948) points out that rural families are more likely than city families to let their moron children run at
large, and he cites the moron commitmentrates as evidence. These rates are much lower for the country than for the cities.t Evidently the farms shelter their morons at home better than the cities and provide simple tasks better suited to their abilities. More evidence is provided by the percentage of urban and rural American draftees in the first world war: I .5 per cent of the urban and 3 9 per cent of the rural men were rejected because of " mental defectiveness."
There is not space to discuss other factors connected with mental quality-alcoholism, vice and juvenile delinquency. Certainly indications are that the rates of incidence are higher in the cities than in the country.
Davies' (193I) conclusion on the whole question of mental abnormality is worth quoting:
It seems that the incidence of mental abnormality tends to increase as population approaches
* Op. cit. In this Scottish district there were in
193I 7,000 more people over 65 and 45,ooo less under 20 than there had been in 1871.
t Ibid., p. iII. See also Sorokin, Zimmernan and Galpin, Vol. 3 (I932), p. 240.

either of the two extremes of excessive density or excessive sparsity, while it is lowest in a mean or normal population. In this case it would appear that rural-urban migration has been a factor of very great importance in the causation of mental deficiency, both rural and urban, not necessarily by draining away the best stocks from the countryside but by depleting it of its normal proportion of population, while at the same time overcrowding the towns.-(loc. cit., p. 147).
This question of the interplay between quantity and quality in a population is one deserving much study, but is beyond the scope of this paper. Our conclusion must be that the rate of mental deficiency is higher in those rural districts which have been surveyed than in the cities. Studies of other rural districts are needed before generl conclusions can be drawn.
Intelligence
And now we come to intelligence, the thorniest problem of all. I will not attempt to go into the question of definition, or into the history of the nature-nurture controversy, now nearly two generations old. I cannot do better than to quote Sir Cyril Burt ('946):
... the inheritability of tested intelligence is remarkably like that of stature. The measurable height of a child may be reduced by illness or malnutrition, particularly during infancy; but that does not obscure the fact that the main determining influence, especially when all are brought up in favourable conditions, is still the individual's inborn constitution. And the same holds good of the measurements obtained by intelligence tests.
Suffice it to say that certain tests are now accepted as useful tools in skilled hands, for specific purposes, and for the classification of children within certain groups. When groups differ greatly in background the question arises : does the measuring instrument favour one group more than the other? For our purposes, do the tests favour the city children ?
American Studies of Rural Intefligence
This question has been debated more frequently in America, with its racial problems, than in Britain. American rural conditions differ widely from British; if I were
D

84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

asked to cite some of them I would hazard
the following: First, the American rural population is far more mobile than the British ; there is an army if migrant workers, and even among stable families there is a habit of " moving on "; second, the Ameri-
can educational system is more uniform and democratic even than the British; this affects test comparisons in the over-I4 age group more than in the primary grades; third, the class system is more " open," both occupationally and socially, and this affects the "pull" from the cities; fourth, the farming structure is different; for instance, the landlord-tenant system is hardly comparable to the British system; land ownership does not have the same traditional meaning, and tenancy is merely a step in the farming ladder.* Broadly speaking, it is easier for an able young man to get land and set up as a farmer in the United States than in England. Bearing these differences in mind let us examine some of the studies that came in such spate during the 'twenties and early 'thirties. Sorokin, Zimmerman and
Galpin (I93i and I932) summarize the results
of sixty-five such studies-I shall not do that I In general, the country children were slower and, therefore, did less well on any tests dependent on speed. An early school survey (Works, I922) found that country children were equal to city children in arithmetic, but deficient in other subjects. This brings up the vast and important matter of rural education, which can only be touched upon here. Roughly speaking, the American surveys have shown that the rural schools in the regions studied are inferior to urban schools, the city children being approximately one year ahead of the country children. The urban superiority varied in direct proportion as " demands made by the tests called for special school instruction as opposed to general powers which the school can do little to make or mar " (Chapman and Eby (i920)). To illustrate this, here is a story quoted by Blackburn (I948):
* A comparison between the British and American smallholdings movements would be of great interest; also a study of the different types of well-paid farm jobs in each country.

A Kentucky mountain boy was being given the Stanford-Binet test. " If you bought 6 cents' worth of candy and gave the storekeeper IO cents, how much change would you receive ? " The boy answered, " I never had IO cents, and if I had I wouldn't spend it on candy, and anyway candy is what mother makes." The examiner, not to be downed, improvised: " If you had taken ten cows to pasture for your father, and six of them strayed away, how many would you have left to drive home ? " The answer came quickly: " We done' have ten cows, but if we did, and I lost six, I wouldn't dare go home." The examiner tried again: " If there were ten children in your school and six of them were home with measles, how many would there be in school ? " The boy said, " None, because the rest would be afraid of catching it too."
That boy was not stupid, but he might have been rated as a moron on the Binet scale.
An interesting American approach is a study in Iowa on children from birth to
i6 years (Baldwin and Fillmore (i928)),
which points up the influence of enviroi\ment. The authors found that
when matched with city children the rural infants show no noticeable differences; the rural pre-school children show some inferiority at the upper ages, and the rural school children show ... increasing retardation . . . especially in language ability.... They show superiority on certain (performance) tests that probably relate to their experiences, but they have a slower rate of action.
The fact that the rural babies up to about three accredited themselves as well as their city contemporaries leads the authors to suggest that, among other causes, the fewer books and pictures in rural homes may account for some of the inferiority of older rural children.
In i929 Shimberg made an investigation to examine the hypothesis of the unfairness of tests. Believing that intelligence tests are to some extent information tests she constructed two scales of twenty-five general information questions, one based on town experience (Test A), the other on rural (Test B). Test A ranged in difficulty from " What are the colours of the American flag? " to "What is a referendum in government ? " Test B began with " Of what is butter made? " and ended with " How can you locate the Pole star? " After careful

THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION

85

standardization each scale was given to large groups of urban and rural school children in the State of New York. On Test A (the urban scale) the rural group was found to be a year retarded, on Test B (the rural questions) the position was reversed, indeed the urban children were slightly more than a year retarded. Shimberg concludes, not unnaturally, that ordinary intelligence tests do not " fit " rural children as well as they do urban; that the country children are different, not inferior.*
Jones, Conrad and Blanchard (1932) have made an important study in which they " analysed the effect of restricted environment on the separate mental operations in the Binet test." Space does not permit a full summary,t but here are their conclusions, somewhat condensed:
... a rural child moving to the city would increase his intelligence-test scores, merely as a result of changed environmental conditions. The rural child . .. is handicapped ... in linguistic information . . . in speed . . . and in adaptation to test situations. The handicap is specific, not general; ... sometimes transitory, but more often cumulative.... It would be unsafe, however, to infer that the average retardation of rural children is chiefly due to environmental factors. The quantitative relations cannot be stated on the basis of the present evidence, but the most likely estimate would be that about half of the average difference of Io points I.Q. is attributable to factors other than those derived from social and educational environment....
Professor Raymond Cattell wrote to the author in January from Illinois, and said, with regard to urban-rural migration:
The evidence seems to be that normally the children of brighter I.Q. tend to migrate to the really big cities somewhat more than those of
lower I.Q.... The country areas seem to start
with a somewhat lower distribution of I.Q. and this does not seem to be entirely accountable for by differences of efficiency of schooling. They then tend somewhat to lose the brighter I.Q.s. ... On the other hand, there is an opposite trend of migration during the time of agricultural slump, when it seems that it is the less successful, and probably, therefore, the less able, who migrate to the cities. Whether these occa-
* Shimberg (1929), p. 52; also cf. Smith (I927) and Shaler (1930).
t For this see Schwesinger (I933), pp. 295-7.

sional heavy migrations through slump are sufficient to offset the endemic trend in the opposite direction is anyone's guess.
To conclude this brief survey of American studies may I quote two other opinions: Frederick Osborn (I940), summarizing a discussion of studies on racial and regional groups, says:
Differences in hereditary potentials for intelligence are widely scattered in different family lines throughout the whole population. In order to sort them out with any accuracy it will be necessary to equalize or allow for environmental conditions affecting the development of intelligence.-(p. 99).
Professor Landis (I948) ends his discussion of rural innate ability thus:
The effective intelligence of rural students, as
measured by their ability to make satisfactory adjustments (in college) is apparently as high as that of urban students. This would seem to be a more valid basis for drawing rural-urban comparisons than performance on psychological tests.... That farm people have almost universally been placed lower than urban groups in intelligence testing may be of some significance, but interpretations must be carefully qualified, for the tests as ordinarily used are not a safe method of arriving at an index of population
quality.-(Op. cit., p. io6).
British Studies of Rural Intelligence
And now we turn to the British rural population again-so much more homogeneous and stable, and yet just as complicated. Again the overall picture of past and recent studies reveals lower average rural scores on intelligence tests, but some high scores in remote districts. In I9I9 Bickersteth (I9I9) tested children in the Yorkshire Dales and in Leeds. The Dales children were better in memory tests, the Leeds children in reasoning. This last was tested by the Burt analogy test (policeman: burglar; cat: ), and the answers would presumably be easier for children with urban background.
Gray and Marsden (I922) also tested a small group of children in the Yorkshire Dales in I923, and concluded, "The country children examined are, as a group, more intelligent than some town classes we tested.
." The famous studies with the Northumberland mental tests by Professor Godfrey

86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Thomson, published in I92I (Thomson I92I, Duff and Thomson I923) found the rural children more than a year behind those in the large cities. Some of the children in the remote Cheviot valleys were found to have high intelligence, and Professor Thomson suggests this may be in part due to these districts being " too remote to be drained by selection to the cities."
This is borne out by a study in the West Riding of Yorkshire under the auspices of the Board of Education in I924. " Mental tests" were applied in sixteen urban and rural elementary schools, and the results showed:
... in the rural schools the most noticeable feature is the greater range in the distribution of intelligence.... The villages where a disproportionate number of . . . backward children were found were . . . mainly villages near a port or city-villages, that is to say, from which the brighter families had already migrated. Other villages, however, in a similar situation showed a disproportionate number of bright and average children; in such cases it was found that the less intelligent families had moved to the large industrial centres owing to the demand for unskilled labourers ; while on the other hand the village itself offered a desirable place of resi-

dence for better families, such as skilled artisans and professional people.-Psychological Tests of
Educable Capacity, I924 (P. 156).
In I937 Dr. Raymond Cattell published his book The Fight for Our National Intelligence, which did much to rouse public opinion about the differential birth-rate. He applied a specially made non-verbal group test to 3,734 io-year-old school children in Leicester city and in rural Devonshire, and obtained figures from which he estimated the following declines in I.Q. in a generation: 3-I for the urban area; 3.3 for the rural. He also estimated " approximately a 30 per cent increase in mental deficiency," and that the very able country children had been cut
down by half. This, not surprisingly, he caLls a " galloping plunge towards intellectual bankruptcy." Sir Cyril Burt (I946), com-
menting on these estimates, says that this alleged plunge, if true, would have aroused
comment from school teachers and educa-
tional officials (and, I might add, employers -some of whom, indeed, have complained
of lowered efficiency). Sir Cyril goes on to
explain the divergence between Cattell's and his own estimates for the decline of the I.Q.

TABLE VI DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE URBAN AREA
- Mean. 100-9
232 (665)

TABLE VII DISTRIBUTION OF INTELLIGENCE IN THE RURAL AREA
Meeoi93650
Aedian 9218057 l 28 2
(227) 24)

(540
7
t4")

Poerstage In esc category
t~~~~9t bd of couhFn.
Actua nwnbers Ia brackets.

Pere 1ntge each eatop at head of ccoumn.
Act wdvmbrs la bceaskt

137t

8-2
12)2
OZ28 40 42085o! z K 40 50 60 70 800 100110120 130 140150 160 170
4 -- INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENTS. -

42 t w
Q.35(1S)

*15
~~~~~20)1'75 04

50 <

60 -

--

70

I8N0TEL90LG1E0N1C1E01Q2U0OT1I3E0N1T4S0.1-5016--01701

THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION

87

(I * 5 urban, 2 0o rural) by citing differences in in towns. He suggested as an explanation

the tests and in the sampling.*

that in Scotland a greater variety of social

Tables VI and VII show Cattell's scores classes go to rural schools; in the cities the

for the rural and urban children, giving the classes are more segregated. The higher

spread of intelligence in both groups.

scores were found in the small (rural) and in

The greatest contrasts lie between the the large (urban) schools rather than in

80-90 and the IOO-IIO I.Q. groups; but the medium-sized ones. He suggests that the

rural children show significantly lower scores children benefit from more individual atten-

in all the I.Q. groups except between 90-ioo. tion in the small schools and from the better

By way of comparison, Table VIII gives organization in the large ones; or that per-

curves by Hirsch on Kentucky mountain haps the " drain to the towns of better

children, and by Terman and Merrill on stock " has left remoter districts more or less

urban children in America.t The greater untapped, so that the small school " way

difference in the averages reflects the greater out " has brighter children. He also raises an

contrast in environment. Actually the interesting query about occupational in-

mountain children appear to have been a telligence. " Intelligence is demanded of

normal group for their environment.

shepherds, small farmers and signalmen,"

and perhaps the parents' occupations influ-

TABLE VIII

ence the I.Q. of the children. It is well

DISTRIBUTION OF SCORES IN INTELLIGENCE TESTS known that the children of professional

MADE BY AMERICAN URBAN AND EAST KENTUCKY MOUNTAIN SCHOOL CHILDREN

parents score the highest on intelligence tests; but do urban, industrial and clerical

28 occupations really demand higher intelli-

26 - - - _' - N-N1964 U*b6a0nChe7

24

Ag(-es--

C4qes2-18,ti)fnfa-Ord&Tes/.

22 _ -2.2-4- ~~~A -~: ,
2200_ OUin5/
IA,v/8_ ~_ ~ ~/~-t-/

\--~~~t~~\'^M/Po/nc,cN&2/-u,1idn9t,ean4nkn5-?CCZEuhoSinsH/n/dSgrK.neeSgnnt6hti1o9dcm.eksRn3A:ty5sI)

_-4-164 --.I

gence than rural work in general ?* Real
evidence on this question could have been obtained by comparisons of evacuees and country children in the rural schools during the war. I have not been able to find a single

12--I j.-

such study.

8- '

V I --

In I939 Macmeeken studied the intelligence of a representative group of Scot-

tish children with Binet and Performance

tests, and found " no evidence of in-

55- 45 5 65- 75 8f5 955- 05- 1/5- 25- f5 /4_15--
44 54 64 74 64 94 104 1/4 /24 (54 /44 154 854 174

feriority of rural to urban children in level of intelligence .. ." though " in interpreting

this we must remember that a remarkable

To swing from the Kentucky mountains to uniformity has been achieved in Scotland,

the mountains of Scotland, two studies made where 99 7 per cent of the teachers are

before the war are worthy of notice. Mowat trained." (p. 46).

(1938) studied city and rural schools in Scot- Evidence from an English education

land and found that the differences of ability authority which has done research with

between schools were less in the country than Moray House intelligence tests shows defi-

* Professor Ashby [(1939) and personal interview]
criticises Cattell's findings on rural intelligenice by maintaining that rural birth-rates have never been sufficient

nitely lower scores for its rural children. In I947 the University of Hull inquiry in two different counties (Perkins, I947), one south-

to account for " the country supplying the cities with its better men." He asks what evidence Cattell has for saying that some villages with high intelligence have

west and one north-east, found mean scores for urban children of:

been " untapped by the towns." If this were true these villages would have grown into small towns. Finally he doubts whether the tests used measure inborn

IOI-7 (S.D. 13-[)
105.67 (S.D. 15-04)

capacity.

t Osborn (op. cit., p. 73).

* See also Russell (1930) and Macdonald (1925).

88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for semi-rural children of:

rural (I2,55I eleven-year-olds) had average

IOO. (S.D. 13.6)
Ioo-64 (S.D. 14.3)
and for rural children:

test scores of 35 *754 (S.D. i6 * 22). The difference of I 4 points is statistically significant. The average score for all Scotland is 36 688 (S.D. i6 * 05). Evidently if there were chil-

97-3 (S.D. I13-1)

dren with high scores from some of the

98-9 (S.D. 13-76)

remote rural districts they could not pull up

Clearly the urban children were fairly superior to the semi-rural ones, especially in the north-east county, and very superior to the
rural children. The author comments:

the rural average, which is almost a point
below the total average. It would be interesting to try rural-urban information
scales on these children, such as Shimberg

used.

The distributions were similar and seemed to support the theory that children in rural surroundings develop at a slower rate than in urban ones. Village children evidently included a

Sir Godfrey has also allowed me to quote
some results from the English survey, which is being conducted by Mr. Emmett, and

number who were thoroughly well able to follow which shows fairly wide variations in urban

a grammar-school curriculum provided they had and rural intelligence. As a whole the urban

been sufficiently well equipped with the two essential skills. Having reached the desirable
level under less favourable circumstances than

children are brighter than the rural by 4-07 points of I.Q. Within two very rural

their town-bred fellows their claims should almost pastoral counties the children in the

receive the fullest consideration.

smaller urban districts are significantly

The author adds that war camps and factories had brought an " infusion of brighter children " into rural communities. The pro-
portion of dull children in the rural areas
was more than twice that in the towns. The proportion of children with scores of I30 or over was different in the two counties, but equally small for rural children:

superior to the rural children. In three agricultural counties each containing large urban areas and backgrounds of extensive
mixed farming the children in the smaller
urban districts are significantly superior to those in the county boroughs (the big cities). In one of these counties, with many small
family farms specializing in dairying, the
rural children are significantly superior to

Urban Semi-rural Rural those in a dockyard sea-coast town. In

S.W. County ... 27 (iz8) IO (2.6) I4 (1-1) N.E. County ... 35 (5-3) 4 (i.8) 3 (-I)

another of these counties, also very rural, with mixed farming, the country children are significantly inferior to those in a large

And now we come to the latest and most industrial city. In the third of these counties

important of all British intelligence surveys there is only a slight and insignificant dif-

-that carried out in I947 by the Scottish ference between the rural children and those

Mental Survey Committee (Scottish Council of a large industrial and shipping area. The

for Research in Education, I949), of which lowest I.Q.s occurred in another sea-coast

Professor Sir Godfrey Thomson is chairman. town, and the total rural children were

The comparison with the famous I932 brighter than these by I 05 points. The

survey (Scottish Council for Research in urban children from the smaller towns (one

Education, I932) was described to this an ancient cathedral and market town) were

Society last October by Sir Godfrey himself. brighter than the sea-coast town children by

Here I will give some unpublished figures, 5 * I2 points.

which he and Mr. James Maxwell have kindly permitted me to quote: The children from

Discussion of American and British Studies

the four cities (27,422 eleven-year-olds) had a A summary of this brief survey of the more

mean test score of 37* I56 (S.D. i6 * io). The important American and British urban-rural

children from nineteen other education comparisons yields no broad conclusion.

authorities, whose areas are almost entirely Faced with such a diversity of results, what

THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION

can we deduce ? The two main questions in Need for Further Research

the field of intelligence testing were: " Do
the tests favour the city children ? " and " Are most of the abler children now living
in the towns due to selective migration by their forbears? " The answer to the first question is, I think, a partial yes; but final judgment must be reserved until more work
has been done on such matters as " test sophistication " and the influence of specific and general elements in the home and school environments.* Professor P. E. Vernon, who
coined the term " test sophistication," is engaged on research into the intelligence of army recruits in various parts of the country. The results of the Hollerith analysis will give important information on rural, semi-rural
and urban test performance. His conclusions,
together with those of the Scottish and
English surveys, will be of great interest. Sir Frederic Bartlett has suggested ways
of minimizing environmental influence, such as testing the rate of improvement, or finding a way by which " significant limits " of intelligence differences could be equated for
different groups.t (Efforts made in the
'twenties to find a " universal test," free of all environmental influence, have not had
much success.+)
The answer to the second question is more difficult, as we have seen. If the tests used in rural-urban comparisons do favour the city children to some extent, how much does this account for the lower rural scores which have been found almost universally in both England and America? The debate on selective migration really hangs on the

The importance of the I.Q. in any assess-
ment of all-round quality may itself be debated. There must, of course, be a basic average of general ability, below which no society is efficient; but does a difference of 2-4 points on, say, the Moray House intelligence tests constitute a drop below such an
average ? This is a vital question and needs
far more thought than it has received from the experts in mental testing. It brings up a
whole complex of questions. Should tests be
standardized separately for groups varying too much in background ? Can temperament and character be measured ? If the social and biological backgrounds cannot be un-
twined, can their respective contributions be estimated ?
Another rich field of inquiry is the
distribution of rural intelligence. The percentages of bright and dull children, and the possible connection between family strains and racial origins, may be more important than the average scores of groups. American sociologists seem to have
concluded that intelligence is more diversified in the cities than in the country,* and this is at variance with most British findings. It probably reflects in part the difference between American and British conditions, but it would repay study. Last, but not least, the question of the greater incidence of mental defect in country districts needs far more investigation. Is there any connection between feeble-mindedness and too great or too little density of population ?

answer. We have seen that Jones, Conrad

and Blanchard consider that only half the

GENERAL CONCLUSIONS

difference in rural-urban I.Q.s is attributable to environment. A similar research in England would be valuable, as would a study planned on the same lines as Shimberg's.

A paper such as this can hardly result in any one conclusion. We have seen that
standards of health and intelligence vary with the shift of economic forces in both

* Cf. Schwesinger (I933, Chapter IV) for an able and town and country. On the physical level the

comprehensive discussion of environmental influence. innate urban quality is probably much the

t Cf. his introduction to Blackburn (1948). For earlier discussions of this question, see Schieffelin and Schwesinger (1930), pp. 42-51.

same as the rural. On the mental level urban environment seems to make for earlier

t E.G. Dodd (1926). It has been found again and
again that non-verbal tests, even those with pantomime instructions, do not eliminate the language element;

development and to call forth different abilities-alertness and speed, for instance,

nor do they escape specific culture factors, such as the

child's reaction to the test situation.

* Cf. Davies (I93I), p. r67.

90 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

as against persistence and thoroughness.* The proper comparison between town and country is in terms of differences, not of superiorities.

Special Qualities of the Countryman
The special character of the countryman has been the subject of many books. At its simplest it reveals itself in the instinctive wisdom, stability and balance of the rural
worker. The country boy of I4 who scores
lower than his town contemporary may well,
at 30, become an abler worker, more skilled and reliable, and with better qualities as parent and citizen, than the same town boy turned factory worker. Sir Horace Plunkett does not hesitate in saying that the countryman's " intellectual slowness is really ...
engendered by the slow processes of nature ... his thought is larger, nearer to the realities of life, than that of the city dweller, his work is more dignified and thorough."t Sir George Stapledon calls the attributes of a good landsman " self-reliance, self-sufficiency ... endurance."' The farm worker of to-day is in many ways more skilful than his ancestors. He may not be so good with animals, but he is learning the intricacies of tractor engines, of grassland management and of efficient crop production. § His employer the farmer needs, besides these abilities, inventiveness and foresight. He must be aware of processes which the townsman can more safely ignore. Such a simple thing as the placing of a haystack means weighing the pros and cons of weather and transport many months ahead. The mating of a cow to-day will influence milk production four years hence. In forestry the cycle may be eighty years.
These qualities of the countryman were recognized during the war in each branch of the services. Both naval and army officers have told the writer that they could always

* Landis (I948) enlarges on this: ". . . alertness has

survival value in the city; but steady persistence may

be equally important in the country...."

tt

Cf. Holdenby Sunday Times,

(19I3). Introduction. January 23rd, I949.

§ This view was forcibly expressed in a letter to the

author by Mr. G. B. Newe, Regional Organiser to the

Northern Ireland Council of Social Service.

recognize the countryman among the ratings
or recruits, and that after training they were the ones who usually got the stiff assignments. The villages and small towns provided more officer material, in proportion to their numbers, than did the big cities. These traits of stability and leadership seem to be fostered by a rural or semi-rural environment.* They may depend more on the home and school than on genetic factors, true; but it is the interaction of biological and social heredity that is important, and this interaction takes place in the home and school. As rural housing and education improve we may see improvement in mental " quality" which will lay once and for all the bogey of rural inferiority. Many a country doctor will testify already to the improved health and " intelligence " of village families who have been rehoused.t And the same could be said of the children who have had the best type of rural schooling.
Farming, fishing, forestry and the other rural industries call for great skills, and these skills are becoming increasingly important to Britain. Certainly many people capable of these skills have been driven from the count-ryside in the past, but there is evidence that this is being corrected. As agriculture becomes more efficient it may need fewer workers, but it is all the more essential that those workers be of good quality. The old association between agriculture and industry is being restored in a new form, as is shown by the Government's attitude toward the decentralization of industry, the stabilizing of farm prices and the encouragement of small holdings; towards rural housing, transport, water and electricity. There is ample latent strength and ability among the rural population and a growing self-confidence. The rural worker is far more apt than the industrial worker to feel that he is doing a vital job, that he is not just a cog in a machine. 'During the dark days of farming
* Cf. Gee (I937). t There could hardly be a more dramatic contrast
than that between the modern Rural District Council house, with its good kitchen, bathroom, living and bedrooms, and the " improved cottage " of a century ago-which was itself such a striking advance over the hovels of past centuries.

THE QUALITY OF THE RURAL POPULATION

the countryman was decidedly not the " happiest man in the land"; but his importance to the nation is at last being recognized, and his belief in his own destiny
is reviving.

AUTHOR'S ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

To the many experts who have given advice and

information I am most grateful, notably Professor

A. W. Ashby, Sir Godfrey Thomson, Dr. C. P.

Blacker and others mentioned in the text. My

thanks are also due to Miss K. Lane and to several

other librarians in London and Oxford, and to Miss

F. B. Schenk, who prepared the charts for use as

slides.

B. S. B.

BOOKS AND ARTICLES REFERRED TO IN THE
TEXT AND FOOTNOTES
Addison, Viscount. I939. A Policy for British Agricul-
ture. London: Gollancz. Arden-Close, Sir Charles, K.B.E., C.B., C.M.G., F.R.S.
1948. Our Crowded Island. EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. 40, No. 1, April. Ashby, A. W. 1939. The Effects of Urban Growth on the Countryside. Sociological Review, Vol. XXXI, No. 4, October. Ashby, A. W. 1935. The Sociological Background of Adult Education in Rural Districts, 2nd Ed. London: British Institute of Adult Education. Baldwin, B. T., and Fillmore, E. L. 1928. The Mind of the Rural Child. Psych. Bull, 25, I85-6. Bickersteth, M. F. I919. Application of Mental Tests to Children of Various Ages. Brit. J. Psych., Vol. IX, No. I.
Blackburn, Julian. I948. Influence of the Social Environment on Intelligence Test Scores. British
Social Hygiene Council Inc. Occasional Papers, No. 4. Blacker, C. P., M.A., M.D. 1947. Stages in Population Growth. EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. 39, No. 3, October. Board of Agriculture and Fisheries. I906. Report on the Decline in the Agricultural Population of Great Britain, x88I-I906. (R. H. Rew.) London. Burt, Sir Cyril, M.A., D.Sc. 1946. Intelligence and Fertility. The Eugenics Society and Hamish Hamilton Medical Books. London. Cattell, R. G. 1937. The Fight for Our National Intelligence. London: P. S. King. Chandrasekhar, Dr. S. I949. The Population Problems of India and Pakistan. EUGENICS REvIEW, Vol. 41, No. 2, July. Chapman, J. C., and Eby, H. L. 1920. A Comparative Study, by Educational Measurements, of One-room Rural School Children and City School Children. J. Educ. Research, 2, 636-46. Davies, D. J., M.A., Ph.D. 1931. Unpublished Dissertation entitled The Condition of the Rural Population in England and Wales, z870-X928. University of Wales, Aberystwyth. Dayton, N. A., M.D., M.C. 1940. New Facts on Mental Disorders. Baltimore, Md.: Charles C. Thomas. Dodd, S. C. 1926. A Statement Concerning Research on an Intelligence Scale for International Use. Princeton Univ. Store, Princeton, N.J.

Duff, James F., and Thomson, Godfrey H. 1923. The Social and Geographical Distribution of
Intelligence in Northumberland. Brit. J. Psych.,
XIV. Fordham, M. I9I6. A Short History of English Rural
Life. London: Geo. Allen & Unwin Ltd.
Gee, Wilson. 1937. Rural-Urban Origins of Leaders in
Education. Rural Sociology, Vol. 2, pp. 402-8,
December. Gist, Noel P., and others. I943. Selective Factors in
Migration and Occupation; a Study of Social Selection in Rural Missouri. Univ. of Missouri Studies, Vol. XVIII, No. 2. Columbia, Missouri. Glass, D. V. 1935. The Town and a Changing Civilisation. London: 20th Century Library. Graunt, J. I662. Natural and Political Observation upon the Bills of Mortality. London. Gray, P. L., and Marsden, R. E. I922. Intelligence Tests in Rural Schools. J. Exp. Ped., 6, 224-3I. Hill, Austin B. 1925. Internal Migration and its Effects upon the Death-Rates: With Special Reference to the County of Essex. Medical Research
Council, Special Report, ser., 95. London. Hirsch, N. D. M. I928. An Experimental Study of the
East Kentucky Mountaineers. Genet. Psychol.
Monog., 3, I83-244. Holdenby, C. 19I3. Folk of the Furrow. London:
Smith, Elder & Co. Innes, J. W. 1941. Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly
Bulletin, 19, 72. Jones, H. E., Conrad, H. S., and Blanchard, M. B.
I932. Environmental Handicap in Mental Test Performance. Univ. Calif. Publ. Psychol., 5, 63-99. Kiser, Clyde, V. 1942. Group Differences in Urban Fertility. Baltimore, Md. : Williams & Wilkins Co. Klineberg, 0. 1938. The Intelligence of Migrants. Amer. Sociol. Rev., 3, 2I8-24, April. Landis, Paul H. 1948. Rural Life in Process. New York and London: Mcgraw Hill Book Co. Inc.
2nd Ed. Macdonald, Hector. 1925. Social Distribution of Intel-
ligence in the Isle of Wight. Brit. J. of Psychology. Vol. XVI, 123-8. Macmeeken, A. M., M.A., B.Ed. I939. The Intelligence of a Representative Group of Scottish Children. Univ. of London Press. Martin, W. J. 1949. The Physique of Young Adult Males. Medical Research Council Memorandum
No. 20. Mayer-Gross, W., M.D., M.R.C.P. 1948. Mental
Health Survey in a Rural Area. EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. 40, No. 3, October. Morris, J. H., and Titmuss, R. I942. Epidemiology of Juvenile Rheumatism. The Lancet, vol. 2, July
I8th.
Mowat, Alex. S., M.A., B.Ed. I938. City and Rural Schools. Publications of the Scottish Council for Research in Education. Univ. of London Press
Ltd. Osborn, Frederick H. 1940. Preface to Eugenics.
New York: Harper Bros.
Pennecuik, Alexander. 1815. Geographical and Historical Description of the Shire of Tweeddale. Leith: A. Allardice.
Perkins, A. Lea, M.A. 1947. A Preliminary Enquiry into the Distribution of Intelligence amongst Urban, Semi-rural and Rural Schools. Univ. Coll. of Hull, Institute of Educ. Studies in Education, No. I, June.

92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Pintner, R. I917. A Mental Survey of the School Population of a Village. School and Society, 5,
597-600. Pyle, W. H., and Collings, P. E. I9I8. Mental and
Physical Development of Rural Children. School and Society, 8, 534-9. Report of the Committee on Land Utilization in Rural Areas. 1942. (Chairman: The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Scott, P.C.) H.M.S.O.
Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee. Part IV.
1929. (Medical Investigator, Dr. E. 0. Lewis.)
1925-7. London: H.M.S.O.
Russell, J. B. 1930. The Measurement of Intelligence in a Rural Area. Brit. J. of Psych. Vol. XX, 275-95.
Schieffelin, B., and Schwesinger, G. C. I930. Mental Tests and Heredity. New York: Galton Publishing Co. Inc.
Schwesinger, Gladys C., Ph.D. 1933. Heredity and Environment. New York: The Macmillan Co.
Scotland's Changing Population. 1946. Published for the Scottish Council of Social Service by the National Council of Social Service, London.
Scottish Council for Research in Education. I933. The Intelligence of Scottish Children. V. London: Univ. of London Press Ltd.
Scottish Council for Research in Education, and Population Investigation Committee. 1949. The Trend of Scottish Intelligence. London: Univ. of London Press Ltd.
Shaler, J. N. 1929. A Study of Mind-set in Rural and City School Children. J. Educ. Psych. Vol. 21, 256-8.

Shimberg, Myra. 1929. An Investigation into the Validity of Norms with Special Reference to Urban and Rural Groups. Archives of Psychology, No. I04.
Smith, W. C. 1927. The Rural Mind. Amer. J. Soc.,
32, 77I-86.
Sorokin, P. A., Zimmerman, C. C., and Galpin, C. J. I93I and I932. A Systematic Source Book in Rural Sociology. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis.
Stamp, L. Dudley, C.B.E. 1949. The Planning of Land Use. (Paper delivered in the Geography
Section of the British Association Meeting. Extracts printed in The Estates Gazette, September ioth.)
Terman, L. M., and Merrill, M. A. I937. Measuring Intelligence. New York: Houghton, Mifflin & Co.
Thomson, Godfrey H. I921. The Northumberland Mental Tests. Brit. J. Psych. Vol. XII, No. 3.
Tilley, M. F. 1947. Housing the Rural Worker. London: Faber & Faber.
Trevelyan, G. M., O.M. 1944. English Social History. London: Longmans, Green & Co.
Tricart, J. 1949. Exemple d'Evolution d'une Socidtd Rurale en " Milieu Repulsif." Population, JulySeptember, No. 3.
Works, G. A. I922. Rural School Survey. Ithica, New York.
Zimmerman, C. C., and others. 1927 and 1930. The Migration to Towns and Cities. Amer. J. Sociology, July-September I927 and July 1930.

THE WORLD'S GREATEST I
BOOKSHOP

FAMED FOR ITS EXCELLENT MEDICAL BOOKS DEPT.
New and secondhand Books
on every subject. Stock of 3 million volumes.
We BUY Books, too!
119-125 CHARING CROSS ROAD, LONDON, W.C.2 Gerrard 5660 (16 lines)
Open 9-6 (Inc. Sats.)
Elugi nReview, VoL ]LM Not 2

