0. G. EDHOLM
Division of Human Physiology, National Institutefor Medical Research, London
The Physiology of Adaptation*

THE TITLE OF this lecture is misleading; a more accurate description of the subject matter would be "Some random remarks on physiological adaptation in man, illustrated by a description of personal experiences of studies on the effects of hot climates". Even this cumbersome subtitle is probably inadequate; adaptation is throughout limited to physiological adaptation.
The definition of adaptation can be attempted by considering its characteristics. There is a delay in the development of adaptation which distinguishes it from the immediate physiological response. If a man is put into a hot and humid environment, his skin blood flow will increase and he will sweat. Ifthe environment is sufficiently severe his body temperature will rise and the sweat rate increase. If he leaves this environment and has a cold shower, he will rapidly return to his pre-exposure condition. The responses are those evoked by stimulation of the temperature regulating mechanisms. But, in addition, adaptative processes have been initiated and a subsequent exposure, provided it is not unduly delayed, will evoke qualitatively similar physiological responses, but they will be quantitatively altered. Reinforcement and time are needed to establish an adaptation, and the various modifications of physiological response do not necessarily follow the same time course. One modification may be easily aroused, another may need more stimulation before it becomes apparent. And so, in Adolph's phrase (Adolph, 1964), adaptation is a syndrome. Since for physiologists adaptation is environmentally determined, a definition could be that adaptation is any property of an organism which favours survival in a specific environment, particularly a stressful one (Prosser, 1964). The environments and conditions which have been studied particu-
* The Darwin Lecture delivered in London on 4th May 1966.

larly as far as man is concerned are: high altitude,
high pressure, heat, cold, high gravitational force,
low calorie intake, and muscular work. It appears to be true that all mankind has the capacity to adapt, as indeed Darwin (1859) himself stated:
Hence I am inclined to look at adaptation to any special climate as a quality readily grafted on an innate wide flexibility of constitution, which is common to most animals.
But when we consider the diversity of man, it might be expected that marked differences of adaptation could be demonstrated. However, present evidence is inadequate to establish unequivocal differences. And where there is suggestive evidence we are unable to state with confidence the reason for such differences. The position to-day is not very different from that stated by Darwin (1859):
How much of the acclimatization of species to any peculiar climate is due to mere habit, and how much to the natural selection of varieties having different innate constitutions, and how much to both means combined, is a very obscure question.
If evidence is to be obtained, then relatively large numbers of human beings have to be studied, and their responses to carefully standardized conditions compared with some precision. This is, of course, far easier to say than to do. The techniques involved in studying human physiology have become increasingly elaborate, as in all fields of research, and so have tended to be less applicable on a large scale in the field.
However, this very elaboration has now begun to make it possible to conceive of relatively large scale studies, due mainly to the development of miniature equipment which can be used by subjects without undue interference. My colleague, Mr. H. S. Wolff, has played a large part in this development, in which he has deliberately aimed to produce-in his phrase"socially acceptable instruments".

136

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, September 1966, 58, 3.

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF ADAPTATION

There has been so much work necessary undoubtedly in many cases-and particularly

within the fields of physiology that we have in human physiology-these have tended to be

deliberately or perhaps, in some cases, acting in regarded as unwanted effects and our conduct

ignorance, confined ourselves to physiology and design of experiments have been carefully

without looking at the contributions from other planned in attempts to exclude these effects.

disciplines.

But if we are concerned as physiologists with

Over the years, perhaps rather slowly, the studying man as he ordinarily exists and lives,

many factors which can affect physiological as opposed to the highly artificial and abstract

responses have become clearer, not necessarily as conditions we impose in the laboratory, then

subjects for study but rather for conditions to be we must not only be aware of these disturbing

controlled. Although this has meant an improve- influences, we must also include them in our

ment in the results obtained, in the sense of studies. This is certainly the case if we wish, as

isolating and controlling unwanted factors, it we do, to bring in physiology to the study of

has also led to an awareness that physiology is human populations.

not enough. We cannot ignore psychological I may seem to be straying a long way from the

effects, even if only for the reason that they are physiology of adaptation in man, but if we want

such a nuisance in spoiling one's results. to examine the process of adaptation, even to

Sometimes, of course, unexpected psychological such impressive changes in the environment as

or emotional responses are of great interest to may be produced by ascending the highest

physiologists. During the war, Henry Barcroft, mountains or travelling to the polar regions,

McMichael, Sharpey Schafer and I planned or to the hottest climates, then also our study will

some joint work on haemorrhage, combining be incomplete or inadequate to the degree that

plethysmography and the then new technique we fail to take into account all the factors in the

of cardiac catheterization. Our subjects were situation. And a formidable list it is: age, sex,

volunteers from the Friends Ambulance Unit, body form and composition, nutritional state,

and were understandably apprehensive as habitual activity, physical work capacity, climatic

apparently they gathered that a steel tube was experience, genetic factors, cultural patterns

to be pushed into the heart. All went well in and behaviour. No doubt this list is far from

the first experiment until we started to bleed the complete, but there is certainly enough to keep

subject, when he fainted. Quite an unplanned physiologists busy for a long time to come.

event, but the results were dramatic. To our

immense surprise, during the fall of blood pressure which accompanies fainting, the blood Effects of Hot Environments

flow in the forearm went up, not down. So we As an illustration of the distance we have to

happily set off to investigate this remarkable travel, I propose to describe some of the work

event, with to us most satisfactory results. Since on the effects of hot environments on man. It

then a number of emotional effects have been would have been equally possible to look at

captured by the physiologists and studied by studies of cold climates, or high altitudes, but

purely physiological techniques. As far as the not to discuss all three in the compass of a

circulation is concerned, emotions such as anger single lecture.

and fear have such obvious effects that they can The problem of heat is chosen for several

be easily recognized and then studied. It has reasons, one of which is the obvious fact that a

taken longer to realize what important effects high proportion of the human race lives in

they can have on other systems, such as those regions which are hot, i.e. have a mean air

involved in temperature regulation.

temperature of 200 C or more during the daylight

What I am attempting to show, without over hours throughout the year. Very roughly, some

elaboration, are the profound effects of psycho- two thousand millions, or two-thirds of the

logical events on physiological processes. world's inhabitants, live in such climates. So the

Althbugh these have certainly been recognized effects of heat on man and the way he adapts to

for a 'very long time by physiologists, these may be said to have wide application and

137

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

be of some practical importance, as well as of The effective stimulus appears to be an increase

considerable scientific interest.

in body temperature. But, surprisingly, man does

The history of scientific investigations on the not appear to adapt to a raised body temperature

effects of hot climates has been sketched by itself.

several writers, and will not be repeated here.

Although there were many important contributions during the earlier part of the century, Studies in the Field

one can date the period of intensive study to the Since acclimatization to heat can be developed

Second World War, when the subject became by short daily exposures, it might be predicted

a critical one to the armies and navies involved. that performance in a hot climate would be

Millions of men were moved to and from hot similar in groups of men artificially or naturally

jungles and deserts back to temperate and frigid acclimatized, and that both would have better

zones, and it was sufficiently evident that performances than unacclimatized subjects.

climatic factors could be of decisive military These predictions have been tested in a large

importance. Because of the difficulties involved scale field experiment but only partially verified.

in making detailed studies in the field, climatic The plan was initially to measure the responses

chambers were constructed in which the various of a group of sixty soldiers exposed to a hot

environments could be more or less reproduced and humid environment in which carefully

and controlled. Very important field work was standardized work was done. On the basis of

done, in spite of great difficulties, but. the success their body temperature and pulse rate at the

of experiments in climatic chambers undoubtedly end of the four hours exposure, and their sweat

emphasized this mode of study, so they were rate, six men were rejected and the remaining

continued after the war was over and, of course, fifty-four were divided into three matched groups

continue still. The military emphasis made it whose average responses were similar. Sub-

inevitable that the subjects of these experiments sequently, one group was sent to Aden for six

were young, healthy, male adults and this also weeks to become naturally acclimatized to a hot

has continued. By far the largest number of climate, a second group was exposed daily

experiments has been made on this particular over four weeks in climatic chambers in London,

group of the population.

to be artificially acclimatized, and the third

Amongst the many important findings from group was sent to Scotland to act as controls.

chamber experiments are that men can develop At the end of the treatment period all the

heat adaptation or acclimatization (the terms are, subjects were re-assembled in London and were

to some extent, synonymous) even if they are again tested in the climatic chambers. The

only exposed for a short period each day, the physiological performance of the artificially

rest of the time being spent in cool or temperate acclimatized group was slightly better than that

conditions. Originally the time required was of the naturally acclimatized group; both

thought to be four hours a day in a hot and groups were now significantly superior to the

humid environment in which the subject worked. control group. All three groups were flown to

More recently, Dr. R. H. Fox and his colleagues Aden, where an arduous military exercise

have shown that as short a time as one hour a was carried out for twelve days. Measurements

day, provided the body temperature is signifi- were made of body temperature and pulse rate

cantly raised, can still produce adaptation (Fox, on all subjects at approximately hourly intervals

1965). The second significant point is that all during the working day. In addition, body

subjects tested, and there must be several weight, fluid intake and urine output were

thousands, have developed acclimatization to measured, and some measurements of food

heat although they were all native to temperate intake were made. Cases of heat illness and

climates and their ancestors were also. Implied other medical conditions were carefully recorded

is the third point, that the physiological changes and military performance was assessed by a

which characterize heat adaptation are un- team of experienced officers.

equivocal and striking, with large alterations. Body temperatures were significantly higher

138

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF ADAPTATION

in the control group than in the other two groups.
The smallest rise was observed in the artificially
acclimatized group, but there was relatively
little difference between this group and the
naturally acclimatized group. There were no
significant differences between the three groups in water intake, food intake, urine output or
loss of body weight. It would be expected that
the group with the lowest mean body temperature
had an important physiological advantage over
the other two groups and particularly over the control group, and that this demonstrated the efficacy of artificial acclimatization. However,
the casualty rates were much the lowest in the naturally acclimatized group, and although the
control group during the first five days were significantly worse than the artificially acclimatized subjects, in the last part of the trial there was little difference between these two groups.
Furthermore, the military performance fol-
lowed a similar pattern, with the naturally
acclimatized group the best, the control group
initially the worst, and the artificially acclimatized group rather better than the controls for the first five days but no different in the last part of the trial. In spite of a real physiological advantage, the artificially acclimatized group were, in terms of performance and liability to
illness, only slightly more effective than the
control group. This unexpected result can, to a considerable
extent, be explained by additional observations made during the trial and by further information. It was hoped, for example, that in matching the three groups on the basis of their physiological responses to heat, other factors would be randomly distributed. Such was not the case. Intelligence scores were significantly lower in the artificially acclimatized group than in the other two and their military experience was also the shortest, both factors which would have affected military performance. The morale of this group also appeared to be low as compared to the other two groups. The incidence of gastro-intestinal disorders was markedly higher in the artificially acclimatized and control groups, as compared with the naturally acclimatized group.
It was concluded that the natural situation is
more complex than in the laboratory. In addition to acclimatization to heat, the group

sent to Aden in the treatment phase had also acquired an adaptation to local micro-organisms as well as becoming familiar with the actual place. It would appear that the factors which can affect man's performance in the heat are not only those of acclimatization but also include (a) intelligence, (b) experience, (c) personality, (d) morale or discipline, and no doubt many others, including genetic constitution.
Accounts of this experiment have already been published (Edholm et al., 1963; Edholm et al., 1962), but it has been mentioned here in some detail as it illustrates the general theme that physiology is not enough. However, it also shows the feasibility of carrying out relatively large-scale studies in the field, and in subsequent experiments considerably more elaborate investigations have been completed successfully (Edholm et al., 1964).
Although there have been extensive studies in climatic chambers and also in the field, these have been mainly on young, healthy, adult Caucasian males. But there have also been important studies of other ethnic groups, notably by Ladell amongst West Africans, Wyndham in South Africa, as well as some work on the American Negro and the Australian Aborigine. The main finding is the remarkable degree of similarity between apparently markedly different peoples. The chief difference is that peoples such as the West Africans, living in an essentially hot wet climate, regulate body temperature with a rather lower sweat rate than Europeans acclimatized to the heat (Ladell, 1964).
Among the difficulties of comparing groups from different peoples are body size and shape, and nutritional differences, as the most obvious. In many cases, a considerable number of subjects are needed before there can be any certainty of establishing differences.
Investigation on Indian Subjects
In one investigation carried out on Indian subjects, a comparison was made with British white subjects in which a deliberate attempt was made to select the Indians to match the British subjects in body size. These studies were made in

139

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

London, and the Indians were flown over at the
end of September, having spent the hot season in Lucknow carrying out a moderately arduous
training programme. They spent the winter in England, eating the same food as their British
counterparts. It was thought that the Indians would on arrival be fully, or nearly fully, acclimatized to heat, and this could be demonstrated by high sweat rates, small or moderate increases in body temperature and pulse rate
in the climatic room, and that there would be
large differences with unacclimatized British subjects. It was also predicted that at the end of their four months stay in Britain their adaptation to heat, as judged by responses in the climatic chamber, would have decreased and might be more similar to unacclimatized British, but if they were re-acclimatized by daily exposure it was believed that they would re-adapt more quickly than the British. Only some of these predictions were realized. On the first test in the heat the Indians were, on the average, better than the British, but not much. Their sweat rates were a little higher, body temperature just
significantly lower, and pulse rate was about the same. The difference was, to us, really surprisingly small. So the first prediction was not entirely confirmed.
The second prediction, about loss of acclimatization, was confirmed by the results of the second test after four months spent in England, when sweat rates were lower, body temperature and pulse rate higher than on their original test, and they were perhaps rather worse than the unacclimatized British. Incidentally, their health during the four months was remarkably good and there was little change in body weight. Then the two groups were acclimatized by daily exposure in the hot room for two weeks. We expected now, in spite of previous disappointment, that there would be a marked difference between the two groups in the rate of development of acclimatization, with the Indians winning. To our surprise, the Indians lost. The differences at the end of two weeks were highly significant, with the British having the better physiological performance (Edholm et al., 1965).
These results certainly indicate the need for more detailed studies of different populations.

They are difficult to explain and the very point
of picking Indians with large body size may have
been partly the reason. These subjects could not
be said to be a representative or a random sample
of the Indian population. They came from many
different regions, but had all served for a number of years (five or more) in the Indian Army and led reasonably similar lives. But in the distri-
bution of body size they came from the top end of the scale and conceivably they could be relatively poorly adapted compared with smaller Indian subjects.
The factors which might affect adaptation to
heat have been listed above. Although some
information is available about some of these factors, in most cases it is inadequate and as regards genetic constitution there is virtually no information at all.
There are other gaps, such as the effects of previous or existing disease states.
In the first part of this lecture I indicated my belief that physiology is not enough, but it is painfully clear that even now we do not have enough physiology. So it might seem that the proper way to proceed would be to extend carefully controlled physiological studies to begin to cover the glaring gaps. I want to argue an opposite, but not necessarily opposing, view. I feel that the opportunity to take part in population studies provides an essential stage in the evolution of investigations of human physiology. Itwas for this reason that, personally, I found the concept of the International Biological Programme so exciting. In this programme the objectives of the section devoted to Human Adaptability include joint work by geneticists, anthropometrists and physiologists in the study of populations, by the development of multidisciplinary teams. Selected populations would be examined to establish demographic features, genetic and anthropometric characteristics, as well as the pattern of disease. Cultural and sociological features would also be determined. The numbers involved in such studies would be relatively large, attempting a virtually complete cover of the selected population. Absolute numbers would clearly depend upon the particular population concerned, but could be 1,000 or considerably more.
It is perfectly feasible for such large-scale

140

THE PHYSIOLOGY OF ADAPTATION

studies to be made in respect of genetics and anthropometry, but as far as the physiological side is concerned it is at present impracticable. Instead, we must work on samples of the defined population, and for some of the more elaborate tests we must use sub-samples.
Investigation in Israel
In these population studies, an essential objective is, wherever possible, to examine similar populations, i.e. genetically and preferably culturally similar people living in adjacent but contrasting environments, and for dissimilar peoples living in the same environment. Such situations do exist, and I have explored the possibility of one such situation, in Israel (Edholm, 1966). Here is a country which is geographically small; the greatest distance is rather more than Dan to Bathsheba, it is now Metullah to Eilat, but even this is not more than 250 miles, and in places it is not more than ten miles wide. Although it is so small, one can distinguish three climatic zones, apart from the coastal area. These are the desert area of the Negev, the mountain region of Judaea with an altitude of 1,000 metres, and the semi-tropical part of the upper Jordan area, including the region round the sea of Galilee.
Into this tiny area has poured a flood of peoples from all over the world. Although they are all Jews, this is a term which has proved remarkably difficult to define. This may not seem relevant either, but it is important to emphasize that these various groups coming from so many contrasting environments appear to be startlingly different from each other; certainly, as regards body size, the tiny Yemenites and the large hefty Kurds, for example; dark Cochin Jews from India and blonds from Russia.
What is more, there are many villages populated by one particular group; as, for example, a village group from Kurdistan remains as the same village group in Israel. So we have the position that in all the climatic zones mentioned there will be a Yemenite village next door to a Kurdish village, and in the next one all the habitants may be Cochin Jews.
Such a situation is enough to excite any

climatic physiologist. Here we have the opportunity of studying contrasting, dissimilar people in the same environmental conditions, and in three contrasting environments. When it is added that in Israel demographic and medical data are available throughout the country and that there is a wealth of scientific talent and facilities, you may not be surprised at my eagerness to exploit the situation. Moreover, such opportunities do not necessarily persist, and intermarriage between the different communities will soon blur the distinctions which may exist.
Further Studies
I have described Israel because the problem of adaptation can so obviously be profitably looked at, but there are, of course, other populations and other localities where multidisciplinary studies can and will be carried out.
The final point I want to make is that extensive physiological field work is now practicable. The methods which are already available ensure this, and I have no doubt whatever that there will be rapid advances from now on which will extend our powers considerably. The great need is to develop a methodology which can be used in the field with many subjects, with the minimum of interference and a high order of accuracy. As one example, Wolff (1965) has developed a heart rate integrator which can provide us with information relevant to habitual physical activity. This can be used on a reasonably large scale, does not inconvenience the wearer or interfere with his activities. A basically similar device can be used to integrate other variables such as skin temperature. As physiologists, we have to learn the value of such devices in terms of the kind of information provided.
In conclusion, there is, I hope, another possible dividend from these population studies. We suffer from a shortage of physiologists interested in the whole animal or man. I believe, and I am of course biased, that the comparative neglect which this implies of work on the whole animal is unsatisfactory in terms of biology. The whole animal is more than an assemblage of parts; the study of the physiology of the whole man is certainly essential for an understanding of clinical problems, but it is also necessary to have

141

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a proportion of physiologists who are experienced investigators in these fields, otherwise we are in serious danger of becoming completely unbalanced. It would appear that the work that climatic physiologists are pursuing is not of sufficient interest to attract the recruits we need. Now, with the International Biological Programme developing, we can surely offer some exciting prospects, such as the possibility that we can hope to advance from the position that Darwin described over 100 years ago.
REFERENCES
1. Adolph, E. F. 1964. Perspective of adaptation: some general properties. In Handbook of Physiology, Section 4: Adaptation to the environment. Pp. 27-35. Washington, D.C., American Physiological Society.
2. Darwin, C. 1859. On the Origin of Species. 3. Edholm, 0. G. 1966. South-west Asia, with special
reference to Israel. In The Biology of Human Adaptability. Ed. P. T. Baker and J. S. Weiner. Pp. 357-94. Oxford, Clarendon Press. 4. Edholm, 0. G., Adam, J. M., Cannon, P., Fox, R. H., Goldsmith, R., Shepherd, R. D., and Underwood, C. R. 1962. Study of artificially acclimatized, naturally

acclimatized and non-acclimatized troops on exposure to heat. Army Personnel Research Committee, Med. Res. Coun., Lond., Rep. No. APRC 61/25. 5. Edholm, 0. G., Fox, R. H., Adam, J. M., and Goldsmith, R. 1963. Comparison of artificial and natural acclimatization. Fed. Proc. 22, Pt. I, 709. 6. Edholm, 0. G., Fox, R. H., Goldsmith, R., Hampton, I. F. G., Underwood, C. R., Ward, E. J., Wolff, H. S., Adam, J. M., and Allan, J. R., 1964. The effect of heat on food and water intake on acclimatized and unacclimatized men. Army Personnel Research Committee, Med. Res. Coun., Lond., Rep. No. APRC 64/16. 7. Fox, R. H. 1965. Heat. In The Physiology of Human Survival, Ed. 0. G. Edholm and A. L. Bacharach. Pp. 53-79. London and New York, Academic Press. 8. Ladell, W. S. S. 1964. Terrestrial animals in humid heat: man. In Handbook of Physiology, Section 4: Adaptation to the environment. Pp. 625-59. Washington, D.C., American Physiological Society. 9. Prosser, C. L. 1964. Perspectives of adaptation: theoretical aspects. In Handbook of Physiology, Section 4: Adaptation to the environment. Pp. 11-25. Washington, D. C., American Physiological Society. 10. Wolff, H. S. 1965. Instruments for the investigation of the physiological and environmental patterns of normal life. In Digest of the 6th International Conference on Medical Electronics and Biological Engineering, 1965, Tokyo. Pp. 309-12. Tokyo, Japanese Physiological Society.

142

