LORD MOYNE
M.A., F.R.S.L.
The Guinness Family

T HE ORIGINS of our family are hidden in The first Arthur also built flour mills at

the mists of a not very remote antiquity. Kilmainham outside the city, and is on record as

The first Guinness of whom there is an un- often riding out to visit them when over 70.

doubted record is Richard Guinness of Celbridge, He was the father of some twenty-one children,

county Kildare, who was born about 1690 and not all of whom survived their infancy. He

was living in Leixlip in 1766. Efforts to trace the married Olivia Whitmore in 1761. She was the

origin of the family beyond him have met with daughter of a Dublin merchant, and it was

no success; conjecture, supported by incon- through her that his descendants became "of

clusive pieces of evidence, has led principally in Founder's Kin" at Winchester.

the direction of the Magennis family of county

Down and of the Gennys family of Cornwall. Church Connections

Richard Guinness of Celbridge is described in Of the first Arthur's many children mention must

legal documents as agent or receiver to Dr. be made of his eldest son, the Reverend Hosea

Arthur Price, Archbishop of Cashel. He first Guinness, who was first of the many Guinnesses

married Elizabeth Read of Oughterard, county to go into the Church. He was born in 1765 and

Kildare, and his eldest son Arthur became a was for thirty years rector of St. Werburgh's

brewer and the ancestor of the brewing side of and became Chancellor of St. Patrick's

the family, while his second son Samuel became Cathedral. His descendants are the eldest line of

a gold-beater and the ancestor of the banking the Guinness family. Among them was Miss

side of the family.

May Guinness, the distinguished painter, who

The Archbishop died in 1752 and left £100 died in 1955, aged ninety-one. She won the

each to Richard and to the first Arthur. The Croix de Guerre for her bravery under bombard-

latter acquired the lease of a small brewery in ment as a nurse at Vadelaincourt, near Verdun,

Leixlip, county Kildare, and soon afterwards, in in the first world war. A disciple of Andr6

1759, the lease of the brewery at St. James's Lhotte, she was an accomplished artist with a

Gate which was to become famous for its stout. strongly individual style.

The lease, which was for 9,000 years at a rent of Hosea's youngest son, Francis Hart Vicesimus

£45 a year, describes the premises which covered Guinness, emigrated first to India and then to

about an acre ofland as "a commodious dwelling New Zealand, where a numerous family of his

house with a large pleasure-garden and fish descendants is to be found to-day. His eldest

pond, the brewery with copper kieve and mill, son, Sir Arthur Robert Guinness, became

two large Malt houses, stabling for twelve horses Speaker of the House of Representatives in 1903.

with loft to hold 200 loads of hay, and an The second son of the first Arthur, usually

uninterrupted supply of water free from tax or known as Arthur Guinness of Beaumont,

pipe money." To defend this water supply from assumed command of the brewing business, in

interruption by the Dublin Corporation, the which he was helped by his brothers Benjamin

first Arthur became involved in litigation, and and William Lunell. He was also a director of

even, it is said, had to menace the men of the the Bank of Ireland, and in 1820 became its

Corporation with a pick-axe; but in 1784 he Governor. As early as 1797, when Ireland was in

was granted a lease of the water for 8,975 years. a most unsettled state, he publicly championed

* Reprinted, with kind permission, from a supplement
to The Times, November 20th, 1959.

the cause of Catholic Emancipation. None the less, he was later involved in a political dispute

3'
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1960, 52, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with supporters of Daniel O'Connell, from The descendants of the first Samuel, the gold-

which a temporary boycott resulted, in spite of beater, were mostly either barristers or bankers.

O'Connell's condemnation of such measures. One of his sons, Richard Guinness the barrister,

It is said that the development of the brewery's married Mary Darley (an aunt of George Darley

export market-especially to India-dates from the poet) and Richard Samuel Guinness, of

the time of this boycott.

Deepwell, was their son. His elder brother,

The second Arthur Guinness had three sons Robert Rundell Guinness, in partnership with

by his first wife, Anne Lee. He was succeeded John Ross Mahon, founded the merchant bank

in the direction of the brewery not by his eldest of Guinness & Mahon in Dublin in 1837, the

son, the Reverend William Smythe Lee Grattan firm's name being changed subsequently to

Guinness, who went into the Church, nor by his Guinness, Mahon & Company. The founder's

second son Arthur Lee Guinness, who was a elder son, Richard Seymour Guinness, who is

dilettante, but by his third son, Benjamin Lee reputed to have been employed by the firm at

Guinness, who had worked in the brewery since the age offifteen, subsequently moved to London

the age of sixteen. He became Lord Mayor of in 1874 and opened an office there in 1887.

Dublin, and restored St. Patrick's Cathedral from Two of the founder's great-grandsons and also

a ruinous condition. He was a Member of two of his great-great-grandsons are partners

Parliament for Dublin City from 1865 until his in the firm at present.

death in 1868.
Sir Benjamin Lee Guinness had three sons. The eldest, who was to become Lord Ardilaun, inherited a partnership in the brewery which he sold in 1876 to his younger brother, Sir Edward Cecil Guinness, later the first Lord Iveagh. Lord Ardilaun, who was M.P. for Dublin from 1868 to 1869 and again from 1874 to 1880, is particularly remembered there for the gift to the city of St. Stephen's Green which he made jointly with his brother Edward.

Edward Cecil, the first Lord Iveagh, spent much of his time in England, and his benefactions were divided between the two countries.
In 1890 he founded the Guinness Trust to provide housing for working people in London and Dublin at a low rate of interest which, being retained for the trust's purposes, would by degrees enable further housing to be built. In 1903 the Dublin and London funds were divided, and the Dublin fund named the Iveagh Trust. At
present the Guinness Trust houses 3,669

Racing Motorist
A grandson of Sir Benjamin Lee, through his second son Lee, was Kenelm Lee Guinness, the
racing motorist, who invented the K.L.G. sparking plugs for his own use, and successfully organized their manufacture on a larger scale when required to do so during the first world war.
In 1886, ten years after becoming sole owner
of the brewery, Edward Cecil Guinness converted the enterprise into a public company. He retained control of the company until his death in 1927. By his marriage to his cousin, Adelaide Guinness, daughter of Richard Samuel Guinness ofDeepwell, Blackrock, county Dublin, he brought together the descendants of the first Arthur, the brewing branch of the family, and the descendants of the first Samuel, the banking branch of the family. As there were three other

families, and the Iveagh Trust 945 families. Family tradition has it that the first Lord Iveagh maintained that public authorities should provide such housing, and that he would show both private investors and public authorities how it could be done. In Dublin he provided what is now called the Iveagh Hostel, a poor man's hotel on the lines of Rowton Houses in London (Lord Rowton was the first chairman of the Guinness
Trust), and later on a play-centre for children, one of the first of its kind. He also laid out as a park the slum area north of St. Patrick's Cathedral, and built the Iveagh Market for the stall-holders displaced by the clearance. In England he endowed the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine and with Sir Ernest Cassel founded the Radium Institute, which is now
amalgamated with the Mount Vernon Hospital.

marriages between Guinnesses in the nineteenth In 1921 he founded the Chadacre Agricultural

century, inter-relationships are complicated.

Institute at Hartest, near Bury St. Edmunds, to

32

THE GUINNESS FAMILY

provide training in agriculture for the sons of Interest in the philanthropic enterprises of

farm labourers, small-holders and small farmers the first Lord Iveagh has been well maintained

in Suffolk and the adjoining counties. In 1925 by his descendants. Six of his grandchildren

he bought Ken Wood as a gallery for the more and three great-grandsons are trustees of the

important part ofhis collection ofpictures. This, Guinness and Iveagh Housing Trusts. Chadacre

together with the house and the surrounding Agricultural Institute has upon its governing

land, have all passed by the terms of his will to body two of his grand-children and a great-

the London County Council.

grandson. On the governing body of the Lister

It is noteworthy that his benefactions were Institute he is still represented by his son and a

largely of a continuing kind, and planned so as great-grandson. The derelict area of the Breck-

to be self-supporting. Responsibility for their land at Elveden in Suffolk, which he bought as a

direction and that of the brewery was assumed sporting estate, was turned into good agricul-

on his death by his three sons, the eldest of tural land by the pioneering methods of his

whom, the present Lord Iveagh, is chairman of eldest son; and his Dublin house, 80 St. Stephen's

the brewery, Guinness Trust, Iveagh Trust and Green, was in due course presented, also by his

Chadacre. In his youth the present Earl was well eldest son, to the Irish Government, who use it

klown as winner of the Diamond Sculls in 1895 both to house the Department of External

and 1896. He was one of the founders of the Aflairs and as a centre for Government

R.N.V.R. and was a Member of Parliament hospitality.

from 1908 until obliged to retire by his father's The brewery in Dublin was purchased in 1759

death in 1927. His brother, Ernest Guinness, by the first Arthur Guinness. It is possible that

who died in 1949, played a prominent part in the the £100 each left to him and to his father by

brewery and the trusts, as did his other brother, Archbishop Price helped them both to realize

my father, in so far as his active political career an ambition, and that they were not unmindful

permitted. As Walter Guinness he represented of the parable of the talents. Their venture has

Bury St. Edmunds from 1907 to 1931. He was this year culminated in the bicentenary of a great

Financial Secretary to the Treasury from 1923 industrial company with ramifications extending

to 1924, and Minister of Agriculture from 1925 over four continents. Perhaps it is not too much

to 1929. He was chairman of the West Indies to believe and to hope that the prosperity which

Royal Commission of 1938. In the first world has followed the fortunes of the company may

war he won the D.S.O. with Bar, and in the in some part be due to the fact that for seven

second world war he met his death as Minister- generations the family of Guinness have regarded

Resident in the Middle East at the hands of it, not merely as a source of wealth but as a trust

assassins of the Stern gang.

handed on to them by their forefathers.

33

