UN4?LOYMENT AND CHILD-BEARING
By FRANCOIS LAFITTE

odaction
OVERTY and.high feitility are itradli-
tionally associated phenomena. Are they likely to remain associated in the
ture? We do- not know, but there are
sons for- suggesg that the association y be p ely broken down. In the
;t place soil progress has resulted. in
her standards of child-, education
s and labo legislation, which have verted thehild'fom-a potential economic et into a certain financal burden. In the
ond place, atid perhaps. more important,
developmen,tof_birth-control seems to
e brought us to the threshold of a new
ch in sbcial 'histtory-the epoc of

uwfvfaaahpmgmioiaicnlrlhiiyeetmsslhaiewmoyhifctoloatsentheaidedoibntec.ricoeoomnaInsmdtowomtonnihfnxcreomfrsiwosylls,slktiltoesiongumshb,atjtoeiitfcnneetdmvBiptirrottieastctbithlasletyhy vioipofa6dBsanrnaaneomeesrtatemi-shyireltlettlidirhoeline.metsdinsmgtighto.tenerunhlddeodioCu,dvucyroro*elgbfanosaahtayfsnitineomaotohdqtssfhnemphue.eieoeftwlUmronrlhn,iortsIesoeslnllueomtyioenrsvpfateitlliipnenhotnugmosepdysyapnuupltumiefsinoelneotmcdyedarlanpevtmilltltriaioehtolowyAncaayinesotbtnmsaw'nlgeiworidebasnrinepsstktstnIht,aeieo9aunrofm3sdcsnaioe7e'esyttf

lntary parenthood. The poor ma to+-day definite econlomic reasons for not: wantitg arge family, 'andin addition the means of
iting his o g are at his disposal. If eaper a:nd imp d contraceptive devices
e into geneWluse among the mass of
4ary manual wage-earners there appears
be no-reason-why, in t-he years ahead of us, poprer classes should not succeed in

NIumbers of Unemployed and their Dependants
'wDumUIanenhntTecesoehmeumrmerpmipalablwnl1oeoces9yreyr3efme71odSer9tsn3Raao7tentm.puuretoomAAorub4srttges7yshi5rts,eChost0dfaoka0temn0ttmcdhc1eimae,htet6teo6UBnf5eont,ewcaeh0oir0meant0dpd,nrhliedtogfpiiaayrosomomfmtnivoeelsitrinndhieetgeends

oiding unwanted children to the same ent as- ther social superiors. The upper-

including
These men

dependent children were divided between

under I4.
Unemploy-

s eitoonu of sterility," with its
tatively udesirable efects, may spread

cmnheinltc-lreInn)suarnandceUne(2m2p9l,o00y0menwtithAss4i3s8t,aonocoe

al classes in the: communjty, and bring (245,500 with 578,500 children). The

titatively undesirable effects in its train. majority of the men on insurance benefit

t follows that voluntary parenthood-f the' endproduct of sogial -developments

were either of work for

" temporarily stopped" or out
relatively short penods, whereas

h have made- a finaiaL liabilityr of
U-reaFing---niay, as tim,e passes, enhance
importc nof econ,omi'c considerations

half the -men on assistance had been out of rweosrpoknsifboirlitaiesyeoafrthoermelnonogenr.assiTshteancfeawmeirley

inipeIn r to birth restrcion. While greater than those of the men on~benefit (see.

Fom.ic ;aetors, eveni .on -the broadest preta,t.itn,., we. by.. no means fthe,ol es .ofx tlie;,declinle in: fe,rtility,' they are

wlTaaarbsgleehr*igIph)re,orp,poaprrattriltyolnybeobcfeacumasueesnethtfeh.rieorymacvtoenhrteaaiglneoewdaelgsate

Irtant-:enough,to. merit.careful con- and most fertile strata of manual workers.

,ration.. ,.'. ;,- . .- .
heiolin analysis: of.,.,the .s,tan,dard of
g ofI f:-rUiesonnemlomet pay
Fusses .efhe enoic circuLmstances

* Ronald C. Polscy, p. 58.

Davison

(I938),

Britisk

Unemployment

t :Richard M. Titmuss (I938), Poverty and Population,

p. 243.

t-My. own estimate.

275

276
Men on Assistance Men on Benefit*...

THE EUGENICS REV1EIW
TABLE I
THE BURDEN OF DEPE£NDENCY, DE:cEMBPR I937

i child

2 children

3+ children

percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage percent e of men of children of men of children of men of chi1m

... 34 12 26 21 40 67

46 24 29 31 25 45

Scales of Benefit and Relief
WVhat provision did unemployment pay make for dependants ? Unemployment benefit was originally designed to be an
insurance payment against loss of wages rather than an allowance adequate for the basic needs of the applicant and his family.
While dependants' allowances are paid,
payments are made at flat rates, of I7S. for a
man, gs. for his wife,t and 3s. for each child,
subject to no adjustments either upwards or downwards in accordance with the applicant's needs or resources. WVhen an unemployed worker has exhausted his benefit rghts he passes on to the U.A.B. Assistance allowances are determined in accordance with a scale intended to be adequate for the human needs and welfare of the recipient and his family, at a level somewhat above a bare subsistence minimum. The Scale was worked out after a consideration of such standards as were used in the Nutrition Reports of the British Medical Association and of the Ministry of Health Advisory Committee on
Nutrition, and by the various local social surveys and local relief authorities. It is designed to cover the fundamental necessities of life: food, clothing, light, fuel, cleaning materials, household equipment, and net rent, provided the latter does not
exceed one quarter of the total scale allowance for all members of the household, dependent or not. In other words, the Scale
embodies a " standard of living" which is deemed to be the minimum adequate.
In assessing the actual allowance in a given
case, account is taken of the household's resources, if any, part being disregarded, and
* My own estimate. j Raised to IOS. in Apri I938.

of any unusual circumstances (high rent, lac
of bedding, etc.). Needs are assessed undt
the standard scale and are then offset agai4 such resources as have been taken int
account. A high rent, "special circun,
stances," or" exceptional need "may justif an increased alowance; resources or a 1ow rent may justify a reduction. But the pur pose of this flexibility is apparently to ensur
whatever the- size of the allowance paid i
indivdual cases, that all families, howe'ver much they deviate from the " normal," sha be receiving an income adequate to maintau
them at the level envisaged by the Scale. A
" wage stop " is, however, applied in certajz
cases, when the assessment approaches -t' closely to the normal wage the applicant
might be expected to earn; and allowance
may be reduced for this reason.
The Measurementt of Poverty
How does unemployment pay compare| with other accepted assessments of miniiu human requirements ? Mr. R. F. George i i936 worked out a Poverty Line desiged establish a bare subsistence minimumi, Based on London pnces for July 1936, it takes account only of food, clothing, fuel, light, and cleaning materials. Rent is omitted and a! other items are ignored. Food requirement
based on the B.M.A. "mnimum adequate"&
diet with an7augmented milk allowance, are
assessed at 6s. 9d. for an adult male, 5s. 9l for an adult female, 5s. 5d. for children agedl 6 to 14, and 3s. iod. for children under 6. The Poery Line, writes -Mr. George, " seeks to a~ssess the cost of a standard of; living so low that, while persons beow it are;
*JoofthRwya Staaistica $Qcty 193,174.I.

<iJiNEMLO~MNT AD CHLD]BEARING27

g: j~

e ty, 'those just a-bove

TABLE III.

woul. ,_N-

be regarded as very

or."
25

pReEr d.cenig

t.ot,he..Ue.liAm.iBna.tesctalhee

allowance
standlard

COMPARISON RATES IN

.:OF BENEFIT RESOURCE:LESS

RAT3S CASES,

DWEICTEHMBAES;SRIS1T9A3N74.E

Benefit (= Amount by

Nntlwane,. .i;t-.is, possible to compare the
ale with Mr. George's minimum in.cases
here there are no resources (see Table. II).
;TABLE II.

U.A.B. which U.A.B.

Minimum rate may ex-

Rate) ceed benefit

Man and wife

...

S. d. .. 26 o

of to ,,andichild

29 o

s. d.

, ,,,, 2 children 320

10

MPARISON-OFU.A.B. SCALE WITH R. F.
SUBSISTENCE MINIMUM IN DECE3MBER

GEMORGE'S
I937

arriedl couplq With onowing nupber- of

R. F. George's Subsistence

U.A.B. Scale in cases without

99.9,,
"t

,3
4
.5

,, 35 0
., 38 0
, 41 0

26
40
56

(U.A.B. rates for children under I4)

dependent children Minimum

under14

(July i936)*

resources

s. d. s. d. s.d. s. d.

0 17 8

19 6

I
2 3 4 I5

22 3to 23 10 21 9

26 32 36

o
x

,, ,,

336'I0oO 2246

6,, 42 Io 28

oto 24

3 6

,,, ,32-I8

9
I
6

40 II ,, 48 IO 30 9 ,,34.IO

The comparison shows clearly that, even
n the Us.A.B. the possible' standard of ing declines as the size. of the dependent
aily increases.' Instead of one uniform

feMa-asYlbIIial9mlrteeOfslvlb.Saet..ooosonwauowtdRdcetraonmioardhanewior-eb1cafsndr5rleia,Steee,.c.ir".e-nfmed*ifatv.taseohonohme'drldniAasdvelodneeBy2mjtsr.I,uhidStMwbsao.nh.aiatnueiAsste6biM.mhddtsir.mut,.-s"amtdttmGoihxhaoieerwaufiteorDtat)erhmeeghgeutocceea-thihrme'lsehiwstm.lpaohbmedoanRuiersiviolnesrnsebwniidtnennsisnIotthfme9atofrarlu3nuiemove7cttts,me,ee.s,o

veilstoafnclei,vitnghefoSrcaalllereaspopueracerlsestsofaemnifloirecseona Modifying Factors

ffer.ent level for families of each size and

es the children in the process.

A comparison of benefit (at that date) with

he U.A.B. Scale in resourceless cases is

qually revealing. In such cases, when there

e dependent children, the U.A.B. minimum

s always the appropriate benefit rate but the

cale allowance may exceed the benefit rate

See Table III).

In addition
upplemented

asistance allowances
for a variety of

may be
reasons.

enefit was very rarely supplemented in

937. Although

a

:
worker's

robably smalle;r when

food requirements are he is unemployed than

hen he is; in w.ork, a com;parison of-these

ssessments owntree's

for ;thLe un-employed with' minimum wages adequate

Mr. for

e' huaii needls of labour"3 (which also

* Sinlce Lo1g prices are somewhat high, Mr. a2iamarrg1ti9gn3r,7e.atm:ssinsTishio:FniJlnJa.htAa.esBr.nionrtetbnhietse;narrutalidecjslue.so.tfeTt4ehneupmalitJotnoDmweascaoenmmd-e
eeduo ~~gb the children, the

ricttubtfcpfaoooooehononrsnilgvcTewwilslaeoahmhshhdoirrmn,eiprwdidtues"eeclcyswmnrhtw,ofhetaoh"oayhotrptnrerfmaewfheneeteraotge,uvnscmnhoneoteiiSomitaslnehencnonliadeamlgdpdelqslypiisaeuefrlcf~wfyemieoaoyooitsnnlssnmiyrthiloepnskeiaeufodaageocdyraudsrttnrcmetsfiuoseiffliaassaioiilscaltmonvftytcilewinalowloytiinsiircsen-ofcotesaelotesrhns:ysnp,r,oeku,eeisfigractbt.?d"angaeuh'henatestee"IpedesdseDfnexd,teaeeot.oontqrxxeoddrrwyutttsdeediaeethnemtetntnahitehtrrttoeet
lmhatcpeoloaawvslndAvo(esocaelesi)we,t-barolwfnTnfeaathcer,hdrheoedoer,m,twpea-hhtesftmeeoteawsrrrhdtjhoeehioatlerfhrtlfraieeoiaecfttnnyntmaygatotimslpriloobslyirasfeisussmfetlsesobUoaeser.esssyreAolse.rnomarwt-ewaeaBnhsinia.yiostnstcue.shdCrahietecoshdemGmtesusmaeamtcnnraiiotacegktnrineritceodanneonalaoemrrtloiise.deyfts

*~Seebohm Labour.

Rowntree

(I937),

The

Human

Needs

of

278 IETUGISkEIW

speaking, the rent allowances seem to have perty0;s'ome 22 per cent. having

been sufficient, and where rents fell short of resources and6 per cent. pess;ing resou

the standard there may have been an of some descnrption.

additional income of up to 3s. weekly.

- The poverty of the:large families is grea

(b) Free school meals or milk are normally than that of the smaller. The U^A.B. Rep

disregarded by the UJ.A.B. But in I936-37 provides an analysis of households accor

not more than 2 per cent. of all elementary to size and to presence or absence of resour

school children we're receiving free school This analysis, beaning in ind the relat

meals of any description, and meals were not inportance (ascertained above) of resou1

restricted to the children of unemployed to fanilies on assistance, the -gap betw,

parents.* Except in certain areas where the Mr. George's standard and the Scale all

local authonrties provide su1bstantial meals ance, and the possibilities of ad-diti

and interpret the term "malnutrition " in a income 'from the operatio of the

generous spirit, free school meals do not regulations,' makes possible a. very ro

appear to be a factor of any but minor assessment of the relation of families of

importance.

size to Mr. George's subsistence level

Personal resources make a great difference

to families on assistance. Of all families with Subssstence Va4ue of U.;A.B. Scale

dependent children (under I4) on assistance According to this assessment, chil

in December 1937, 54 per cent. had no couples or couples with one child were us

resources and 46 per cent. had resources of above the' subsistence level, though the 1

some kind. Resources made a difference to may have been near 'to it tifhtey' had

them, because resources are never wholly resources. Couples with two children

taken into account by the U.A.B., which is probably above the- subsistence level' iff

obliged to disregard certain amounts and had resources; some of them may have

certain types of income. About 70 per cent. more 'or less near to it. Without reso

of these resources consisted of the earnings they probably were living at the subsiste

of. sons, daughters, brothers or sisters at level, but in'many cases may have bei

work. Most of the remainder came from little below. Couples with three or

official funds (unemployment benefit, pen- children were probably.in most cases

sions, and disablement grants).

the subsistence level if they.had no resou

In the Pilgrim Trust- study of the long- If they possessed resources, 'the best that

unemployed at the end of I936, the investi- be said is that most of them were prob

gators found that 4 per cent. of the families living near to the 'level and 'some of t

in their sample were on or below Mr. George's below it.-

bare subsistence level, 30 per cent. actually It appears,. in consequence, tlt, of

being below. Of the latter, four-fifths were families w.ithout resources all tho$eln wa

families with no resources.t A careful com- there were t.hree or more de,pend,ent c.hil

parison of the Pilgrim Trust dVata with those were living either below or, at bes,t, oiw

in the last Report of the U.A.B. suggests that .subsistence level;, and.tha,{ most of the

the findings of the Pilgrim Trust survey of chi.ld famil.ies' were living, p.robab.ly mo:

the long-unemployed (totalling half of the less on the subsistence le.vel 'or' a littl.e a

~'thefamilies on assistance) may have been very it. WVith regard-to th.e-'fa,milies' ,with reso

nearly true of all families on assistance. The

Dsituation''seems to 1Wave 'been In

comparison suggests that 28 to 30 per cent. bet.ter. \Pr.obablyvonlyin th cases o..1£ain

Of all families on the U.A.B. in December with -four or mor.e children were'most"oft

1937 must have been living in " extreme definiitely below the subsistence level;I

* M. E. Green (T938), in the Report on Nutrition of the
British Associationz for La&our Legislation.
t Men Without Work : A Report lo the Pilgrim Trust
(I938).

most of the 'families wif ithcr-e}hil
would seem ;to hae 'beexven the subsist
level rather thian aboe it. D; To lappreciate. th .iII signitrwe' of

tYNEMPLOYMENTAN.-D CIIDPERNG

279

flClUS1O3;i tZEt.berecdaued that two.

*d -f. th~4~e~i4etit~chldren. of U.A.B.

yees werfs tobe in families with

ree or
quently

.ntI~I dent
it seems certain

k that

. well

Coi-
over

the deed hildren of men O .A.B.- were gt best -wling -in the
tor" conditions of George's bare

the
vvery sub-

stence leve6l; and at worst in " extreme

verty."

This conclusion is, of course, only a rough

proximation to the truth, but no facts are

scoverable which
s. Mr -George's

ssutgagnedsatrtdhawtasit

ibsasererdoneo-n.

ndon pries for July. I936j but it seems

probable that l pal ce divergencies were

sufficient magnitude to mnodify the con-

sion that the majority of the children of

e on assistance must have been living at

below Mr. George's subsistence level.

The Pigrrimtrust Survey provides a mass

confirmatory evidence. One instance

y be
Lpie

quoted.. In the
from- Livel

families in their
the investigators

d that 53 per cent. of those with one

pendent child, -68 per cent. of those with

o childdreanxd, 94 per cent. of those with

e or
verty

more
Line.

children were
Summing up

below George's
the position as

whole, the Report concludes: "WhMere

re are more than one or two children,

e is almost always evidence of hard-.

Iltpeei-seeefvewaeimvtnsoh'uc:rolosnenalrty,htoehtneh.eecrhSceihfpliodalrlrdeet,,sasbntuhctaostuitspatlnhuedenafUroad.rvsAo.utBrho.-ef George-.to the large famnily.

cmilies on Denefi

[nformat,ion- con,cerninlg the cond.i.tions of

of men ,on :benefit ,is ufficient to enal a e formed. It'is likely

more scanty, but it
general imnpr~ession
that they had more

esonal- resourc'es th-an' the men on assist-.

c,
d ye

ssgmiianvlc,elenet.rh'etfihraemmi';blgeyrtteea.rrteeesrpm,poonlpspoioby,imlriettuninetistrieewcsoourfldodsr

ag.and acur1 household efects.

.or faile w,h, some resources benefit
variby, 25. above the minimtum assist-.

*.lbaotbTtaammcsalaamptdBsfsfeweirthnheamnhvcunoegthonohufsiknesmritebaehcva.learsdsetlteecialessyreeendonfehtelflrsdeitcmapdraaTfwypiiiir-hsaabsmegratofhastfeprtnceaqtrtsiei,fecoirsytmith'gnouheeMlevavwibdisnhialatbeniewrleotaalailahsylrwceeayh.iotnihsosdnityb,teseoobsfwch,tbfenrsellerleheweermehiwsmGlrytb.llhrillyebnswovouaeseihufUeollsoe)atihwpiuvnovcsveodtonwt.abtdenreidPrioloeuurevnoyhmhhAlefon,rogcurdrfcefrm.oec.ufnfgvtser.echienuoawoBasooichs'oettmsbhurtses.rpedeilstrniausehalThtrrererbranmjenea5eemveahsadeeolaathcols,ossdncsstl-iesysebeald.arursaoeelfosscasWebvxifasu6ioourohpbbhs-ooaftoeterdsrirwaarimniilecamnfsmcy.tcmielallesmmih1oyeeabeidebsdnisytlrsi3a4nsnoul.esro(ltwcltiyeslofcniseuieeh.iemenhid(eewemetnrsovasnevcintcraeiFssfhci.efdneeahhrle,etoonweeoulwtas.loieTnwtnrgrsirilithfhlhaahtbmoacvettdbewabiadsaaaboe,ilil-inaehtronseobfmtnldenllfmntiefsaculoaagcebeyfeeototslifnuhnbolnrvaeeplteswawirnmeleasdnrwdscesarewItlmiaaoytteeue,hnIotndeintrtttftnicIimoomabdrlchloieochhhl)ienolfi.in-eee.eetyeyrrndre,ee-flsfs htmbttsisMtoodhuehhhrumuevuribaeee.tbpeeTssslasorntoiUptevmoiRns.oshofqehotsisAypgnurnweai.uaeweniontnBvsemonscit.tiueshxrthoe.rainiuknmuaelnbsea.petlmfegtetmesn,nw,eevoutodpene-nTbif,rltlcldtshae,vehoLattlgeeriayyalihlawtoop.ivnmeathrmvi:nutpgrelidinigerogcelnngeaeaehhansgdtlairtthalmtls-"htayaidaabtsstrfnsmetthaeoonahernpoerdtbajiausfchioetdroedtoicatserefatutsyifsrsiqnrneautttudmortghyabaaafDehugetatrtoeedessetodferscmimtfhastiseeeebnftnglm"nhewobmtrthbarleatheebeeovrorhaaonmyrnaeewetetf
fscpodooravorreveTwrsirheancnicr6gstb.cihbyoeiefvcldredoe7nnddbucu.yiclnfiudfnsMoetiirrrhgo.enta6hG,Beem.oraamrMenrigm.drleaAke'i.osdnafslmdcl7ieoiodunw.sepauiltfbnmeosac,urteamoanwtftoeiicse5tahkc*hlilduall.yttyd

280 THE.EUGENICS REVIEW

U

Problem of the "Overlap"
But the full di.mensions of the problem

The. extent of seiious problem.

this "overlap" presen%ts It,is serious not primari

a'

can only be grasped if it is realised that the great majority of working-class children are

because it means that some. of
ployed may,gr.w into workshies

the
and

louanfeer4s.

doomed to phases of existence at such a level but, rather because of the light which it

at one time or another in their childhood throws upon the standard of living of that

days, and that a considerable number of -considerable body of men with large farnii1j

working-class children are normally born and who are actually at work- and earning Ao

brought up in families whose income from more than the U.A.B. would give them.

wages may be no-higher, or very little higher, survey of existing wage rates in certain

than the income they might expect if they trades. and industries shows that earnings i,

were on assistance or-on benefit.

a vast number of cases must appear a por

The greatest obstacle to the raising of the compensation to a man for a hard week'5

rates of unemployment pay is fear of a total work when he could receive an equivalent

abandonment of the principle of " less sum, or a little less, without working at al

eligibility." Public authorities are faced if he were on assistance or on benefit.

with the dilemma of keeping down un- The Pilgrim Trust. report provides many

employment pay at a level - that cannot instances of such conditionsin' various parts

easily be defended on human grounds, or of of the. country. It points out that the buIJt

greatly increasing the extent to which of the children of unemployed miners in the

workers with dependent families would find Rhondda and in Crook (Durham coalfield)

themselves as well off out of work as in work. would probably not have been k2etter off if

Benefit and assistance are normally their fathers had been in work. In such areas

deemed to "overlap" wages if the gap the family man is equally poor whether he

between .unemployment pay and wages is works or not; and poverty is normal for i

less than 4s. Both unemployment authorities childre.n, not a passing phase in their life

*made surveys in I937 of the extent of this but possibly an unchanging event through

"overlap." -The study of wage levels and out the whole of their childhood.

benefit rates in August I937 showed that .With all the goodwill in the world the two

only 2* 3 per cent. of the men on benefit and unemployment authorities are unable to

5*2 per cent. of the women, were as well off risk a complete abandonmen.t of "less

on benefit as in work. But this average eligibility" in favour of the "human

conceals a far greater "overlap" where needs " of the unemployed. The Unemploy.

workers had large families. Thus io per cent. ment Assistance Board felt ,itself justified, in

.of the men drawing 4IS. benefit, 26*I per view of the undoubted misery of many of the'.

cent. of those drawing 475. benefit, and large family cases dependent upon its

34.6 per cent. of those drawing 5os. benefit allowances, to instru.ct its officers in 1937

were deemed to be as well off or better off on that : " a family of five or more childr.en may'

benefit than in their normal employmnent. in itself be regarded as a sufficient departure

As might be expected the U.A.B., in Decem- from the normal to justify-consideration of!

ber 1937, found a greater average " overlap " waiving or mitigating the a:pplication of the

*among its clients, for 6*I2 per cent. of the men wages stop on the ground of special circum~

-and 14.4 per .cent. of the women were stances "; but at the same time the Hoard

receiving allowances which were lest than 4s. had* to--urge- its officers to exercise their

below their declared wages. There are no discretion in such cases with ".'special.care,"

published data which would enable a .and to " look .with special closeness at cases

differential analysis of the extent of the where allowances of 455. or more woulld be

*" overlap" in families of each size to be made, payable-.an amou,nt upon which many

but the Board's report suggests that.the families do actually ma,intain themselves

.situation is similar in. broad outline to that fully while the thead of' .the hous,ehold is in

of the families on benefit.

employment." .-. .-..

I UNEMPLOYMENT AN HLD.PBARNG

21

IoeTm'-nwchuhoenuiultldt'deSeediinefcl~r.en1ad1s9ae3.n7tthsef,'opubIrnenodnspeuoftrrihtata.nitbocneytooSIfsti.fanat(cmuUriteploairtseyoes

|well or better "'off 'on benefit'than i work

y over one tlird. To increase the adult

ependats' benefit by the same amount (up

JIOS.) just.

would nder

only increase the "overlap" ,one tenth. The Committee-

though not without some hesitation and

t unanimously"--therefore felt obliged,

'takinigthe Insurance Scheme and the wage

stem as asure;

th.ey Bcth

are," to recommend
authorities are fully

the latter
conscious

the' dilema confronting them. Lord

Rshcliffe, Chairnan of the U.A.B., in the

Board's Report for I937,.. stressed the "far-

aching implications " and the " questions

f very serious social consequence " involved

in the existence of this "overlap." The

Statuory Commiittee pointed out in, I935

that ."the growing . direct provision for

filies, ,under Unemployment Insurance

d Assistance, is beginning to raise acutely

the general problem of dependency under a

wages system'
rovision." And

which
rn 1937

makes no similar
they more explicitly

stated:, "As was urged, by Endowment" Society. . . the

the Family problem of

dependency needs to be considered -as a

whole. To consider it only in relation to

persons who are 'unemployed leads to an

impasse in one direction or another."

Poverty and Fertiliy

Human beings in Britain will case, live on a " fodder basis."

not,
ven

in any if they

were willing. to do so,. it seemls clear that a

substantial. proportion of the families on

unemployment -pay, and -many families

dependent-upon wages, could not, under

prevailing conditions-, maintain themselves

even in bodily fitness. Present standards are

underminiing the physical. health of hundreds

of thousands of British families. A great mass

of evidence has been accumulated in recent

years which.. leaves connection between

no doubt of poverty and

the close excessive

ill health and premature mortality.* Within

ihtpkfmonerahoeoewsareuevtttaespehcaunesunlenrthnotrcesoitteehflhhtsemwdweihwp,hneagocl"grtorhueoheifslywaalouuadteavfdssydrsaeuseleagtfntnltwfohtoolhooeotyarersittkstecsbcPehaceehrosriaowia'rcvlbnelrtshelgodrs.oerrmfeofe.oimtlinarsbhn,m.eTeeiuitarin.l.otiutnbyIimshngrElnotuodisntmutustRthgasci.eehiedxaepsvtetfvoee"ioerttreootrhhtnaAd,ne,yoel
hrwinhsmiepmkseunteaxraeuostrlpoaptBstumranevlteaobhliiueritrttentatidhsnninhfprmiyoaioohdoientnfln.wfyctng,plshihtiLcaayiiehso,ohraTlcnxnaiedathpdidtvlrnlhaneheydeetircei-nnsSenstJcb,ceogwuaoeoobuplinaonm-nraoi-ftrrtdnfeatetenihiaihatemkontatrndfWogtieaWsmttwtaiolitieeimanmhilladntnasnpelmelatntioortsetcsaterarshrmovletrmiltaeo-e.fawsrhangtnile'issnacidhrisutetTsnvtetssnheDowheydr,plo.ueeasifswclrd.cmbt.badilshiauauuiot-rransstntrtMkemdetiihnat,ok-notthni-nbowhhantaooyetneetogflf
ictslh-aaCnstiasoetntshaieitsnrbleeielwkaetafliseyvasettluouymrebhedieignmihnaBfiresnirutttciialhsiihntcyeliidorfefc?.utmhWPseohtvlaaeontrwcteeiysrs gllccchtembtcfrlwbnimieooahiohheiocneaoeeelnsuminrwcreenaovrmaiwehirlttrekstneteitrnd"ahreircouyoaoarg-aasnioncrodmnleecssccgucgftyet.iinsoiee-rlhoglrotg.c,lnnsapcseafiiia"hwtogsgtielfsPgvteriaoeuriaacsahaieboe.rvsnoiptetvroTinlfxdesfdresholnsef:ahtWs.cdci-iaanceeeot-ltcumtadhtntnefiitytlmieptis"netmihhmlischfsantieeeweinonethsmacrghnh.befinaameta-tasasewrtimnlistgnoovchhqrclleEfrcycneeueocietyhebvraialelhsmhcaiafpaeownnil,iareytislhara'iromslte.menbitmyrdhhrrlrsivtemigtrkf-eeoaeeailptvaheci*foipanrsaeoyefaenoonuossetcmblufrcnrvigeioon,eospytc"tmwenonnrdaroreemesrnhqtsdocefo-rpoipotrufaicxlasadtnvcooyaiewacpnsaceimcc.sernreohnhhyraidseheemeofceisyelipy,sdteonxabawEtiphetnnpplswssogimmoaovdoteeretfvhnlaoue,,hocttetesfeirlriaebthshnhi-iiitnndey-a,sye-ne-annnes

...M. Tit,.s o.. ct

may therefore tend to accelerate decline of working-class fertility,

the rate unless

of (a)

28.2 UP

i[Ai

Cs IX-X- -,
I..

'I "I

I.,

the small-family fahion can be changed, and:

* labour ":: stan aid tt over ha

people persuaded to use birth-control for spacing rather than for avoiding births,

the chien of me substaitial ppEi

n

aosfsi-stthaenccheiladnrde,

and/or, (b) some of the economic circuni-

oof men on benefit nu te been liv

stances which may act with increasing force

below Mr. R. F. Geoge's "'bare sub

as checks upon fertility are mitigated.

sistence level."

A positive population policy must take into account the possibility of voluntary parent-
hood becoming general in the future. It might even decide, for eugenic reasons, to encourage voluntary parenthood. In any

(b) that similar conditions were wrrnormal t many large famil whose bread.
winners were in employment in occupa.
tions-payixng low wages.

case it will have to devise means of ensurng 2. Although unemployment pay is low i

that voluntary parenthood does not become a synonym for voluntary childlessness for

family cases, has created

atnhe"eoxviestrelnacpe"ofbleotw'wweangeurnaetn%

a large number of married couples, and of ployment pay nd ,wages, with the resI
ensurng that the desire for children is not that

frustrated by economic circumstances. Fashions have their roots in the solid facts
of life; the small-family fashion cannot be changed by propaganda and exhortation
alone. Measures to mitigate or. eliminate the financial handicap of. parents as compared with the childless within each income group, measures to enhance security, to make child-bearing and child-rearig safer, a-re all needed as a basis for effective propaganda.,
It may well be that far-reaching measures of
such a character will be necessary before the working maln of to-day--no longer le his

(a) public authornties fiid it diCffiult 1 raise benefit and assistace rates wit out substa'tially ncreasing the pn portion of persons who are a we,ll a -out of work as eieloyment.
(b) the problem of the financial,burdeni
depenffldency has to be considered asj
whole, and not merely in relation those families. who have fallen outs the framework of the wage syst
through the unemployment, sickn
or incapacity of the breadwinner.

grandfather driven to drink thro.ugh inordinate working hours and degrading conditions, literate, and sufficiently familiar with naterial comfort and the "good things in life" to want more of them--can be persuaded once again to undertake the responsibilities of a large family, when all his interests encourage him to limit his offspring and his social superiors .have set him an: example which he can hardly be blamed for
following.

3. It is suggested that the low standard living necessitated by present rates i unemployment pay and by low wages
certain occupations constitute a powe
potential reason for family limitaton a
manual wage- earners. Improvements material co'nditions in the past. half-centur
the growth of popuilar education, the achiea ment of' higher.stadards of. child healtha -welfare have all encouraved thae worig ma to" expect more of life.' Th-enew .faor

.volunt~x parenthood ihrough cbntracepti

I. An anlysis of the stanldard of livi.ng of
families on unemployment benefit or assist-
ance in December 1937 suggests

may theref.ore *liquidate in .the. future. t tra.ditiQgnal. association o.f pover.ty-with hi fertility by reinforcing eeonoxruc incentiv
to family linitaLtion; uniless; measures ha

(a) that most families w.ere below Mr. been set in operation to mitigate or elimina

Seebohm Rowntree's "' humanl needs of the finanial bur4en of pethood

Uuguics RviW. VolXi Nod

