PAMPHLETS.

53

various species of resoTts are classified as Tenement Apartments, Massage

Parlors, Parlor Houses, Furnished Room Houses, and Hotels. During

the five years parlor hous-es, which are simply brothels, have virtually

oeased to exist, and tenement houses, which are "nearly akin," have

diminished in number from I,172 to ioi, and prostitutes attached to

them from 2,976 to i8o. Some description is given of the different kinds

of house accommodation, and the catering to vice in disorderly saloons

and in streets is depicted.

J. H. W.

Smash the Line. Pp. 5; 1917.

Do Your Bit to keep Him Fit. Pp. I2; 1917.

Two tracts issued by the American Social Hygiene Association

(I05, West 40th Street, New York) concerning prostitution and venereal

disease on the occasion of the mobilisation of the United States Army.

Objection is taken to "segregation," the "Red Light " district, which

is also known as "the Line "; that is to say, a particular dcistrict for

prost.itutes, which is found in practice to advertise vice, and the medical

inspection to be " faked " and futile. The open trade is a lesser evil, and

soldiers should be provided with entertainment.

J. H. W.

REPORTS.

The National Baby Week Couneil, under the patronage of
H.M. Queen Mary, with the Right Hon. Lloyd George as president and Lord; Rhondda as chairman, was formed in March, 19I7, and a Baby Week was held in July with the object of helping to -secure "to every child born in the United Kingdom a birth-right of mental and bodily health. "
It is a lamentable fact that the average citizen never looks inside a Blue Book of any description; hence the appalling figures of our Infant
Mortality Statistics (ioo,ooo bibies lost per annum, a number which,
according to Lord Rhondda, might be halved) came as news to the great majority alike of the educated and the uneducated public.
The Council itself consists of the representatives of go national or central societies, and from them an Executive was elected, whose work was aided by sub-committees dealing with finance, propaganda, etc., while about 6oo local committees were established throughout the United Kingdom.
Many voluntary societies and local councils were then brought into touch, and support was given by the London County Council, the Board of Education, the Local Government Board, and the County, Borough, Urban and Rural District Councils.

One of the most hopeful results of the work of the National Baby

Week Council has been the arousing of public interest and creation

of a strong public opinion as to the rights of the citizen with regard

to securing better health, and it may well be that the formi-ng of a

Ministry of Health will do much to carry on this work which is of such

urgent, national and racial importance.

N. A.

Seventh Report of the Penal Reform League, 19I4-19I7, with Memo-

randum of Recommendation to the Russian- Minister of Justice. London:

68a, Park Hill Road; 1917; pp. 22; price 3d.

Touching on educational reform, on the pensioning of mothers,' on

"solicitation " by street-walkers, on the progress of the probation system

for criminals and inebriates, on forcible feeding in prisons, with "the sad

death of a victim in Ireland." The "Memorandum " rejoices to hear

that the Russian Revolutionary Government has abolished the death

penalty and the police, and hopes that these two decisions may never be

revoked.

J. H. W.

54 EUGENICS REVIEW.

A National Minimum for Youth, No. I4, Penal Reform League
Series. London: 68a, Park Hill Road; 1917; pp. i6; price 3d. Recommendations of a Committee of the League regarding juvenile
delinquency, approving the provision of compulsory day education schools for boys and girls between the ages of 12 and i8, the prohibition of street trading, and the extension of the probation system at the cost of the Treasurv. Mothers should be pensioned from public funds, earning a living wage by their being mothers. The ideal education should be in the open air, town children being turned out "on a piece of vacant land." This becomes feasible through our tramcars and railway systems,
the cars being empty in the morning on the journey from town to, country, and in the evening on that from country to to-wn. J. H. W.

Committee of Social Investiaation and Reform, Report, I9I6-I7. West-

minster: I9, Tothill Street; pp. i 6.

The Committee consists mainly of women, and the subscribers and

givers of donations are n-early all women, a list of them being appended.

There is an "Emp-loyment an.d Hostel Department," also an "Office and

Club Room Department" recently opened. Educated girls and women

who wish to make a new start in life are taught hand-weaving. Re-

education is a difficult problem. Girls fresh from the streets require

exceptional treatment. The work is at present only on a small scale, and

funds are needed for its extension.

J. H. W.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

ENGLISH.

The Relation of Cancer to Diet and Forests.

SOME HISTORICAL REFLECTIONS ON CAN-CER. (Harold P. Cooke,

M.A., University, Durham). A learned monograph on the connection

of cancer with food, as suggested by some, while others represent

that the disease is most prevalent in the most wooded districts of England.

Mr. Cooke takes as a crucial example the diet of the Ancient Greeks,

among whom cancer "was familiar," and the arboreal character of the

country in which they lived, quoting passages from Plato and Aristotle

to show that flesh meat was eaten, and giving the authority of

Mr. Maurice Thompson for the deforestation of Ancient Greece in the

Fourth Century B.C., so that neither alleged cause of cancer seems to

apply. At the same time the Ancient Greeks are allowed to have eaten

but little meat. Oaks and myrtles are named by Plato, and everyon-e

knows the tall plane-tree in the Phwdrus. Might not the existence

of " concomitant variation" still be argued ?-Science Progress, October,

1917; pp. 324-327.

J. H. W.

War and Sexual Laxity in Germany.

MORAL PROBLEMS IN GERMANY, by Marianne Weber. Summary

of a speech made at Berlin in Fe&ruary, 1917. The War has intro-

duced "the lowest forms of sexual indulgence" and recourse to

prostitution by married men; also sexual misconduct of wives and

mothers. Long before the War there was the relation of CCVerbultniss,"

or temporary consent, which "is secured by preventive measures against

unwished-for responsibilities." The exodus of girls from home and their

factory and other labour are stimulants. In the wealthier classes the

same causes are at work. The tendency to assimilate women's life to that

of men leads to sexual laxity. The young of both sexes have it instilled

into their minds that abstinence is physically injurious. Young girls

of the better classes enter on temporary sterile relations.-The Shteld,

December, 1917; pp. 440-446.

J. H. W.

