Registration in Relation to Eugenics.*
By SIR BERNAT.D MALLE'T, K.C.B.,
(late Registrar-General for England.)
I am glad to comply with a request which has been made to me to offer sonie observations on the bearing of Registration and Census
administration upon Eugeriic problems. I have, however, sorne difficulty in doingr so, because it can hardly be said that Government vital statistics, as hitherto understood, have hecii collected and organized with any direct refcrence to the study of the "agencies under social
control which may improve or impair the racial qualities of future generationis either physically or mentally"-to adopt a definition
which figures as the motto of the "Eugenics Review" of London. Professor W. Bateson, F.R.S., the author of a brilliant Galton lecture in 1921, has indeed told us that the "first essentials for any serious in,vestigation of the biological structure of the communiity are analytical data as to the distribuition of facultv and similar particulars which our present returns to the Registrar General do not aim at supplyina," and that "to decide from these retuirns how the birthrate is distributed among the variouis grades, even among the various nges, of the parents is not readily possible," adding that the "Registrar General returns miaht be made to give that iniformation but they do not because, thoulgh Governments are manipulating living units, social physiology is no concern of theirs."
I fear there is truth in this indictment, although, as I shall hope to show, a good deal has been done in the past to lav the foundation for eugenic study, and although the British Census of 1911 did make at lea-st one serious statistical contribiition to the problemis of htuman fertility. It may be said, moreover, in mitigation of suich strictures, th.at until we know what preci.se mneaning for our puirpose should be attached to the word "eugenic," an(l utntil some means have been discovered for measuring the changes which may be taking place in the "actual inborn character-," of a population Mwhich would give a clearer direction to statistical in(quiries, there mav be some excuse for what looks too muich lilke culpable neglect. I can only say, as
regards the Department with which T was until recently connected,
that we were always anxious to meet modern requirements in this direction as far as our verv limited powers enabled IIs to do so; and that I hope the establishment of the Ministry of Health, with full powers and active interest in the questions which interest us, may in time enable the dreams of greatly increased efficiency in which we indulged-more co-ordination of agencies and statistical publications
affecting pub!ic health, better e(quipmlent of intelligence branches,
J Paper read to the International Congress, 1921.

24 RUGICNICS RICVIRW.
and the like-to be realized. I cannot but anticipate that the discussions at the forthcoming Congress will throw much light on all these matters--not only as to the objects to be arrived at but also as to the methods adopted by Government and other agencies, more especially in the United States of America.
It may be worth while to alance briefly at the vital statistics published in the United Kindgom in order to see how far they bear
directly or indirectly on "eugenics" and how they might be made ot
greater assistance to such studies. Good ordinary vital statistics of population, birth and death rates, infant and adult mortality, pre
valence of specified fornms of disease resuilting in death, overcrowding shewn by houising conditions-and so on, are of couirse the indispensable prerequisite for all stuidies directed towards social inmprovemnent. They
require to be supplemented by the tabulation of all the known facts as to the prevalent diseases which impair health and working capacity without resulting in dcath-"morbiditv" statistics--such, e.g. as might be furnished by the administration of the National Health Insurance Acts in the United Kigdom. All these sets of statistics
should be systematically related to each other; death rates, and particularly birth rates, with occupation andc housing, for instance,for the hygiene of the workshop in modern conditions is no less important than the hygiene of the home. Even economic conditions, as Major Darwin insisted in his valuable address to the Rov.al Statistical Society in JJanuarv, 1919, are closely concerned with eugenics. We cannot afford to neglect the effects of the fiscal and social legislation of the present dav in encouraging, on the one hand, the muiltiplication of the least fit elemenits of our population, and on the other in depressing the level and even endangering the existence of the intellectual middle classes whose fertility is alreadv disproportionately low. Here also and, generally, in the differential effect of the )ossession of "wealth" on the birth rate are subjects for more careful study, statistical and other, than has vet been given to thenm.
Much of this work, of course, is already being done with skill and completeness, inuch also in a piece-meal and spasmodic fashiorn, while some has hardlv been attempted. All of it would fall well within the competence of a properlv equipped public department. Before passing, however, to the consideration of sugraested reforms in registration which would facilitate progress in the studv of eugenics in a broad sense, I should like to draw attention to a section of the Census of 1911 the results of which have becn recognised in Great Britain as a genuine
contribution to euigenic research, that which dealt with the fertility of the population, and which, by its inclusion of questions as to the duration of marriages and the numbers of children born and surviving has provided material, on a national scale, for analysing the fall in fertility since 1.876 (the year of the highest birth-rate) by social class, occu1pation, birthplace, and locality of residence. I am proud to have been associated, as the official in charge of that Census, with this novel departure, but the crcdit for both the initiation and the organization of the work, was due to my colleague, Dr. T. H. C. Stevenson, C.B.E., Superintendent of Statistics at that time.
An untoward fate seems to attend the tabulation of fertility statis-

REGISTRATIO- IN RELATION TO EUGENICS.

*5

tics, if, as I understand, those collected at the 1900 and 191& Censuses of the United States still remain unpublished. In our own-case, at all events, the tabulation and publication of the results were most unfortunatelv delayed by the war, and are not even yet fully available. But in April 192(0, Dr. Stevenson anticipated his report and summed up its main conclusions, with much important comment, in an address to the Royal Statistical Society of London oin the 'Fertility of Various Social Classes in England and Wales from the middle of the Nineteenth
Century to 191 ." This paper will be familiar to students of the subject, and I need do no more here than touich on one or two main points.
iy a standardizing process, which serves both for fertilit:y and
ehild mortality, a means was found of measuring and comparing the fertilitv experience of anv -section of the population throughout the whole period represented by a considerable number of marriages still in existence in 1911., i.e. back to the decennium 1851-1860. from which about 50,000 marriages survived at that date. The selection of suitable sections of the population to which to apply the method adopted presented greater difficulties, since the Census makes no record of social position, only recording variouis facts from which this inay be deduced. The test of domestic servants kept was rejected as applying to too small a section, and that of the size of tenement occupied proved disappointing. It was therefore decided to fall back on the gradation by occupationi which had been used in tabulating occupational fertility and infant. mortality from the births registered in 1911, a classification which was no doubt open to criticism in some points of detail but which at all events secured comparability with the published birth registration results. Eight social classes were thus obtained (see page xli and Table 28A of the Registrar General's 74th Annual
Report for 1911, Cd. 6578 of 19189), the first rie of which correspond roughlv with the social grades of the popiulation beginning with Class I, IUpper and Middlle Classes, and ending with Class V, occupations including mainly unskilled men, while Classes VI, VII, and VIII, consisted of textile workers, miners, and agricultural labourers respectively, which it seemed desirable to distinguish separately.
Much of Dr. Stevenson's paper is taken up with explanations of
the figures given in the tables (uoted and with the discussiorns of such points as the causes of the low rates of fertility in certain classes and occutpations, the effect of female occupation upon married fertility and the probability of artiricial restraints as the cause of decline; but the salient fact brought ollt is that, even when allowance is made by the method of standardization for the v-ariation in the age of marri-
age in the different social classes, fertility is found to increase downwards throughout the social scale. In addition to marrying later in life the more prosperous classes are less fertile when married. The method used measures the effect of the second difference by eliminating that of the first, and by this means demonstrates that even if the-se classes married as earlv as the others their fertility would be much lower. The relatively lower fertilitv of the more successful and pros-
perous classes is, of course, no new discoverv. but it mav be claimed -that this disouieting fact has now been established by evidence on a
wide national basis.

26 EUTGENICS RECVIRW.

More formidable from the eugenic point of view is the conclusion

that the relative defect in fertilitv of the higher social classes is largely

a new phenonenon, dating from the commencemenit of the decline in

fertilitv generally. The difference in fertilitv between social classes

is small for marriages
that if the comparison

contracted
cutild have

before 1861
been taken

b(asocksmtawlelntays

yetoarssugsguebs-t

sa18tnSad9n6t.iitawlriatep(hiu(alalyitsvilingcrrihentastsehusbissteoqr,etasepnmetac,txaimpmpaur;yomxhifmaoavrtetihoeenximsbateretrdiwaeigenensaltlflhoercl1cals8as9esss1)e-,s

which may be more apparent than real.
foundlIt is much to be rearetted that it has not been

possible to

repeat the "fertilitv"(quiestioins in the British Censuts for the present

wryaiepelspaleeraa;rricsnhb.duitcaatnetodneosapuprnaeodhcvuhialdsaaestwiiloaalnln:rbeeiaamndrymedaelbiinteisezweenidldlawomhnnoeoeutn,inbDaters.ftoofhSretmwefavaoterneentgrsoioioannfli'aswaffporirannarilaengugrrgeaetppnhoiharctts

remedial action, if suich is possible and desirable. is not attempted.

I may now tuirn registration methods

to the conisideration of certain which are desirable fromi the

reforms
etugenic

in British
point of-

view.

Aslong a.o as ini NoX ember 1916; in my first Presidential address

to the Roval Statistical Societv on the Organization of Registration

in its bearing on Vital "Statistics." I expressed the opiinion that we

were nearly at the end of what purely administrative action under

twmroiueaiiccy.rosrrhtdwthloesefrbnneeoeebcebxteiaiastss.shetideani,rrinyngg"afpanoolfrdwuttieorghgrteaeshvteierhimnepatrirVnniwofeaavocnreGcmtmeoainetuenninrgtotanlaoornfRodedntgeehifxewsethctepitenacirrshvtiOeiofcnTusiitlnocalfetaairoccssueotitciriiucnvraHidalwtcadhylroi.e"cssithenaatttrTihhcseohe--

remedy these delfeets we required (and still require) two things: (1.-

power obtain of the

rwfebughliilcsehtrracitainnQfnoornomlfaytbiiborenthg)sbivyaennd,aysdoeoafftahr"sqausbiyeIsmateimomnbanewaarirsree,sof"btvohneletpghuiebslloiacctci:aosnainotdon

(2) a very considerable reorganization of the registration service of the

country. Under the first head I will do no more than refer to the

suggestions made in that address of fertility tables which might be

derived from fuller birth registration infornmation. But I may also

quote-jUst as one instance--a paragraph which has a direct bearing

on

eugenic "As a

study. record,"

I

wrote,

"the

present

entry

is

defective

in

that

it

either fails to identify completely the person to whom it relates or-

fails to point directly to the next step in tracina the family history.,

Thus in the death entry of one of the hundreds of John Smiths. there

may be no clue to the marital condition or to any fainily relationship

of the deceased man, and all we can learn from the record is that a

certain John such a day of

Smith, aged 54, a such a disease. If,

carpenter, died at
however, the entry

ments as to the date and place of his birth, and that

band of Mary Smith, formierly Jones. to whom he was

such a place on
choentwaaisnetdhesthautse-. married on such

a date, there would be something resembling a complete indentifica-

tion of the deceased man and indications from which the family history-

REGISTRATION IN RELATION TO EUGENICS.

27'

could be traced by any interested person. In the same wav, the birth
entry of John Smith tells us onlv that he was horn at such a place on
suichl a date and that he is the son of John Smith and Mlary Smith,
formerlv Jones, buit it gives no clue to the next step backwards in the
family history. If, however, the entry contained the date and place of marriagre of his parents it would direct us at once to the docunmentary
record of that ev.ent.
The first essential, then, is such an amendment of the law as wouild
enable the authorities to obtain mnanv more data from the ptublic and
to remedy long standina deficiencies which it would be tedious to enuimerate here. Under the second head falls the question of the adrnin-
istrative machinery recjuired whiclh is in the main one of purely local
interest; but the suggestion that a systemi of General or National
Registration should be instituted seems to contain possibilities for
the euaenist which would Justify some reference to it here. Impressed by the success for its special object of the National Registration Act
of 1915, hastily devised though it was as a war nmeasure, I was soon1 led to consider the possibilities presented l)y a permanient organization on such lines--and particularly, the suggestion that a General Register might be m-nade to subserve the purposes, amongst others, both of Births
and Deaths Registration and of Census in a more complete and reliable form than the present. I therefore l)ut forward this idea in the address alluded to.
The opportunity was allowed to pass, and I do not know wlhen, if ever, the proposal may be revived. But it has received a good deal of consideration since it was first suggested, and was even made the subject of a special inquiry by a (Covernment Conmmittee which examined t.he question in detail, and prepared a careful and elaborate Report.
The scheme then drawn up involved the maintenance. in various local centres througqhout the countrv. of registers of the local populations. These registers would contain one or more cards or sheets devoted to each individual, and showing his record from its commencement with the entry of his birth, which would furnish evidence both of his age and identity. (There are many John Smiths, but presumably only one born at a certain address on a given date, to parents of recorded names, ages. and occupations, etc.) To this would be added as time went on the chief registrable events of his life-changes of address, occupation (as already registered under the National Unemplovment Insurance Act), marriage, the birth of children, etc., etc. ,--most of the information required being already recorded in one official register or another, but without any provision for the association of the whole. Such registers of the population are already in existence in some
European couintries; and once the machinery is provided for maintaining them in even an elementarv form by ascertaining changes of address .and providing for the transfer of the records from one local register to another as the movements of the persons concerined require, a skeleton is available which can be, clothed with all the infonnation re-
quired for variouis administrative purposes regarding individual
-citizens. By this means each separate item of information recorded would acquire greatly increased value from its association with the

29 EUJGENICS REVIEW.
other facts recorded for the same individual. It is generally the association of the facts rather than a record of the facts themselves, which is found to be lacking when further statistical information regarding our population is called for, as we have no organized means as yet of collating the nunmerous items of information independenttly collected and recorded as a result of the many paternal activities of the modern state. Thus the scheme amounts to the co-ordination of the numerous official inquiries and registers now made and maintained independently of each other into a single system which would provide a d(osfsier for each individual containing those particulars regarding him which the State is chiefly concerned to know.
Upon the purelv administrative advantages of the scheme, such as the consolidation of numerous registers maintained for various purposes, I need not dwell: but the existence of a General Register ofthe whole population maintained locallv in the several administrative areas woul(l lave an imnportant errect, from our present point of view, in immensely improvina the validitv of the existing (or extended) data derived from the Registration of Births, Deaths and Marriages. For the information supplied by the public on the occasion of a birth or death or a marriage, now incontrolled and therefore productive of errors, would be checked and supplemented by the records of the individual or family which would gradually be accunmulated in the General Register, and the production of an identification card containing the name, address, occupation, etc., etc., on each occasion of the
registration of ariy one of these events, would ensure a uniformity of statement the absence of which is one of the principal difficulties met
with in the preparation, for instance, of occupational birth and death rates. Under the present svstem a man's occupation nmav be stated differently on his clhild's birth certificate, on his own marriage and death certificate, and on his Census schedujle, without any change ini his occupation having occurred. When the births of 19?11 were tabulated according to the parents' occupation, it became evident that the return of occupation in the birth certificates differed seriously from those stated for the same man in the Census of the same year: and this
applies equjally to occupational mortality statistics. A general
registration system would at least ensure that each individual would( have the same occupation at any given time for purposes of occupa-
tional registration and registration of marriage, parenthood and death. Another advantage nmuist be described. The registration of births
and deaths by itself, however carefully carried otut, can yield buLt very imperfect evidence a- to the trend of natality and mortality. In order to provide the infomiation which has been the foundation of our hygienic progress, and which is demanded by students and administrators alike on an ever increasing standard of accuraey and elaboration, the number of these events registered must be related to the size and make-up of the population amongst which they occur. As authoritative information on the suibiect is provided only by the decennial Census the requirement has to he met during the ten vearssucceeding that event byr estimates of the probable ntumbers living in each locality, estimates which in the absence of a count can never be satis factory. Many illustrations of extreme over- or under-estimates

REGISTRATION IN RIELATION TO IZUGINICS.

29§

are broujght to liaht at each Census. The existence of a General
Register woulld at once remove the difficllty which largely vitiates
calculations of local birth rates and death rates uipon which sanitary progress so largely depends. With its help we should be able to ascertain the porpulation of the local area at any given date not onlv in miass but in full detail of sex, age and nmarital condition. This information would be of such immense value to our vital statisties-
that it miaht be expected to satisfy the often expressed demand for a quinquennial Census. For it would in fact provide us with an ele-
mentary Census annual lv, or as often as miaht be required, at a mini -
mum of trouble and expense Not only, moreover, would the Census
under some such scheme as this form a speciallv careful and elaborate revision of the Register, but the existence of the Register would
enormously improve the information contained in the Census. For the
facts stated on the Census schedules would no longer, as now, be the
unsupported statements of more or less careless and irresponsible people, but wouild represent the revision of a pre-existing record by which the statements made for Census purposes would be checked and
verified. Further, the facts recorded at the Census would be brought
into harmonv with those appearing in all the other records which came within the scheme of general registration. Obviouslv siich a system would provide the first re(quisite of good vital statistics, full and
accurate data.
It is time to consider whether suich a general registration svstem, if instituted. might not be utilized for the furtherance of eugenic research in a more direct fashion. Some years acro the late Mr. Walter Hazell propounded before the Royal Statistical Society (see Journal for Jtune 1914) a plan for recording, from the existing records of births, marriages and deaths at Somerset Houise. the life historv and family connections of every individual by making "life-cards" for every child which would provide a connecting link between various members of a family
and even between the several events of an individual life. The idea was to "raise the life records of men to the level already attained for
pedigree animals." Various objections were raised in the course of discussion, some of which, such as the supposed hostilitv of the population to identification cards and other so-called "inquisitorial"
arrangements, the experience of National Registration has shewn to be
largelv imaginary, while others might well have proved insuperable in practice if attempted under present administrative conditions. There can be no doubt, however, that if the scheme for General Registration referred to should ever be adopted it could be made to constitute a record of life histories on a muLch more complete scale than that envisaged by Mir. Hazell. That scherrme involved the creation of a simple or skeleton central index register of the whole populatiou fed from the local registers, for the puirpose of maintaining the accuracy of those registers in the matter of removals and the prevention of duplicate entries. But this index could, if desired, be made to serve other useful purposes and among them a complete genealogical record of the whole population. If to the particulars required merely for identification puirposes there were added notes of the parentage, marriages, births of children, change of occupation, cause of and age at death, information

so EUGENICS REVIEW.-
would be afforded by which not only could the genealogical history of each family in tinme be traced, buit from which some inferences at least could be drawn as to their social status. It is less easy to see how correct inferences could be drawn from any suich records as to the physical or mental fitness of the individual or family.
Pedigree stock books are designed for the eugenics of animals, and
it is obviously impossible to press the analogy too far in dealing with
mcn and women. It is for statesmen and eugenists to decide what
measuires can safely and properly be taken to encourage good stocls and deter the multiplication of the uinfit* but it is certain th-at no action can be taken without adequate know ledge and it is the primary buisiness of the statistician to provide the facts upon which action mav be based. It is froni this point of view that I have approached the question of genieral registration. and I cannot help thinlking that in some such development as [ have outlined there may be consi(lerable possibilities for the fuirtherance of eugenic science. But even if the admittedly administrative advantages of a scheme of general registration should e, entually lead to its adoption, it wouild re(luire a much more serious
interest in euigenic questions than is at present to be fotund in govern-
ment circles in mv own or other countries to secure the utili7ation of the Register for the purposes suigaested in the ftoregoing renarks.- We were recentlr told by a British Minister, as Professor Bateson has reminded uls, that "in nolitics, in the affairs with which Covernments have to deal. it is not accuirate knowledge that matters, it is emotion." I
do not even know how such suggestions as I have been referring to would commend themselves to eugenic students. If, uipon consideration, it appeared to them that the facts of "life historv" which might be obtained in this wayv would be useftul, if not indeed essential, to the progress of their work, then it would be incumnibent on them to do what they could to educate public opinion and bring pressuire to bear on the authorities concerned. It is possible that discussion at thc Conference may do something to throw light on the merits or demerits of this pro-
posal-at present in a purely academic stage.

