FITNESS FOR MARRIAGE

By C. P. BLACKER, M.C., M.D., M.R.C.P.

T HE proposal that certificates of fitness has been proposed by various writers and

be exchanged before marriage has been authorities. It will be seen that the subject

put forward on many occasions and in is not nearly so simple as it appears at first

a bewildering number of different forms. It glance, and that the authorities differ much

has been urged on personal grounds, as a among themselves as to what they regard

means of securing the happiness and stability as desirable. Some want voluntary measures

of each marriage; on hygienic grounds, with only; others want the issue of certificates to

a view to lessening the incidence of venereal be compulsory, but their exchange between

diseases; and on racial grounds, with the engaged partners to be voluntary; others

object of improving the hereditary qualities want both the issue and the exchange of

of future generations. Every intermediate certificates to be compulsory but the decision

combination that can be imagined between as to whether marriage should or should not

a strictly voluntary exchange of certificates take place to be voluntary; others want a

and a compulsory enforcement of such wholly compulsory measure, involving the

exchange has been suggested. For the British prohibition of marriage in the presence of

public the matter was raised as a live issue on certain serious diseases and defects.

November I4th last year, when a resolution The authorities differ also about what they

favouring a compulsory exchange of health wish recorded upon the certificates. Some

certificates was moved in the House of Lords, wish to confine the inquiries to venereal

by Lord Kilmaine.

diseases; others wish to extend them to

Superficially viewed, the measure seems to other contagious diseases such as leprosy, and

be logical and practical; when scrutinized, to infectious diseases such as tuberculosis;

however, it is seen to bristle with difficulties. others wish to include diseases of genetic

The Eugenics Society has appointed a com- origin appearing in the individual; others to

mittee consisting of Dr. Langdon-Down prohibit the marriage of normal people with

(Chairman), Sir Humphry Rolleston (Presi- bad heredity. Nobody has yet attempted to

dent of the Society), Mr. B. S. Bramwell, suggest what degree of morbidity in the

Dr. Stella Churchill, Dr. Maurice Shaw and pedigree of such a normal person should

myself, to draw up a Pre-nuptial Health constitute a bar to marriage. Here is an

Schedule in accordance with the recommen- abstract of the more relevant papers.

dations contained in the Society's statement

of its Aims and Objects.* Before its first

meeting, I prepared for the committee an abstract of the literature that was available
on the subject in the Society's library, and I have subsequently obtained information from certain European countries which use
such certificates. The schedule has not yet been prepared in its final form. It is hoped, however, that it will be ready for publication in the July issue of the REVIEW.
In the meanwhile, this article is written with the object of providing a survey of what

GIBBONS, R. A., M.D. A State Certificate of Marriage. Eugenics Review, I924, XVI, II7.
The late Dr. Gibbons asked for legislation requiring postponement of marriage until the applicant had been certified free from (i) syphilis, (2) gonorrhoea, (3) tuberculosis, (4) genuine poverty, and (5) mental defectiveness. The furnishing of the certificates should, in his view, be compulsory. His paper does not discuss what routine medical examinations and investigations should be made,

nor does it take account of the individual's

* EUGENICS REvIEw, 1934, XXVI, P. 133.

heredity.

33 C

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

VIGNES, HENRI, M.D. Certificat Prenuptial. forgotten much easily obtainable and diverse

Le Progrus m6dical, 193I, No. 4I.

objective information "!

Three possibilities, the author argues,

present themselves. (a) A certificate, to the verdict of which the individual should be obliged to conform. (b) A certificate, to the verdict of which there is no obligation to

VIGNES, HENRI, M.D. Certificat de Mariage.
Proceedings of the Second Session of the Institute of International Anthropology, Prague, I924.

conform, but which the betrothed persons This summarizes twenty-one answers to

should be obliged to submit to each other or a questionnaire sent out by the author.

to each other's families. (c) A certificate with- Opinions are furnished by four obstetricians,

out obligations of any sort, but intended to three anthropologists, one biologist, three

furnish relevant information and to " give physicians, two paediatricians, one " phthisio-

cause for reflection" (donner a r4fle'chir). logue," one specialist in venereal diseases and

The author favours the third form of certifi- three publicists. The questions bear upon the

cate. He points out that many French general problem of how best to spread a

parents require their daughters' fiances to eugenic conscience throughout the com-

take out life insurance policies. If the in- munity. The problem of marriage certifi-

surance company refuses to insure, the cates is included. The answers show much

parents can deduce that the betrothed is ignorance and irreconcilable differences of

mauvais pour le service. Dr. Vignes demands opinion. As a whole, they are so unconstruc-

that the girl, no less than the man, should be tive that it is not easy to see why the paper

examined. " I have already emphasized," he was written.

says, " that to be married to a woman with

infantile organs and an infantile nervous BIARDEAU, LAURE. IV. Le Certificat Pre-

system can be more disagreeable to a man nuptial.

than it is to a woman to be married to a This paper is not in our library, but a fairly syphilitic. Pelvimetry and the search for the full review by Dr. R. A. Gibbons appeared stigmata of congenital syphilis seem to be of in Health and Empire, September I932. Un-

incontestable utility."

fortunately no reference is given. The

The author would like to see instituted a book opens with harrowing statistics of

fantastically detailed list of routine investiga- the incidence of syphilis and gonorrhoea in

tions, involving records of the body build and France. It proceeds to a study of the laws

measurements of all the bony parts (in par- relating to marriage that htve been passed ticular the circumference of the chest), the in different countries-i.e. Norway, Sweden, weight and the relation of weight to build, Denmark, and, of course, the United States.

the pulse (sitting and lying down), the
frequence of respiration and its relation to the pulse, the basal metabolism, the vital
capacity, the blood-pressure, the oculocardiac reflex, the visual acuity, the condition of the ocular fundi, all objective stigmata of
congenital or acquired syphilis (with the answer " present " or " absent "), the objec-

Proposals centring round the pre-nuptial marriage certificate have been discussed in Germany, Italy, Mexico, Holland, Czechoslovakia and Turkey. The impression given by the author of the review is that the sub-
ject has been much discussed, and that a number of ill-considered laws have been passed which do not work in practice. This

tive stigmata of alcoholism, the examination especially holds of America.

of the urinary pH, urea and sugar, the

Wassermann reaction and coagulability of ROLOFF, BERNARD C., Superintendent, Illinois

the blood, X-ray examination of the chest, Social Hygiene League, Chicago. Medical

examination of the epididymis and the cyto-bacteriological examination of the

Examination Before Marriage. The World's Health, October, I927.

normal secretions. "And," the author adds, This is an open letter wnrtten by Mr. Roloff

" in this enumeration I certainly have to Major Darwin. In a previous number of

FITNESS FOR MARRIAGE

The World's Health, the latter had expressed before marriage, and to refrain from marry-

the view that prior to marriage each party ing if they are affected with venereal disease,

should be compelled to make a declaration of pulmonary tuberculosis, leprosy, epilepsy,

the belief that he or she was free from certain chorea or other nervous affections. He

specific infectious diseases. Mr. Roloff re- further recommends the establishment of

gards this proposal as useless on the grounds health centres where pre-marital certificates

that people do not tell the truth about their will be given free of cost. He apparently

medical history. " When," he says, " I advocates voluntary measures only, but gives

studied the Michigan law I secured a copy of no idea of exactly what examination should

the affidavit that each applicant for a licence be made as a routine. He refers vaguely to

is compelled to sign and swear to. Upon the hereditary diseases, but gives no clue as

back of this appear in small print, in legal to how they should be traced, or in what

phraseology such as would baffle the in- degree they should be present in the pedigree

telligence of even an educated person, brief to contra-indicate the giving of a certificate

extracts from the law to the effect that feeble- of fitness for marriage.

mindedness, insanity, tuberculosis and

venereal disease acted as a bar to marriage. FIELD, A. N. Medical Marriage Certificates:

A Suggestion from New Zealand. Eugenics

" Ingham County, where the capital of Review, I9I3.

Michigan is situated, issued then goo mar- The author proposes that everyone should

riage licences yearly. In the two and one-half be " compelled by law to undergo a medical

years of his office, the deputy county clerk in examination." The examination would be

charge remembers not a single instance where private and confidential, and its results would

an applicant admitted being feeble-minded, not be divulged even to the other party to the

insane, tuberculous or venereal.

marriage. The certificate would be issued to

the candidate for marriage, who could then

" And in that very county I dug up the do as he or she thought fit with it.

case of a man and woman, both of whom had A further proposal is that the certificates

been warned by social workers not to marry, should be graded. " The 'A' or top grade

who secured a licence and married without certificates given to a thoroughly sound and

challenge, with this result:

well-built person would be something worth

having; a ' B ' would be tolerable; a ' C '

First child : a monstrosity. Second child : a still-birth.

would conjure up visions of doctors' bills and physic for a future family of physical weaklings, and 'D '-well-would be a pity."

Third child : a still-birth.

The author proposes that records be kept of

Fourth child : an imbecile.

Fifth child

feeble-minded.

the number of " A's " who marry " A's,"
B's," " C's," etc. " The country would be
able to see at a glance how things were tend-

ing and, in the case of the ' D's,' more specific

"The husband deserted and all the living information might be published in another

members are supported in institutions or by table to show the grounds on which they

charity."

were so classified."

Since there are about 8,ooo marriages a

LOPES DE VALLE, PROFESSOR J. A., University year registered in New Zealand, the cost to

of Havana, Cuba. Pre-Nuptial Medical the State at the rate of a guinea per examina-

Examinations. The World's Health. (Date tion would be under £17,000. Mr. Field

not given on reprint.)

anticipates that some of those to whom low-

Professor de Valle-reviews the history of grade certificates were issued would wish to

the subject and existing laws. He advises dispute the doctor's findings and that their

everyone to submit to a medical examination complaints could be heard by private appeal

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

boards in different districts. " Persons to be delivered by a "hygiene service." At

appealing would deposit so much to defray these centres, " every man desiring to con-

the expenses of the appeal, the deposit to be tract marriage must, during a fortnight

returned where the appellant was successful preceding the registration of the intended

and to be forfeited where he failed."

marriage, undergo a medical examination

The author makes no attempt to specify and provide himself with a certificate stating

what routine examinations should be per- that he is not affected by venereal disease."

formed, nor by what criteria the doctor The author does not say whether a Wasser-

should classify applications in categories mann test should be performed as a routine.

"A" to D."'

TREDGOLD, A. F., M.D. Marriage Regulations

HEAGERTY, J. J., M.D., Chief of Division of Venereal Disease, the Control Department

and National Family Records. Eugenics Review, I9I2, IV, I.

of Health, Ottawa. Medical Examination The author suggests that no marriage

Before Marriage. (The journal in which this should be allowed to take place without the paper appeared is not given on the reprint.) production of a licence, and that such

In this paper, medical examination before licences should only be granted after (a) a

marriage is advocated for three reasons: medical examination of the individual, and

(i) to give candidates for marriage full know- (b) an inquiry into his or her family history.

ledge of their physical condition; (ii) to The paper is essentially a plea for the

delay the marriage of those who are suffering establishment of an adequate central record

from a communicable disease until the disease office. The medical examination should be

is arrested; (iii) to prevent the marriage of similar to that which is now required by any

the unfit.

good life assurance office, and should be

As to (i) and (ii), the author writes: similarly conducted by specially appointed

"Whether or not it [i.e. the examination] local referees. The examination of the family

should be made compulsory is a matter of history would be made by a board of medical

grave moment and the decision should be left experts, and the licences would be granted or

to the mature judgment of the most en- withheld by a central authority after a full

lightened and best thought of the country." consideration of these two reports. The

The third reason clearly envisages a com- author deplores the lack of adequate family

pulsory measure. The author attributes the records, and for the proper functioning of the

failure of compulsory medical examination central record office suggests that it would

in the United States of America to the fact be necessary to have (a) a system of notifica-

that every male candidate is there subjected tion, and (b) a method of compilation.

to a Wassermann and " smear" test. " There (a) Notification. The author regards as

is no necessity," says the author, " for these unsatisfactory the way births and deaths are

laboratory tests except in the case of now registered. Two medical death certifi-

individuals who give a history of venereal cates are advocated. The first, addressed to

disease or are suspect."

the local registrar, should merely state the

fact and cause of death, and be furnished as a

BARD, DR. LEOPOLD (Buenos Ayres). Sex confidential document directed to the Regis-

Hygiene and Health Certificates Before trar-General. The second would complete Marriage. The World's Health, I926. the individual's record already in the posses-

Here is outlined a Bill (limited in scope to sion of the central record office. Defects of

venereal diseases) which was drawn up for development, detected in the course of the

presentation to the Argentine Legislative child's school career, would previously have

Assembly. It proposes to establish a been registered and transmitted to the

" national office of public hygiene " charged central record office. (The author does not

with the delivery of pre-matrimonial certifi- specify which defects of development he has

cates. In the provinces the certificates are in mind.) Diseases of various kinds should be

FITNESS FOR MARRIAGE

37

notified, importance being attached to epi- in the printed form of certificate. The certi-

lepsy, insanity and various forms of mental ficate should also include a declaration that

defect. The records relating to the careers of he or she had never been confined in a prison,

criminals are also to be forwarded to the mental hospital, or home of inebriates, or had

central office, and clerks to the guardians been certified either as a lunatic or as a

should be required to make an annual return mentally defective person, or had been con-

of all the chronic paupers within their union victed of any offence, or previously married

districts.

or divorced. When any such statement could

(b) Compilation. " The work of the Central not be truthfully made, full particulars

Record Offices would consist in the compila- should be given of the facts which made this

tion of the various notifications received, to impossible. The name and address of a doc-

form a personal history sheet, and in this way tor who had been consulted should be stated,

there would be gradually built up a perman- with a definite request to that doctor to

ent record of every individual from birth to answer any inquiries made by the other

the grave. By means of a system of cross- party, or by his or her parents or guardians."

references and indexing, the relationships of Thus it will be seen that Major Darwin

each person could be shown and would enable advocates a compulsory exchange of pre-

the family to be traced for a number of scribed certificates, signed not by a medical

generations."

man but by the person about to get married.

In this paper, the author is more concerned

to describe the principles which should guide

us in collecting and co-ordinating relevant data, than in considering how the doctor

POPENOE, DR. PAUL. (Personal communication.)

should proceed when furnishing a certificate Mr. Paul Popenoe writes in a letter to me,

of fitness for marriage.

dated September iith, I934: " I am afraid

we have nothing to offer on the subject of

physical examination before marriage. We

DARWIN, MAJOR LEONARD. The Need for have talked it over, back and forth, for a good Eugenic Reform. I926. John Murray. many years, without ever making up our

Major Darwin discusses this problem on minds what ought to be done and what can

pages 459 to 464 of his book. He is opposed be done. A dozen or so of our states have

to the production of a pre-nuptial medical laws that the male applicant for a marriage

certificate being made a compulsory pre- licence must present a certificate of freedom

requisite to marriage, on the grounds that it from infectious disease, but this, of course, is.

would place too much power in the hands of intended principally to prevent the spread of

the medical profession. " The following pro- venereal disease, and is of very little eugenic

posals are suggested for consideration: Each importance. Now to frame a law that may be

party should be obliged before the issue of a properly enforced, and at the same time have

marriage licence to sign a certificate in a any eugenic value, is something that no one

prescribed form, and this certificate should has yet seemed to have discovered.

be handed to the other party by the authority " The Bill that was actually drafted by the

dealing with these matters some time before committee of our Eugenics Society here was

the issue of the licence. This certificate extremely short-merely providing that a

should contain a declaration of the belief that marriage licence should not be issued unless

he or she is not suffering from certain non- both of the couple presented a medical

contagious diseases or certain contagious examination certificate showing that they

diseases in a form which might injure the were free from any condition that might un-

other party or the children of the proposed favourably affect either the spouse or the

union, the diseases in question, including future progeny. This seems to me so vague

insanity, epilepsy, venereal diseases, tuber- and general, that I believe it is worthless.

culosis, and possibly others, being set forth " For the present, I am rather inclined to

38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

favour the type of law which has been adopted by the Society Union and has been strongly commended in France and elsewhere, under which it is merely required that each partner be fully advised of the deficiencies of the other. Then if they wanted to go ahead and marry, they can do so with their eyes open. This is a step forward, even if a short one. In the present status of public education, and with the very limited number of competent examiners available, I do not see how we can hope to pass any general law that will be compulsory. I may be too pessimistic on this subject, and should be very glad indeed to learn from you the lines of your projected law."
LORD KILMAINE S SPEECH (House of Lords, November I7th, I934).
In this speech Lord Kilmaine moved the following resolution: " That the marriage laws should be so amended as to make it obligatory for both parties to the proposed
marriage to produce medical certificates of
fitness when they come before a Minister of Religion or the Civil Authority." It will be seen that Lord Kilmaine proposed, not a voluntary, but a compulsory measure. The certificates should, in Lord Kilmaine's opinion, be signed " by some competent medical authority; the fee for them should be fixed, and should be fixed as low as possible; and some steps should be taken to ensure that the answers given are true." Lord Kilmaine's proposals bear a general resemblance to those of Mr. A. N. Field referred to above. There should be four certificates: " Certificate A, the ' all-clear,' showing that the parties are perfectly fit to marry and to raise a family; Certificate B, which will show that for some reason of health it is advisable that there should be delay, but that the parties may present themselves again three or six months hence; Certificate C would say that the parties can marry without danger to each other, but that for family or other reasons it must be a childless marriage; lastly Certificate D would prohibit marriage altogether." Lord Kilmaine concluded his speech with these very surprising words: " I would like to add that

among the objections to my proposal is that couples might very much resent undergoing medical examination. I do not propose that they should undergo medical examination; that would only be necessary in the case of venereal disease. In all other cases, it would simply be necessary to answer questions relating to general health and family history."
As was to be expected, Lord Kilmaine's proposal met with vigorous criticism. " How," asked the Archbishop of Canterbury, " is the private practitioner to take the responsibility except perhaps in the case of a clear-cut ' all is well '-the Certificate A of the noble Lord, or the quite definite Certificate D (prohibition)-how is he to take upon himself the responsibility of saying there must be delay, or of saying 'I think you must be prepared to render yourself childless'? That is putting an onus upon a private practitioner which needs a great deal more thinking out before we can agree to it." (The responsibility would, in fact, be intolerable in view of Lord Kilmaine's con-cluding proposal that no medical examination should take place.) In replying for the Minister of Health, Viscount Gage said: " We are convinced that to go now a long way beyond what we are doing on the lines suggested by the noble Lord without very large evidence of public and medical support, would be disastrous to the very cause which the noble Lord has at heart. Though I cannot therefore accept in any way the motion of the noble Lord, we are very grateful to him for raising the subject. We desire to listen carefully to expressions of opinion from the public on these matters and we shall continue to watch the whole situation with the greatest attention, as I think everyone will agree it is a matter of the greatest possible importance."
The debate was terminated by a short speech from Lord Kilmaine withdrawing his motion.
THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF
EUGENICS.
At this congress, which was held in New York in August, 1932, Dr. J. A. Mjoen read a paper entitled " Health Declaration before

FITNESS FOR MARRIAGE

39

Marriage."* In describing the measures should be planned and what points it should

which had been adopted in Norway and include. I would suggest that a number of

Sweden, Dr. Mjoen opposed the requirement health certificate forms used in connection

that every candidate for marriage should be with life assurance by different companies

medically examined, on the grounds that should be collected, and these should be gone

such a measure would excite antagonism in through point by point to see what could be

countries where prostitutes are exempt from omitted and then to consider what particular

such examination. " Personally," he said, " I point should be stressed. It is undesirable to

am of the opinion that a pre-nuptial exami- make the form unnecessarily elaborate or

nation is powerless to reveal the existence of complicated, as we do not want doctors to

syphilis in its latent stage and that it is charge a big fee for giving them. This ques-

embarrassing for women to submit to an tion of the expense is likely to be one of the

examination from which, in certain coun- deterrents, because most young people get-

tries, prostitutes are exempt. Not advocating ting married have so many expenses in front

obligatory medical examination, yet desiring of them, that even a guinea for each of the

to safeguard married people and their chil- couple would often be a serious matter, and

dren, we demand the registration by a doctor two guineas each would be still more serious.

of the declarations made by the contracting " I should like to suggest that when the

parties as to their state of health. Given certificate is drawn up the British Medical

under oath, these declarations have the effect Association might be approached with a view

of awakening the conscience as to sex respon- possibly to agreeing to some recognized fee,

sibilities."

and in view of the public utility of the certi-

ficate they might be willing to fix upon a very

MILLARD, DR. KILLICK. (Personal communication.)

reasonable figure if they were appealed to in the right way. Without some sort of lead,

For some years Dr. Killick Millard, medical medical men will be uncertain as to what fee

officer of health for Leicester, and late presi- they ought to charge."

dent of the Society of Medical Officers of Dr. Killick Millard's suggestions have been

Health, has advocated the exchange of adopted by the Committee which has drawn

pre-nuptial health certificates. In a letter to up the Society's schedule.

me dated December 3rd, I93I, he made the In the next issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW

following valuable suggestions: " You ask the measures relating to this subject which

me for suggestions as to how such a form have passed into law in other countries will

* A Decade of Progress in Eugenics. Wiliams Wilkins
Co., 1934. P. 222.

be summarized, and it is hoped to publish the Society's schedule.

Publishers: DAVID NUTT, London - G. E. STECHERT & Co., New York - NICOLA ZANICHELLI, Bologna FELIX ALCAN, Paris - AKADEMISCHE VERLAGSGESELLSCHAFT m. b. H., Leipzig
RUIZ HERMANOS, Madrid - F. MACHADO & C.ia., Porto - THE MARUZEN COMPANY, Tokyo

1n

2t Year

inT ATONA LRlEVIW OF S IENlFIlC SYTHIZISI

"'SCIEINTLkA Published every month (each number containing zooto i1opages)

12'TE ONLIY

REVIE W

the contributors

to which

arearerarlleyeiilnttelrenarytinonaali. oEndiatLorGs:enF.eGrnBaOrTllTASSZecZcrIeeta-ary0y.:

BRUNI Paadllo

- F. ERIQU
Bonetti

1I THE ONLY REVIEW that has a really world-wide circulation.

13 TE ONLY REVIEW of scientific synthesis and unification that deals with the fundamental questions of all sciences: mathematics, astronomy,

geology, physics, chemistry, biology, psychology, ethnology, linguistics; history of science ; philosophy of science.

in TME ONLY REVIEW that by means of enquiries among the most eminent scientists and authors of all countries (On the philosophical principles

of the various sciences; On the most fundamental astronomical and physical questions of current interest ; On the contribution that the different coun-

tries haie given to the development of various branches of knowledge; On the more important biological questions, etc., etc.), studies all the main

problems discussed in intellectual circles all over the world, and represents at the same time the first attempt at an international organization

of phil6oophical and scientific progress.

T ONLY REVIEW that among its contributors can boast of the most illustrious men of science in the whole world.

The

articles dot a

are published in the language of their authors, and-every number not French. The review is thus oompletly accessble to tho who

has a know

s only

m t containing the Freonh. (Write for a

Fech translatfio of a free copy to the General

the artidc Secretary

of

Scientia, Milan, sending eightpence in stamps of your country, merely to cover packing and postage).

SUBSCRIPTION: SOShilling

ubsantisl

are ganted to those who take up more tha one year's ubsipti

For information apply to "SCIOSIA." Via A. De Togni, 12 - Niao UO (It)

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI No. 1.

