REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

I69

scientific education for the future of the world. The difference between a good human brain and a bad one is that between light and darkness, but there is a steady gradation from the one into the other in structure and quality in every community. When we consider the yet undiscovered nature of mind and its relationship to organisation and the complexity of the social organisation in a civilised nation, the eugenist may well be discouraged, but this is not the attitude of modern science. We consider that no earnest student of eugenics can afford to neglect or to be ignorant of the main facts and conclusions of Dr. Tredgold's treatise. If we were to refer to one tithe of the relevant facts in that book or to dilate on their eugenic significance we should pass altogether beyond the limits of a review. Take, for example, one genealogical study referred to by Dr. Tredgold. Joseph " Nam " lived in the mountains of Massachusetts about 1760. He had eight children-" Some of the descendants of whom were prosperous, but the majority sank into the lowest social grade and are now living under the most wretched conditions. Of 784 descendants who have been traced it was found that 88 per cent. of females and
go per cent. of males were excessively addicted to alcohol; i8o were illegitimate. There were 232 licentious women and I99 licentious men, as contrasted with 155 chaste women and 83 chaste men; there were I9 epileptics, 24 insane, of whom seven have been in custodial care; three in a girls' home; I5 in an orphan asylum, and 40 in State prisons."
Think of such a biological and social problem as this multiplied by the thousand and you have an example of what the eugenist of the future has to investigate, explain and antagonise !
T. S. CLOUSTON.

Barnett, MARY G. Ind'ustrial

Young Schools.

Delinquents: A Study of Reformatory
London. Methuen and Co.; price 3s. 6d.

and net;

pp. 222, XiV.

THE purpose of this book is to give such an account of our reformatory

and industrial schools, and of their inmates, as will interest and inform the

general public. Miss Barneft's information is derived from frequent

attendances at Children's Courts and visits to many of the schools; she

has also made herself acquainted with much of the literature and reports

on the subject. The result is a book which should certainly be of use to

those who wish for information regarding juvenile delinquents and the

great strides which have been made in our treatment of this class during

the past fifty years. Perhaps nothing brings this home so clearly as the

statements that in I833 a boy of nine years was sentenced to death (but not

executed) for stealing 2d. of paint; whilst two boys of fifteen years were

transported for seven years for stealing a pair of boots. Miss Barnett

traces the gradual change brought about since that time, largely due to the

work of Lord Shaftesbury and Miss Mary Carpenter, up to the Children

Act of I908. She gives a useful account of our present system of institu-

tional treatment for juvenile offenders, together with many particulars

regarding organisation, management, staffing, methods of treatment and

results; whilst her final chapter contains a brief synopsis of the recent

report of the Departmental Committee on Reformatory Schools. We think

that Miss Barnett is a little out of her depth when she makes the statement

that " country dwellers, from an early age, are witnesses of the works of

Nature, and therefore their subconscious mind is imbued with a spirit of

reverence." Nor are we quite convinced that " a child with adenoids, or

even with decayed teeth, may have a perverted moral sense which will be

corrected by proper medical treatment." But in spite of these and a few

other generalisations which would have been better omitted, the book is

still one ledge of

which we this class

can and

recommend to those who wish to of the working of these schools.

obtain

some

know-

A. F. TREDGOLD.

