ELIOT SLATER
M.D., F.R.C.P., D.P.M.
Galton's Heritage

LAST YEAR the world was celebrating the centenary of the publication of The Origin ofSpecies. In comparison with his
cousin, fame has passed Galton by. If Galton's work had less world-shaking consequences than that of Darwin, it is not because he was a man of lesser ability. In a letter of 1871 Darwin wrote:
I have been speculating last night what makes a man a discoverer of undiscovered things; and a most perplexing problem it is. Many men who are very clever-much cleverer than the dis-
coverers-never originate anything. As far as I can conjecture the art consists in habitually
searching for the causes and meaning of everything which occurs. This implies sharp observation and requires as much knowledge as possible of the subject investigated.
Both Darwin and Galton had this compulsive
curiosity.
Variety of Scientific Interests Galton's contributions were scattered over an immense field. Karl Pearson, and others since, have tried to find some unifying thread linking them all together. It seems to me that
the only connecting thread was Galton's wayward personality. He was the scientific dilettante at his super-excellent best. Like Darwin, he never received any adequate scientific education. What he got was the first few years of a medical training and enough mathematics at Cambridge to attain a poll degree. He had no apprenticeship, no mentor, and never knew the discipline of a research laboratory. Throughout his scientific life he worked on his own, turning his hand first to one thing and then to another, as the fancy took him. It was his fortune that the fields to which he turned his attention were almost unexplored. It has been rightly said that the discoveries of fundamental importance are always made by amateurs, since in a new and
*The Galton Lecture delivered in London on Feb-
ruary 17th, 1960.

untouched field there can be no experts. But the amateur who makes discoveries in new territory is usually an expert in some more established field. Galton was an expert in nothing. Pearson says that at the age of thirty-two he knew more mathematics and physics than most biologists, more biology than mathematicians, and more pathology and physiology than either.
His scientific career began at the age of twenty-eight, when he undertook a journey of exploration in south-west Africa, to which he was attracted by the expectation of encountering big game. He was advised to put himselfin touch with the Royal Geographical Society, and was briefed on how to make observations of the needed accuracy and reliability for map-making. He did his work with such efficiency as to receive the Society's Gold Medal and in due course to become a Fellow of the Royal Society. It is to the friendships and connections he made in this way that his subsequent scientific evolution must be traced. He developed an immense respect for his fellow-scientists, the reverence of the amateur for the professional. He wrote:
A collection of living magnates in various branches of intellectual achievement is always a feast to my eyes; being as they generally are such massive, vigorous, capable-looking animals.
About his own status he was modest to the point of unconsciousness. Pearson notes that Galton did not regard himself as one whose faculties gave him rank in the extreme tail of a frequency distribution.
He would have recognized such a position for half his friends, before he thought of it for himself.
Galton had a strongly mechanical bent. Even before his African expedition, in 1849 when he was twenty-seven, he had published a pamphlet on the telotype, a printing electric telegraph. This was the first of a long succession of mechanical inventions, others being an instrument for sun-signalling, a shield for the protection of

9I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1960, 52, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

riflemen, stereoscopic maps, spectacles for a further great improvement in technique, by

divers, the Galton whistle for testing the power which averaging was substituted for superim-

of hearing for high notes, a wave-engine, and position. A rotating switch was used to sample

many others. Remarkable as the ingenuity of the signal voltage at regular intervals after

these contrivances must have been, one suspects each stimulus. Corresponding charges were

that they all had the defects of lack of profes- stored in capacitators and progressively summed;

sionalism, since they have all suffered shipwreck and the accumulated charges could be examined

on the river of time. Pearson notes that in the continuously on a cathode ray tube, from which

Galton Laboratory there was a whole series of a photographic record could be obtained. In this

models, "Galton's toys," the very purpose of way the entire scatter of the observations was

many of them being unknown.

eliminated and a single clean line, corresponding

to mean values, could be obtained, which showed

Composite Photography

even minute features of the wave-forms and

One of Galton's devices which is of much more allowed more accurate measurement.

lasting interest and importance is his invention It is noteworthy that Galton set himself the

ofcomposite photography. It will be remembered immensely complex task of examining the

that, by superimposing upon one another a human face, while Dawson was concerned with

number of under-exposed photographs he tried a single wavy line. Yet Dawson needed some

to extract from them some common quality. fifty different ordinates to describe this curve.

In his way he tried to demonstrate a phthisical To accomplish a corresponding task with human

facies from the super-imposed photographs of faces one would need something like a television

tuberculous patients, and in another instance to scanner with storage units running in number to

show up the common quality in the countenances the order of 10,000 or so. However, simpler

of violent criminals. He found the technique tasks may be found lying to hand. It has been

exceedingly difficult, although he tackled the suggested that such a problem as photography

mechanical problems involved with his usual of the canals of the planet Mars, where also

untiring patience and ingenuity; and indeed the small regularities in appearance are swamped

whole method was beyond solution by the in adventitious light variations, could be tackled

technological resources of his day.

along a similar line.

We are now beginning to enter an era in There is another association between Galton

which Galton's idea may bear fruit. As an and the planet Mars with an even more contem-

example of a modem application I may mention porary echo. At the end of the last century

the work of Dr. G. D. Dawson in the Neuro- there was a near approach between Mars and the

logical Research Unit at the National Hospital. earth, which caused some discussion on the

Dawson had reason to believe that in the normal possibility of communication with an intelligent

subject an action potential evoked by the form of life on Mars, if such there was. Con-

stimulation of a peripheral nerve could be trary to the generally expressed scientific

detected by electrodes placed on the scalp over opinions, in an article of 1896 Galton pointed

a particular part of the opposite side of the out not only that the possibility existed but also

head. However the action potential would be so what its method would be. The emission of dots

weak that it would be wholly obscured by and dashes could be used to build up first

adventitious electrical changes, occurring in a system of numerals, then to characterize 7T,

the electrical circuits and in the scalp of the and from that to proceed to the communication

subject. In the terms of the communications of directions and movements, and finally of

engineer, the signal would be indistinguishable pictures. Once pictures were being sent and

from the noise. However, by superimposing a received, the problem would be solved. At the

large number of tracings, forty or more, he end of last year we learned that listening for

obtained a thick and fuzzy band with discernible interstellar signals is to begin at the Radio

waves, whose time of onset and whose period Astronomy Laboratory at Green Bank, Virginia.

could be roughly measured. This result led to The Project OZMA, based on the work of

92

GALTON S HERITAGE

R. W. Meadows, relies on the feasibility of the book. There are references to Galton on some

means of communication outlined by Galton, thirty pages scattered throughout this work;

and on the fact that there is one particular wave- and his ideas are the starting point for a system-

length, the radio emission line of neutral hydro- atic study of the appearance of imagery in

gen, which would have a very high probability normal and abnormal states of mind under

ofbeing chosen for long distance communication experimental conditions. There is great interest

by any advanced world.

in the analysis of the relations of autistic and

logical thinking, and the estimation of the role

Imagery

played by spontaneous imagery in creativity.

Another field, in which the stream of inspira- McKellar draws attention to the restricting

tion starting from Galton has seemed till lately effect of imagery on abstract thought. The image

to have dried up in sandy soil, is that of visual that at some times supplies a fruitful model for

imagery. Here he was a pioneer out on his understanding, may at other times mislead, as

own, and he had to gather all the facts for him- has for instance been the case in the past with

self. By patience and system he described an the concept of the luminiferous ether, and with

immense variety and richness of visual imagery, the rival wave and corpuscular theories of the

of spontaneous origin, which he found to be nature of light. Galton believed that a habit of

especially prominent in childhood. Number- suppressing mental imagery must characterize

form, for instance, which he described, is the men who deal much with abstract ideas. But he

visual form in which numbers, or numerical maintained also that the visualizing faculty

data such as months and days of the week, may should be developed in education. We should

present themselves to some people in the mind's be able to call up at will a clear, steady and

eye. Galton describes one subject who could complete image of anything recently examined;

both imagine and mentally manipulate a slide visualize it freely from any aspect; project its

rule, so as to be able to carry out difficult image on paper and draw an outline; and

computations in his mind with speed and construct images from description.

accuracy. Into this fascinating world Galton This bringing of imagery into relation with

was not able to penetrate very far; indeed, the education is of interest in connection with the

principal conclusion of a general and compre- educational theories of Cuisenaire and Gattegno,

hensive kind which he was able to draw was that which are beginning to be used in schools in

most people think of their own mental processes this country and on the Continent. Cuisenaire,

as being of a universal nature, to which the think- a mathematics master in a Belgian school,

ing of all others must conform. They find it found that if he provided his children with

almost impossible to believe that others may ready-made number-forms, their capacity to

have ways of thinking which are to them use them to understand abstract mathematical

unknown, and who may find their ways incom- ideas, such as the commutative law, or power

prehensible. The science of analysis of human and logarithms, or infinite sets, led to very

communication has not progressed sufficiently rapid progress. The number-forms supplied are

to see just how far this principle will take us. exceedingly simple, and consist of sticks of

For many years no further work of any wood, 1 cm. square in cross section, and

importance was done on the line pioneered by from 1 to 10 cm. long, coloured so that each

Galton. One might perhaps mention attempts prime in succession starts a new colour sequence:

made, in the first place by Golla, Hutton and the sticks 2, 4 and 8 cm. long belong to the red

Grey Walter (1943), to correlate Galton's family, 3, 6 and 9 to the blue family, 5 and 10 are

personality types with EEG characteristics- yellow and orange, and 7 is black. Such models

attempts which have led to no profitable results. are obviously very much more adaptable and

It is a different matter, however, when the convenient for mental manipulation than some

psychologist turns to the influence of imagery of the eerie number-forms described by Galton,

on imagination and creative thinking, as has which the child develops for himself out of his

been done by Professor McKellar in a fascinating untutored imagination. They indeed look like

.93

ER-5

THER ETTUGWNTIS REVIPW

things which have been dwarfed and stunted of people as being either "neurotic" or "not

through lack of proper nourishment. There is neurotic." When one thinks in terms of more

no knowing how much value the average man and less, "neurosis" loses its unfortunate

might derive from his capacity for visual and pathological implications and comes to be seen

auditory imagery, if it were developed by as a mode of normal variation. A shift of this

education instead ofbeing systematically ignored. kind may be called for in the most unlikely

looking places. For many scientific purposes it

Correlation and Variation

is more appropriate to think of maleness and

The scientific work a man does, which is fully femaleness as the poles of a continuous rather

developed and exploited by others, becomes in than a discontinuous distribution.

the course of time part of the general body of

knowledge. The individual stamp is lost, so that The Basis of Creativity

his name may hardly be remembered, and his If we want to get an impression of Galton's

personal contribution is relegated to a matter of personality as a creative worker, we must look,

historical record. This has been the case with not only on the greatest of his achievements but

Galton's work on meteorology, where he has also on his least. Galton's mind, except when

the fame of having discovered and named the he was asleep, was never still. There seem to

anticyclone, and the great merit of having been have been but few subjects which offered a

the first to construct weather maps. So also it problem to a lively intelligence, and practically

has been with his work on finger-prints, on twins, none where an answer might be obtained by

on anthropometry and the measurement of counting and figuring, which did not claim his

human variation, and in the development of interest. Thus in the 247 works in Blacker's

the calculus of correlation. His work in any one definitive bibliography, there are "Statistical

of these fields is of an originality and a funda- Inquiries into the Efficacy of Prayer," "The

mental importance which would satisfy a first- Average Flush of Excitement," "Free-will,-

class scientist for the whole of his life-work. Observations and Inferences," "Measure of

To this there is not much one can add. The Fidget," "Arithmetic by Smell," "Terms of

mathematical tool of correlation, which Galton Imprisonment," "Three Generations of Lunatic

developed single-handed from its beginnings, is Cats," "Temporary Flooring in Westminster

a fantastic achievement for a man who never Abbey for Ceremonial Processions," "Straw-

had the advantage of any very adequate mathe- berry Cure for Gout," "Number of Strokes of

matical education. However, though the calculus the Brush in a Picture," "Cutting a Round Cake

of correlation has become the most powerful on Scientific Principles." In this bizarrely

tool available to the psychometric psychologist, variegated collection there are some items which

and is used as a basic instrument over a great are wholly ephemeral and trivial, but not many;

variety of scientific fields, in conceptual import- and some, like the "Inquiries into the Efficacy

ance it seems to me to come second to Galton's of Prayer" are a delight to read.

study of quantitative variation.

Galton's scientific work is characterized by

When one is concerned with human attributes, the simplicity and lucidity of his thinking. His

the change of attitude involved in considering approach to a problem was a naive one, without

people as showing a characteristic to a greater preconceptions, and one is invariably impressed

or lesser degree, instead of merely having or not by the luminous intelligence with which he

having it, is revolutionary. Even where the tackled a problem. He attained his ends mainly

characteristic with which one is concerned is by ingenuity, logic and abundant patience and

beyond the present reach of measurement, the capacity for hard work. He also showed a naive

change from the one way to the other of thinking trustfulness and courage. Though a praeter-

about one's observations has the most far- naturally shy man, he did his own field work,

reaching consequences. One may take the applying to fellow members of learned societies

example of "neurosis." It used to be universal for details of their private lives, and to friends

and it is still common for medical men to think and acquaintances for information about their

.94

A.IAYTNT

T- WD TAIdE

Laboratory possessed no fewer than five

"registrators," small mechanisms designed to

be carried in the pocket, to record a count by

such means as the prick of a pin on a card,

without exciting the notice of the company.

While Galton was having his portrait painted

he was counting the strokes of the artist's

brush. At a scientific meeting when he lost

interest in the theme of the speaker, he would

be counting the fidgety movements of the audi-

ence, and relating them to sex and age. Walking

the streets of the city he recorded the per-

FIGURE1

centage of attractive, indifferent and repellent-

D.R. G. D. DAWSON'S DEMONSTRATIONS OF A looking women he met, with the object of

SINGLE SWEEP WITH NOTHING TO BE SEEN BUT
THE "NOISE" OF THE AMPLIFIER, THOUGH WITHIN IT THERE IS A 0-25 MICROVOLT PULSE. IN

forming a Beauty Map of the British Isles. A great deal of his incessant intellectual

OPPOSITE QUADRANT AN AGGREGATION OF 220 activity must be put down to the delight he

SUCH SWEEPS, AND ABOVE THE AVERAGE OF THOSE 220 SWEEPS, WITH ALL NOISE EFFECTIVELY
ELIMINATED

must have felt in the use of his own powers. It suggests the restless playful activity of children,

or the athletic young man turning handsprings

ways of thinking and imagining. Ernest Jones, in his study of genius in the person of Freud, has
said that an element in the achievement of a
man of scientific genius is credulity. This may well have been true of Freud, whose ideas came to

at the side of a swimming-pool. Yet the psychiatrist also receives a strong impression of a
compulsive quality, of a need to count for counting's sake, or for the sake of engaging a mental engine that would shake and rattle without aload.

him intuitively, and who had to believe passion-

ately in their truth in order to make progress. Obsessional Traits

It was not true of Galton. He, too, had his Obsessionality was a feature of Galton's

sudden flashes of intuitive insight-he names family history. According to Pearson one of his

the place and time when the concept of correla- father's sisters

tion descended on him- but he relied on them had a triple inkstand with three coloured inks,

relatively little. His works are characterized by self-criticism and dispassion. H4e was remarkably surefooted, and seldom went seriously
astray. There are, however, points where he took a false path, and some of these are im-

triple penwipers and pens; every conceivable apparatus for writing, printed envelopes for her various banks and business correspondents; printed questions for her grooms, "Has the mare had her corn?" etc.; a dozen or more cash boxes elaborately arranged to receive in separate

portant. Thus he went astray on assortative mating, considering that people are attracted
by their opposites up to a limiting point after which the tendency is reversed. This led to a

compartments each kind of coin from each type of her property . . . As many as 100 painted labels have been counted in a flower bed of hers of 12 square feet. In short, we appreciate what Francis Galton meant when he said that the desire

neglect of the effect of assortative mating in the to classify and organize which existed in his family,

maintenance of able families. There are other he felt at times as almost a danger to himself.

instances which we shall have to notice later. Galton's father was a wealthy banker of

Galton was secure as long as he relied on reason; meticulously businesslike habits. He required

it is only when he comes to the formulation of his son to provide the most exact statements of

his religion and particularly eugenics conceived all his expenses, and to account for the money

as a religious aim, that he steps outside the allowed him down to the last penny. Galton

guidance of reason alone, with fateful results. says his mother was described to him as having

Galton's maxim was "whenever you can, been in her early years joyous and unconven-

count." Pearson notes that in his day the Galton tional, but does not say that she remained so

95-
ER-6

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

after years of marriage. It must have been from his Quaker father, and not from his mother, that he derived a weight of puritanical guilt, of whose existence one only knows from its eventual removal. The reading of The Origin of Species
brought, he says, a real crisis in his life, and freed him from-the constraint of his old- super-
stition as if it had been a nightmare. That
occurred when he was about forty, and the damage was done.
Galton was liable to nervous symptoms almost throughout his life, and twice had a breakdown. The first was at the age of twenty. In his Memories he writes:
It was during my third year at Cambridge that I broke down entirely and had to lose a term and go home. I suffered from intermittent pulse and a variety of brain symptoms of an alarming kind. A mill seemed to be working inside my head; I could not banish obsessing ideas: at times I could hardly read a book, and found it painful even to look at a printed page. Fortunately I did not suffer from sleeplessness, and my digestion failed but little. Even a brief interval of complete mental rest did me good, and it seemed as if a long dose of it might wholly restore me.
Both Galton and Pearson attribute his illness to doing too much. Since this too much consisted in rather desultory reading for mathematical honours and a great deal of social life, the explanation is not very convincing. Apart from
the "obsessing thoughts," there seem to have been symptoms of somatic anxiety-palpitations and dizziness are mentioned in a letter to his father of November 1842-and some degree of depression. Early in 1843 he wrote poems, of which two begin with the lines:
Well may we loathe this world of sin, and strain As an imprisoned dove to flee away;
and
How foolish and how wicked seems the world.
Nevertheless the condition does not ring quite like a simple anxiety state, and the depressive element could not have been severe in view of the lack of interference with appetite and sleep.
His later illness, at the age of forty-four, is described as follows:
During the whole of this interval I find from old diaries that I frequently suffered from giddiness and other maladies prejudicial to mental effort, but that I invariably became well again on comDletelv changing my habits . . . The warning I

, i. . ...

. '' r11-

?0s

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.
.. ~~~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~......... ... ...........

....

FIGURE 2 FRANCIS GALTON, AGED THIRTY-EIGHT, FROM A
PHOTOGRAPH OF 1 860
received in 1866 was more emphatic and alarming than previously, and made a revision of my mode of life a matter of importance. Those who have not suffered from mental breakdown can hardly realize the incapacity it causes . .. After recovery seems to others to be complete, there remains for a long time an impossibility of performing certain minor actions without pain and serious mischief .. . This was a frequent experience with me respecting small problems, which successively obsessed me day and night, as I tried in vain to think them out. These affected mere twigs, so to speak, rather than large boughs of the mental processes, but for all that most painfully.
One must conclude, I think, that Galton's trouble was a liability to painful compulsive rumination.
Puritanism In his Memories, all that he has to say about
his mother is confined to one short paragraph, recording nothing of her emotional relationship to him or of his feelings to her. The main feminine

96

GALTON'S HERITAGE
his only notion was that they might throw open their houses for drawing-room meetings. That women might have their own ideas about the breeding of the next generation had not occurred to him. He naively imagined that the abler men could have the abler women for the asking, while Pearson comments that the abler men, either by choice or necessity, do not mate with the abler women, and the latter, either by choice or necessity, remain to a large extent unmarried.
Galton married in 1853, at the age of thirtyone, and enjoyed forty years of married life;
~ ~ ~ ~ . . .yetasfarasonecansee,hiswifehadpractically no influence in moulding his personality or his views. There is hardly a word about her in Pearson's biography. During their life in London she probably saw very little of him, at least alone; practically the whole of his day must have been taken up either with scientific work or with his very numerous commitments in the Royal Geographical Society, the Royal Society, the Anthropological Institute, the Biritish Association, or the Observatory at Kew, etc.

FIGURE 3
FRANCIS GALTON IN HOLIDAY GARB; TAKEN AT VICHY,AUGUST 1878,WHEN AGED FIFTY-SIXYEARS
influence in his childhood was a much-loved sister, older by twelve years, who spent the greater part of her life lying on her back and who devoted herself to his education. Apart from her, the dominant influence on his life was certainly that of his father. Nearly all his letters as a boy and a young man are written to his father, whom he loved and who dominated him. It was his father, who pressed him on to make a career for himself; and once his father had died all plans of that kind were immediately discarded. This relationship possibly explains the extreme reserve with which Galton touches on the most personal of his experiences, though it is clear that his feelings were both warm and deep.
Pearson comments ruefully on his incomprehension of the psychology of women. When ideas came up for discussion on how women might play their part in the eugenic movement,

. ..4~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.......

_ 1-6:. m l iS2j_B3a,, i_1|.BS _ ;i.B .;_~i~~;~~@~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~........

FIGURE 4
FRANCIS GALTON IN THE SIXTIES

97

THF FIIUGFNICS RFVIFW
Lethbridge, presumably describing his old age, wrote:
He enjoyed his food as keenly as a child, although he was a very small eater and most abstemious in every way. He delighted in afterdinner coffee, of which he allowed himself two teaspoonfuls, and that only when I, or some other coffee-drinker, was staying with him to set a bad example.
She notes also that he loved the sunshine, and even on the hottest day would insist on walking on the sunny side of the street.
Nevertheless, for his London residence he chose what must have been a gloomy house, where his work-room looked out on a lightshaft. Though fond of travel, he does not seem to have been impressed by magnificent scenery. Art, whether in colour, form or verbal expression, was no essential need for him. He was totally unmusical. He was not fond of animals, and had no comprehension and love of young things.

I RNI GATO IN THE SEETE
Both husband and wife came from large sibships, yet their marriage was childless. Pearson supposes that the lack of children must have been a grief to Galton, but notes also that he was alarmed by children and did not find the right words to say to them.
The couple travelled a lot abroad and were also accustomed to making visits to spas under medical direction. Not only was Galton liable to nervous symptoms, but his wife also seems to have suffered from one of those nameless forms of chronic ill-health which one finds not infrequently in the women of Victorian times. Pearson says he was wonderfully patient with her. One is compelled to wonder whether their life together was of a kind to have much chance of producing children. Galton's biographers note that the subject of sex was one which he found distressing and preferred to ignore.
Though he must have been a man of acute sensibilities, he seems to have denied himself the pleasures of the senses. His niece, Millicent
98

A Feminine Trait?
To this side of his nature one gets a clue from his photographs, which show a lower half of the face which is ill-matched with the upper. The nose, eyes and forehead show nobility, energy and intellect. The chin is fined away and the

t111 | ~~~~~

~~~~~1.~,... ~

l I *1 x.w..t... ....

:. .§ ..
.. FIGURE 6
FRANCIS GALTON FROM A PHOTOGRAPH OF 1902

GALTON'S HERITAGE

mouth is held in a compressed and prim expression. Furthermore, as it seems to me, there is a sexless or even feminine quality to the

other man living or dead; and I never entered his
presence without feeling as a man in the presence of a beloved sovereign.

countenance, which ifanything gets more marked He was particularly impressed by intellectual

with increasing age.

eminence, but he appreciated excellence in any

The final point which emerges from these mode of competitive endeavour. In 1864 he was

photographs is the remarkable extent to which turning over ideas of breeding both dogs and

he remained physically preserved into old age. men for intelligence. The trouble was that even

There is but little sign of ageing shown in the the best were, he thought, not good enough:

photographs between the fifties and the eighties. The general intellectual capacity of our leaders

This resistance to ageing was, of course, also shown mentally. Of his old age he wrote that it was a very happy time for him, provided one accepted its numerous limitations. From his

requires to be raised, and also to be differentiated. We want abler commanders, statesmen, thinkers, inventors, and artists . . . The foremost minds of the present day seem to stagger and halt under an intellectual load too heavy for them.

studies on Hereditary Talent he concluded that
"the highest minds in the highest races seem to have been those who had the longest boyhood." In his own case he did not make a beginning with the serious business of life until he was over thirty. Pearson says he was young till his death. Even between forty and fifty he was a boy who must try his powers on all things that came his way. At the age of seventy-four he complained
for the first time that his brain power was not
as vigorous as formerly. The feminine streak was also a source of
strength. He was a remarkably unaggressive man.

Galton thought that the leaders of mankind were set apart from the rest both psychologically and biologically. Thus in his essay of 1872 on "Gregariousness in Cattle and in Men," he traced to this gregariousness "slavish aptitudes, from which the leaders of men and the heroes and prophets, are exempt." On the biological side he was of the opinion that extreme ability does not blend:
Very gifted men are usually of marked individuality, and consequently of a special type. Whenever this type is a stable one, it does not blend easily, but is transmitted almost unchanged,

Though often taken by his work into the fringes so that specimens of very distinguished intellectual

of controversy, for instance, in the conflict heredity frequently occur.

between his science of finger-prints and the On this fundamental but fallacious idea

Bertillon system of personal identification by Galton's preoccupation with the "noble stirps"

bodily measurement, he succeeded in not getting arose.

involved. As Blacker says, there are no polemical writings, and he seems to have made no personal enemies. In the closing years of his life there were_) acute disagreements between Karl Pearson, his scientific heir, and the direction of the Eugenics

The role of the average man was, he thought, a very subordinate one.
The average man is morally and intellectually an uninteresting being. The class to which he belongs is bulky and no doubt serves to help the course of

Education Society, who were the representatives social life in action. It also affords, by its inertia,

of his faith for the future. Though he might have been torn in two by opposing loyalties, he dealt with the situation gently and without
rancour, and largely held aloof.

a regulator that, like the fly-wheel to the steamengine, resists sudden and irregular changes. But the average man is of no direct help towards evolution, which appears to our dim vision to be the goal of all living existence ... Some thorough-

going democrats may look with complacency on

The Hero-Worshipper
One of his most boyish and most engaging qualities was his capacity for hero-worship.

a mob of mediocrities, but to most other persons they are the reverse of attractive. The absence of heroic gifts among them [for Galton never saw the common man in times of war] would be a

His admiration for Darwin knew no limit. When he died, Galton wrote:

heavy set off against the freedom from a corresponding number of very degraded forms. The general standard of thought and morals in a mob

I feel at times quite sickened at the loss of of mediocrities must necessarily be mediocre, and, Charles Darwin. I owed more to him than to any what is worse, contentedly so. The lack of living

99

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

men to afford lofty examples, and to educate the virtue of reverence, leaves an irremediable blank. All men would find themselves at nearly the same dead average level, each being as meanly endowed

right would exceed his neighbour to the left by a larger margin than that man would exceed his other neighbour. This led Galton to the mis-

as his neighbour.

leading idea that there was more variation at

Galton would not allow that the class of the mediocre might be leavened by men of exceptional potentialities who never showed their capacities. He did not believe in "mute inglorious
Miltons."

the extremes of the distribution than about its middle. The correct view is that variability is a quality of the group as a whole, but that its effects will be more openly manifested at the
extremes than near the mode.

If a man is gifted with vast intellectual ability, eagerness to work, and power of working, I

An example which Galton chose to illustrate his idea is certainly striking. In two years of the

cannot comprehend how such a man should be mathematical tripos at Cambridge, out of 17,000

suppressed.

marks as total, the top man scored between

This view shows a remarkable lack ofinsight into 7,500 and 8,000. The runner-up was 2,000 marks

his own case. From a reading of his life story behind, in the 5,500 to 6,000 class; while behind

one would think that it was the sheerest accident him, in the class 500 marks below there were no

that diverted Galton himself from a life of hunt- fewer than three men. Pearson says: "It was at

ing and shooting. This was the life his brothers this time that Galton first realized the great

lived, and the life he led contentedly for some principle that while between men of moderate

years, until an impulse took him into African ability there is scarcely any difference, between

exploration. Even after that he might have gone 'illustrious' and even 'eminent' men there are

on as an explorer, had not his health been extraordinary differences." At the end ofhis life

adversely affected.

at the age of eighty-two he made an elegant

Of the "lower middle classes" Galton thought application of this idea by calculating the proper

still worse; they might be summed up as mentally proportions for the distribution of a sum of

and physically litter-scatterers. They and those money between first and second prizes. Taking

still lower than them made up "the present army only 100 individuals, supposed to follow a nor-

of ineffectives which clog progress."

mal distribution, the interval between the fiftieth

Galton's excessive admiration for heroic
virtues, for the leaders of men, and for the extreme deviant generally, no doubt had its emotional roots in his relation to his father, and to such later father-figures as Charles Darwin. It had, however, a rational basis. This was derived from his way of looking at normal

and fifty-first is only one-tenth of the interval between the ninety-ninth and 100th. On this basis the intervals between the first and the second
and between the second and the third prove to be as three to one, and it is in this ratio that the total prize money should be divided. From this Galton draws a moral:

variation.
Galton never made use of the concept of the standard deviation. He thought of people who had been measured in some characteristic as

Differences in ability in power to create, to discover, to rule men do not go by uniform stages. We know this by experience-our Shakespeares, our Newtons, our Napoleons have no close
compeers in the populations of their own genera-

being drawn out in a long line, the man with tions-but we see a reason for the gulf which

the lowest measurement to the extreme left, separates the genius from ourselves ...

and the man with the highest to the extreme

right. So arranged they would show the "ogive The Existence of an Elite

curve," which runs almost level over the middle We must now look at Galton's ideas on the

part of its course, but dips or rises with increas- subject of an elite, since they determined the

ing steepness towards either extreme. This way in which he thought a eugenic policy would

distribution was then divided conceptually into have to be impleme nted. sn

parts equal in length, quartiles, octiles ov mtamisihUl ,is-nb class of human being

centiles-percentiles as we now call them. Whei which can be regarded as constituting an elite.

looked at in this way, the man at the extreme Instead we have only individuals, who do indeed

100

GAL'rON S HERITAGE

excel, but excel in a limited range ofperformance. capable of within its own limited range of

To begin with, we must distinguish between application. The transcendent value to the com-

the man and his achievement. Galton does not munity of the possessor of such a mind is almost

tell us that the man, who scored 2,000 more entirely social and hardly at all biological.

marks than his runner-up in the mathematical Discussing the "Worth of Children," Galton

Tripos, did anything very remarkable in his took the view that the brains of the nation lay in

later career; and there is no reason to think that what he called the W and X classes, i.e., in

he did. Darwin showed more insight than persons making up approximately one-third of

Galton, when he observed that the discoverers one per cent of the population. This view is

of undiscovered things were often less clever conditioned by the confusion already noted

than those who made no discoveries. There are elements of chance and will which intervene

between social and biological values, or between genotype and phenotype. It is probably true

between ability on one side and achievement on the other.

that the valuable innovations, new ideas, new creations, which accrue from one generation to

Small quantitative differences in causes may the next are received at the hands of one in 300

lead to large or to qualitative differences in effects. This phenomenon may be met with in

of the population or less. But the genes which provide the constitutional element in variation

intelligence testing. We may pose two intelligent subjects with a problem which the one solves in

in intelligence are distributed throughout the entire population. There are a great many more

three minutes and the other in thirty. If we now give them a second and more difficult problem, it

of these valuable genes among the vast hordes of those of average intelligence, or even in the

may be that the first can be expected to solve it lesser hordes of those of subnormal intelligence,

in an hour, and the second in fifty years, that is than there are in the chromosomes of the intel-

never, within the limits of a lifetime. In a walled- lectual aristocracy. The trouble is, of course,

in courtyard full of prisoners, it may be that the one man who can jump an inch higher than his

that in the lower ranks genes of positive effect are in dilute concentration. But if we are to ap-

fellows will catch a glimpse of the horizon, praise the value ofa mine, we do not take account

while the others can never see more than only of the nuggets of pure gold and forget the

the sky.

ore.

High achievement is the reward of the

specialist, and his specialization has to be paid for

by compensatory deficiencies. Take any expert Ignorance of Mendelism

off his home ground, and the mediocrity of Galton's misconceptions arose because he had

the performance is painful. Indeed, if the to do all his work without the aid of Mendelism.

subject of debate is minimally off-centre, the Thus when he supposes that, if the W and X

same can often be said. Listen to one of the classes were removed from a community it

B.B.C.'s "Critics" discussing a visit to a picture would be left with a dead level of mediocrity,

exhibition, or to a learned judge giving his views he missed the fact that a single generation of

on juvenile delinquency, or even, let us say, to random mating would restore the previous

a well-known psychiatrist on the subject of variability. The men of middle ability who

human personality, and it would be pardonable make up the bulk of a population may not

to suppose that the man was clueless. To achieve distinguish themselves by the creation of new

his fantastic level of performance, Galton him- social values; but, looked at biologically, they

self had to sacrifice practically everything else. constitute the treasury of genetic variability

Judged solely by the standards which can be and provide the raw material out of which the

attained in the arts, humanities and sciences, extreme deviants are made.

even the best of us are incompetents in all Finally, brief notice must be taken of Galton's

senses but one-mental cripples with a single disdain for the "army of ineffectives which clog hypertrophied organ. The mind of the specialist progress." Of course, he was right to emphasize

is a precision tool which can only show what it is the way in which human progress is retarded

IOI

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by sheer stupidity. But the drag on progress is some specified field of activity are rather

not the stupidity of the stupid but the stupidity of less feebleminded than the average will have do

the intelligent. All the really disastrous things what we can for those who are rather more so.

which have happened to mankind can be laid to However, if we abandon the means proposed

the account of intelligent, indeed, frequently by Galton, does it follow that we should abandon

brilliant men. For these tragedies the intellectual his ends? I do not think it does. To be sure, we

proletariat are blameless.

must not blink the fact that the whole complex

Galton thought that eugenic policies could be of ideas comprised under the heading of eugenics

furthered by encouraging the fertility of families arouses strong opposition, not least among

in which eminent men had been known to occur. biologists. During his lifetime Galton had to

This was a consequence of the mode of research suffer the disappointment of failing to arouse

he had to follow in studying hereditary genius, an echo among his scientific colleagues. He pre-

and of the limited range of results which this sented his ideas in the second Huxley lecture of

approach could provide. His ignorance of the Anthropological Institute, "but the seed

Mendelism led to an important misconception fell on barren soil," and the address was never

of the biological nature of the family. He saw published in their journal. Galton's critics

that there might be resemblances between a man pointed to the effects of the environment, as in

and one ofhis grandfathers which were not shown the slums; and the resistance that any normal

with the intervening parent. To account for man would offer to interference with marriage.

this, he derived one-quarter of the hereditary It was said that "at present the care for future

equipment of an individual from each of his man, the love and respect of the race, are quite

two parents, one-sixteenth part from each of beyond the pale of the morals of even the best."

his grandparents, and so on, leading to a series Karl Pearson stigmatized these ideas as unsup-

whose sum is unity. The model is misleading. ported by statistics, and half-baked. We are

All of a man's genes come from one or other of likely to rate them higher now, and the statistics

his parents, and there is no remainder of are beginning to come in. Yet is it still true that

genetic variability to be allocated elsewhere. even the best can take no care for the genetical

The view that a man might base a claim for future of mankind? I do not think that there is

differential treatment on close relationship to any biologist, even among those who shun this

an eminent man alone is quite unbiological. To Society, who would not agree that care for

take an example, we have no reason to suppose this aspect of our racial future should occupy us.

that a man of average intelligence will sire more The point on which they would insist is that

intelligent children if he is the son of parents of social efforts, which are not supported by the

superior intelligence than if his parents were as weight of the evidence and by a consensus of

average as himself. The biological worth of an informed opinion, should be held in reserve.

individual depends on his individual consti- In some respects I think that our critics go

tution, regardless of what that of other members too far. It is indeed true that all wild populations

of his family may be.

carry great numbers ofgenes of deleterious effect,

and yet maintain their vitality. It is true that

Ends and Means

mankind can safely foster the infirm, and

This argument leads to the view that the means indeed permit their reproduction, without

by which Galton proposed that eugenic ends alarm for the future of the race. The variability

should be attained are not the right ones. We of a race is its source of strength, and variability

have to abandon, I think, the whole of his ideas is the contribution of the heterozygote. But we

about diplomas of eugenic worth, the encourage- can make a fetish of the heterozygote just as

ment of fertility in eminent families and imposed Galton made a fetish of the extreme deviant.

restrictions on the fertility of the socially incom- We must have some sense of proportion. How

petent. They all suffer from a fatal defect, that far would the balance of heterozygote and homo-

of dividing humanity against itself. All mankind zygote be shifted by, say, a raising of the mean

is in one boat together, and those of us who in intelligence by half a standard deviation? Surely

102

GALTON'S HERITAGE

to a negligible extent; yet such a rise would transform our society. To give priority to the biological advantages of heterosis is to value reproductive vigour higher than vigour of the mind. As matters stand we are embarrassingly
rich in the one and poor in the other. Stupidity is an enslavement of the spirit of man. If for biological reasons it is unsafe to contend
against it, then those are risks we shall have to take. The biologists must tell us how to do it, and not that it shouldn't be done.
Perhaps it might be possible to find, entirely outside the field of genetics, principles which would have a directive influence on reproduction, which would not be dysgenic in their effect, and which might receive almost universal assent.

This century is marked by increasing concern for the welfare of children. All that we might ask is that every child should be given a fair chance in life. To be an unwelcome guest in the
home into which it is born does not constitute a fair start; and people who for whatever reason are unwilling to be parents should be provided with foolproof methods of avoiding conception. Furthermore ifthere is any accident, whether it is irl-health, or poverty, or unhappiness, which for a time would make it difficult for prospective parents to give their child the background and the upbringing it needs, they should for that time think well before they saddle a new human being with an unfair handicap. With this proviso we might safely forget criteria of eugenic worth.

REFERENCES
Blacker, C. P. 1952. Eugenics: Galton and After. Duckworth.
Dawson, G. D. 1954. A summation technique for the detection of small evoked potentials. EEG Clin. Neurophysiol., 6, 65.
Galton, Francis. 1908. Memories of My Life. Methuen.
Golla, F., Hutton, E. L. and Walter, W. G. 1943. Objective study ofmental imagery. J. Ment. Sc., 89, 216.
Jones, E. 1956. The nature of genius. Brit. med. J., ii, 257.
McKellar, P. 1957. Imagination and Thinking. London, Cohen and West.
Pearson, Karl. 1914-1930. The Life, Letters and Labours of Francis Galton. 4 vols. Cambridge University Press.
Trivett, J. V. 1959. The coloured sticks. New Scientist, 6, No. 160, 1183.
The portraits of Galton are reproduced from Volumes II and IIA of Pearson's Life with the kind permission of the Biometrika Trustees.

103

