SAVE THE CHILDREN.
REPORT ON THE PHYSICAL WELFARE OF MOTHERS AND CHILDREN IN SCOTLAND.
SOME months ago it was our pleasant duty to introduce to our readers the delightful Reports on the Physical Welfare of Mothers and Children in England, Wales and Ireland. Now the cycle is completed by the masterly presentment by Dr. W. Leslie Mackenzie on the same problems in Scotland.
These reports have been made to the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust. Under the enlightened and generous action of this Trust no expense has been spared in the collection of the necessary information, nor in the setting of it forth in such a guise as to attract and interest those who may turn to it for guidance and instruction. The paper, type, and general style of the volumes combine to make the study of their contents pleasant and easy.
The volume on Scotland has, for frontispiece, twin maps; one showing the lie of the land in Scotland, her mountains, rivers and plains, the- other indicating the distribution of her population. Naturally, the emphasis of the two maps is founded on contrast. The heavily-shaded mountain areas correspond to a sparsity of inhabitants, while the fringe of coast, deeper in the southern part of the country, corresponds to the industrial and thickly populated part of the country.
As Dr. Mackenzie points out, the highlands and islands of Scotland represent about 56 per cent. of her area, but support only IO per cent. of her population. Whereas on the other hand the midland valley contains more than 75 per cent. of the population but covers not quite one fifth of the area. Still the problems of healthy, happy life for mothers and children exist not only in the slums, the alleys, and the wynds of the densely populated industrial areas, but also on the desolate mountains and moors, and in the scattered and inaccessible islands.
The whole of the volume breathes out the author's eminently sane and vigorous view of the difficulties and intricacies of his problem. As Medical Member of the Local Government Board for Scotland, he is responsible for the physical welfare of nearly five million people. The numbers compared with the population of England and Wales is small, but the difficulties of Glasgow, Coatbridge, Motherwell and Wishaw are strictly comparable to those of Manchester,
Liverpool, Sheffield and Leeds, "and we have not to face the
special trials of the men who minister to women in their hour of need in the islands and islets set in the well nigh perpetual storms of the northern seas.

72 EUGENICS REVIEW.
All this is brought vividly before us in a paragraph on page 17: " In the rapidly growing industries the want of systematic care for any but the individual workers, the want of town planning, the over-building of areas, the over-crowding of houses. the urgency of the labour demand, the stresses of the labour required, the ill-organised food supplies, the sporadic provision for sickness, or injury, or temporary unfitness; these and the multitude of derivative effects tend, in the aggregate, to destroy the life of the child and to make the life of the mother superlatively difficult Whether we think of the problems of prematernity or maternity, or infancy, or early childhood, the result is always the same; the mother and child suffer first and most." Dr. Mackenzie goes on to consider the difficulties of the smaller and more slowly developing industrial centres which do not depend on one central industry. Consequently he says: " The civic life is more rich and varied; the interest in social problems is better directed; the organisation of voluntary and civic energy develops more smoothly if more slowly." But they suffer from the difficulties which beset the effective working of small areas.
The difficulties of efficient care of the crofters, the fishers, and other highland and island folk are very great. There may be local overcrowding, the housing problem is as acute as that in large towns, and there is an " exceptional disproportion between local production of commodities and local demand." Curiously enough these hard circumstances have wrought out the salvation of the people. Their isolation, their poverty,
their inability to supply themselves with the very necessities of life have not only made them hardy and courageous, but they
have "developed an intimacy of touch between the islands and the western continents." The island of Lewis has sent a phenomenal number of men to the services."
After the charming introduction stating the main terms of the problem, Dr. Mackenzie proceeds to unfold the details of the factors and the solution which presents itself to his vision. Chapter II. of the Report deals with The Expectant Mother. She is indeed the main factor of the problem. The health and vitality of the child after birth depend greatlv on the health and the environment of its mother before its birth. There are few things more astonishing than the fact that until quite recently the care of the pregnant woman, and, therefore, the care of the unborn child failed to present itself as one of the primary duties of the state.
In this land of individualism and liberty it seems to have been no one's business to warn the expectant mother of possible dangers, to watch for signs of commencing disease, and to provide hospital accommodation and opportunities for rest for those women who were weary and heavy laden.

SAVE THE CHILDREN.

73

MIedical students and nurses were taught to recognise the
finished products of over-fatigue, and of disease in the expectant mother, but there was little heed of the initial stages, and no provision for the early and most hopeful treatment of the abnormal conditions of pregnant women which, if untreated, develop into the grave and disastrous condition known as the Diseases of Pregnancy."
During the last few years, increasing attention has been devoted to this part of the problem, and Dr. Ballantyne of Edinburgh was one of the earliest and most strenuous advocates for the provision of pre-maternity hospitals and wards.
The dimensions of this problem are suggested by the remark of Dr. Mackenzie, that in the five years, I9I to 19I5, 23,48I infants under the age of one year died in Scotland from congenital causes. Roughly, some 4,600 children a year. The causes are specified as prematurity, congenital defects, nonexpansion of the lungs, atrophy and debility. This list of causes of infantile mortality does not, as Dr. Mackenzie points out, go deep enough, much lies behind; for instance, the child, before birth, "may have died from any one of many maternal accidents, falls, blows, over-straining, shock, fright, worry, underfeeding, ill-health due to syphilis, epilepsy,, metritis,
anemia, nephritis, bronchitis, alcoholism."
Dr. Mackenzie gives his readers a paper by Dr. Ballantyne on this subject that will well repay careful reading (pages 28 to
47.)
Chapter III. of the Report deals with Provision for Maternity; The Nursing Mother.
Public sympathy is always accorded to women in their hour of need, and the appeal of lying-in hospitals is one to which a ready response is forthcoming. But this sympathy and the provision for a certain number of beds for the benefit of parturient women scarcely touches the fringe of this great and urgent question. So long as three quarters of the cases of confinement are attended by midwives, the true difficulty is to provide midwives in sufficient number, adequately trained, and properly equipped for their difficult and responsible work.
Dr. Mackenzie quotes Dr. Chalmers for the fact that whereas in Glasgow the rate of puerperal fever in women attended by doctors was 3.4 per thousand births, it was all but double (6.6 per thousand) in patients attended by midwives. The blame for this should not rest on the midwives, but on the system under which they are trained, supervised and paid.
Chapter IV. of the Report deals with Maternitv Benefit, and Chapter V. with the provision for Mother and Child under the Poor Law. These chapters do not lend themselves to summary or comment, but well repay a careful perusal.

74 EUGENICS REVIEW.
In Chapters VI. and V II., Dr. Leslie Mackenzie deals with the important subjects of the unmarried mother and the unmarried mother's child.
He poinits out that there is no one way of solving these difficult problems and that each unfortunate girl must be dealt with not as a member of a class but as an individual. He gives much information as to the arrangements which at present exist in several Scottish towns, and he strongly emphasizes the fact that in all cases it is most desirable that the mother should be able to keep her child with her, and that it is usually wise to endeavour to restore the young mother to her own family, at any rate for a time. Dr. Mackenzie gives many quotations from the girls' letters showing how the awakening of their maternal instinct was a soothing and elevating influence. On page I29 we find suggestions made by an experienced worker as to the solution of these problems. He says there should be: First, education against the danger of drugs that may be used to procure abortion; Second, education of boys in the results to the women; Third, education that a doctor, and a good doctor at that, is the only person to be consulted ; Fourth, education in the danger of quackery; Fifth, education that the good home-father, mother and child-is the one method of avoiding irreparable injury to the child.
Illegitimacy is common, varying from i6-5 per thousand in the county districts to T2 per thousand in the larger burghs. It
is also found that certain counties and towns tend to maintain the same, or approximately the same, rate year after year. For instance, Banff had a rate of 28-8 in I913, 26-8 in 1914, and 28'8 in I9I5, while in the same three years Edinburgh 'showed rates of 8-i, 8 6 tnd 8-5 only. The reasons for these variations are not evident-neither poverty, nor feeble-mindedness, nor nature of the mother's employment can be certainly adduced as a general cause.
The death-rate of the illegitimate child is nearly double that of the legitimate. This disparity is not due only to disease or want affecting the child through its mother before birth, but is also caused by the difficult environment which too often awaits it after birth. The unfortunate infant is not wanted by anyone, and all too often no proper provision is made for its maintenance and its welfare. Undoubtedly the time has come when the State must make the care of the unmarried mother and her unfortunate but innocent offspring one of the primary duties of the community.
In Scotland, as in England and Wales, the rate of infantile mortality is influenced in part by the number of rooms in the house in which it lives. Thus in one-room tenements the death-rate of infants is 23-6 per cent., in two-room tenements I9'I per cent., while in tenements containing three rooms it is only 4'2 per cent.

SAVE THE CHILDREN.

75

Another factor in the problem of child-life is undoubtedly the return to work of the mother too soon after childbirth. In many manufacturing centres-for instance, Dundee-the women return within a month of the child's birth. This means that the infant is deprived of its natural food and also that older children have to get their food for themselves because their mother's time off from the factory by Ino means coincides with the hours that the children are free from school.
In the interests of both mothers and children measures should be taken at once to improve the housing accommodation, to forbid women to return to work out of their homes during the months that they should be suckling their children, and to make adequate provision for the supply of nourishing food both to the expectant and the nursing mother.
On all these subjects Dr. Leslie Mackenzie furnishes interesting and valuable information; he has the matter clear in his head and wvarm at his heart, and it is at once a pleasure, a privilege and a responsibility to study his lucid pages.

