FUTURE TRENDS IN POPULATION*

By R. R. KUCZYNSKI

IF I had had the privilege of talking on reason, I think, is that these records were

future trends in population to an audience started by men who were interested mainly

like this on May 25th, I837, I might well in the legal aspects of registration and that

have begun by saying: " It is practically this viewpoint is predominant even now.

impossible to discuss future population One consequence thereof is that all statistics

trends in England because England, unlike published by the Registrar-General are

the Scandinavian countries (Denmark, Fin- registration statistics and not vital statistics.

land, Sweden and Norway), unlike France, From the beginning of registration, the date

Belgium, and Austria, has not yet compre- of birth or death was ascertained, of course,

hensive records of births and deaths. But on but in preparing the statistics no account was

July Ist, the Act for Registering Births, ever taken of the dates on which the regis-

Deaths, and Marriages in England, which has tered events occurred, and all official reports

been opposed so strongly by the clergy, will show births and deaths according to the date

come into operation, and I feel confident that of registration.*

in a few years from now we shall have all This defect may at first sight seem a trivial

those basic data on reproduction which matter, but it is not so. The time-lag be-

Sweden has had for over sixty years." To a tween the occurrence of the event and its

modem demographer who knows that in registration is, to be sure, rather irrelevant if

England even to-day some of these data, and you compare the number of deaths in various

in fact the most important, are not available,

the optimism which I would have displayed in 1837 may seem rather foolish. But I think

* A few days after I had delivered this address, my attention was called to the fact that of the twenty-three

there are some extenuating circumstances: England had produced John Graunt, the

tables on mortality embodied in the Registrar-General's annual report, one shows the deaths by months of occurrence. The above statement, therefore, is not

founder of vital statistics; she had produced correct so far as deaths are concerned. The table in

Edmund Halley who discovered the basic principles which we still apply to-day in
measuring mortality; she had produced Malthus who did more to arouse interest in
the problems of reproduction than any man

question is introduced in the report for 1935 by two notes: " (a) The figures for the last three months of 1935 are not available at the time of going to press; (b) Totals for any period made up from this table will differ from the corresponding figures shown in other tables which are tabulated according to date of registration." A comparison leads to the following results:

before or since.

Registered Occurred Difference Last Quarter I934 II4,33I 113,493 + 838

Registration Statistics instead ofVital Statistics

First Quarter I935 I32,657 Second Quarter I935 121,935

134,194 12I,253

- I,537 + 682

How, then, is it to be explained that the Third Quarter I935 ioo,o66 98,9I3 +1,153

hopes which demographers, a hundred years
ago, may have cherished for the future of
English vital statistics were fulfilled only to a limited extent, and that people who, like our-
selves, are interested in the future population

Total

468,989 467,853 + 1,136

The differences are greater than I expected them to be because I assumed that deaths, apart from exceptional cases, are reported within five days. If this assumption were correct, Note (a) would not be understandable. Had I been aware of this table, I would have

trends of England will, five weeks from now, emphasized more strongly the necessity of making

commemorate with mixed feelings the centenary of the beginning of civil birth and

available all the death data by date of occurrence. -As matters stand, the value of the data contained in all the other twenty-two tables is impaired by the lag of time

death registration in England? The principal

between the death and its registration. This is, for example, also true of the official life-tables. There is no

point, it seems to me, in applying most refined methods

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May in computing life-tables as long as the basic data are

24th. Io97.

not the deaths occurring in a definite period of time.

99

100 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

years since deaths must be registered within five days, and usually are so. But when it comes to studying closely the trend of mortality during a short period, the official statistics lack the necessary precision. The deaths from influenza recorded in the Great Towns for each of the five weeks between January 3rd and February 6th, I937, numbered 768, I,100, I,137, I,55, and 976 respectively. But it would be rash to conclude therefrom that the peak of mortality was reached in the last week of January, as the figures appear to suggest. The deaths registered in that week, which ended January 30th, comprised firstly almost all the deaths occurring on January 24th, 25th and 26th, secondly, a more or less considerable portion of the deaths occurring on January 20th,
2ISt, 22nd, 23rd, 27th, 28th, 29th and 30th,
and thirdly, some deaths occurring before January 2oth which had not been registered in due time. It seems then more likely that the maximum number of deaths actually occurred either in the second or the third week of January. But is it not rather awkward that after a hundred years of death registration and in spite of all the pains physicians take in preparing accurate medical certificates of the cause of death, the answer to the question, " When was the peak of mortality reached in the last influenza epidemic? " is, so to speak, anybody's guess?
Results of Lag between Births and their Registration
On the whole, however, the consequences of the fact that we have in England merely registration statistics are much more serious in connection with births, since the time which is allowed to expire, between the birth and the registry, is six weeks and since a registration fee is charged only when a birth is not registered within three months. So far as births are concerned, the weekly reports of the Registrar-General reflect indeed merely the changes in the amount of work performed by the local registrars. How little these changes correspond to actual changes in the frequency of births may be illustrated by one example. In the Great Towns, 5,750 births were registered in the week ended December

2ISt, I935, the number dropped to 3,677 in the week ended December 28th, and jumped to 6,786 in the following week. Although the oscillations are not in every year as great as this, the number of registered births is always particularly low in Christmas week and always particularly high in the week
following. The long delay allowed in registering
births has the consequence that the quarterly returns of registered births likewise throw only a very dim light on the actual fluctuations in the number of births. It should be noted in particular that the section " Natural Increase or Decrease " which appears in each quarterly report is utterly misleading. In the last report, the one for the quarter ended December 3Ist, I936, this section read: " The natural increase of population by excess of births over deaths was 2I,360 as against natural increases of 7,729, 28,I78 and I8,260 in the corresponding quarters of I933, I934 and I935." But since the births registered during a quarter comprise probably something like 30 or 35 per cent. of the births occurring in the preceding quarter and something like 65 or 70 per cent. of the births occurring in the quarter of registration while the deaths comprise about 2 or 3 per cent. of
the deaths occurring in the preceding quarter and 97 or 98 per cent. of the deaths occurring in the quarter of registration, the figures officially stated to represent the natural increase in a given quarter are altogether un-
trustworthy. Since moreover the percentages just mentioned naturally vary all the time a comparison of the excess of registered births over registered deaths in various quarters is perfectly futile. All this is obvious, but unfortunately, is little known. Very few authors writing on seasonal fluctuations of births in England seem to be aware that what they discuss are in fact seasonal fluctuations in the numbers of registrations, and that, for example, the usual increase in the number of births from the last quarter of one year to the first quarter of the next is, in part at any rate,
fictitious.
Even the yearly birth figures do not necessarily convey a true picture of the actual changes in the numbers of births. The

FUTURE TRENDS IN POPULATION

number of registered births decreased from since I774 was not included in the English

6I3,972 in I932 to 580,4I3 in I933, and rose birth schedule. The order of birth was like-

again to 597,642 in I934. It is evident that wise omitted. William Farr, who in I839

the actual number of births in I933 must was appointed Compiler of Abstracts in the

have been smaller than in I932 and I934. General Register Office, repeatedly deplored

But it is doubtful whether the difference was the lack of such information. In a letter to

as large as indicated by the statistics of the Registrar-General, published as an Ap-

registration, and my doubts are enhanced by pendix to the Annual Report for I867, he

the fact that the number of registrations in stated:

the last quarter of I933 was over I0,000

Two grave defects in the registers of the United

lower than in any other quarter from I850 to Kingdom deprive them of much of their utility as

this day. If we then compare the births registered in I934, I935 and I936, we find that they numbered 597,642, 598,756 A.nd 605,659 respectively. In view of the dis-

pedigrees, and as records of facts for the solution of the great problems of population. Neither the age of mothers at the births of each of their children, nor the order of birth, is recorded; so that the number of children borne by women at

crepancy between the dates of occurrence different ages, and in the course of their lives,

and the dates of registration these differences cannot be ascertained.

are so small-especially if one takes into con- In I869, at The Hague, he " fully in-

sideration the extraordinarily large drop in dorsed" the resolution accepted by the

birth registrations in the Christmas week of International Statistical Institute, " That in

I935, and the additional opportunity of each birth-registration certificate the age of

registering births in I936, it being a leap year the mother, and for the legitimate children

-that it is impossible to tell whether births also that of the father be stated, and that

actually increased between I934 and I936. those data be compiled in tables by age, dis-

But there remains the fact that the average tinguishing the married woman from the un-

number of births registered in these three married." Fifty years later " the First Con-

years exceeded that of I933 by about 20,000, ference of Government Officers engaged in

and you know the far-reaching conclusions dealing with Statistics in the British Empire "

which have been drawn from this fact. It accepted a resolution, " That all birth regis-

may also seem at first sight that it really does ters should contain a record of the age of each

not matter so much how large the increase in parent and the number of children previously

births actually was, whether it amounted to, born to the same marriage, distinguishing

say, I5,000 or 25,000. But if you consider between those living and those dead." But

that the average number of marriages in the England remained adamant. On July Ist,

years I933 to I935 was by about 30,000 therefore, we can celebrate two anniversaries:

higher than in I932, you wiU easily under- the centenary of the introduction of the birth

stand that registration statistics which leave and death registration, and the centenary of

it open whether births have increased by the birth and death registration forms of

I5,000 or by 25,000 are no adequate substi- I837, which have survived without an altera-

tute for vital statistics.

tion up to the present day.

We are thus confronted with the following

Omission of Maternal Age, Birth Order, and situation: while nearly all other countries

Duration of Marriage

predominantly inhabited by Whites, includ-

Another deplorable consequence of the fact ing Canada, Australia, and New Zealand,

that birth and death records in England were publish the number of births according to the

started by men who were interested mainly in age of parents, and while many of them pub-

the legal aspects of registration was that the lish in addition the order of birth and the

needs of the demographer were sorely duration of marriage at birth, yet all these

neglected in preparing the registration forms. data are lacking for the United Kingdom. As

Such a simple question as the age of the a consequence thereof our ignorance of some

mother which has been asked in Sweden of the most elementary facts of human life is

I02 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

simply appalling. Let me illustrate this by
one example. I am speaking here to an audience which has an exceptionally good
judgment on conditions surrounding marriage. But if I were to ask you to write on a
slip of paper the percentage of first-born
legitimate children who, you think, are born
in this country in the first seven or eight months of marriage, I feel sure your answers would vary enormously, they would vary perhaps between 5 and 50 per cent. My own
guess, by the way, would be nearer to 50 than to 5 per cent., because I happen to remember that at the census of I9II something like 20 per cent. of the couples married for less than a year overstated the duration of their
marriage in order to conceal the fact that
their children had been conceived before the
wedding. Since couples with no child had no reason to pretend that they had been married
for over a year, and since probably many couples who had a child of over three months, inadvertently (or because they did not mind) stated that they had been married for less than a year, the proportion of first-born legitimate children conceived before marriage must have been very large indeed. The lack of adequate information concerning the duration of marriage at the time of each birth renders the task of the students of future
population trends and in particular of those
who will be called to frame a population policy unnecessarily difficult because they are not in a position to analyze, for example, the trend in the total number of children con-
ceived out of wedlock, who constitute perhaps I5 or 20 per cent. of all children, while the proportion of children illegitimately born is only 4 per cent.
The defect in the birth registration form, however, which rightly has been complained of more than any other is the absence of a question bearing on the age of the mother. In order to measure population trends we must, first of all, know the fertility of women at
various ages, and this presupposes the knowledge of the age of mothers at the birth of
their children. Now let us suppose we knew as little of the ages of mothers for all other
countries as we know for England. In computing the reproduction of the women in

England we might then start by assuming an equal fertility of women at all ages between fifteen and fifty years, and would thus find
for I933 a gross reproduction rate of o89.
It would, however, occur to us that this is most likely an overstatement since fertility is higher at the younger ages which at the same time comprise a larger number of women. We might then make a second computation, assuming that all children were borne by women in the age group of twentyfive to twenty-nine years, which was the largest of all age groups for this year, and would thereby obtain a gross reproduction rate of o * 8o. But I do not see what more we could do, and our conclusion would be that the gross reproduction rate must be some-
where between o 8o and o089. Since, how-
ever, we know the ages of mothers at each birth for many other countries, we may go a step further and compute what would have been the gross reproduction rate of England if the fertility rates for the various age groups, which we actually do not know, had been proportionally the same as in some other country where fertility on the whole was about as low as in England. If we took as standard a country such as Germany where fertility rates were particularly low at higher ages the gross reproduction rate of England would appear to be o*84, while if we took as standard a country such as Norway where fertility rates were particularly low at lower ages the gross reproduction rate of England would appear to be o*86. But it is possible, of course, that the 580,ooo births registered in I933 were distributed among the women of different ages in such a manner that the gross reproduction rate was lower than o * 84
or higher than o*86, and, as stated before,
we cannot even tell how much the actual number of births differed from the number of registered births.
Fallacies in Estimations ofPopulation Trends
You know that in recent years computations have been made for many countries showing what would be the future trend of population if fertility and mortality were to remain year in year out what they are now.
Since we do not know fertility in this country,

FUTURE TRENDS IN POPULATION

I03

similar computations for England could needed for carrying up and down the per-

merely show what would be the future trend sonnel will take up all the space so that there

of population if mortality should remain will be none left for offices. Should the

year in year out what it is now and if fer- descendants of the present population of

tility should remain year in year out what it England in a hundred years time number not

would have been, say in I933, if the number more than 4,000,000, they would then consti-

of births occurring in I933 had been exactly tute only a small minority of the total

the same as the number of births registered population of this country, because immigra-

in I933, and if the fertility rates for each year tion of one kind or another would inevitably

of age had been proportionally the same as prevent the depopulation of such an attrac-

in Sweden, or in Norway, or in Germany, or tive area.

in some other country which the computer

may have chosen as standard.

Future Numbers of Present English Stocks

In so far as such computations are made in If, however, we forgo any attempt at

order to elucidate the present balance of estimating the number of people who in a

births and deaths, the results for England, of more or less distant future will live in this

course, are less conclusive than for other country and confine ourselves to speculating

countries, and this is most regrettable be- about the fate of the stock which now in-

cause there is, I think, no better method of habits England, we are on much safer

showing what is happening now. In so far ground. If fertility and mortality remain

as such computations are used for forecasting what they are now this population is bound

the future trend of population, a forecast for to decrease steadily. Its numbers, by defini-

England would not necessarily be more trust- tion, could not be affected by immigration.

worthy if exact fertility rates were available Emigration would only accelerate the process

because the unknown factors are anyway too of decline, and so would wars and epidemics.

many. The forecast which, it seems to me, is A reduction of mortality, on the other hand,

the safest to make is that the actual popula- could have no decisive effect because the

tion of England in the year 2037 will be gross reproduction rate is much below unity.

determined more by other factors than by If fewer girls remained unmarried fertility

the fertility of to-day. A computation which would increase somewhat, but by no means

shows us that, if fertility in England declines sufficiently to ensure replacement.

for another fifty years in the same proportion How would earlier marriages affect repro-

as it has in the past, the descendants of the duction ? If the future couples have more

present population of England, a hundred children because they marry earlier, fertility

years from now, would number only of course would increase. But if fertility per

4,ooo,ooo, even if mortality were reduced marriage should remain the same, earlier

considerably and even if there were no marriages would accelerate population de-

emigration, is very instructive because it indicates that the bulk of the stock which now inhabits this country is doomed to die
out within a comparatively short period if present fertility trends are not checked in due
time. But thereupon to forecast that the population in England a hundred years from
now will be 4,000,000 would be perfectly foolish. It would be just as foolish as to fore-
cast that a few hundred years from now there will be no offices in New York because if the height of office buildings continues to increase at the same rate as it has in the past, the lifts

crease. This statement sounds paradoxical as it may seem that, if the average age of mothers at birth decreases and the average length of the generation is thus shortened,
this ought to affect favourably the population
trend. And as a matter of fact, the Journal
of the Institute of Actuaries published only a
few months ago a note in which the author, after having quoted seven net reproduction rates, five of which were below unity and two above, stated: " Of two different countries whichhave the same net reproductionrate, the one with the shorter average generation length is in the stronger position." But the learned

104 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

author is mistaken. Of two different countries which have the same net reproduction rate the one with the shorter average generation length is in the stronger position if their net reproduction rate is above unity, but is in the weaker position if their net reproduction rate is below unity. Let us take as an example a group of a thousand elephants and a group of a thousand fleas, both with a net reproduction rate of 2, that is to say both doubling within a generation. It is evident that by the time the elephants have doubled themselves, the fleas will have reached an astronomical figure. If on the other hand both the elephants and the fleas had a net reproduction rate of 0 * 5, that is to say, if they
were reduced to one-half within each generation, the fleas would have died out long before the elephants would have been reduced to 500.
We thus reach the conclusion: Neither a reduction of mortality, nor an increase in the number of marriages, nor a change in the age of marriage can prevent the bulk of the present population from dying out unless fertility per marriage increases.
Differential Fertility and Population Growth
You may have noticed that I have used repeatedly the term " the bulk of the population," and I am now coming to an aspect of the future population trend in which this Society has always been particularly interested, the effect of differential fertility upon population growth. Let us suppose there was a country inhabited by two absolutely different types of people, type A comprising Io,ooo,ooo females with a constant net reproduction rate of 0 5, and type B comprising I,000,000 females with a
constant net reproduction rate of i .5. After
six generations type A would have dwindled from I0,000,000 to I56,ooo females, while type B would have increased from I,000,000 to II,39I,000. At the same time the net reproduction rate of the whole country would have risen from about o * 6 to about I * 5 because the bulk of the population which now has a net reproduction rate of only 0*5 would have practically died out. If in England I0 per cent. of all women had the

same fertility as the average woman had fifty or sixty years ago and if all the descen-
dants of these women kept on displaying the same fertility, the low fertility of the rest of the community need not to worry us much from a numerical standpoint; it might cause
a temporary decline of population but the gaps would soon be filled.
Unfortunately we know practically nothing about differential fertility in England. By
using the fertility rates of other countries we are able to ascertain approximately the average number of children born to a woman
in England, we are also in a position to estimate roughly the average fertility in various sections of the country, but all statements about differences in the fertility of various economic or social classes are guesswork. The investigations of differential fertility made in other countries are little known here. If they were better known, people here would probably be more cautious in talking about
the present fertility of the well-to-do as compared with the poor, of the wives of professional men as compared with the wives
of workers, of the industrial as compared with the agricultural population. I shall confine myself to quoting a passage from a recent
report of the Director of the Statistical Office
of Norway based on the census taken in that country in I930.
The old rule which was stated in I920: the highest number of children in the agricultural classes, the second highest in the industrial working classes, and then decreasing number of children for the other classes, indicating that the number of children was a function of the economic standard, does not seem to exist any more. If we take Oslo as an example of an advanced position we find that the average number of children for the marriages which had lasted ten years in I930 was lower for the working classes than for the factory owners, wholesale dealers and professional occupations as for instance physicians, barristers, etc. ...
Statistics of occupation do not however give a true picture of the economic position of the different classes. I therefore tried at the Census of I930 to classify marriages in greater Oslo (Oslo and Aker) by duration of marriage, number of children, occupation and income. This classification was carried through for marriages having lasted ten years or less in 1930. . ..
The result of these inquiries for all classes and for all years of marriage is that the average

FUTURE TRENDS IN POPULATION

I05

number of children has a tendency to decrease Proposed Changes in Fertility Statistics

with increasing income, up till an income of 5-7,ooo kr. For the higher income-groups there is a tendency of increasing number of children

This is not the place to develop a detailed programme for the badly needed reform of

with increasing income.

the official fertility statistics. I shall confine

The figures for the three social groups do not myself to sketching briefly what I consider

however show the same tendency. The figures for the workers show a tendency of decreasing

as the minimum demands:

number of children with increasing income. The i. The yearly reports of the Registrar-

figures for the employees seem to show a tendency General should show from now on the births

of decreasing number of children with increasing income, up till 3-4,ooo kr. and later on a tendency
of increasing number of children with increasing

by months of occurrence. Similar tables should be published as soon as possible for

income. The figures for those working on own the last ten or twenty years.

account are small and very irregular, but there is 2. Beginning with January ist, I938, there

a very slight tendency of decreasing number of children in the lower income-groups with increasing income, and afterwards a slight increase of number of children with increasing income.

should be recorded for each birth the age of
the mother, and in addition for each legitimate birth the date of marriage, the order of

There are doubtless in Oslo keen observers of the life of the people who are in close touch with all classes of the population. But do you think any of them could possibly realise
the fundamental changes in differential

birth within the present marriage, and whether the mother has been married more than once.
3. A thorough census of fertility should be taken not later than December I938.

fertility which had occurred between I920 Demand No. i, I trust, will not meet with

and I930 before having seen the results of much resistance, and it is even conceivable

this census ?

that before long the Registration Act may be

In matters of differential fertility it is so amended that births will have to be regis-

wrong to take anything for granted. Never- tered, as in other countries, within a few

theless a study of differential fertility may be days. If this is done it would be possible to

considered as a luxury which one can dis- report the births according to the date of

pense with as long as the population is occurrence also in the Quarterly Returns

replacing itself. But although our statistics without delaying their publication unduly.

do not reveal more than the number of Demand No. 2, it will be said, is asking too

registered births by sex and legitimacy, we much at a time; the Registrar-General has

know that this number is so low that the bulk agreed anyway to include in the birth

of the population is doomed to die out even if registration form a question about the age of

fertility should not decrease any further. the mother, and the public would resent par-

This knowledge is spreading with an amazing ticularly a question about the date of mar-

rapidity all over the country and is rightly riage. Such objections, however, should not

arousing a great deal of concern. In a few deter us. I mentioned before that seventy

years from now the Government very likely years ago William Farr considered the omis-

will be compelled to embark on a population sion of questions about the age of the mother

policy which may become as costly as its and about the order of birth as the two grave

present rearmament policy. I certainly would defects in the registers of the United King-

not be the least ashamed of urging a thorough dom. We cannot accept to-day a compromise

and continuous investigation of fertility for by which the first of these grave defects

the sake of satisfying my scientific curiosity. would be removed in the near future, and the

But, as matters stand, it is my firm convic- second perhaps after another seventy years.

tion that dozens of millions of pounds which Nor do I see any ground for the belief that

might be wasted through a haphazard popu- the public would resent a question about the

lation policy could be saved if such a popula- date of marriage. When thirty years ago I

tion policy were based from the outset on a took charge of the Statistical Office of Berlin-

thorough knowledge of the facts.

Sch6neberg, I had this question entered on

B

io6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the local birth registration forms, and all know the duration of marriage. We would

through the fifteen years during which I know, for example, how many fourth children

directed this office there was not a single are born now, but we would not know how

complaint about that question. It is now many of these fourth children are the issue of

asked in many countries on the Continent, marriages which were concluded, say, in the

and also, for example, in Australia and New last ten years. It may be that the number of

Zealand.

fourth and later children born to-day is still

The recording of the age of the mother will very considerable, but that at the same time

mean a great step forward. It will enable us the children born to marriages concluded in

to compute reproduction rates, and these the last ten years are nearly all first or second

rates will tell us the exact deficit in the children. William Farr did not demand that

national balance of births and deaths. They the duration of marriage be ascertained.

may show that something must be done to He lived in a period of stable fertility, and in

stop the decline of fertility but they cannot such periods interest focuses rather on the

show what should be done. The other day I total number of children born to women

discussed with a friend what allowances who have passed the child-bearing age. We,

might have a decisive effect upon fertility. I however, live in a period of changing fertility

told him that in my opinion allowances ought and we must therefore ascertain first of all

to start with the second child because the the fertility of the more recently married

many couples who nowadays do not want couples because it is their behaviour which is

more than one child would hardly be in- indicative of what we may expect from the

fluenced by the prospect of obtaining an couples who are going to marry in the coming

allowance for a third or fourth child; that years. Demand No. 2, therefore, is really a

the allowance for the second and subsequent minimum demand. I have forgone proposing

children should be something like ten shill- many questions which are asked in other

ings per week, but that I did not much like countries, such as the age of the father, I

the idea of having this allowance granted for have brushed aside the recommendation of

any number of children. He said that he the I920 Conference of British Common-

agreed with me, but that in his opinion it was wealth Statisticians to record the sexes and

after all of paramount importance to induce ages of previous children, both living and

parents to have at least three children. He dead, and have confined myself to what I

proposed a grant of ios. a week for the second consider as absolutely necessary.

child, £i for the third, I5S. for the fourth, Demand No. 3, which asks for a fertility

ios. for the fifth, and nothing for any further census to be taken not later than December

child. Now let us suppose we knew the age of I938, will encounter, I am afraid, unsur-

the mothers at birth and had ascertained that mountable opposition. It will be argued that

with present nuptiality, fertility, and mor- a fertility census will be taken anyway in

tality, married couples, on an average, have connection with the general census of April

only i * 8 children. This would show us how I94I and that it would involve too heavy an

serious the situation is. But unless we know expense and too much trouble for the public

the order of birth, we cannot tell the propor- if two censuses were taken at so short an

tion of childless marriages, the proportion of interval. But these objections are not valid.

marriages with one child, with two children, A fertility census taken in connection with

etc. Unless we know the order of birth we the general census of I94I could not ad-

cannot tell whether the plan suggested by equately cover the ground because it would be

my friend is likely to be more effective than impossible to include all the necessary ques-

other schemes, and we cannot tell, of course, tions in the form appropriate for the regular

what would be the cost.

censuses. Since, moreover, it would not be

But even if we knew the age of the mothers possible and not even in the general interest

and the order of birth, the situation would to delay the compilation of other important

still be rather obscure as long as we do not census tables by granting precedence to the

FUTURE TRENDS IN POPULATION

I07

tables on fertility, we could not expect to get for a hundred years, have not changed one

the report on fertility before I945. If, on the question in the birth or death registration

other hand, a special fertility census were form. They included three questions on

taken in December I938, the form to be used fertility in the census schedule of I9II, one

for this census could be such as to comply question in I92i, and none at all in I93I.

fully and exclusively with the needs of a If they now add a question about the age of

fertility census. The report on this census the mother on the birth registration form and

could be published in I940. The form for the include a few questions on fertility in the

general census of I94I would not be encum- form of the next general census our ignorance

bered by questions on fertility, and its results of all essential aspects of fertility will be, for

could then also be published earlier than about eight years more, nearly as appalling

otherwise would be the case. Nor would the as it is now, and our knowledge even after

cost of the fertility census of I938 be alto- that will be quite inadequate. If, on the

gether an additional expense, since the census other hand, the minimum demands which I

of I94I would cost considerably less if it did have mentioned previously should be ful-

not embody a fertility census.

filled, we would, within three years, have a

When in I9I9 a petition prepared by a fair knowledge of present fertility trends, and

committee of the Royal Statistical Society the Government would be able to embark on

and signed by I63 distinguished persons, a population policy with some chance of

thirty-six learned bodies and other societies, success.

thirty-nine county and municipal authorities, But in view of past experiences and remem-

ten medical officers of health and public bering what Mr. Keynes has said-" There

health committees, etc., represented to His is nothing a government hates more than to

Majesty's Government " the urgent need of be well-informed; for it makes the process of

a reorganization of the present system of arriving at decisions much more complicated

official statistics," the Cabinet appointed a and difficult "-I am less optimistic about

committee which, in I92I, reported " that the near future of English fertility statistics

the allegations put forward against the sys- than I would have been a hundred years ago.

tem of national statistics as it stands to-day In fact, considering the mean expectation of

are, broadly speaking, not established." life at my age, I am afraid that if, before I am

This committee, which included the Regis- dead, you ask me again to talk to you on

trar-General, stated in particular, " that the Future Trends in Population, I would disap-

whole body of official statistics is the product point you pretty much the same as I had

of evolution." Evolution? The Government, to to-day.

Eugenie Review, Vol. XX=X No. 2.

