REVIEWS OF BOOKS
sented by Coon should be checked at source reduces somewhat the value of their compilation. At the level of ideas, Coon has done much to popularize, though he did not originate, the notion of fossil man as a single polymorphic and probably polytypic species since the early Pleistocene, and so has counteracted the excessive "splitting" of many earlier anthropologists. He has also promoted the idea, a useful counterbalance to earlier theories, that much of human evolution, in features such as brain-size, proceeded by gene-diffusion between relatively static populations, rather than by wholesale migration and invasion. Finally, and most importantly, he has stimulated, indeed obliged, most physical anthropologists to re-examine critically their own concepts of human taxonomy and evolution.
C. J. JOLLY
SOCIOLOGY
Dahlstrom, Edmund (Editor). Trs. Gunilla and Steven Anderman. Foreword by Alva Myrdal.
The Changing Roles of Men and Women. London 1967. Duckworth. Pp. 205. Price 42s.
The Changing Roles of Men and Women is an English translation, revised and brought up to date, of a collection of essays first published in Swedish in 1962 under the title Women's Life and Work. The change in title, as Alva Myrdal points out in her foreword to the volume, reflects the change in the scope of the two versions. The emphasis is no longer exclusively on the way in which women are prepared for their role in society and the constraints upon their behaviour as wives, mothers or workers; it is equally on the way in which child-rearing practices in the home and the school prepare boys for the roles which society expects them to fulfil in adult life.
The opening essay by the volume's editor, Edmund Dahlstr6m and his colleague
Rita Liljestrom summarizes the relevant data concerning trends in the relative position of men and women in Sweden in demographic terms and in terms of their part in the occupational structure and in intra-familial functions, incidentally comparing these trends with
those in other industrialized countries. It examines and seeks to reconcile economic, sociological and psychological theories concerning the conffict between the expressed ideologies of equality of educational and occupational opportunity and the persistence of marked differences in the roles allocated to the two sexes in the country's occupational institutions and its familial groupings. It also suggests the areas in which data which can contribute to explanation are still lacking.
The themes which are touched upon in this first essay are developed at greater length in succeeding ones. One of these reports on data obtained from samples of eight-year-old, eleven-year-old and fifteen-year-old cohorts and from parents which show how, despite professed egalitarianism, boys and girls are subjected to different socialization processes and how these help to prepare them socially and psychologically for clearly differentiated roles in adult life. These data, incidentally, do not lend support to Freudian theories of female envy of the male. Boys were more conspicuous than girls among the small minority of children who at eight years would prefer to have been the other sex, although the reverse was true among the fifteen-year olds.
Two essays consider the factors in the employment situation, including employers' attitudes, which still relegate women to roles carrying inferior status and rewards, despite the virtual absence of overtly discriminatory educational and training policies. The data although fuller and more thoroughly analyzed than those available for the UK suggest that the patterns in the two countries with regard to employment are very comparable.
The final essay, again by Dahlstr6m, categorizes and discusses the current ideologies which determine the nature of the ever-changing, but everlasting, debate on sex roles. Dahlstr6m distinguishes several distinct ideologies. There are firstly the conservative
275

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
ideologies which he subdivides into "traditional" and "romantic", the first categorized by the belief that woman is the weaker and inferior sex and that her activities must be sharply differentiated from those of man. The "romantic" ideology is also based on the belief that men and women are essentially different, but that neither sex is weaker or inferior. The current progressive ideologies he divides into moderate liberal, radical liberal and radical marxist. The moderate liberals adhere to the view that although it is legitimate for women to have two roles, that of motherhood must take precedence over that of worker while the children are very young. The radical liberal ideology asserts in contrast that there must be absolute equality between the sexes including comparable male participation in the care of the young. This view, which still emphasises the importance of the family, is in its turn contrasted with the radical marxist view which suggests that the family itself is an institution which inevitably leads to the exploitation of the wife and mother, and urges the development of socialized methods of child-rearing which do not place such degrees of responsibility on the biological parents. It seems that the two radical ideologies, and in particular the liberal as opposed to the marxist one, have more active support in Sweden than they do in Britain, where the debate still centres round the divisions between conservative and moderate-liberal ideologies.
The book does not pretend to present new material. It is concerned rather to take stock of what has been established and what still needs to be done. The material presented, while highly compressed, is clearly expressed and well referenced.
MARGOT JEFFERYS
Rainer, John D. and Altshuler, Kenneth Z. Comprehensive Mental Health Services for the Deaf. New York. 1966. New York State Psychiatric Institute. Pp. xiv + 191. Distributed to interested agencies and individuals upon request; mailing charge $1.00.
THE IMPLICATIONS OF early profound deafness are not widely recognized not only by the lay public but often by those whose work brings them into contact with the deaf. The need for specialized psychiatric services for the deafis now becoming increasingly recognized and the Department of Medical Genetics, New York State Psychiatric Institute, have pioneered the development of such services.
This work is a fitting sequel to the previous monograph produced by the Institute entitled Family and Mental Health Problems in a Deaf Population, published in 1963, which described the findings ofan investigation undertaken into the genetic and demographic aspects of mental health of the deaf population of New York State. The initial investigation demonstrated the need for the development of comprehensive psychiatric services for the deaf with special training in manual methods of communication and the psychological aspects of deafness.
This recent publication describes the developent of an out-patient programme and of a special unit for the deaf within a large mental hospital. It describes the administrative framework, the mode of ward administration, methods of treatment and the special educational and group therapy techniques needed for a comprehensive programme. The particular needs and difficulties of a special psychiatric unit for deaf patients are delineated, but it is shown quite clearly that such patients can derive enormous benefit from these services.
This volume and its predecessor are the only two comprehensive works in this very important but long neglected field and will be of immense and special value to others who are developing or are about to develop psychiatric services for the deaf. It is to be hoped, however, that they will be read by all whose disciplines bring them into contact with those suffering from early profound deafness.
We await with interest the findings of the third project now being undertaken by the
276

