A. S. PARKES
C.B.E., M.A., Sc.D. Cantab., D.Sc. Lond., Ph.D. Manc., F.R.S. Mary Marshall Professor of the Physiology of Reproduction, University of Cambridge
Change and Control
in Human Populations*

FIRST OF A LL, I must emphasize that I The third consideration is that, although man

am not a demographer, still less am I a is biological material, he is specialized material

medical statistician. I am a biologist who in that he has developed mental powers much

finds that the study of the processes of repro- greater than those of other animals. Unfortu-

duction leads naturally to an interest in its nately, he was endowed with emotions, especially

consequences. To a biologist, the human race, fear, before he developed a capacity for effective

whatever else it may be, is biological material, reasoning. As a result, awed by the mysteries of

and I must start with some biological considera- his environment and his own existence, and as

tions. the outcome of his sexuality and gregarious

The first is that, in nature, the essential task of habits, he developed an astonishing assortment

a species is to survive, and to this end repro- of taboos, phobias, fetishes, and superstitions,

ductive capacity is such that any kind of animal, many of which, having become enshrined in

including men, if able to multiply to the limit religious, social, legal, and ethical systems, have

without wastage would in time swamp any part survived into the days of comparatively rational

of the world in which it could live. In practice, thought on at least some other matters. These

all animal populations are kept in check by three factors-excessive reproductive capacity,

limiting factors, of which the important ones are superior female viability, and psycho-social

food-supply, disease, and enemies. In terms of influences-are responsible for much of the

the human race these factors are famine, pesti- change, and restrict the possibility of control, in

lence, and war, the traditional scourges of human populations.

mankind.

Against this background, I want now to

The second consideration is that the male is consider changes in the population of Great

less viable than the female. This rule applies not Britain.

only to man, in which mortality of males exceeds

that of females at all stages of the life-cycle, but Changes in Great Britain

also to some farm and laboratory animals. This As is well known, the population of Great

curious and interesting phenomenon has excited Britain-England and Wales, and Scotland-is

much speculation, but it is not even certain now a little over 50 million. This size of popula-

whether it has a chromosomal or an endocrino- tion is of comparatively recent growth. At the

logical basis. The fact, however, remains, and it beginning of last century, when the ten-yearly

plays an important part in the sex composition of census began, the population was a little over

populations.

10 million. Four-fifths of our present population,

therefore, has been acquired during the past

* The third Darwin Lecture of the Institute of Biology 150 years, most of the increase being in the

and the Eugenics Society delivered on December 12th, 1962. It was published in the Lancet on February 16th, 1963 (No. 7277).

nineteenth century. At the present time total population is increasing very slowly and is doing

II
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1963, 55, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

so mainly as the result of increasing longevity years. The young female has thus acquired the

-the birth rate is still little above replacement slight scarcity value previously held by the male.

rate. In 1960, births were about seventeen per It will be interesting to see what she does with it.

1,000 population as compared with thirty-five per

1,000 at the peak between 1860 and 1880, twenty Changes in World Population

per 1,000 during the so-called baby boom in 1946 I want now to turn to the very different picture

and 1947, and about fifteen per 1,000 in the 1930s presented by world population.

when serious doubts began to arise about the In 1930, the population of the world was about

fertility of the inhabitants of these islands. 2,000 million. By 1954, it was thought that it was

Needless to say, these doubts were quite un- about 2,500 million and that it might rush up to

founded.

3,000 million within the lifetime of many of us.

In Britain, therefore, we do not have a popula- This was one of the many underestimates which

tion problem in the sense of a rapid increase in characterize this subject, because world popula-

numbers. In recent years the important changes tion is already thought to exceed 3,000 million

have been in age and sex composition within the and it is rushing upwards at a rate which conjures

overall figures, changes caused by reduction in up visions of staggering numbers of people in the

the death rate and an associated increase in the foreseeable future. Estimates of 10,000 million

expectation of life at birth. So far as the indivi- by the end of next century, which a few years ago

dual is concerned, these developments in medical seemed fantastic, seem conservative in the light

science must be regarded as largely beneficent. of present trends. To quote from the preface of a

Demographically, however, from the point of United Nations report on The Future Growth of

view of the community as a whole, medical World Populations (1958):

science is creating problems of a formidable nature. With a relatively stable birth rate, decrease of the death rate does three things: it

... it took 200,000 years for the world's human population to reach 2,500 million, it will now take a mere thirty years to add another 2,000 million.

increases the total population over what would otherwise be the level; it alters the proportions of the sexes, especially among young people; and it profoundly alters the age structure of the

With the present rate of increase, it can be calculated that in 600 years the number of human beings on Earth will be such that there will be only one square yard for each to live on. It goes without saying that this can never take place, something

population by increasing the number of old will happen to prevent it.

people. Men over sixty-five years and women over sixty were 6 per cent of the population in

The human race will have to decide whether that " something" is to be pleasant or un-

1901, 12 per cent in 1941, and are likely to pleasant. amount to more than 20 per cent in 1971. This The explosive growth of world population has

accumulation is becoming a major social prob- not been caused by a sudden increase in human

lem and one for which medical science, in the fertility, and probably owes little in any part of

widest sense, is directly responsible.

the world to an increase in birth rate. It has been

The work of medical science, however, has caused almost entirely by advances in the mediconferred one unmixed benefit: it has adjusted cal and ancillary sciences, and the consequent

the proportions of the sexes at marriageable age. decrease of the death rate in areas where the

About 105 males are born for every 100 females, birth rate remains high. Many examples could

but in time past this excess of males was abolish- be given of the impact on population growth of

ed in early childhood because of high infant even a single discovery in medical science. An

mortality falling differentially on the males. outstanding example is D.D.T., the use of which

There was thus a substantial excess of females at must have saved tens of millions of lives.

marriageable age. The progressive decrease of Two points are of especial interest.

child mortality has progressively increased the The first is that the impact of medical science

age at which the excess of males disappears, and on world population is accelerating. In Great

at the present time there is still an excess of males Britain it took a century for the expectation of

in the age-group twenty-five to twenty-nine life to increase from forty years to sixty years-

12

CHANGE AND CONTROL IN HUMAN POPULATIONS

that is, it increased one year every five years. In at least malnutrition, has to some extent always

India the expectation of life at birth is now about been with us, and in the past has been a potent

forty years, and it is said to be increasing by two- limiting factor. Even now, a quarter of the

and-a-half years every five years. Even if the birth world's population is admitted to be under-

rate were at no more than replacement level, this nourished and another quarter malnourished.

increasing expectation of life would add enor- One school of thought maintains that this need

mously to the population of India. In fact, of no longer be so, that man has muscles as well as a

course, the birth rate is far above that level. In mouth, and brains as well as a belly. It is argued

England, the social background was able to that the intensive application of scientific

adjust itself gradually to the increased expecta- methods to production and distribution could

tion of life. In India and many other places, increase food supplies and other resources suffi-

medical progress has been so rapid that the ciently to provide not merely subsistence but an

necessary adjustment of the social background improved standard of living for the world's

lags far behind.

rapidly increasing population. 1 have even heard

The second point is that the growth of world it said, quite recently, that the world could sup-

population is taking place unevenly, and the port not 3,000 million people as at present, but

differing rates of increase mean a continuous 45,000 million-half an acre each for all pur-

shift in the balance of world population. I have poses. Unfortunately, this optimistic view takes

already said that the population in Great Britain no account of the fact that reproductive capacity

is increasing slowly and that mainly by increasing allows potentially for geometric increase in

longevity. We have in fact one of the lowest rates numbers, while resources can only increase more

of natural increase in the world. Great Britain is slowly. The groundnuts fiasco showed clearly, if

being outbred by North America, North Amer- demonstration was needed, that agricultural

ica by South America and South America by production cannot be increased merely by press-

some parts of Asia.

ing a button, especially now that man has largely

robbed the world of its accumulated fertility. In

Control of World Population

future, increase in food production will mean

The growth of world population cannot continue hard work, with all the assistance that science

indefinitely at its present rate; something will can give, and there is no possibility of its keeping

happen to stop it. What will that something be? pace with the potential reproductivity of the

We should be ill-advised to rely on emigration to human race. In any case, the argument based on

other planets or other solar systems before it is an indefinite increase in resources inevitably

too late. That "something" will therefore be one breaks down at the vision of standing-room only

of the three traditional biological checks to on the planet Earth.

population growth-shortage of food, disease, Given the need for slowing the rate of popula-

and war-or a fourth and essentially human and tion growth, how is this to be effected? One

humane check-voluntary control. What about argument is that, with an improved standard of

the biological checks? Short of some new and living, the birth rate in other parts of the world

catastrophic manifestation, the limiting effect of will fall spontaneously without fertility control

disease will decrease still further in many parts as it has done in Western Europe during the

ofthe world. War is likely to be far more effective present century. This argument begs the question.

in future than in the past in reducing human For what reason does the birth rate fall with an

numbers, but few would wish to adopt this improved standard of living? It is easy to say

remedy for overpopulation. In fact, to those who that people come to prefer motor cars to babies,

believe that pressure of population is a potent but how is this preference implemented? Evi-

cause of war, the spectacle of defence scientists dently voluntary control, by whatever means,

slaving away to deal with the effects of the work must have been a large factor in the decrease in

of their colleagues, the medical scientists, is the birth rate in Europe during the past fifty

enough to make one despair of human reason. years. In any case, to judge from the current state

The third of the biological checks, famine, or of affairs in the United States, it seems that what

'3

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is known as the demographic cycle works both from long-term suppression of the activity of the

ways, and that with a very high standard of reproductive organs is that male and female

living there are both motor cars and babies. should be able to take alternate shifts-say,

Arguments based on the idea of a demographic alternate yearly shifts-in consuming pills. But

cycle, therefore, provide little comfort, and we must aim for still better methods. In my

motivation to fertility control and the availability opinion the possession of the means and the

of simple means are becoming increasingly willingness to adapt his fertility to his environ-

urgent.

ment will distinguish man from the animals in a

As to motivation, in the West we have the far more fundamental way than does the

sorry spectacle of opposition arising from man- possession of television or atomic bombs.

made religious dogma. In the East, among the

people of the underdeveloped nations accus- Control of Quality

tomed to a high birth rate and a high death rate, So much for control of the quantity of human

motivation to family limitation, for either per- beings. What can we do about quality? This is a

sonal or demographic reasons, does not come serious question for us in this country. So long

easily. As to means, biological research on as present demographic trends continue, the

fertility control is making very rapid strides at inhabitants of the British Isles will constitute an

the present time. The so-called Pincus pill, which ever dwindling proportion of the human race. In

suppresses ovulation and is effective by mouth, these circumstances, how are we to hold even our

has a remarkable record of effectiveness when present somewhat attenuated position in the

properly used. The outstanding problem of such world? Obviously we cannot take part in a

medication is not as to its effectiveness but as to propagation race, and the answer must lie in

the general practicability of taking twenty pills a quality not quantity. It is often said that a

month according to a set regime, the frequency comparatively slight rise in average intelligence

of uncomfortable side-effects, and the pos- quotient would give a great advantage to any

sible dangers arising from the long-term country. Can we achieve this? Different people

inhibition of the anterior pituitary gland. The will naturally have different ideas about how

last hazard I consider to have been much exag- such an improvement might be effected. Most

gerated by specious arguments which take full would agree that the mentally and physically fit,

advantage of the difficulty of proving a long- heavily aware of their responsibilities, should not

term negative. In fairness it should be pointed be inhibited from reproducing their kind, as

out that the ovulation-producing activity of the many are at present, by the economic pressures

human pituitary gland is inhibited for a year or of raising a family, or by the chronic uncertain-

more during pregnancy and lactation; so in this ties of our times. Some might suggest a policy of

respect the continued use of the pill may be positive eugenics; but, apart from obvious cases

likened to a rapid succession of pregnancies. of mental or physical deficiency, have we the

However undesirable in other ways, a succession necessary knowledge? There may be doubts on

of pregnancies is not usually regarded as this point, but what is certain is that knowledge

carcinogenic or endocrinologically catastrophic. is now being gained with great speed. The wide

Many will be glad to know that the male has dissemination of such knowledge as it becomes

not escaped attention in research on fertility available must surely be a main aim of eugenics.

control. A variety of substances are now known Whether it can be put to use in time to give us

which inhibit spermatogenesis without sup- here the relatively increasing quality of popula-

pressing the androgenic activity of the testes, and tion which would compensate for our relatively

attention is being directed to the selection of one decreasing numbers only time will show. As

or more free from toxic or other unwanted with fertility control, knowledge may well out-

effects.

strip motivation; for it is a sad commentary on

It is to be hoped that work on the male will be the human race that man will accept, for his own

pushed on rapidly to a successful conclusion. progeny, genetic hazards to which he would

The obvious answer to the question of hazards hesitate to expose his domestic animals. But at

14

CHANGE AND CONTROL IN HUMAN POPULATIONS

least it should be made possible for everyone to action on the part of the two sexes. For this

obtain the best genetic advice available in the reason, and because of our social conditioning,

light of current knowledge, in the hope that motivation in the case of eutelegenesis is obvi-

sooner or later it will become recognized that in ously going to lag even further behind technical

breeding, as in other ways, the human race is achievement than it does in the case of fertility

more important than a domestic animal. Then, control and genetic improvement.

and probably only then, will it be possible to take

action against low-grade individuals who are Choice of Sex?

irresponsibly indifferent to both the quantity and If at some future time germinal choice in the

quality of their offspring.

sense used by Muller becomes an acceptable

I can hardly leave this subject without a word possibility, what about the additional possibility

on eutelegenesis-i.e., the artificial insemination of choosing the sex of the offspring? According

of women from selected and known donors of to present knowledge, this is most likely to be

outstanding ability, probably with material which effected by the separation of X- and Y-sperma-

has been preserved at low temperature for many tozoa in vitro, followed by artificial insemination.

years. We have recently heard a good deal about Successful manipulations of this kind have been

this from Sir Julian Huxley and Dr. Muller. The claimed in animals, and the in vitro separation

idea is, of course, not new-the word was in- even in man; but there is at present no solid

vented more than twenty-five years ago-and it basis of reproducible experiment. However, such

raises many intriguing questions which are a procedure would fit in well with eutelegenesis,

obvious to everyone and which raise emotional and there can be no doubt that this technical

and other reactions of varying intensity. In this problem, too, will be solved in time, giving the

connection, we should recognize the magnitude possibility of eutelegynogenesis and eutelean-

of the revolution in animal breeding initiated by drogenesis.

the possibility of long-term preservation of

spermatozoa. Reproduction in mammals nor- A Concluding Question

mally involves contemporaneous and contiguous Some years ago I wrote, "It is the ethic of the

action on the part of the two sexes. The advent of medical man that life must be saved if only for

artificial insemination abolished this require- the gallows, or prolonged if only for months of

ment in principle; but, in cattle at any rate, the suffering. In the same way it is the ethic of

practicability of effectively using semen long medical science that disease must be conquered

stored in the frozen state has enormously ex- no matter what risk of war and famine may

tended the scope ofthe technique. It may be said, thereby be incurred." My question now is

in fact, that in cattle breeding we have abolished whether in modern times this is a completely

time and space, and gone far in exploiting the adequate ethic? Medical science is largely

reproductive potential of superior males. With responsible for creating the problems of over-

this example before us, there is little doubt that population, old people, and survival of the unfit,

the technical problems of telegenesis in man and it can reasonably be expected to take a large

would soon yield to intensive attack. Human share of the responsibility for solving them.

pregnancies have already been reported follow- Medical science, after long years of looking

ing the insemination of frozen and thawed askance at contraception, is gradually coming

semen; but, generally speaking, work on the to the view that death control must be balanced

preservation of human spermatozoa has not been by birth control. Can medical science now go

pursued with the vigour which the interest of the further and reconcile the interests of demo-

subject seems to justify. No doubt this dilatori- graphy, of eugenics, and of the individual in

ness is due partly to hesitation about the testing other ways also?

of frozen and thawed specimens, but mainly it In an overcrowded world, it is hardly logical

seems to arise from a lack of enthusiasm for the that time and money should be spent on the

idea of abolishing in human reproduction the treatment of infertility, on facilitating the propa-

need for contemporaneous and contiguous gation of defects, or on prolonging life in cases

IS

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of fatal disease. Further, in so far as medical science cannot attack everything at once, it
might logically concentrate research on diseases that disable rather than on those that kill, and on

medical profession. It is certain that further research should be devoted to diseases that cause suffering and disability, not to the mortal illnesses, since we are all condemned to death.

those common in the less crowded parts of the Objectivity of this kind is probably not as rare as

world. Again, provision for voluntary euthanasia might be expected; but medical science continues

would be a welcome relief to many people. A to push on with its task of saving and prolonging

man and a woman thrust life on a new individual life, with little or no regard for the personal and

without his consent and for reasons which are demographic problems thereby created. Surely

mainly egoistical. It is one of the anomalies of there is a most urgent need to forget ancient

the Western world that society then tells the new shibboleths and evolve ethics and policies which

individual that he must put up with his life for as reconcile humanitarianism and medical science

long as may be, however burdensome it may be with the limitations of society and of our world?

to himself or others. Surely this is a gross viola- It is not going to be easy or rapid. It takes

tion of the liberty of the individual.

twenty years to make a man, and on the average

Lest these ideas be regarded as the product of longer still to get rid of him. It takes years to

too much biology and too little humanity, I make an inch of top soil and centuries to alter

quote a letter which I received recently from a traditional beliefs. It is going to be very difficult

lady writing from a private address and unknown to harmonize all this with the spectacular and

to me:

accelerating technological progress of to-day.

The recent valuable discoveries in surgery and We can now fly round the world in a couple of

medicine have been applied to prolong life without days, but we still get only one summer a year-

regard at all for social and economic consequences in a chaotic world, and unfortunately have frequently caused great physical and mental suffering,

and not always that. But harmonize such things, in some way, we must; and the sooner we start

which I am sure was not the intention of the the sooner we shall get results.

i6

