POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA

By D. V. GLASS

SO far as the continued maintenance of the wastage due to death would have had to their populations is concerned, Norway, be only about 2 2 per cent., implying an

Sweden and Denmark are in a position similar to that of most other Western countries. In each of the Scandinavian
countries the net reproduction rate is below unity, and in each of these countries this is the momentary end-point of a decline in
fertility which has been proceeding for some sixty years. Table I gives the position in the most recent years for which the necessary basic statistics are available. In addition to

expectation of about 33*8 years lived in the reproductive period, having regard to the existing age-distribution of fertility; and, though possible, this would be a difficult
goal to achieve.* The implications of these rates have not
passed unnoticed in Scandinavia. Long before population policies were beginning to take practical shape in any of the three countries, estimates of future population

the net reproduction rates, in which mortality
is taken into account, gross reproduction rates are given, and show that, with the
possible exception of Denmark, no further reduction in mortality would be sufficient to compensate for the low level of fertility. Even in the case of Denmark it is doubtful if much compensation could be obtained by reducing mortality. In I934, a year in which mortality was relatively low, the wastage of fertility due to death was about IO-2 per cent., with the number of years lived by women in the reproductive period at 3IO4

had been made, showing the trends in numbers which might be expected if fertility and mortality behaved in accordance with
certain sets of assumptions. In I926 Professor S. D. Wicksell published five such
estimates for Sweden, two of which showed
a future decline of the population.t In I93I,
Dr. Adolph Jensen made three estimates of the future population of Denmark, one of which implied an eventually declining and another an eventually stationary population.+ Subsequent estimates include a series
for Norway, published by Professor Wicksell

out of the 35 which would obtain if there

were no deaths occurring to females between birth and the fiftieth birthday. For the net
reproduction rate to have been unity in I935,

TABLE I

GROSS AND NET REPRODUCTION RATES IN THE SCANDINAVIAN COUNTRIES*

Gross Reproduction Rates.

Net Reproduction Rates.

Norway. Sweden. Demnark. Norway. Sweden Denmark.

I931 1-o36t o09oo I-O64O 0909t o0785 0o929

1932 O-989 o*879 I*o65 o0874 O-775 o0938

1933 o0899 0o82I IOI2 o0799 0733 O0903

1934 o0883 o08I5 I*040 O*797 o*727 0934

I935 o-869 - I022 0-783 - 0*902

* Computed from statistics given in Befolkningens Bevaegelser for Denmark; Folkemengdens Bevegelse for Norway, 192I-32, 1933, 1934, and I931-35; and
Befolktningsrcrelsen for Sweden, 193I to 1934 inclusive.
Female Life Tables were computed separately for each country and for each year given in the Table above.
t 1930-I for Norway, as the appropriate statistics are not available for the separate years.

* At first sight this may seem incorrect. But the coefficient of survival for 1935 (NRR + GRR) was o- 883, with the number of years lived in the reproductive period by the original cohort of the Life Table (radix) at 30 - 49. For the GRR of I * 022 to have yielded a net reproduction rate of i - o, the coefficient of survival would have had to be o *978, and for this to have been
the case the number of years lived in the reproductive period would have had to be (o0 978 . 0o 883) X 30 49, or 33-78. The reason for this apparent error is that fertility is not equally distributed among the different years in the period I5 to 50 years, but concentrated largely in the earlier period where mortality is lowest. It would therefore be incorrect to estimate the number of children required to yield a net reproduction rate of unity from the sex ratio at birth and the number of years lived in the reproductive period. An estimate produced in this way would give a result, for 1935, of
(35 + 30.49) X 2o065, or 2-37I. The correct figure (Total fertility + NRR) is 2-340.
t S. D. Wicksell, " Sveriges framtida befolkning under olika f6rutsittningar," Ekonomisk Tidsskrift,
1926.
t A. Jensen, " Horoscope of the Population of Denmark," Bu4leti,n de l'Institut International de Statistique, vol. xxv, 3me. Livraison, I93I.

89

go THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in I934,* and a new series for Sweden given
by Professors Myrdal and Wicksell in their report to the Swedish Population Commission.t With the possible exception of the last estimates, about which it is too early to judge, the lowest fertilities assumed for the purposes of computation were still higher than have actually been shown in the most recent years. It should be emphasized that these estimates were aimed primarily at elucidating the effects of certain trends, rather than at attempting to forecast the probable populations of the future. Clearly, however, such computations indicate a real interest, among the social scientists at least, in the prospects of the populations of the three countries. But the interest was not translated into concrete proposals until very recently. For one thing, each country had its own immediate problems with which to deal, and for another, it takes a considerable time, as has been shown in England, for obsolete opinions on population to be replaced by accurate facts.
The final cause of the change of opinion may be attributed to a book by Alva and Gunnar Myrdal, Crisis in the Population Question, published at the end of I934.+ This book, as a writer in the Anglo-Swedish Review expressed it, dropped a bombshell among the thinking public of Sweden.§ And apparently the thinking public of Sweden is much larger, proportionately, than that in England, for by the middle of I937 the book had sold some i6,ooo copies, equivalent to a sale of over I00,000 here, a figure rarely reached even by popular novels. The book explained the significance of recent trends in fertility, discussed the possible consequences of a fall in population, and examined,
* S. D. Wicksell, " Bidrag till den formella befolkningsteorien. Med tillamningar pa Norges befolkning,"
Stats0konomisk Tidsskrift, 1934, parts 1-2. t G. Myrdal and S. Wicksell, " Utsikterna i fraga
om den framtida befolkningsutvecklingen i Sverige," Betdnkende i Sexualfrdgan, Appendix 8, Befolknings-
Kommissionen, Stockholm, I936. t Alva Myrdal och Gunnar Myrdal, " Kris i Befolk-
ningsfragan," Stockholm, I934. The seventh and popular edition was being sold in I937. An English translation is expected fairly soon. There are also Norwegian and Danish translations of the book.
§ " The Depopulation Alarm in Sweden," AngloSwedish Review, January I935.

in the light of existing knowledge, the reasons for and possible cures of the present low fertility. In particular, it placed the population problem in its social context, and showed that for the bulk of the population the existing alternatives were either poverty or
family limitation. The Crisis in the Poppula-
tion Question was a political and social study expressing the views of two distinguished social democrats, and it provided a factual basis for discussion of the whole question. The Riksdag was soon presented with motions by private members for the establishment of a population commission, and a Royal Commission was set up in May I935. Experts from all the related fields were co-opted-it is a Swedish tradition that experts should play a leading part in the government of the country-and more than a dozen reports on various aspects of the question have already been published, including a bulky general introduction to the whole field of Swedish population problems.* In the same year, a Royal Commission on Population was set up in Denmark, but in Norway there has so far been no attempt to project a coherent and unified policy concerning population problems.t Up to the present, Sweden is the only member of the Scandinavian group in which population policies have actually been implemented, and the remainder of this paper will be concerned largely with the proposals made and implemented in that country.
Scandinavian Approach to Population Prob-
lems
In the first place, it must be emphasized that the whole approach to the population problem is different in Scandinavia from that commonly found in the totalitarian states. In Germany and Italy-and to a
* Betdnkende i Sexualfrdgan. A popular summary of
this report has also been published under the title Familje och Moral, Stockholm, 1937.
t Dr. Jahn, Director of the Norwegian Central Bureau of Statistics, has urged the setting up of a Royal Commission on population. Norwegian publications dealing with present trends in fertility include D0r vi Ut, a pamphlet by Aase Lionaes and Arne Skaug (these two authors were also responsible for the Norwegian adaptation of the Myrdals' book) and Det Er Liv Eller D0d Det Gjelder, Oslo, I937, by 0. H. Langeland.

POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA

9I

considerable extent in France and Belgium propaganda was deemed an offence against

too-strong elements of repression are evi- public decency, and at the same time to widen

dent in the legal structure which has been the grounds on which abortion may legally

created to check declining fertility. These be procured.

elements include the tightening-up of the Certainly there is a real need for such

laws relating to abortion, the legal endeavours provisions in Denmark, where there are no

to check birth-control propaganda and the birth-control clinics,* and where the giving

use of contraceptives,* and the attempts to of advice on the subject is confined almost

drive women back into the home. But in exclusively to panel doctors, and only to a

Scandinavia the initial assumption is that small percentage of these. In Sweden there

parenthood shall be voluntary. The mandate are but five birth-control clinics-one pri-

of the Swedish Commission categorically vately organized by the Riksf6rbundet for

states that homes which economically are Sexuell-Upplysning, and four run by munici-

badly off should not be burdened by too many palities-with a total attendance of less than

children, while the mandate of the Danish 6oo patients in I935-t The result is that

Commission specifically states that no repres- coitus interruptus still remains the chief

sive measures shall be considered.

method of birth control and that abortion

In practice this has a very interesting is widely practised. The situation in Nor-

result. It means that along with measures way is rather better, for there are twelve

for encouraging fertility, there must also be clinics, run by private organizations but

other measures which make it easier for receiving grants from the municipalities

people to obtain reliable birth - control and the National Health Insurance Fund.

information. Consequently, the development However, it is doubtful if these clinics

of public birth-control clinics is an important see as many as twelve thousand patients

feature of Swedish population policy-though per year, and since a large number of

so far, this element has not been translated patients attend for advice connected with

into reality-while in Denmark State birth- maternity and infant welfare, it is unlikely

control clinics in every district are obligatory that modern techniques of contraception

under an Act which was to come into force on are known to more than a very small pro-

April ist, I938,t but which has now been portion of the Norwegian population.+

postponed until October Ist, 1939.

Both in Sweden and Norway, Royal Com-

The Danish Act was largely the result of missions which have reported in recent years,

a committee set up to investigate the ques- have recommended an extension of the

tions of birth control and abortion, and was grounds on which abortion may be obtained

not part of the policy inspired by the Popula- -a Swedish Commission which reported in

tion Commission. But it is interesting that, I935, and the Norwegian CommIIission which

in spite of a serious concern for the con- issued its report in the same year, actually

sequences of a declining population, Den- urged the legalization of abortion on social

mark should pass an Act which provides that indications. In Norway no legal changes

" clinics shall be established by public

enterprise, wherein persons of both sexes shall have access to correct and warrantable

* With the exception of an ante-natal clinic in the State hospital in Copenhagen. The Clinic for women's diseases also gave birth control information in cases

instruction in sexual hygiene," thus repealing where it was considered essential.

the previous law under which birth-control

t Torsten Gardlund, " BAttre polikliniker for f6delsekontroll," Morgonbris, April I937. See also his

report " Forefintliga radfrigningsbyraer for sexualup-

* There is as yet no law in Germany against birth- plysning i Sverige," Beta4kande i Sexualfrdgan,

control propaganda or contraceptive practice. But the Appendix I2. The private organization mentioned

Penal Law Commission has reported in favour of such above has about 33,000 members, and gives a con-

a law, and a measure to this effect will probably be siderable amount of advice by correspondence.

enacted in the near future.

t From a report by the present author on " The

t Law No. I63, I937, Regarding Measures Relating Effectiveness of Abortion Laws in Six Foreign Coun-

to Pregnancy, Amalienborg, May i8th, 1937. See tries," which it is hoped will be published in the near

EUGENICS REVIEW, May I938, P. 43,

future.

92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

have so far been made, but in Sweden the who are in need of the means for buying the

Riksdag passed, on May i8th, I938, an Act necessary household equipment; for whom

legalizing abortion on humanitarian, eugenic the grant of the loan is advisable, having

and medico-social grounds.*

regard to the applicants' own conditions and

interests; and who are known to be diligent

House-furnishing Loans

and economically prudent, and have shown

For the rest, the general policy envisaged the will to save, so far as this has been

in Sweden-and also, so far as can be judged possible. The loans are to be repaid, with

from the reports which have been published, interest not less than that paid by the State

in Denmark-is twofold. First, to encourage for its own obligations, in quarterly instal-

marriage, and secondly, to provide a social ments of such an amount that the loan shall

and economic environment in which the be completely refunded within not more than

extra costs associated with the bearing and five years after it has been granted.*

rearing of children are reduced as much as It will be noticed that no racial or physio-

possible. The second object is, of course, as logical demands are made by the regulations.

much concerned with the physical condition Nor is the loan in any sense a gift-it is not

of the children, and therefore with the interest-free, and there are no cancellations

qualitative aspect of the population question, at the birth of children. In fact the main

as it is with the quantitative aspect.t Under idea, according to Professor Myrdal, is to

the first aim are included the Swedish loans enable young couples to escape the dangers

for setting up households. These loans have of the hire-purchase system, and also, since

been granted since January Ist, I938,+ the their current expenses are lowest at the

money being provided by a governmental beginning of their married life, to have them

loan fund administered by the Central Bank repay the loan as quickly as possible.t

and its local branches.

Finally, unlike the German marriage

Among the regulations in accordance with loans, there is no attempt to drive women

which the loans are given the most important back into the home. On the contrary, the

points are the following: The loans are Population Commission is very anxious to

designed to allow persons who are already safeguard and guarantee the employment of

married (in which case the application for a married women, and to establish their right

loan must be made within six months of the to have children and to take the required

marriage) or who are going to be married (in absence during pregnancy and childbirth

which case evidence of the intended marriage without being subject to the fear of losing

must be produced) to buy the furniture and their jobs. This has already been laid down

other household equipment, the need for under the health insurance system, and has

which is occasioned by the marriage which been extended to women employed by the

has been or is going to be contracted. At central and local government authorities.

their maximum the loans are I,OOO kronor, A good deal has also been done with the

and they are given only to persons who are help of the Professional and Business

Swedish citizens or who will be so as a result Women's Association by creating public

of the marriage (in the case of foreign brides); disapproval of certain banks and insurance

companies which followed the practice of

* This year (I938) there is also a Swedish Government dismissing women on account of pregnancy

Bill before the Riksdag for licensing the trade in or childbirth.

contraceptives. t Concern for the qualitative aspect is one of the main
reasons for the Swedish policy of giving children's

No income limit has been laid down in the regulations for administering the home-

allowances in kind rather than family allowances in cash. Professor Myrdal believes that cash allowances

furnishing loans, but it is clear that they are

would have the greatest quantitative effect upon

" undesirable" parents who care least about their * Though this rule may be relaxed if circumstances

children.

make so rapid a repayment difficult. The present rate

Nos. 8og-io, Kungl. Maj: ts Kung6relse om statliga of interest is about 31 per cent.

bos4ttningsldn, September 30th, I937.

t In a conversation with him in September I937.

POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA

93

intended only for members of the working quite possible that the increase in the number

class.* To this extent they leave untouched of marriages may be fictitious for another

a problem created by the Swedish educa- reason. In Sweden there are many unwedded

tional system. Primary education in Sweden unions-in I934 over I4 per cent. of all live

is free, and secondary education is inexpen- births occurred to unmarried women-and

sive, particularly because of the large it is possible that a large proportion of any

numbers of bursaries and grants in aid of subsequent increase in marriages may be due

fees which are available.t But little assist- to the legalization of these existing unions.

ance is given to students proceeding to the In any case, it is clear that the decline in

universities. These students generally borrow fertility over the last sixty years has not

from the banks, and the practice has become been associated with changes in the amount

so well established that students' promissory of marriage.

notes are regarded as safe assets. Thus at

the end of a degree course, a student often Protection of Unmarried Mothers and their

finds himself with debts of io,ooo kronor,

Children

and such an amount must be a serious Outside of marriage, Sweden has taken an

barrier to early marriage.

important step in improving the situation of

It is, of course, much too early to speak of unmarried mothers and their children. A

the effects of the home-furnishing loans.

They have only been in operation for six months, and as the total grant given for the

1932-4, we take the age-specific fertility rates of married and unmarried women separately, and combine these with a table which shows the joint effects of the nup-

financial year I937-8 is only two million tiality and mortality of the period, we have a division

kronor, there will not be more than 2,000 to 3,000 loans. For the financial year I938-9, the government has asked for a grant of six million kronor. Theoretically, however, the
effect of the loans depends upon whether

of the net reproduction rate into o io8 for illegitimate, and o 651 for legitimate births, giving a total rate of O*759. Since, according to the nuptiality of 1932-4, out of i,ooo single women at 15 years of age only 789.59 marry by their fiftieth birthday, the net reproduction rate of women who had married at least once by the latter age is o-824. If we assume that women who do

their net result is merely to speed up marriage without either increasing the total number of marriages or the fertility of each marriage. If this is the case, the result will be to increase
the rate of decline of the population, since the earlier marriages will mean a shorter generation, other things being equal. It is

eventually marry bear illegitimate children during their unmarried life at the same rate as those women who do not marry by their fiftieth birthday, and if we also assume that 5 per cent. of the illegitimate births are borne by married women, we should have a nuptial net reproduction rate of 0o94. Consequently, a point somewhere between o 824 and o *94 would represent the maximum net reproduction rate which could result from universal marriage, unless marital fertility itself were raised. It should be noted that nuptiality has risen

* Apparently some idea of a lower income limit is

in Sweden in recent years, probably as a result of the return of relative prosperity. The probability of marry-

involved, since it is unlikely that loans will be given to ing at least once by the fiftieth birthday was, for

applicants who are so poor that they could not repay females, o-7698 in 1932 and o-78I5 in I933 (R. R.

them.

Kuczynski, " The Analysis of Vital Statistics," Ecozo-

t In 1934-5, 37I,598 kronor were distributed from the bursary and prize funds, and in I936 the government set up a public legacy fund of 65,ooo kronor for the same purpose (Social Work and Legislation in Sweden, issued by the Royal Social Board, 2nd edition, Stockholm, I938). Dr. Richard Sterner, in a discussion
of this question, suggested that the actual cost of secondary education was probably only 120 to 140 kronor per year, but that there were many pupils who paid only half of these fees, and also a considerable number who paid no fees at all.
t The question of the influence of marriage on net

mica, May I938). In 1910-I2 the probability was 0 * 7670, and in I900-02, 0 * 7896. For Denmark the official figures are o08575 for 1921-5, and o-8366 for 1926-30 (iEgteskaber, Fodte og D0de i Aarene 1926-30). By comparison the Norwegian probability was o * 7592 in I929-3I (approx.), the French was 0 9057 in 1930-2, while for England and Wales in 1936 the probability was o-8863. (Unless the sources are specifically mentioned, the nuptiality probabilities have been specially computed from the appropriate statistics.) It may be argued that it is inappropriate to apply the nuptiality of 1932-4 to the fertility of the same period, and this is

reproductivity is a complicated one. Professor Wicksell, in " Nuptiality, Fertility and Reproduction," Skandinavisk Aktuariedtidsskrift, I931, and in " Fruktsamhet
och Forokning," Hygienisk Revy, 1936, expresses a
belief in the significant effect of the increase in nuptiality

largely true. But the application of the nuptiality of a previous period would not cause any fundamental difference in the result. It should, however, also be remembered that if women bear children at an earlier age, the wastage due to mortality will be reduced

upon the reproduction rate. But if, for Sweden in slightly.

94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

considerable advance on the position in other situation affects families of different sizes is

countries was made as long ago as I9I7, when shown by the partial census of I935-6,

the Act relating to children born out of which made a special investigation of

wedlock instituted a system of specially incomes in relation to the family. The main

appointed legal guardians to act in the features are given in Table II.

interests of the mothers and their children,

generally until the children reached their

TABLE II

eighteenth birthdays. But it was found that the maintenance allowance - determined

MEDIAN INCOMES (INCLUDING HUSBAND'S AND WIFE'S COMBINED INCOMES) IN MARRIAGES WITH GIVEN
NUMBERS OF CHILDREN*

generally by the court, and amounting to Mamiages with the Median Incomes per year in

I5 to 20 kronor per month in the rural
districts, and 20 to 30 kronor in the townswas often delayed. In I935, about half the

following numbers

Kronor

of children under Towns Rural Kingdom

I6 years of age

Districts

cases liable for this payment showed either complete or partial default.* To remedy this, the Riksdag decided, in I937, that a child whose father is liable to support himand this applies equally to the children of

0
I
2
3
4
5
6

3,145
2,967
3,023
2,986
2,790
2,650
2,573

I,362
I,478 1,459
1,449 I,388
I1349
1,314

2,148
2,072
I,955
I'75I
I,6I2
1,474
1,425

separated or divorced parents-may receive an advance on the payment due to him, such an advance generally being given for a year

7 8
g or more All marriages

2,500
3,036

1,323
1,200
i,o88
I,421

I,4I0 1,275 1,I91
I,993

at a time. The payment is then claimed from

the father by the Treasury, and the costs of To a considerable extent this picture is

giving these advances are shared by the overpainted. First, there is a marked

Treasury (75 per cent.) and by the particular tendency to understate incomes, and,

local district (25 per cent.) from which the secondly, it is very difficult in the rural

advance is received.t

districts to estimate the monetary value of

income received in kind. The I936 statistics

Economic and Social Conditions in Sweden of wages paid to workers in industry appear

Before dealing with the other steps which to be considerably higher than would be ex-

have been taken and proposals which have pected from the figures given in Table II. But

been made, it is important to know some of it would nevertheless be true to say that there

the facts concerning the economic and social is an inverse relationship between income

conditions of the Swedish population. Those and the number of dependent children, and

who have been impressed by journalistic this, whether looked at from the point of

eulogies of Sweden will be surprised to learn view of the standard of livng or from that

that, according to the I930 census, 76*2 per of the correlation between income and

cent. of the active population earned not fertility, still produces the same effect. The

more than 2,000 kronor per year, and that larger families are worse off, economically,

5I-9 per cent. earned not more than I,000 than the small ones.

kronor per year. Yet the incomes of 2,000 Further, housing conditions in Sweden

kronor and more per year formed 66-4 per still leave much to be desired, in spite of the

cent. of the income earned by the employed fact that slums, in the English sense, are

population as a whole, and the incomes of Io,ooo kronor or more per year, which are earned by only i * i per cent. of the employed
population, form i6 -4 per cent. of the total income of all employed persons. How this

* The income statistics cited in the text are from R. Sterner, " Levnadsstandarden i svenska familjer."
The table, which refers only to marriages contracted
since I900, is from Betinkande i Sexualfrdgan, page 26.
In a letter, Mr. R. Sterner stated that in 1936 the average annual earnings of full-time or nearly full-time

male workers were 2,848 kronor in industry, and
* R. Sterner, "Levnadsstandarden i svenska between I,200 and I,400 kronor in agriculture (includ-

familjer," Betiankatnde i Sexualfrdgan, Appendix 7.

ing income in kind), with forestry workers at about the

t Social Work and Legislation in Sweden, pp. 228-9. same level as, or a little below, agricultural workers.

POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA

95

very rare. According to the housing census of I933, in which a child under I5 years of age is counted as half an adult unit, and kitchens, halls, and rooms smaller than 9 square metres (about 97 square feet) are reckoned as halves of a room unit, about
I3 per cent. of all dwellings were overcrowded in the sense of having more than two adult units per room unit. About 30 per cent. of children under 15 years of age were lving in these overcrowded conditions, and so
were 47 *4 per cent. of the families with three
or more children. These statistics apply only to urban
districts-excluding Stockholrm, where there had been a housing census in I93o-or to agglomerations in rural districts, excluding therefore most of the agricultural workers.* But in rural districts the problem is certainly no less important, since, even if the number of rooms per family is higher, the families are larger than in the towns and the quality of accommodation is far worse.t According to a special housing inquiry made in connection with the census of I935-6, and covering a hundred rural communes, about I5 per cent. of the dwellings were dilapidated and 9 per cent. were damp. About 33 per cent. of all dwellings consisted of not more than one room and a kitchen, as compared with approximately 50 per cent. in the towns, and about ii per cent. of all dwellings were overcrowded in the sense of having more than two adult units per room unit. In addition, the prevalent " best room " system further restricted the space used for sleeping, so that of the population in families with three or more children under I5 years of age who were living in small dwellings, nearly 63 per cent. slept in overcrowded conditions in which there were four or more persons per room.+
* A further account of urban housing is given by R. Sterner and G. Lange in " Undersokning rorande smilagenheternas- beskaffenhet," (Betdnkende med
Forslag Rorande Andringar i Vissa Delar ar Halsovdrdsstadgan, Appendix i, Stockholm, i935.
t See Allmanna Bostadsr4kningen Ar 1933, Sveriges
Officiella Statistik, Stockholm, I936 (R6sume) and R. Sterner.
t Social Work and Legislation in Sweden, loc. cit. Also, according to the partial census of 1936, dwellings
consisting of not more than two rooms and a kitchen

Housing Improvements
Clearly, then, housing and the standard of life of the larger families are two problems which are in urgent need of attention, and these are the problems with which the Swedish government is now dealing. Some improvement of housing has come about in recent years as part of a general public works policy for relieving unemployment. In I933, the Riksdag appropriated 5 million kronor for granting loans to builders and contractors who wished to build new houses
in towns and urban districts, and in I935 a further grant of 3 million kronor was given,
though the latter was also intended to help in the repair of existing dwellings. In I936, still another grant of 2 million kronor was made, but the fund is now available for repairs only.
Similarly, beginning with I933, grants were made by the Riksdag for improving and repairing rural dwellings, provided that the applicants were in need of financial aid. The upper limit of the grant is I,OOO kronor per dwelling, and in practice the average amount has been about 700 kronor. At the same time, loans have been made for building new dwellings in the rural districts, at 4 per cent. interest and to be repaid within twenty years, the maximum being 3,000 kronor per dwelling. Since most rural dwellings are built of wood, this sum probably represents the upper limit of about 70 per cent. of the total cost of construction. By the end of I936, nearly 39 million kronor had been granted for rural housing, of which about
7.5 million kronor were used for putting up
new dwellings.* Since, however, much of the work was intended immediately to reduce unemployment, control over the quality of the work was not all that could be desired,
constitute 58 4 per cent. of all dwellings in the rural communes. Of these small dwellings, 35 4 per cent. are either dilapidated or overcrowded (having more than two person units per room unit) or both. 14 * 8 per
cent. are dilapidated only, I3*3 per cent. are over-
crowded only, and the rest both overcrowded and dilapidated. Of all rural accommodation, including large dwellings, approximately 23 per cent. are either
overcrowded or dilapidated. (Partiella Folkr4kniingetn i Mars 1936. Specialunders6kning av Bostadsforhdllandena i IOO La-ndskommuner. Rdsum6, p. xvi.)
* Decree of June 30th, I933.

96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with the result, according to Professor the rapid disappearance of the speculative

Myrdal, that in some 2 or 3 per cent. of the builder in the near future. Special attention

repaired houses the repairs were inadequate.* has to be given to the provision of baths,

There is also the question of the rent communal laundries, access to parks and

charged for various kinds of accommodation. playgrounds, and the provision of indoor

Since the war, the co-operative building play centres and creches if these are thought

societies-of which the two most important to be necessary. The dwellings may range

examples are the Stockholm Co-operative from single-family houses to blocks of flats.

Housing Society (S.K.B.), founded in I9I5, The loan covers up to 40 per cent. of the

and the Tenants' Savings Fund and Housing value of the dwellings, the rate of interest

Society (H.S.B.), founded in I923-have being that paid by the State for its own

helped considerably in reducing rents. It is borrowing, and the commune concerned

estimated that in general the rents of co- must provide the land free of charge and be

operative dwellings are IO to 30 per cent. responsible for the payment of interest and

below those available in the open market, amortisation. It must also provide 5 per

while outside Stockholm they are generally cent. of the capital required for building.

25 to 30 per cent. below the prevailing It is estimated that in this way rents will be

market price; but the co-operative societies about IO to I5 per cent. below those prevail-

have built only a small proportion of the ing in the open market. In addition, the

houses in the post-war period. Table III State makes grants to the communes for the

shows the rents for small dwellings in the purpose of further reducing the rents charged

period October Ist, I933, to September 30th, to the large families. Thus a family of three

I934-

TABLE III

AVERAGE ANNUAL RENT IN KRONOR FOR DWELLINGSt
CONSISTING OF:

room 2 rooms 3 rooms I room. +I kdtchen + kitchen. + kitchen.

Stockholm ... 6ii 748 1,124 I,609

70 other towns 277 38I

605 898

dependent children has the rent reduced by 30 per cent., a four-child family has a 40 per
cent. reduction, and a family of five or more children is given a 50 per cent. reduction. To cover these rebates, 500,ooo kronor were
allocated by the Riksdag in I935 and 650,000 kronor in I936.*

Reference to Table II (p. 94) shows how difficult is the position of families with three or more children. To improve the position of these families, the government initiated, and in I935 the Riksdag agreed to, a project for rehousing 2o,ooo families with three or more dependent children, who are at present living in overcrowded dwellings in the towns and urban districts. In I935, ten million kronor were granted for this purpose, and a
further fifteen million were given in I936.
From this fund loans for constructing
dwellings of not less than two rooms and a kitchen for the accommodation of the large
and relatively poor families are granted to

As an illustration of the result of this
policy on rent charges, a flat in Stockholm. built under this scheme, consisting of two rooms, kitchen and bathroom, and provided with central heating and constant hot water, will be let at 550 kronor per year to a threechild family and 400 kronor per year to a
five-child family. The average rent for a dwelling of two rooms and a kitchen in Stockholm in I933-4 was, as is shown in Table III, I,I24 kronor per year.
In keeping with the general policy, the blocks of flats which Stockholm is setting up for large families are on the outskirts of the town, near to water and the green belt.t

the communes, or through the communes to public utility building societies or individual

* W. Goodsell, " Housing and the Birth Rate in Sweden," American Sociological Review, December I937.

contractors of the same class as the building Also Social Work and Legislation in Sweden.

societies-which would seem to indicate

t Social Work in Stockholm, City of Stockholm Statistical Office, 1937. Collective creches will be pro-

vided in the blocks of flats, so that children may be

* In a conversation in September 1937.

looked after while their mothers work or go out. At

t Social Work and Legislation in Sweden, p. 289. one cr6che in Stockholm which the present writer

POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA

So far, nearly 4,ooo new dwellings have been The same year also saw a decree instituting

provided for large families,* which is a grants for needy children. Orphans, father-

rather slower rate of construction than was less children, and the children of certain

anticipated. This has been due to the fact classes of disabled persons, may now receive

that the scheme leaves the initiative to the State allowances. For orphans, these amount

communes, and at the beginning many of the to 300, 360 or 42o kronor per year, dependent

towns and urban districts showed reluctance upon the cost of living in the district in which

to undertake additional duties. But com- the child is living. The grants are reduced

bined propaganda by the government and the if they are being given to more than one child

tenants' associations is helping to arouse in the same family, and also if the total

interest in the work. Rural housing is as yet family income is above 6oo, 8oo or I,000

unaffected by the scheme-though the house kronor per year, these limits being related to

repairing grants have been made to about the cost of lving in the different localities.

6o,ooo rural families-but this year will see Above these incomes the grants are reduced

its extension to the rural population.f It by 70 per cent. of the difference between the

will take a slightly different form in this actual income and the income limit. At the

extension. Probably pre-fabricated sections same time the grants are increased by 6o

will be supplied and will be set up largely by kronor per year for children under two years

the labour of the future occupiers,+ thus of age. For the other classes of children the

following the method adopted in the garden- basic grants are 6o kronor per year less than

city suburbs of Stockholm since I926.

for orphans. In all cases the allowance

ceases at the child's sixteenth birthday.*

Grants for Mothers and Children

For the rest, the Swedish population policy Measures under Consideration

is still mainly in proposal form, each proposal Among the various proposals which may

being the result of a careful study made by be implemented in the near future, is one

a committee specially set up for the purpose. relating to State taxation. In its original

Two more actual measures should be noted, form, the Population Commission's proposal

however, in connection with assistance to urged a fairly steep gradation of income tax

mothers. In I937, the law relating to with a high exemption limit for families,

maternity benefit was amended so that a and a special tax on bachelors. But the

woman whose taxable income (or the taxable special Committee on Taxation to which

income of whose husband) is below 3,000 the proposal was handed has not accepted

kronor per year may now receive a lump sum the bachelor tax and has reduced the

of 75 kronor to help cover the costs of her exemption allowances to families. The

confinement. Consequently only 8 per cent. amount of exemption also varies, of course,

of all mothers are now excluded from such with the cost of living of the various localities.

benefit, instead of the 26 per cent. under the Thus in Stockholm, according to the modified

previous ruling by which the upper limit of proposals, there would be an exemption of

taxable income was 500 kronor per year. 760 kronor for a man, 760 kronor for his wife,

Apart from this grant, necessitous mothers 620 kronor for each of the first two children,

may obtain grants of up to 300 kronor for the and 940 kronor for each subsequent child,

birth of each child.

while the age limit for children would be

raised from i6 to i8 years.

visited, a charge of 6o ore per day was made for looking after a child from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. and giving it three

The Population Commission has also considered the question of free meals for children,

meals in that period. Such cr6ches are generally found and has recommended that in primary schools

in the H.S.B. blocks of flats. * 3,750 by April igth, I938, according to R. Sterner.

a meal of some cooked food, together with

t According to a letter from Mr. R. Sterner, May
1938. * Social Work and Legislation in Sweden. According

: According to Dr. A. Johansson, in a discussion in to Dr. Sterner the cost of children's allowances will

September I937.

amount to about 20 million kronor per year.

B

98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bread and butter and milk, should be given, reports,* one dealing with help to needy

or, where there are no cooking facilities, mothers, in which it is proposed to follow

that the children should receive an " Oslo the Swedish example and give a grant to

breakfast" (which will be referred to in help cover the costs of bearing a child, the

more detail in the section on Norway). At other with the question of providing suitable

first this proposal is intended to apply only housing conditions for large families. Here,

to about 20 per cent. of the children in again, the proposal is along the Swedish

primary schools, but it is hoped that in, say, lines, consisting essentially of rent rebates of

ten years, it will apply to all the children in 30 per cent. for three children, 40 per cent.

these schools. In addition, the Commission for four and 50 per cent. for five or more

suggests that doctors at the maternity and children.

child-welfare centres should be able to order Denmark has, of course, already seen a

free supplies of milk, vegetables, fruit and so considerable amount of State help in provid-

forth, for those mothers and children who ing houses and flats. Up till April Ist, I936,

show signs of malnutrition. There is also a by which date the relevant Act fell into

suggestion that large families should be abeyance, the State provided loans for up

entitled to special reductions in the price of to thirty-six years and covering as much as

milk, butter, and other protective foods. 95 per cent. of the total cost of construction,

Further, the report on children's clothing including land costs, to public utility building

recommends that poor families should be societies, and by I937 about 20 per cent. of

given clothing to the value of 65 kronor per the population of Copenhagen was lving in

year for children aged seven to fifteen years, dwellings under public or communal control.

and of 45 kronor per year for children aged Loans for up to 70 per cent. of the costs of

under seven years. The cost of such a scheme construction were also given for private

would be in the neighbourhood of 22 million buildings. In both cases the rate of interest

kronor per year. Family allowances are not charged was 4i per cent., about i per cent.

proposed, for the Commission believes it more below the market rate.t Since I936, how-

satisfactory to use other methods to relieve ever, such public assistance as is given to

parents of the cost of bringing up their housing must come from the communes

children.*

concerned, unless new provisions are made

under recommendations from the Population

Danish Measures and Proposals

Commission.

It has already been noted that few specific

measures relating to population policy have Norwegian Measures and Proposals

been promulgated in either Denmark or In Norway less has been done to improve

Norway. But in both countries a consider- housing, for the task of giving grants to help

able proportion of recent legislation has a the provision of new dwellings has fallen

direct bearing on the population question entirely to the communes. In Oslo, the

and thorough studies of the different aspects municipal authorities granted loans covering

of the question are being undertaken both up to go per cent. of the " normal value,"

through the Population Commission in which apparently was equivalent to about

Denmark, and by means of ad hoc com-

missions in Norway. As regards Denmark, * " Betaenkning . . . angaaende Moderens Rettig-

the establishment of public birth- control clinics has been mentioned in an earlier section of this survey. The Danish Popula-

heder i Anledning af F0dsel," Copenhagen, 1938, and " Betaenkning . . . angaaende Laan till B0ligbyggeri og Huslefradrag for Mindrebemidlede, Bornerige Familier," Copenhagen, 1937. I have to thank Mr.

tion Commission has also recently issued two

H. H. Koch, of the Socialministeriet, for informing me of the progress of the Danish Royal Commission on

Population.

* The information as to the further proposals of the t F. C. Boldsen, " Der Wohnungs und Siedlungsbau

Population Commission was kindly supplied by Mr. in DAnemark, Schweden und Norwegen," in Vom

R. Sterner, who has been responsible for some of the Wirtschaftlichen Bauen, i8* Folge, ed. R. Stegemann,

material produced by the Commission.

Dresden, I937.

POPULATION POLICIES IN SCANDINAVIA

8o per cent. of the actual value. By I937, wholemeal wheat flour) served with margarine

about I7 per cent. of the population of Oslo and goat's milk cheese, further wholemeal

was lving in dwellings built under such bread with margarine and cheese ad lib, and,

grants. But the general housing situation in finally, half an apple or orange, or a raw

Norway is still very unsatisfactory. Accord- carrot.* Margarine was used for economy

ing to the reports of the Oslo Birth Control only, and is probably now being replaced by

and Maternal Welfare Clinic, 67 per cent. of butter, especially as the government decided

the patients who attended in I933 lived in to allow public and municipal institutions to

dwellings containing not more than one buy butter at a reduced price. In March

room and a kitchen, while the percentages I938 Professor Schi0tz proposed that half an

were 58-2 in I934, 58 5 in I935, and 59-5 in orange be given in any case (or briar marma-

I936.* These figures refer, of course, to a lade, which is very rich in vitamin C), as well

very selected sample of the population. But as a raw carrot or half an apple, and that

according to the I930 census, there was between September and May a teaspoonful

marked overcrowding among the general of cod-liver oil should be given to each child

industrial workers and their families. In at breakfast.

Oslo, 29 - 8 per cent. of these workers lived in The " Oslo breakfasts " have been adopted

overcrowded conditions (more than two per- by the elementary schools in Oslo, Bergen,

sons per room), 29 o per cent. in Bergen, Trondheim, Troms6 and a number of other

32 5 per cent. in Trondheim, 27-2 per cent. schools in rural districts. The breakfasts are

in Stavanger, and 21i0 per cent. in Dram- given free of charge in the towns, but a

men. t It is likely, however, that the near charge is made in many of the rural schools,

future will see improvements in housing or else the children bring the standard con-

conditions, since the present government is stituents with them to schooL In Oslo about

seriously concerned with the problem. 46 per cent. of the school children receive the

On the other hand, some important steps breakfasts. t

have been taken to improve the conditions Finally, a Committee set up in I934 to

of mothers and children. Since I915, for consider the question of family allowances

example, mothers who are badly off have has just issued its report. The Committee

been entitled to a subsidy from the com- was primarily concerned with improving the

munes to help them during pregnancy and conditions of children, and not specifically

childbirth. During the last six weeks of directed to a population policy, and its

pregnancy they are entitled to the payment problem was to decide how far children

of 45 to IIo kronor for the period. For the could be helped by public institutions and

first month after childbirth they receive how far by direct cash allowances. The

between 35 and IIO kronor, and for the next majority report concludes that collective

five months their grant is from 30 to 85 effort is best for such needs as housing, and

kronor per month.4F

medical attention, but that, for the day-to-

As regards children, there is the now well- day needs of life in a country in which the

known system of " Oslo breakfasts," which population is scattered and transport slow

were first instituted under the direction of and expensive, cash family allowances would

Professor Carl Schi0tz in Oslo in I93I. These be the most satisfactory solution, particularly

breakfasts, which are generally given half an if these allowances were paid to the mothers.

hour before morning school begins, consist of

one-third of a litre of full-cream milk, a * If an orange is given, it generally begins the meal. "Kneipp cracker" (made preferably of t From C. Schi0tz, " Skolefrokosten," Tidsskrift for
den Norske L&8geforening, I938, and a special memoran-
* M0drehygienekontoret i Oslo, Beretning for 1924-34, dum entitled " The Oslo Breakfast," both kindly sent

1934, 1935 and I936.

to me by Professor Schi0tz. Parents who wish their

t I930 Census, Vol. io, " Boligstatistikk," pp. 26* to children to have the breakfasts, must state their

28*, Norges Offisielle Statistikk, IX, 63. Oslo, I935. reasons-poverty or poor health, or both. But Profes-

I Information given by Dr. Frydenberg, of the sor Schi0tz says that " it is not considered as a matter of
Socialdepartmentet, in a discussion in September I937. reproach or shame to get free meals."

0oo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It recognizes the need for allowances graded in relation to the cost of living in different parts of the country, but, because of the complexity which such a system would involve, recommends a uniform allowance as between the different districts, graded so that the highest amount is given for the first child, with decreasing amounts for each subsequent child.
The Committee suggests no specific allowance, being willing to leave this question until such time as the government decides to implement the proposal, but in the estimates of costs which were drawn up by Dr. H. Palmstr0m, who was actuary to the Committee, the rates chosen as examples were I00 and i20 kronor per year.* If I20 kronor per year were given for each child under I5 years of age, the annual cost would be nearly eighty-two million kronor. On the other hand, if the allowances were graded so that the second child received only go kronor, the third and subsequent children only 50 kronor per year, the cost would amount to nearly 66 million kronor per year. As for raising the necessary funds, the majority report suggests an increase in the turnover tax, a i per cent. turnover tax now yielding
about 30 million kronor per year.t There is
as yet no suggestion about when these proposals will be introduced by the govern-
ment.+
* These amounts appear small, but it should be noted that, according to the Norwegian census of 1930, over a third of the employed male population aged 15 years or more was earning less than i,ooo kronor per year, and this was the case with over half of the employed women. In the rural districts the respective proportions were 54 per cent. for the men and 76 per cent. for the women. See " Inntekt og formue efter skatteligningen: 1930-3I," pp. 20*, 2 and 3, Folketellingen i Norge, I930, vol. 7.
t Cand. 0kon. Alfhild Hertzberg, " Barnetrygd i
Norge," Urd, 1938, and " Utkast til Lov om Barnetryd met Motiver," Socialdepartmentet, Oslo, 1938, both kindly sent to me by Judge Wiesener, who was Chairman of the Committee.
t But Dr. Arne Skarrg states (in a letter to the present writer) that it is unlikely that these allowances

Conclusion
It is clear from the account which has been given that in the Scandinavian countries there is a real interest in the various problems which arise out of the population question. Whether the proposals and measures introduced in Sweden and Denmark will have any effect is, of course, impossible to say at the present time. But of the general proposals two things may be said. First, that they are in keeping with the thesis of democratic government, for they all emphasize the need for voluntary parenthood. Secondly, whatever their effect upon fertility, the proposals are in any case all socially desirable.
Here in England we may not, perhaps, be so concerned with the immediate prospects of a declining population. We have a population of nearly forty millions, and we may perhaps be less afraid of seeing some decline than Sweden, with a population of only 6s2 millions, Denmark with only 3-7 millions, or Norway with only 2 9 millions. Nevertheless, it is a reflection upon us that with so wealthy a country we should do so little-and do it so grudgingly-to improve the conditions of the mass of families, and that it should be left to countries which we generally regard as poorer than our own to show us the way. It is to be hoped that the Scandinavian example will not be regarded in this country merely as a theme for discussion by social workers and academic sociologists.*
will be introduced. Apparently the tendency in Norway, as in Sweden and Denmark, is to give allowances in kind-food, clothing, etc.-instead of in cash.
* Shortly after this paper was read, the American Academy of Political and Social Science produced an issue of the Antnals devoted to Sweden (" Social Problems and Policies in Sweden," May, 1938). This issue provides authoritative studies by many Swedish experts, and contains an article by Professor Gunnar Myrdal on " Population Problems and Policies," which should be referred to especially for a discussion of the reasons why Swedish policy is directed to the granting of subsidies in kind, instead of cash family allowances.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXX, No. 2.

