THE INHERITANCE OF BLINDNESS

The Contribution of Eugenics to the Reduction of Eye Disease

By J. MYLES BICKERTON, F.R.C.S.

(A paper read to the Eugenics Society on March 15th, 1932)

T HE total world figures relating to 4. Those persons who become blind after 65

blindness must be of staggering

years of age are often not registered.

dimensions. In China, one disease

They obtain the old-age pension,

(trachoma) has been estimated to have

which is the same in amount as the

blinded one million in both eyes, 3 to 4

blind pension, ios. weekly. This is

million in one eye, and to have gravely

a very large group, and is likely to

injured 20 million-this out of a popula-

grow as the average length of life

tion of, say, 400,000,000.

increases.

In the United Kingdom the registered 5. Many blind persons of a suitable age to

blind were reported as follows:

obtain the blind pension, between the

TABLE I

ages of 5o and 65 years, do not apply for it because they have never heard

Year. England and Scotland. Wales.

Total.

about it.

i919
1929
I930 I931*

...
...
...
...

25,840
52,727
56,853
62,727

...
...
...
...

-
8,5I6
IO,OOO

...
...
...

65,369
72,727

The certification of the blind, however, is done in a very haphazard way in this country, and the real causation of blindness
is not truly shown, so that the figures in

Around 8,ooo of these blind are also men- Table 2 are only approximate. A child, I

tally defective, and many are deaf.

should explain, is considered blind if it can-

There has been an increase, therefore, of not read school books with safety to the

35,000 odd in the registered blind in the eyes; while the criterion for an adult is the

last twelve years, while that for the last capacity to do work for which eyesight is

year was 4,I26-i.e. over eleven a day. The necessary.

total figure, however, is by no means a true I have recently been on a sub-committee

indication of our blind population, for the which has made strong recommendations to

-following groups of persons are largely the Ministry of Health to improve the

excluded, and may increase it to 250,000 registration, and if this is done, heavy blind

blind persons:

figures will very shortly be forthcoming.

I. Almost all blind persons of the well-to- A glance at Table 2 will show that blind-

do classes.

ness in the more active years of life is very

2. Infants below school age (many die largely avoidable, while much of it is due

blind).

either to definitely dysgenic births or to the

3. Those persons who become blind after unrestricted production of children in poor

leaving school at fourteen years or or bad circumstances. In this table I have

later, until reaching blind pension age given the groups of the blind and the per-

at fifty years. Many of these persons centage in each group which could, in my

refuse to be certified, regarding it as opinion, be greatly reduced by the preven-

rather a disgrace.

tion of birth-since for practical purposes

bad genes and certain types of bad environ-

* The figures for 193I are estimates.

ment may be included together as causes of

"15

I6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 2.-Rough Figures of Causation of Blindness in the United Kingdom.*

Disease.

Trachoma

...

...

Purulent Conjunctivitis

Ophthalmia Neonatorum

Accident

... ...

Congenital Defects ...

Senile Degeneration ...

Glaucoma

...

...

Myopia ...

...

...

Syphilis

...

...

Senile Cataract ... ...

Others ...

...

...

Per cent.

2...
... 2 ... 5
5...
... 6 ... I0
Io...
... 14
I5... I5... I6...

...
... ...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Largely avoidable per cent.
2 ...
I ... 5 ...
2 ...
6 ... ...
I ...
4 ...
I0 ...
I ...
2 ...

No. of blind at Ioo,ooo.

No. of blind at 250,000.

2,000
2,000

...
...

5,000
5,000

5,000 ... I2,500

5,000 ... I2,500

6,ooo ... I5,000
Io,ooo ... 25,000

Io,000 ... 25,000

I4,000 ... 35,000

I5,000 ... 37,500

I5,000 ... 37,500

i6,ooo ... 40,000

I00 ...

43 ... 43,000 ... 107,500

The 43 per cent. in column 2 may represent 70 per cent. of blind years lived. Those blind in one eye may number about i,ooo,ooo.

Under one year of age.*

Cause.
Accident ... ... ...
Syphilis ... ... ... Purulent Conjunctivitis Congenital Defects ... Ophthalmia Neonatorum ...

Per cent.
2 ...
...
8 ...
30 ... 50 ...

Category.
neglect. heredity. dirt.
heredity.
dirt.

Ioo
(2I per cent. of the blind are blinded in the first year of life.)
* Column i is modified from Harman, and the other figures are my own estimates.

blindness which can only be eliminated by
preventing the birth of sufferers. TRACHOMA, 2 per cent.-This disease does
not occur in clean households (see China,
Egypt, etc.). PURULENT CONJUNCTIVITIS, 2 per cent.-
This condition rarely occurs in clean households, and I reckon that i per cent. is entirely avoidable (onlv one child in five is born into a clean home in England).
OPHTHALMIA NEONATORUM, 5 per cent.This disease, due to gonococcal infection at birth, could and should be entirely wiped out by the prevention of unsuitable births.
AccIDENTS, 5 per cent.-A fair number of these occur to infants, a fact which has con-
siderable relevance to the limitation of

births. A woman explained in a South London court, for instance, that she was the only person alive and responsible for 68 children (made up by three marriages; 26 of her own children, 22 of her second husband's, and 20 of her last husband's, all other parents being dead). There was recently reported a family in Buckinghamshire of 39 children, and one woman, newly
married, had nine children in 2 34 years.
How can she manage, with a husband earning ,£3 a week ?
SYPHILIS, I5 per cent.-I reckon that IO per cent. of the syphilitic blind owe their condition to congenital syphilis, which might be called a ' pseudo-heredity '-since it never goes beyond the second generation

THE INHERITANCE OF BLINDNESS

II7

-and which could be entirely eliminated by hereditary-glaucoma (i per cent.), extreme

preventing syphilitic women from having myopia (I4 per cent.), senile cataract (i per

children.

cent.), and other types (2 per cent.)-a total

Naturally, if a woman has been shown of 24 per cent., or practically one quarter

(by the Schick, Wassermann tests, etc.) to of all forms of blindness. As a prelude to

be syphilitic, she should avoid conception at discussing them, I should like to repeat the

all costs, unless and until she has been com- platitude, too often forgotten, that normal

pletely cured. If, however, her condition sight (emmetropia) is also hereditary, a

is not discovered until after conception, the great number of genes being jointly at work

problem becomes more difficult; but treat- in its production. The various departures

ment during pregnancy will always obtain from normality are due to the aberration of

a non-syphilitic child if the treatment is one or more members of this gene-complex.

thorough and commenced around the fourth
month. If treatment cannot be thorough the choice is between the birth of a congenital syphilitic and inducing an abortion; and I, for my part-though I know many will not

GENETIC TYPES OF BLINDNESS
Heredity is the study of differences or variations, the laws of which show that we may all differ in three ways:

agree with me - am strongly inclined i. By modification (environment).

towards the latter.

2. By combination in accordance with

Congenital syphilis, which shows itself in the eyes anywhere between 2 and 35.

Mendel's laws. 3. By mutation, the production of new

(usually 5 to 25) years of age, is a slow and hereditary types.

terribly distressing affliction to patient, In certain simple forms of life io per

parents, and even doctors. From two to ten cent. of the offspring are mutations; and

years' treatment is often necessary before according to Darwin's law of natural selec-

even a quiescent stage is reached, and it tion, the best or hardiest of these varieties

may cause blindness in three different ways survive. Thus variation has a beneficial

-by interstitial keratitis (or inflammation) effect on the community if the law of natural

of the cornea, by a widespread choroiditis selection is operative. The trouble in

with destruction of the retina, or by juvenile England now is that we have dysgenic

optic atrophy. Needless to say, too, a con- selection.

genital syphilitic is often an ament, and Mutations act very well plus eugenic selec-

is never really healthy.

tion. They act fairly well plus natural

In my opinion, therefore, Wassermann selection. They act badly minus natural

(or other) tests should be compulsory in selection, and very badly plus dysgenic selec-

appropriate cases, and a positive indication tion.

should be followed by treatment, contracep- We must get back to natural selection

tion, sterilization, or abortion, according to first, and then to eugenic selection. This

the circumstances. I have said " compul- conclusion is logically irrefutable. Educa-

sory," but I believe that if the women of tion and environment have remarkable

England knew that congenital syphilis, effects upon the individual during his life-

with all its terrible concomitants, could be time, but they do not influence his heredi-

entirely eliminated, they would welcome the tary equipment.

appropriate routine from the medical pro- We know more about the hereditary

fession. As it is, large numbers of diseases of the eye than about those of any

syphilitics matry and produce defective other organ, and for the good reason that,

children; and at King's College Hospital being the most important and complicated

last year 34 per cent. of the new syphilis of our sense organs, its slightest defects

cases-mostly eye-were congenital.

cause marked disturbances of function.

My chief concern here, however, is with The genetics of variations in normal eye-

those types of blindness which are strictly colour are too well known-though not yet

II8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

finally elucidated-for mention here, and
the abnormal condition of albinism is also fairly widely recognized as a simple recessive. But the eye defects associated with albinism are not so generally realized,
nor is it always understood that they are really but symptoms of a general deficiency.
Practically all albinos are below the average in health and vitality, many are aments,
and all, as a direct result of their condition, are photo-phobic, because their eyes lack the pigment necessary to protect the sensitive retina. The consequence is that they hang their heads, pucker their brows, and half-close their eyelids to shut out the light; and often, moreover, they suffer from nystagmus or myopia. The incidence in the
population is i in io,ooo, and 30 per cent. of it is due-like so many similar recessives -to consanguineous marriages.

parent myopic, only ioo children were myopes and 300 non-myopes.
Therefore although short-sighted offspring are often born of normal parents, when both parents are short-sighted their children invariably suffer from the same defect.
Sex-linked Myopia
(Worth).
U
2.
Chart 2. Dominant Myopia, with nystagmus (Vogt).

Albino (Tertsch). Chart 1.

Chart 3.

THE MYOPIA GROUP.-The genetics of this varied group have not been fully dis-
entangled, but one can say for certain that short sight never arises in the absence of a hereditary predisposition, though that predisposition may remain latent in good health
or be accentuated by illness and physical
disability-as the myopia increases, the eye stretches until the retina is destroyed.

Wilson's other figures are interesting. In 677 myopic children, hereditary evidence was as follows:

Grandparents Mothers ...
Fathers ...
Siblings ... Uncles, aunts Cousins ...

...
...
...
... ... ...

... 54 ... 369
... 254
... I64 ... 3I ... 9

Dysgenic births are the chief cause of severe myopia, and many high myopes go blind, while there are immense numbers whose very defective vision is practically
equivalent to blindness, but who do not come

Father to son ... ... 79
Father to daughter ... I49
Mother to son ... ... III
Mother to daughter ... 23I

within the scope of the Blind Persons Act. Hereditary evidence was found in:

Without intending to imply that it is a
simple unit character, I must agree with Clausen, who considers that myopia tends to be recessive. Wilson, for instance, found
that in ioo families with one myopic parent

Low myopia, up to 3 dioptres 65 per cent.

Medium,

4-6 dioptres 66 per cent.

High,

7-I2 dioptres 67 per cent.

Very high, over I2 dioptres 67 per cent.

there were 200 myopic children and 250 non- Hereditary evidence was found in the

myopic; while in 9I families with neither following occupations:

THE INHERITANCE OF BLINDNESS

II9

School children ... 65 per cent.

Home workers ... 63 per cent.

Factory workers ... 68 per cent.

Clerks ... ... 6o per cent.

Labourers

... 6o per cent.

The run of the figures in these last groups ivz 66* 6666 66

indicates independence of environment.

Reference must be made here to DETACH-

Microphthalmia (Ash).

MENT OF THE RETINA, which is a fairly

Chart 6.

common sequel to high myopia. Bogatch

reported a family of eleven high myopes in seven of whom detachment of the retina
supervened in one or both eyes. Retinal detachment is found as a dominant, recessive, or male sex-linked in different pedigrees.
In the same way, ASTIGMATISM, LONG SIGHT, AND SQUINT (which is often associated with long sight), may be inherited. Squint, from which more than 2 per cent. of school children suffer, is responsible for a large number of blind eyes.

due to hereditarily determined atrophy of
the retina. Some 300 pedigrees are given
in the Treasury of Human Inheritance. The condition begins in early youth an&' progresses to complete blindness sooner or later, often around forty years of age. As in other diseases, there are several torms,
as shown by their differing heredity, the commonest being recessive-33 per cent. of those thus affected owe their condition to consanguinity. In some families the condition is linked with deafness.

r~~~~~r- ~ W ||r-r--- i
Long sight-Internal squint (Clausen and Bauer). Chart 4.
NYSTAGMUS, PTOSIS, OPHTHALMOPLEGIA. -These may occur generation after generation.

II 1 1 1 1 1 I1I1 I1
sw U* e@ -U in 0*
Retinitis Pigmentosa (Sambuc). Chart 7.

I7

3a_C 0 * @ Ua
Ret. Pigmentosa (Mooren). Chart 8.

Hereditary Nystagmus (Holm).
Chart 5.
MICROPHTHALMIA, or very small eye, with anophthalmos (lack of an eye) as the extreme form, has been found as a dominant, recessive, or recessive sexlinked (Ash) (next column).
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA.-Czellitzer says that nearly 4 per cent. of all the blind are

.L P
Ret. Pigmentosa (Mann). Leber's Optic Atrophy. Chart 9.
OPTic NERVE ATROPHY AND OPTIC
NEURITIS.-These frequently cause blind-
ness, and the hereditary variety is well recognized by ophthalmologists, i,ooo pedi-

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

grees being available for study. 85 per shows that a common ancestor is probable;

cent. of those affected are males. The and it is by no means improbable that all

disease comes on at different ages, the those in Switzerland derive ultimately from

average being about twenty. Diminution a common source. It is certainly found

of vision is the chief symptom and often most frequently in remote valleys where

appears suddenly; there is a central inbreeding has been common.

scotoma, and after six months or so the There is a dominant ataxia, cerebellar

disease remains stationary. The malady ataxia, or MARIE'S DISEASE.

has been traced once through six genera- ANIRIDIA (absence of the iris).-All such

tions, twice through five generations, and cases that I have seen have been of blind

often through four generations.

standard. I particularly wish to call atten-

LEBER'S OPT1c ATROPHY is a name for tion to the Risley pedigree (i9i5) of

the sex-linked variety. It appears to be an aniridia. One blind man with aniridia, had

a-biotrophy, or lack of vital force, occurring I3 children similarly affected (I00 per

at the prime of life.

cent.),

Optic atrophy occurs also in another 6I grandchildren out of 63,

hereditary disease, FRIEDREICH'S ATAXIA, 39 great-grandchildren out of 42-

which is a severe recessive ataxia. It is I14 blind out of II9 (Chart I4).

very crippling, but the patients live to old age and are a great burden on their relatives (or on the State). A study of all cases

CONGENITAL CATARACTS AND SENILE CATARACTS (Charts I5-I7). - These are usually dominant, and are very important,

(Hawkes.) Hered. Optic Atrophy.

Macklin stating that I3 per cent. of the pupils in blind schools are blind through

cataract, and Hirst giving Io per cent. in

I,300 blind persons (anophthalmia and

microphthalmia came next).

Hered. Optic Atrophy (Norris, 750).

Chart lOa. (Bickerton, 908.)

Chart lOb. Hered. Optic Atrophy (Thomsen, 802).
Chart 1 1.

Chart 12. (Norris, 88i.)
C 13a6.i
Chart 1 3a.

THE INHERITANCE OF BLINDNESS
Hereditary Optic Atrophy (Hogg, 837).

I2 I

Chart 13b. Aniridia [Absent Iris] (Risley, I9I5).

I
I3 Affected children (all blind). 63-6I Defective (blind).

42-39

Chart 14.

122 THE EUTGENICS REVIEW pedigrees it is recessive. Cameron's pedi-
gree shows both lenses affected in each case.

I^66Bi +- - 6

tt

Lamellar Cataract (Nettleship). Chart 15a.

6A 6 b
Dominant Night Blindness. Nougaret family. 2,II6 persons; 135 affected (Nettleship). Chart 15b.

Hereditary Dislocation of Lens (both) (Cameron).
Chart 1 8.
GLAUCOMA.-In this group the hereditary factor is not always very marked, though congenital glaucoma does occur, and there is a probable hereditary predisposition to it in many other cases. This is known as hereditary anaphylaxis, or abiosis-a lack of vital force which causes the structure to die before its time. Many pedigrees suggest a dominant heredity, but the hereditary course is occasionally interrupted, and casual causes are often necessary to bring out the disease. It may arise early in life as a juvenile glaucoma, and ostensible anticipation is known to occur, though this can be explained by unintentional statistical selection. Occasionally glaucoma is recessive, and appears then to be common in Jews, among whom consanguinity is fairly frequent.

Cataract (Loeb, 328). Chart 16a.

(Fromaget, 290 L.)
Chart 16b.

rI O *o

a * 0o a

Inflam. Glaucoma (Howe). Chart 19.

Cataract (Loeb). Chart 17a.

Coralliform Cataract (Nettleship).
Chart 17b.

ECTOPIA LENTIS (congenital displacement
of the lens) has been traced as a dominant through six generations, though in some

Juvenile Glaucoma (Kamenetzki). Chart 20.

THE INHERITANCE OF BLINDNESS

123

Glaucoma (Bickerton, 1932).

hold euthanasia in these cases, and at the same time forces us to act in a barbarous and monstrously inhuman fashion, is, in my opinion, indefensible.
Glioma Retinae (Newton, 339).

Chart 21.
BLUE SCLEROTICS.-This is a condition in
which the coat of the eye is too thin or too transparent, accompanied by a failure in development of connective tissues. It is often associated with fragilitas ossium, or brittle bones, and with a type of deafness due to oto-sclerosis. The female is more likely both to show and to transmit it.
Seventy-three pedigrees since I903 show 463 defective individuals; it is usually dominant.
Of adults with blue sclerotics:
6o per cent. had liability to fractured bones.
6o per cent. had oto-sclerosis. 44 per cent. had all three defects.

*a 5
Chart 23. Glioma (Wilson, 349).
00TTTX Chart 24. Glioma (Thomson and Knapp, 335).
O0-00

Chart 25. Glioma (Griffith, 333).

Blue Sclerotics. x Fragilitas ossium. (Burrows.) Oto-sclerosis 40 per cent. Chart 22.

(Letchworth, I898.)

GLIOMA.-This is a rare malignant

growth, occurring in infants, of the nerve

elements of the eye, which in some families shows a strong hereditary tendency, and is

Chart 26a.

Chart 26b.

apparently recessive. It usually affects MACULO - CEREBRAL DEGENERATIONS.

both eyes, and their early removal is Several conditions might be described under

necessary to save life. Some sufferers sur- this heading, including the rare disease of

vive, marry, and often transmit the defect. the central nervous system known as

Bell found I28 cases in 36 pedigrees; amaurotic family idiocy. Commencing at

Clausen's sibships showed 83 affected and about five or seven years of age, the chil-

6i unaffected. Mohr considers the condi- dren go blind within two years and mentally

tion to be lethal in a homozygous condition. degenerate within the next two; death occurs

The death of a child with glioma of the around I7-I8 years. Amaurotic family

retina is an appalling experience for parents dementia is a diffuse tapeto-retinal de-

and child, and may take as long as two generation causing total, or nearly total,

years. The law which forces us to with- blindness, beginning at birth or later, and

I24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

frequently associated with cerebral degeneration producing idiocy. It is a not infrequent cause of congenital blindness.

yss~~~~{iO o

00 o c

., 13 1 ,. .
Female.

Male.

Amaurosis Sex-linked (Sedgwick).

Chart 27a.

Chart 27b.

which is regularly associated with myopia, and one or more simple recessive types
(Switzerland, Japan). DAY BLINDNESS.-A cone vision defect.
These cases are colour-blind and also of "blind standard."

0O

Day-blind

(Hessberg).

0 cz
0 Amaurotic Family Idiocy-' Tay Sach'
(King, Rus, Stewart). Chart 28.

Chart 31.
'a3 w Day-blind (Lutz).

Chart 32.

COLOUR-BLINDNESS.-This is usually a

ri , ?I , | l

6 0 * Z*** U

*--6UU

well-defined, recessive, sex-linked character, which affects 5.8 per cent. of males and .5

o-aoaa a"a-n-"- o * ovy o per cent. of females; but there seems also

to be a rarer form of a recessive nature.

Progressive night-blindness. Death i6 months after Any such defect in colour vision, of course,

complete blindness (Bordley).

incapacitates the affected individuals for

Chart 29.

work as railwaymen, sailors, motorists, etc.

rr i ,
Q4irD 4~

I. oz- ~ ~o~

.-' fn o

Stationary night-blindness (Sedan).

Chart 30.

NIGHT BLINDNESS (above).-This is due to a defect of the rod vision (colourless vision). At dusk these cases are blind, though their sight is normal in good daylight. The famous Nougaret pedigree, by Nettleship, shows 135 affected persons out of 2,1I6 in nine generations (a dominant heredity). There are also a recessive sex-linked type,

Colour-blind. (Dominant Female Sex-linked.) (Rare form.) Chart 33.
SOME SUGGESTED REMEDIES Crude though effective methods for the
relief of suffering have been practised in many parts of the world. A Chinese potentate, for instance, the ruler of a province, whose soul was torn by the sufferings of the lepers in his State, consulted with his officials. It was decided that he should call

THE INHERITANCE OF BLINDNESS

together all the lepers from far and wide, No woman with active syphilis should be

to a banquet where amidst beautiful flowers allowed to have a child.

and music, and plied with unlimited quan- Euthanasia for infants with gross defects

tities of food and wine, they soon became might be available for parents who wish to

oblivious to life and to their infirmities. At make use of it-though here, again, I

this stage the banqueting hall was set on realize that all eugenists may not agree with

fire, and next day all was lovely once more, me.

pain and suffering had been banished from The other reforms I most wish to see are

his State. This is a true story. The exactly those advocated by the Eugenics

Esquimaux eliminate unwanted children. Society-the teaching of biology to all

In Brazil, surplus children are sold into children and young persons, the formation

service without undue hardship to them or of biological health centres or of national

their parents; but in England, on the constructive birth-control clinics, and the

coldest night for three years (in February active co-operation of the medical profession

I932), a child was left on a doorstep in in the eugenics movement, which should be

Esher, Surrey, near the richest city in the looked upon as a form of preventive

world.

medicine.

Our problem to-day is how to make the essential humanity of these principles conform to the sentiment of our time. Fortunately, our knowledge of the laws of biology-which are just as much the laws of God as those which govern the motions of the planets-enables us to reduce hereditary suffering just as effectively as did the more drastic methods of other times and
countries.

WHAT HAS-AND MIGHT BE-DONE
I have here indicated some-among many -methods which would prevent much needless suffering. Those who think that there is something to be said for action along these lines, but who fear lest public opinion may be difficult to move, may remember the past fights-some of them very recentwhich have been won.

A racial defect can be eliminated just as i. The washing of the body was regarded

thoroughly by the sterility of its bearers as by devout Christians as a heathen custom,

by their death; and I am therefore in the dangerous to the believer, in the time of

fullest sympathy with this Society's cam- Philip II of Spain, who had all the Moorish

paign to prevent the procreation of aments baths destroyed.

and the social problem group.

2. About the year I780, Hanway invented

My concern in this article, however, is the umbrella, which was considered by

with the hereditary blind who, indeed, many as an unjustifiable interference with

present an easier problem. They should not the laws of God.

only be allowed, but encouraged, to marry, 3. My father-in-law tells me he remem-

but on the one condition that by birth con- bers young children, both girls and boys,

trol, sterilization, or abortion, they avoid being forced up chimneys to sweep them.

having children. I am aware that many Some were choked and suffocated and others

members of this Society will disapprove of roasted; but Bill after Bill was rejected by

my advocacy of the last method, and it is only my own opinion that it is suitable for certain cases. I also consider that the law should not force a pregnant woman, as it does at present, to have a child against her wish-especially as this law is no more effective than those against the sale of

our eminent gentlemen in Parliament, and it was not until the jointed brush was
invented that a stop was put to this practice. 4. Bills brought before Parliament for the
prevention of animal torture at fairs, and
at times of public holidays, were greeted with laughter and ridicule, and the practice
did not cease until 1830 or thereabouts.

sweepstake tickets in England or alcohol in 5. Bills for the prevention of cruelty to

the U.S.A.

children were opposed on the grounds that

126 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

they were seeking to interfere unwarrant- 7. When Darwin's Origin of Species was

ably with the rights of parents. At this published, the religious opposition was

time the frightful conditions of child labour frantic.

were considered unavoidable.

The present prospects of the eugenic

6. Hickman, who originated experiments movement are certainly far better than were

in anasthesia about I822, was refused per- those of the reforms I have mentioned,

mission to read a paper before the Royal especially since the practical proposals sug-

Society when Sir Humphry Davy was Presi- gested here and by others are fully in accord

dent. When anesthesia was first intro- with the sentiment of the day. They would

duced to relieve the pangs of childbirth, the reduce much suffering and cause none, and

pulpits, even up to I847, resounded with should therefore especially appeal to the

denunciations of this practice on the grounds religious bodies of this country-who have

that this was interfering with the punish- now a finer opportunity than ever before of

ment of woman for her share in the original capturing the imagination of the people and

sin. of guiding the ethics of the community.

THE SIMPLER MODES OF INHERITANCE

i. Dominant Heredity

2. Recessive Heredity

nn nD nn nn nD nD
nD nD nn nDnD DD

00 00 00
00 0000

nR nn
nn nn nR nR
nn RR nR nR nR nR

000 0 0 0 (0 000 O

nn DD

00

nD nD nD nD 0 0 0 0

nR nR

00

nn nR nRRR Q

S

nD DD

00

nD nD DD DD 0 0 0 0

nR RR

0*

nR nR RR RR 0 0 0

DD DD

00

DD DD DD DD 0 0 0 0

RR RR

00

RR RR RR RR 0 0 0

nn homozygotic normal 0 nD heterozygotic defective 0 DD homozygotic defective 0

nn homozygotic normal 0 nR heterozygotic normal 0 RR homozygotic defective 0

Cataract, congenital Microplhthalmos Myopia Blue Sclerotics Ectopia Lentis Aniridia Ptosis, Nystagmus Congenital Night Blindness Glaucoma, congenital Retinal and Optic Atrophy Reticular Corneal Opacity Nodular Corneal Opacity Buphthalmos

Albino
Microplhthalmos, Anophthalmos Retinitis Pigmentosa Myopia Optic Atrophy Ectopia Lentis Glioma Retinae Retinal Detachment Amaurotic Family Idiocy Day Blindness

3. Sex-linked Heredity

xx xY

O*

xx xx xY xY 0 0 0 0

xx xY

03 0

xx xx xY xY 0 0 0 U

xx xY

0*

xx xx xY xY 0 0 0 *

xx xY

00

xx xx xY xY 0 ~0 * *

xx xY

00

xx xx xY xY * * * *

xx carrier female normal 0

xx defective female
xY defective male
xY normal male
x

OU

Microphthalmos

Anophthalmos Optic Atrophy (Leber)

Nystagmus
MReydo-pGiraeen Colour Blind

Haemophilia

Macula Absence, Atrophy

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 2.

