THE PROBLEM OF MATERNAL MORTALITY

By GEORGE PITT-RIVERS
(Hon. General Secretary, International Union for the Scientific Investigation of Population
Problems)

I. THE PROBLEM STATED

per one thousand live births for England and

SINCE I9II-I5, when the maternal

death-rate was four per
births, there has been

tehaocuhsaynedarlivae

tendency for the maternal mortality rate in

England to increase or to be maintained.

From time to time the Minister of Health has

called attention to this fact, and the Press has

published its commentaries, accompanied by

medical and lay articles and correspondence.

The various degrees of alarm or surprise

expressed by medical men, lady " welfare

workers," and others, as well as the confident

prescription of remedial measures have be-

come the familiar annual aftermath of the

publication of the Registrar-General's and

Ministry of Health's reports.

An examination of these reports during the

past ten years generally reveals a persistent

similarity. Their main features may be

grouped under the following heads.

Wales), the rate varies in different districts, and as between rural and urban districts in the same areas. In the county of Middlesex the rise has been from 3 85 deaths per one
thousand births in I932 to 4*77 deaths per
one thousand in I933.* While returns show a rising maternal mortality rate they also show a diminishing birth-rate and a decrease in the infant mortality rate, which has reached the lowest recorded. No attempt has been made to link these accompanying factors in an etiological survey, beyond a hazarded opinion that " there must be operating some growing adverse factor or factors, possibly concerned with changing habits or mode of life."t
(c) In the search for the causes of maternal mortality and puerperal complications, stress has been laid on the importance of maintaining a strict asepsis. Yet an examination of the reports shows conclusively that the increase in the total maternal death-rates can-

(a) After a congratulatory insistence that a "notable victory has been won since the

not be attributed to any corresponding increase in the deaths from puerperal sepsis,

beginning of the century in halving the and that specific infection cannot be cited as

infant death-rate," usually described as " one an operative factor to account for the general

of the best tests of health progress" (Sir increase. In England, as in the United States,

Kingsley Wood, Parliamentary Secretary to maternal deaths from non-puerperal causes

the Ministry of Health, October 5th, 1927) associated with and aggravated by child-

attention is called to:

birth either remain static or tend to increase.

(b) " The situation revealed by the present Although an improvement in technical

maternal mortality rate in this country, methods and an increase in hospitalization

which is certainly disturbing and gives cause has been anticipated as a means whereby to

for concern" (Idem. I927). Similarly, in combat the evil, medical opinion has at the

I934, the Minister of Health again called same time tended to show an increasing lack

attention (House of Commons, June 20th, of unanimity about the cause of matemal

I934) to the prevailing high incidence of mortality.

maternal mortality, which has not been (d) In spite of an admitted etiological

reduced during the period since antiseptic failure in arriving at the causes of maternal

methods were first introduced. On the other mortality, no lack of enthusiasm has been

hand, while the maternal death-rate as a

whole continues to increase, and shows the highest recorded for thirty years (it was 4 42

* Report by Dr. J. Tate, Medical Officer of Health for Middlesex.
t Idem.

273

274 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

shown in medical and lay quarters in proposing increased obstetrical and hospital services to arrest the unabated maternal death-rate, which traditional methods, in spite of a greatly increased expenditure, have in the past proved ineffective in arresting.
11. THE DEMOGRAPHIC APPROACH TO THE PROBLEM, AND THE USE OF CORRELATIONS
It is then an undeniable fact that, in spite of all the efforts of public health authorities and of increased hospitalization, the maternal mortality rate continues to rise. It is one of the many problems of population in which, for its elucidation, the physician must join with the demographer, anthropologist, biologist, sociologist, and the statistician. This means that the problem cannot be divorced from the problems of a lowering birth-rate, of a lowering infant mortality rate, of a postponement in the nuptial age, of an increase in induced abortions, due to the dread of pregnancy and the ineffective use of contraceptives, and to economic factors which are largely responsible for the increasing reluctance on the part of women in all but the lowest economic strata to bear large families or any families at all.
It has not been generally recognized that these phenomena are world-wide among civilized peoples and that, if investigated in relation to one another, they are explainable.
In all these departments of research mistaken opinions based on a faulty diagnosis are prevalent, because of a failure to appreciate that the determining factors in the total situation are correlated, and cannot be determined in isolation. As an instance could be mentioned the very prevalent opinions, that are currently accepted without any evidence, on the effects of contraceptives on fertility, it being generally assumed, from opposite points of view, that the use of contraceptives and the wide dissemination of birth-control propaganda are responsible for the lower fertility rate.
With regard to the problem we are primarily considering, references are frequently made to the growing use of analgesic

methods in labour, and, more relevantly, to operative methods of delivery, increasingly resorted to when there is insufficient indication for interference. Contrary to general and popular assumptions these can be shown to have contributed to, rather than to have reduced, the high maternal deathrates in precisely those countries where the greatest interest has been shown in this problem.*
Associated with the phenomena of a later age of marriage of both sexes, and of an increase in celibacy, is the change in the adult and mating sex-ratio in civilized populations. It is well established that when the high peak in the growth of population has been reached, the death-rate will overtake the birth-rate, within a calculable period not far distant, and inaugurate a period of population decline. Not only does this tendency affect the age-grouping of the population whereby the proportion of young to old diminishes, but the adult and mating sexratio is also affected in such a way as to bring about an increase in the proportion of adult males to adult females of marriageable age. This decrease in the proportion of marriageable females, and the postponement in the nuptial age, tends to operate unfavourably on the marriage rate and to increase the number of celibates.
III. WORLD REVIEW
In the United States maternal mortality appears to have increased during the first
quarter of the century.t It also increased
during the first two decades in Germany, Scotland, and Sweden. During the same period it remained stationary in some fifteen other European countries.
Basing our comparisons on the I9oI-Io
* It is not denied on the other hand that obstetricians are beginning to appreciate the correctness of this view. Cit.: " The Responsibilities of the Obstetrician in the Problems of Population," by Dr. G. W. Kosmak, Editor, American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. Ex. Proceedings Second General Assembly of the International Union for the Scientific Investigation of Population Problems; ed. G. Pitt-Rivers, 1932.
t Cit., Woodbury, R. M., "Maternal Mortality"; U.S.A. Dept. of Labour; Children's Bureau, Bulletin
No. 158, I926.

THE PROBLEM OF MATERNAL MORTALITY

275

averages in New Zealand, Australia, United States, Scotland, France, Spain, Belgium, and Switzerland, maternal mortality averaged between five and six per one thousand live births. This rate is roughly twice as high as it was in Sweden, Italy, and Norway, where it averaged less than three.* Since I920, where available records are complete, the following comparisons may be made, though for different periods:
Low rates (I923-7): Denmark 26; Nor-
way 2-8; Finland 3I. (I925-7): France 2 5; Holland 2-4. (I922-6): Italy 2-8.
High rates (I92I-5): U.S.A. registration area 8-3; (I923-7): Belgium 5-6; Aus-
tralia5s; Germany5'I; SouthAfrica4g9;
New Zealand 4-8; Switzerland 4-4.
While standards of accuracy and statistical methods vary among different countries, making international comparisons in rates a matter of considerable difficulty, the correlations and inverse correlations in all countries having a well-established bureau of the census can be well supported by similar correlations established by statistical comparisons between different districts over periods of time in the same country. For purposes of internal comparison the careful reports furnished by the statistical and medical health authorities in the United States of America are of great value, particularly since the United States has been widely held to show one of the highest puerperal death-rates in the civilized world.
A recent review by the New York Academy of Medicine Committee on Public Health Relationst has again emphasized the failure to effect any reduction in maternal mortality, more noticeable in relation to the general death-rate, and in the infant death-rate. Public health work appears to have effected reductions in infant mortality and in diseases of the respiratory system and the alimentary tract; on the other hand there has been an actual increased mortality in infantile diarrhoea and enteritis, congenital debility and
* Pitt-Rivers, Clash of Culture, pp. 83-4. t Maternal Mortality in A ew York City, 1934, published by The Commonwealth Fund. Investigations into 2,041 cases.

malformations,* and in the cancer rate of the general population.
On previous occasions I have called attention to figures which showed that in New York State, in spite of the great extension of public health centres and maternal welfare clinics, there was no corresponding fall in maternal mortality.t
During the I9I5-25 period in New York State the deaths from puerperal causes numbered I5,876, representing a death-rate of 58-5 per ten thousand total births, or the death of one mother in every I7I births; while one in every nine deaths of women between the ages of I5 and 44, irrespective of conjugal state, was due to puerperal causes.
In the age-group 25-9 maternal mortality accounted for one in six deaths from all causes, being the second most frequent cause of death, the first being tuberculosis. The fact which I am most concerned to emphasize, however, is that during this period deaths from puerperal causes had actually increased in the urban districts while they had decreased in the rural. Neither antenatal care nor obstetrical services succeeded in lowering the rate, although during the same periods the infant death-rate fell steadily.
In accounting for this variation and the lower maternal mortality in rural as compared with urban districts, it had to be admitted that the rural practitioner usually lacks facilities for the needless obstetrical interference which has been suggested as one of the leading causes of excessive mortality.: Whatever conclusions may be drawn from the facts, they can contribute little to support demand for increasing the establishment of obstetrical clinics and hospitalization.
Among the causative factors cited by medical statisticians to account for the increase in maternal mortality mention may be made of the continued reduction in the
* The Australian Commonwealth Bureau of Census
Statistics include congenital debility and malformations as a classified cause of infant death.
t DePort, J. V., Maternal Mortality and Still Births in Aew York State, 19X5-25; New York, 1928. Cit.,
Review, Pitt-Rivers, EUGENIcS REVIEW, October 1928.
t DePort, op. cit.

276 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

size of families, which gives a greater proportion of first confinements. Reference is also increasingly given to the assumed increasing frequency of induced abortions and in the frequency of efforts to avoid childbirth after pregnancy has begun, and, as has already been mentioned, of the growing tendency on the part of women to demand instrumental interference and the desire to make childbearing as easy and painless as possible. In this connection reference may be made to the inquiry into 2,000 cases attended in the St. Bartholomew's Hospital district, which showed that septic infection followed instrumental delivery in ten times the number of cases following normal delivery.*
IV. THE ABORTION RATE AND THE USE OF CONTRACEPTIVES
In view of frequent references to the use of abortifaciants and to induced abortions as a factor conducive to subsequent puerperal complications, some mention should be made of the demographic indications which bear on this subject. In the first place it must be recognized that ineffective contraceptives lead either to abortion or to unwanted pregnancies and illegitimate births. Since the evidence for any rise in the illegitimacy rate is frequently challenged, the following figures are offered for what they are worth. The rises are noticeable in the same countries, and no comparisons are made between different countries where different customs obtain.
According to the I929 census for England -and Wales the proportion of illegitimate births rose from 4 50 per cent. in I928 to 4.55 per cent. in I929. The maximum since I9OI was reached in the exceptional war year of I9I8, but the proportion of illegitimate to total births in the period I90I-5 was given as 3 95 per cent.
The live illegitimate births registered in I929 was 29,307. But in relation to the abortion rate, for which we have no figures, though all the indications suggest a rise, we have to remember that a large proportion of the abortion rate is potentially a reduction in the total illegitimacy rate. Furthermore,
* Itsterim Report of the Departmenttal Committee on
Maternal Mortality and Morbidity, I930.

only a proportion of ante-nuptial or extranuptial conceptions result in illegitimate birth. It is clear that a large proportion of marriages following ante-nuptial conceptions is not in anticipation of marriages already arranged, but is forced on the parties
by the condition of the woman and the failure of contraceptive methods used. In this connection Coghlan's study of the New South Wales vital statistics for the decennial
period of I8gI-IgOO is of interest.* Twenty-
two thousand out of 85,000 marriages during the period were contracted after conception had taken place. Coghlan shows that in every I,000 first-born children, 5Io are of post-nuptial conception, and of the remainder, or antenuptial conceptions, rather less than half are legitimate and rather more than half,
or 257, are illegitimate. The proportion of seventh-month children which may, according to this calculation, have been erroneously included in the ante-nuptial conceptions, is very small, and could not appreciably affect the proportions.
From the census figures for England and Wales, comparing the rates for I92I and I929, we find in the birth-rate per one thousand total population: 22-4 per one thousand in I92I, and i6-3 per one thousand in I922, or a decrease in the birth-rate of 6- i per one thousand. The illegitimate rate was I-02 in I92I, compared with o 74 in I929; equivalent to a drop of only o-28 per one thousand. That is to say, there was a decrease in the legitimate birth-rate of 5 - 82 compared with a decrease of 0 *28 in the illegitimate rate. Thus, taking the nearest integer, we find that, out of every twenty-four fewer births per four thousand of the total population only one fewer birth per four thousand of population represents the decrease in the rate of illegitimacy.
The proportionate decrease in illegitimacy is shown to be appreciably less than the decrease in legitimate births. It compares as 704 legitimate births in I929 to one thousand in I92I, according to the corrected ratio by standard age rates, as against 804 illegitimate births in I929 to one thousand in
* T. A. Coghlan, The Decline in the Birth-rate of New
South Wales.

THE PROBLEM OF MATERNAL MORTALITY

I92I. It must be allowed that this affords (I922) of 42 per one thousand live births,

some evidence of a fairly substantial rise in followed by Australia with 53. At the other

the comparative rate of illegitimacy, apart end of the scale Chile, in I9I4, showed the

from the illegitimate or extra-nuptial con- highest white-infant death-rate in the world,

ception rate, for which we have no figures. It of 286, while in the I906-IO period it was 3I5.

also affords some indications that the induced The average for the white races was (I9OI-IO)

abortion rate, for which we also have no about I50, and for the negroes of the United

figures, must be assumed to have increased at States 24I for males and 206 for females.

least proportionately. While it is manifestly Throughout Europe and America reports

impossible to estimate the number of self- have shown a tendency for a higher infant

induced and " illegal " abortions resulting in mortality in urban than in rural districts.

injury though not in death, it may be noted There is also a tendency in European coun-

that of the I,956 deaths directly due to child- tries for infant mortality to increase down-

bearing investigated by the Departmental wards along the social scale. The countries

Committee on maternal mortality between showing the lowest infant mortality rates,

I928-30, i68, or IO - 5 per cent. of the total, during the early periods of recording before

were classed under abortion. The deaths I900, have also been the countries that suc-

due to criminal abortion recorded by the ceeded in making the greatest percentage

Registrar-General in I928 totalled 57, while reductions during the first decade of the

during the same year clinically induced twentieth century.* In England and Wales

abortions followed by death from sepsis infant mortality declined from IO9 in I9II-I5

numbered 224.

to 74 in I929. New Zealand, the country

The suggestion made here, which further with the lowest infant mortality rate, showed

research may determine, is not that the pre- at the same time (I9IO-20) the highest

sumed increase in the abortion rate can be maternal mortality rate of about six per

held to be an operative factor in the main- one thousand live births, followed by

tenance of a high maternal mortality rate, Australia with the next highest maternal

but rather that it has tended to increase the mortality rate, while Chile had the lowest

sterility rate amongst the ante-nuptial or maternal mortality rate amongst the white

unmarried women, in addition, of course, to races. Public health work has- certainly

any other cause of sterility already operative, reduced infant mortality, but it is precisely

such as gonorrhoea.

in those countries where the reduction in

infant mortality has been effected that the

V. MATERNAL MORTALITY AND INFANT MORTALITY-INVERSE COR-

maternal death-rate is correspondingly high. In England as in the United States the maternal death-rate has actually increased

RELATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

in the urban districts compared to the rural

Quite unreasonably, the reduction in the districts in the same states in the same

rate of infant mortality has been hailed by countries; that is to say, it has increased

medical men as well as laymen as evidence of precisely where hospitalization is greatest.

a higher standard of national health and Neither ante-natal care nor obstetrical ser-

fitness. For instance, Sir Arthur Newsholme vices have succeeded in lowering the rate.

wrote: "infant mortality, the deaths of Whatever conclusions may be drawn, this is

children under one year of age, is the most a statement of fact which cannot be denied.

sensitive index of social welfare and of In New Zealand, where European obstetrical

sanitary improvement which we possess." methods have been introduced among the

During the first two decades of the twentieth Maoris, the consequence appears to have

century New Zealand led the world with the been to favour an increasing tendency of

lowest infant mortality rate and had the puerperal complications among the Maori

highest maternal mortality rate. New

Zealand had the lowest infantile death-rate

* East, Mankind at the Cross-roads.

278 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

women. Yet, over the same periods in the same countries the infant death-rates have fallen steadily. In England we have reached
the lowest infant death-rate (under one year of age) and the highest maternal death-rate over a period of thirty years.
In both New Zealand and Australia, which led the world in a low infant mortality rate, cancer was annually responsible for more deaths (I9I7-2I) than could be assigned to any other cause except diseases of the heart. Comparing the cancer mortality rates in England, Australia and New Zealand, the actual annual rate, as well as the rate of increase during the ten-year period ending I92I, is higher in the same order that the infant death-rate is lower. Chile, on the other hand, with the highest infant mortality rate of any white country, showed one of the lowest rates of cancer mortality. The next highest cause of infant mortality in Australia and New Zealand is assigned to congenital debility and malformations. Here again there is no sign of decrease. Since I920 nearly half the deaths of children under one year of age in Australia are attributed to congenital causes. New York figures, as already mentioned, show an increased mortality in infantile diarrhoea and enteritis. The mortality figures do not, however, represent the gravity of the eugenic aspect of the question, since for every infant death due to congenital
causes there are many survivors who, if they reach maturity, suffer permanently from the handicap of a congenital defect.*
The report issued by Sir James Galloway's Committee on the National Standard of Physical Fitness as the result of an analysis of medical board examinations, I9I7-I8, showed that two in every three of the men of military age (I7-I8) failed to reach the not very high standard which qualified them as Ai or fit to shoulder a rifle in the firing-line. It is estimated that one in I20 persons is feeble-minded, one in 200 is insane, one in every ten too sickly or feeble-minded to be capable of supporting themselves.t In
* Cit., Pitt-Rivers, Clash of Culture, ch. v. t Cit., Mental Deficiency Committee of I929, and reference by Lord Horder in address, Euge-nics and the Doctor, pub. B.M.J., Dec. gth, 1933.

the year I933 there was a total loss of
29,000,000 weeks' work, equivalent to over half a million persons for twelve months, due to illness, for which insurance benefit was
payable.
Taking the maternal mortality rates
I90I-I0 averages already referred to in New
Zealand, Australia, United States, Scotland,
France, Spain, Belgium, Switzerland, Italy, Sweden, and Norway, the groups with the lower maternal mortality have the higher infant death-rate. The latest figures from Canada show the same inverse tendencies. Where, as already stated, the infant deathrate has been most conspicuously reduced, the group of infant deaths from congenital
causes and malformations remains un-
affected.
We are led to the following conclusions. "The significance is not so much that at any
one time and in any one district a low infant and a high maternal mortality are most frequently co-present, but that the rate of
maternal mortality tends to increase where the infant mortality decreases, and that the lowered infant mortality only results in a constitutional impoverishment of parturient mothers, reflected in a high or higher maternal mortality rate in the next generation, sixteen to thirty years later. The point is that
medical services and obstetrical advances cannot and do not help. It is quite unreasonable to hail the reduction in the rate of infant
mortality as evidence of a higher standard of national health and fitness, since the reverse is much nearer the truth. But the truth, of course, is likely to be unpopular, especially with medical officers of health, who wish to conceal the fact that their expensive services for alleviating symptoms are actually aggravating causes.
" We have succeeded in lowering the infant
mortality rate at the price of a high matemal mortality rate and a constitutional and
functional impoverishment of the quality of
our breeding mothers. Survival of the strains of pregnancy and parturition depends far more on constitutional fitness and stamina than on medical preparation and obstetrical assistance. The child's chances of survival, however, are increasingly dependent, not

THE PROBLEM OF MATERNAL MORTALITY

279

upon its constitutional and hereditary robustness, but upon its protection from bacterial attack and the artificial and medical assist-
ance it receives. In short, we save the weak
or defective potential mothers at birth and during childhood, who become increasingly

unfitted themselves to survive the test of giving birth. The only remedy is the eugenic one of caring for the finer stock rather than subsidizing the diseased and defective."*
* Pitt-Rivers, Weeds in the Garden of Marriage,
PP. 73-4.

Statistical Studies in Genetics and Human Inheritance

ANNALS OF EUGENICS

Edited by R. A. FISHER
(Founded by K. PEARSON)

The forthcoming issue, Volume VI, Part II, will contain articles by

R. A. FISHER M. N. KARN R. R. KUCZYNSKI

F. YATES L. S. PENROSE ELIOT SLATER

Subscription, in advance, 50/- per volume. Four quarterly parts obtainable separately at 15/- each from Galton Laboratory, Gower
Street, London, W.C. 1.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XVI, No. 4.

