REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

171

ledge of biology and physiology, who would be able to supply them with

the fuller particulars which would certainly be required by a child who

had read the book with intelligence. It is an excellent handbook for

parents.

G. M. CHAMBERS.

Chesser, E. SLOAN. From Girlhood to Womanhood. London. Cassell and Co.; 1913; price 2S. 6d.; pp. 142.
THIS book can be given to any girl abo-ve I2; it explains simply the stage of development from girlhood to womanhood and gives her sensible and practical advice as to the best means of becoming a happy, healthy, and attractive woman. Dr. Sloan Chesser puts forward a high ideal of life.
G. M. CTHAMBRS.Q

Chesser, E. SLOAN. Woman, Marriage and AMothierhood. London. Cassell; 1913; price 6s. net; pp. 287.
WE have here another of the popular books of the day dealing with social questions affecting marriage and motherhood, written chiefly from the point of view of women. There is much good work in it. The earlier chapters are historical and treat briefly of the evolution of motherhood, of marriage laws and customs, and of the legal position of the wife and mother at various times and places. The results of sweated labour, the social effects of factory work on the homes and of our prison system are clearly stated. There is an account of the attempts, both on the Continent and in England, to provide pure milk for infants, to feed nursing mothers, and to establish schools for training in the art of home making and baby rearing.
The most obvious omission is the absence of any reference to religious
ideals and sanctions as influencing matters connected wvith sex and social
reform. There is also no attempt to deal with the extremely important variations in outlook upon all these questions which result from the physiological and psychological differences of sex. It is the necessity for the constant readjustment of these two points of view-a readjustment required by the ever varying pressure on one or the other of a changing civilisation-that constitutes the extreme difficulty of handling these problems.

It is to be feared that more better organisation of society, with increased inspection and training and more humane treatment on all sides, although it might achieve considerable temporary improvement and is
therefore worth working for, would not really help mnuch to a more
permanent solution of the eternal problem which confronts humanity. r. n xv

Sandeman, GEORGE. Social Renewal. London. price 2S. 6d.; pp. I50.

WV. Heinemann; 1913;

pwdtifMibwMro"."ttorooeaerrrnTssTl.irnf.n.eehrneuHolterk.cefilnrsSdeeE"Stiacmraus"iaa(pabieslw;pnbplno.ranopeg.our"cdstrdnosa"oanwiekaesltndontem3laiemodanu3reAa(nnfa)rsnscpfg.dnae.tn,tcatc,iioh"eentvcfeptprsde1orrhahoh9tTueeeoifn)ohenhpasln:tedwotoiceaollr,nsishoninymo.nfiebttaecsotsasshs!wigiteig;draitnrhrngoehlhhdtTeivigrptiiierhfahenaishsvrtpnisgsveieor,sataoadyfuhossttutnowtiobhaehmrdw"ygncla,loe.eaibaihtiteusahnn-osdyefilgm.ttwtidlaacgheaslynran.tnbcttsemtdnooedetefodo.vhreioeoresger-evscftrbrexioareeomymarelrrsno.Sieaeclyuteoworptrespbe.wcelrdtvknpiuryeooiotoe"paspfoiwtrtRloeo;trHenhtylcfteuhen.e,eyiesuleasted.yaoe.letrtcixeraysc.es.ieorabasouergn.lyiorinpatlogisetncteiypnrisethfirbsosdtseoer"eausoo'atir.ketfmcsottyopyethdh¢offi".o;daueeos"r,tiowb.nsohiiiienrhetsttettelfaasyahyshoraode.t"fseergnsir"eroirhoedoreeoofiwuaiaeup!nnnr.tplmisa;oas,reyadTtftogooteanhecepgthanTeiiaaBltahciehrtnnuehenentt5ieey,ddte,ytg.syo

172 EUGENICS REVIEW.

you are. Occasionally we are told something worth hearing, for instance, that poverty is laTgely due to "the inordinate diversion of labour to the production of comparatively useless and unde.sirable things " (p. Io8): but the book is not all equally valuable.
A. W. COCKEURN.

Green, C. E., F.R.S.E. The Cancer Problem: A Statistical Study. 3rd

Edition. Edinburgh. Green; 1914; price 5s. net; pp. 98.

IN the first chapter of this work Mr. Green describes certain diseases of

plants caused by mycetozoa, and argues that some analogy exists between

these conditions and cancer in man. In the next chapter he quotes evi-

dence to the effect that the occurrence of one of the plant diseases referred

to is favoured by the use of manures which have been dissolved in sul-

phuric acid, and then examines the occupational incidence of cancer

suggesting that those occupations in which the use or formation of sulphur

compounds occur exhibit high cancer rates, but that on the other hand

trades, such as those of tanners and papermakers, in which lime is greatly

employed, are relatively immune from cancer. In the following chapter

the geographical 4istribution of cancer is considered, and in chapter IV.

arguments are adduced in favour of a belief that the combustion of coal

leads to the development of cancer, the principal evidence being derived

from contrasts between the proportion of deaths from cancer to deaths

from all causes in coal burning and peat burning districts. In the Iast

chapter, Mr. Green suggests that calcium salts may have some curative

value in the treatment of cancer. The book is only of interest to eugenists

in so far as, the real cause of cancer being unknown, the possibility of an

inherited constitutional predisposition cannot be ignored. It is therefore

unnecessary to review it at length, and we would merely remark that few

readers are likely to be convinced by the evidence presented. To take

only a single point, the proportion of cancer deaths to deaths from all

causes, cannot be compared in different districts unless the age constitu-

tions of the populations are approximately the same, a fact which Mr.

Green does not appear to have realised.

M. GREENWOOD.

Pyeraft, W. P. The Courtship of Animals. London. Hutchinson; 19I3;
price 6s.; pp. 318 and 40 plates.
THE title of this book does not suggest any close relation between its subject and eugenics, but the author, in the preface and introductory chapter, shows that he regards the two subjects as closely connected. He writes: " Such facts [the sexual behaviour of animals] have a vitally important bearing on the very problems of social well-being which now
loom so largely among us. ' Reform ' is in the air. Its protagonists are
busy amongst us with schemes for our regeneration, among which ' sexproblems ' are made to occupy a very conspicuous place. But no good can come of their cogitations so long as they fail to realise the springs of behaviour in this regard. The facts herein set down will, it is hoped, help much towards this end." The facts given in the book are full of interest; many of them are little known, and, especially when dealing with vertebrate animals, the author is clearly a master of his subject. He is strongly convinced that the realisation of the intensity of the sexual instincts in animals is of importance to would-be reformers of human affairs-" it is idle to speak of an equality between the sexes in this matter, in regard to the human race. Dogmatism, and the frequent repetition of pretty platitudes, will not alter what Nature has ordained." As a collection of facts of the greatest interest the book is admirable, and the descriptions are generally clear and graphic. In his speculations the author is less convincing, and when dealing with the facts of sex in invertebrate animals, is occasionally inaccurate. His contention that sexual selection acts, not by the conscious choice by the female of the most brilliant male, but by the success of the male which most completely

