WEST INDIAN IMMIGRATION

SOME CRITICISMS, COMMENTS AND A REJOINDER

AS WAS to be expected the Society's A Comment by Dr. C. 0. Carter, B.A., B.M.,

Broadsheet on West Indian Immigration* M.R.C.P.

aroused a variety of comments, and crit- The aim of the Eugenics Society's Broadsheet

icisms. In general, however, it seems to have been was to stimulate people to clarify their own

accepted as an honest attempt to provide a views on the social and eugenic implications of

wider perspective on this difficult topic. We here immigration into this country of men and

print the recommendations set forth at the end women deriving ultimately from West Africa.

of the Broadsheet, followed by certain of the My own thoughts have been clarified, and those

criticisms received, either in whole or in extract, bearing on the eugenic considerations are given

together with a final rejoinder from the named below, with the full realization that these are

author of the Broadsheet.

matters of judgment about which there is no

scientific certainty. The eugenic considerations

Recommendations

fall, I think, under three heads: the problem of

The first is the promotion of research upon the miscgenation, the genetic quality of people of

degree and results of race mixing so far.

West African origin as a group, and the genetic

The second is a deliberate and extensive effort quality of the immigrants as individuals.

so as to educate people that there shall be proper My own view of miscgenation is that it is not

appreciation of the qualities of the human or important. There are theoretical grounds on

group which is exotic, coupled with the recogni- which a mixture of British and West African

tion that breeding with that which is different is derived populations might be genetically harm-

more likely to lead to trouble than to happiness. ful. In contrast to the other populations in

The third is for real consideration to be given Europe and Near Asia which have provided

to the advisability of imposing upon all immi- immigrants to Britain, the inhabitants of West

grants of whatever origin or type, certain tests of Africa differ widely, in many of the individual

quality so as to limit the arrival of those with gene frequencies that can be measured, from the

attributes below the general average for the inhabitants of any European country. This is

United Kingdom.

true of many of the genes for the red blood cell

Thefourth is that the time has come for very antigens, the plasma proteins, and the variants

careful consideration to be given to the question of haemoglobin. Since genes undergo selection

as to whether an annual quota should now be as part of integrated gene complexes, population

imposed upon West Indians, and indeed upon mixture might have been harmful. My own view

others, wishing to enter the United Kingdom, is, however, that the theoretical arguments are

and this in spite of the disadvantages such a not compelling, and that actual observation of

measure would entail.

mixed Negro-White populations suggests that

** *

the mixture has neither any marked genetic illeffects, nor, on the other hand, produces any

Several letters appeared in The Times following obvious hybrid vigour.

the publication of the Broadsheet; the corres- The next eugenic consideration, that of the

pondents included Dr. Kenneth Little (October genetic quality as a group of people of West

13th); Mr. George Unwin (October 16th); African origin, can be considered under the

Captain Richard Pilkington (October 24th). heading of health, and of socially valuable

* West Indian Immigration by Cohn Bertram. Issued by
the Eugenics Society and circulated as an enclosure with THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1958, 50, 3. Price ls. 6d.

qualities of mind. As regards health, fortunately none of the single gene-locus differences between
the two populations appear to cause maternal-

25I
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1959, 50, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

foetal incompatibility. It is probable that the those trained for, or suited. to training for,

immigrants as a whole will be genetically less occupations for which there is a national short-

well adapted to diseases prevalent in Britain, age; the fourth would then be redundant. I

and also will carry genes (such as that for sickle- would have liked to have seen two further

cell haemoglobin) which had selective advantage recommendations: first that Britain should in-

in West Africa, but are disadvantageous here. tensify her present efforts to help the West

However, the main environmental causes of Indians develop a more balanced economy in

disease are being so rapidly eliminated that their own islands; second that Britain should

genetic lack of resistance to them is, I think, intensify her efforts to help West Indians learn

becoming irrelevant. With respect to mental the art of planning the size of their families.

qualities, many research workers have shown

differences between the averages of populations A Letter from Dr. Lucy Mair, Ph.D., Reader in

of European and West African origin, but none Applied Anthropology, University of London

which cannot be explained as due to cultural Sir, In his preface to the Eugenics Society's

differences. There very probably are differences Broadsheet on West Indian Immigration the

between the averages of the populations, but President warns us that policies dictated by

they are dwarfed by the differences which may benevolence or sentimentality may be frustrated

be found between individual members of the by "the inherent qualities of humanity". I must

same population.

therefore try to avoid basing arguments on

In my view, therefore, the eugenic effects of ethical presuppositions which might be dis-

West Indian immigration will, in the main, counted as sentimental, and consider only

depend on the individual genetic quality of the matters of logic and factual accuracy.

immigrants. Little information is available on The matters discussed in the Broadsheet

this at the moment, and genetic endowment is, belong to quite different orders of fact-the

in any case, difficult to measure. But, in my own social, concerned with the relations of organized

opinion, there is no doubt that, if immigration human groups, and the biological, concerned

in Britain was restricted to those who have with the hereditary constitution of individuals

reached a good educational level, Britain would -but the line of argument slides to and fro

be gaining from the narrow view-point of between them.

national eugenics. A policy of restricting immi- Undoubtedly certain social and administrative

gration to those for whom employment is problems have been created by the immigration

readily available would be selective in just this of West Indians in significant numbers to certain

way. Britain has need of nurses, teachers, localities (if West Indian imigrants are con-

technicians and scientists. West Indians suitably sidered in relation to the total population of

trained, or capable of being trained, for these the United Kingdom their numbers are not

occupations could be accepted without difficulty. significant). These problems may be regarded as

In contrast, there is already unemployment, and the cost of permitting free immigration from

will probably continue to be unemployment in Commonwealth countries. It is relevant to weigh

this country as automation develops, among this cost against that of departing from the

those who cannot be educated beyond the re- principle of free immigration. The importance

quirements of simple manual labour. Taking the of friendly relations between the United King-

wider view, however, talented West Indians dom and the members of a Commonwealth in

will be useful whether they come to Britain or which people with white skins form a small

remain in the West Indies, and Britain's gain minority is recognized by the hard-headed at

will be the West Indies' loss.

least as clearly as it is by the soft-hearted to

My personal views, therefore, on the Broad- whom the warnings of the Broadsheet are

sheet's recommendations are that: the first is addressed.

valuable; the second is, given the right social It is not clear whether we are being told that

conditions, unnecessary; the third is valuable, the problems of inadequate housing and unem-

and best achieved by limiting immigrants to ployment are peculiar when it is West Indians

252

WEST INDIAN IMMIGRATION

who are unemployed or live in slums. It is almost troops of many nations have been stationed were

universal to find that the most recent immigrants a significantly high proportion of the total.

to any urban area are the worst housed, and also, But the Eugenics Society is actually less con-

because they are identifiable as outsiders, that cerned about the birth of "unwanted" children

those who have been longer established in the than about the birth of"racially mixed" children.

area resent their competition for accommodation Why? They say repeatedly that we know nothing

and for jobs. All that is said under this head about the effects of "race mixture". They say

could have been said of Irish immigrants a that "a satisfactory study of the results of distant

century ago. They entered this country, as the intermarriage could only be carried out in a

West Indians do, because it offered prospects of place where social antagonism was negligible".

employment which were not available at home, But if this is granted it seems hardly permissible

and those who did not move on to the even to use phrases such as "However conclusively

better prospects of America attained in the the unsuitability of race mixture may be demon-

course of time to living standards comparable strated to be. . ." It cannot be seriously suggested

with those of their neighbours and ceased to be that this leaves the question open.

thought of as a different kind of human being. How do we know what is a race, and how do

One must also say something about the argu- we measure distance? West Indians have dark

ment from the illegitimacy rate in the West skins; this is a conspicuous difference, but is it

Indies, which is taken to show that "the British correlated with other marked genetic differences ?

conception of family life must be alien to these If so, why are we not told what these are? We

immigrants". To a student of society it is not also learn that the Huguenots and Jews were

entirely certain that there is a British conception separate stocks which immigrated in the past.

of family life, but one can see how most readers They were not so markedly different that it

of the Broadsheet will take it. The statement is mattered; indeed they contributed, not genes,

made, without any reference, that the permanent but "notable talents", to our "genetic pool". It

unlegalized unions which have been called is as surprising to be told that "the Jews" are a

"faithful concubinage" are now being replaced population with a constant genetic composition

by promiscuity. One may compare with these as it is to have it suggested that the Huguenots

statements the results of the intensive study of developed a mutation when they separated from

family life in British Guiana made a few years the Roman Catholic Church.

ago by R. T. Smith. He demonstrated that the It is an observable fact that culturally different

majority of fathers recognize their children, and peoples often find it difficult to live in amity, but

the latter suffer no social disabilities from their the Eugenics Society, in ascribing this to genetic

illegitimate status. It is normal for children to be differences, disregards an enormous range of

brought up as members of afamily, even though facts which are directly relevant to this question.

the constitution of the family has not been These facts are the consequences of the one

sanctioned by Church and State. The ceremony fundamental fact that the human being is subject,

of marriage is regarded as an element in middle almost from the moment of conception, to a

class culture, and is sought by people who wish process of environmental influences such that it

to raise their class status. A high rate of illegit- is extremely difficult to relate characteristics

imacy for first-born children has been found in of mind or behaviour with genetic factors. These

the lower status groups of many societies; it environmental influences include deliberate pro-

proves little about attitudes towards the responsi- cesses of education both in values and in

bilities of parenthood.

techniques, and it is by these latter that human

It is true that the number of illegitimate births "qualities" are commonly judged.

is high in places where there is a transient popu- The Broadsheet bids us note that there are few

lation of unattached males, as occurs particularly obvious examples of populations which are

where armed forces are stationed. It would be "better for being the progeny of two markedly

interesting to know whether the illegitimate dissimilar parent stocks". Better for what?

children of "mixed" parentage in places where Resistance to disease? To Communism? Passing

2S3

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the eleven-plus? Economic efficiency? Where a serving biological ends. There does not seem to

population is denied economic and social be a shred of evidence that the offspring of black

opportunities because of the attitude towards it and white are biologically inferior. Theoretically

of other sections of the community, it is not inferiority might exist, but to the paediatrician

likely to be "good for" much. Nevertheless, the working in an area of London that has a large

"Indos" of Java made "better" Dutch soldiers child mulatto population there is nothing what-

than did the Javanese. The coloured population soever to suggest that these children compare

of South Africa have been found to be "good unfavourably with others in physical, intellect-

for" quite a number of professional activities, ual and emotional health.

and, since they have attained to higher social A "complete mingling of the races of man-

and economic status than the Bantu, could, I kind" is historically remote, would be essentially

suppose, be called "better" than the less mixed unlikely if evolution remains selective and would

population which ranks below them on this certainly be extraordinarily dull. But those who

scale. value variety more than uniformity will feel that

If we follow the argument of the Broadsheet, there is something to be gained by "fringe"

we are to explain the results of observable social mingling and that what is gained by the intro-

discrimination in terms of a genetic make-up duction of "new blood" will more than offset a

which is not observable. Ifthis is a scientific mode slight weakening of racial distinctions. Does

of argument, the difference between the natural anyone feel that the eleven pages of Joneses in

and social sciences is even wider than I supposed. the London telephone directory or the equal

LUCY MAIR number of Smiths in Edinburgh is evidence of

"emotional and genetic chaos" in this island or

Comments from Dr. J. P. M. Tizard, M.A., B.M., has seriously diminished the separate identities

F.R.C.P., D.C.H., Reader in Child Health of the three nations?

at the Institute of Child Health of the Reference is made to the possible "stultifica-

University of London.*

tion" of human evolution by miscegenation

The Broadsheet contains many interesting facts (pages 19 and 20) since races have in the past

about immigration to this country and discusses specialized in accord with climatic and other

many varying opinions concerning the effects of environmental factors. It seems doubtful if

race admixture.

under conditions of modern civilization members

It is almost impossible to be wholly objective of any race (except perhaps a few of the most

in dealing with the subject of race relations and, primitive) could not be adapted to living in any

on reading and re-reading the Broadsheet, I habitable part of the world. But if this is still the

cannot but conclude that, in trying to present case, then presumably natural selection will still

the facts fairly, the author has unconsciously and operate and the proposition that it is impossible

implicitly allowed a personal bias against to "unmix" (page 20), once race mixture has

miscegenation to obtrude.

taken place, becomes illogical.

In the section on Biological Considerations Common experience tells one that a marriage

frequent reference is made to the "distaste" felt stands a somewhat better chance of success if

by individuals or groups for the intermarriage the man and wife are not only of the same race

of men and women of widely differing genetic but also of the same nationality, intelligence, and

stock. De gustibus non est disputandum and, social class but this is not to say that marriage

although I do not share this distaste, I willingly between widely differing individuals is never

concede that others have a right to their preju- happy or should not be attempted.

dices. But it should not be allowed that this It would seem likely that similarity in intelli-

distaste, however widely held, is necessarily gence, taste, religious outlook, social class and so

on is of more importance in marriage than

* Dr. Tizard is a member of the Society's Council. A nationality and these qualities might also prove

variety of his helpful suggestions were incorporated by the author in the final draft of the Broadsheet, but Dr. Tizard would have liked him to have gone further.

to be ofgreater importance than race if the social prejudice against "mixed" marriages disappeared.

2S4

WEST INDIAN IMMIGRATION

It is difficult to believe that "individuals of out to present a broad factual account of this

widely differing genetic constitutions" can "live problem, gives wise warnings against emotion-

in propinquity, harmony and in friendly esteem" ally-determined and premature views, and then

unless the idea of intermarriage is acceptable, after a good clear beginning turns right round

even if, in practice, such marriages are few. on itself. Several recommendations of the latter

On page 14 of the Broadsheet the author lists part appear archaic and based upon no sort of

a number of countries in which race mingling valid evidence that one can gather in or out of

has occurred peaceably, followed by the example the Broadsheet. Restriction of immigration may,

of the United States of America and South with regret, become necessary from economic or

Africa where race tension exists. He then con- other necessity, but the eugenic grounds for this

tinues "Viewed with distant dispassion, peaceful are very doubtful. Dr. Kenneth Little has

happiness is not typical even of race juxtaposi- demolished a good part of this publication from

tion, let alone race mixture, in many areas of the the anthropological viewpoint in The Times of

world, from Ceylon to Southern Africa and from October 13th, but I should like to add a few

Malaya to Kenya". If the word "even" is omitted comments.

and the words "let alone" replaced by the word It is suggested, for example, that the untutored

"without" this sentence would in my opinion child basically discriminates on skin colour.

sum up the situation admirably.

The authority for this statement is not given,

It is difficult to agree whole-heartedly with any and several years with my children in India and

of the four recommendations which conclude now in an immigration area in London convince

the Broadsheet. Research into the degree of race me that the reverse is true. Children are accepting

mixing in this country might be interesting, but souls, and discrimination comes only with

research into the results of race mixing would, sophistication. It is alleged too that the various

as the author admits, be extraordinarily difficult races evolve in their own ways depending upon

to evaluate.

local conditions, and that the genetic constitution

The second recommendation is based on a appropriate to those conditions will be en-

proposition which is debatable. The third implies dangered by miscegenation. This theory would,

that the existing inhabitants of this island set a even if proved, be of slight importance. Adapta-

recognizable standard of "quality" against which tion over the centuries must have been to

would-be immigrants can be judged. The fourth terrain, climate, food and disease, yet never in

might in certain circumstances become a sad history has man been less dependent on such

necessity; my views on this have already been local factors. The whitest man can live happily

expressed in THE EUGENICS REVIEW* A fifth in an air-conditioned house on the Equator, and

recommendation might have been added: namely the blackest at the North Pole in electrically

that steps should be taken to improve living heated clothes: food can be transported and

standards in the West Indies, with the hope disease prevented. Emotion and group-attitudes

that the Federal Government will lift restrictions differ between communities, but surely the

against English immigrants!

Broadsheet treads on very insecure ground in

I have been highly critical of the Broadsheet claiming them to be genetically determined?

but I think we owe a debt to its author for The world grows ever smaller, and as we

collecting and presenting the facts and problems impinge upon one another it becomes clearer

and for giving us the opportunity of trying to that racial discord will be the outstanding

clarify our own thoughts on this vitally important problem of the future. The Broadsheet's answer

topic. to this falls not far short of a form of Apartheid:

Letter from Dr. Richard Fox, M.B. (Lond.),
M.R.C.P.
Sir, Broadsheet No. 1, West Indian Immigration is a rather bewildering document in that it sets

we are told that the public must be educated in the troubles and unhappiness that result from most cases of mixed breeding (an unverified assertion) and in the " . . . appreciation of the qualities of the human or group which is

* 1958. 49, 185.

exotic. . ." This emphasis on differences seems

2 f5

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

unfortunate at a time when reconciliation and between White and Black is nothing less than

toleration are so vital, and especially as the the height of folly. Miscegenation once it has

factual foundation is so much in doubt: the taken place will be irreversible.

memorandum is looking the wrong way. The

geneticists tell us that mixed breeding leads to Comments from Dr. J. R. Baker, D.Sc., (Oxon),

vigour in the species, and in-breeding to decline.

F.R.S.

Surely the evidence must suggest that the ill- DR. G. C. L. BERTRAM S broadsheet is in

effects of mixed marriages are culturally deter- many respects admirable, but it appears to me

mined and that attack should therefore be that he has overlooked certain facts and given a

directed at cultural attitudes? Several examples wrong emphasis in a few places. I believe that

are mentioned in the Broadsheet of the trouble- thefollowing notes are worthy of consideration.

free and even beneficial mingling of races: in (1) Our country-its customs, laws, literature,

Greenland, New Zealand, Portugal, parts of learning, wealth, buildings, cultivated lands, and

South America, and England in earlier times. This natural scenery-is our heritage and our home.

makes the conclusions still less easyto understand. Our ancestors intended it for us, their progeny.

Another problem is that one is not clear from It is proper for us to improve it as much as we

this document how far to apply these views. can and hand it on in turn to our own descendants.

Although expressed in relation to West Indians, (2) The people of any overpopulated country

there is nothing to prevent their extension to can maintain or increase their standard of living

inter-marriage with Jews, Celts, Latins, etc. by restricting their birthrate. The effect of their

Should we educate the public against marrying prudence must eventually be nullified if unres-

them too?

tricted immigration be allowed.

RICHARD FOX

(3) Colour is over-emphasized in Dr.

Bertram's broadsheet. It is true that colour-

Extract from a Letter Received from a Lady differences are striking at a distance, but human

I cannot see any purpose in the Broadsheet.... relationships depend on impressions gained from

Bloody-mindedness is no less revolting because nearby. It is obvious to Europeans who have had

it is manifested by verbal attack wrapped up in opportunities for conversation with people of

pseudo scientific language and under the pretext various races that many dark-skinned people of

of being high minded.... Your Society seems to India have facial features closely resembling

have as its aim the setting of man against his their own, while negroes (especially negritians)

fellows ... hate seems to motivate every public are sharply distinguished by their tightly twisted

utterance . . . West Indian children . . . are hair, prognathous jaws, thick and often everted

jolly little hybrids or shall we say pretty con- lips, and broad noses. The emphasis on colour,

vincing conclusions of the qualitative results of so frequent in discussions on race, tends to

miscegenation.

minimize the very real structural differences that

exist.

Extract from a Crusade Appeal launched on Albinos occur occasionally among negroid

October 9th, 1958

races. They are whiter than any normal European,

After a considerable amount of thought and but people of the white races do not regard them

prayer, over a period of many months, the as similar to themselves.

author of this appeal has been moved to send it Most Europeans do not consider that a dark

out believing that under God's guidance and skin is necessarily disfiguring. Many ofthem take

help our British Isles can be delivered from the a great deal of trouble to make their skin as dark

invasion of the Black Man before it is too late... as possible.

Our White Women and White Girls are being (4) Those who consider it probable that

betrayed and being given up into the hands of certain races are intellectually superior to certain

the Black Men, Pakistanis and Indians by the others, are commonly said to exhibit "racial

very ones who should be protecting them.... To prejudice". This is surely a wrong use of the

ignore God-given aversion to inter-marriage word prejudice. It seems to me probable that the

256

WEST INDIAN IMMIGRATION

various peoples of Europe are, on the average, the Broadsheet is mine, but I am fortified by

intellectually superior to the Australian abor- appreciation of what seems to me to be the

igines. This does not imply that I had prejudged corporate sound sense of that Council.

the question before I knew anything about the Criticisms of the Broadsheet are reproduced

Australian aborigines.

above because they may help the achievement

To find out for certain whether different races of balanced judgment. Commendations of the

are (on the average) intellectually and emotion- Broadsheet are not reproduced because praise,

ally equal, it would be necessary to separate a of its nature, does not lead to further under-

very large number of new-born babies from standing.

their parents, to educate them together in isola- I do not intend to deal in detail with points

tion from the outside world, and then to submit raised by critics, though helpful some of them

them to tests of intellectual and emotional are. But I do commend to all critics a more care-

development. Such an experiment cannot be ful reading of what they criticize. A single

carried out, but this does not mean that it is example will suffice. The Broadsheet includes the

wrong to form an opinion on the subject. It remark that "the untutored child's basic dig.

would be an extraordinary circumstance if races crimination by skin colour is apt". The use of

that differ markedly in the structure of the skull the Oxford dictionary will demonstrate that the

and in other measurable features were identical word "discriminate" does NOT include a value

in their nervous and sensory systems, and would judgment, and I did not intend to attribute one

consequently respond in exactly the same way to the child, which simply perceives a difference.

to the same education. Many examples can be To "discriminate against" is quite another

quoted of species of animals which are so closely matter. Or do I here misunderstand the critic?.

related that even experts can scarcely distinguish The Broadsheet was written by a person, I can

them by structural features, but which have say with all sincerity, who has benevolent feelings

markedly different habits (and never breed and many personal friends of many makes in

together in nature).

many lands. The Broadsheet was written in the

simple belief that wider perspectives will lead

Rejoinder by Dr. Colin Bertram, M.A., Ph.D., ultimately to wiser decisions. If critics feel that

General Secretary of the Eugenics Society success has not been achieved, I express regret

and named author of the Broadsheet

and add the hope that they will themselves be

Life would indeed be dull without variety of more successful in the same endeavour.

opinion: Something stimulating, too, would be Truly did the Society's President, Sir Charles

lost if critics and protagonists were to lose their Darwin, write in the Preface to the Broadsheet:

apparent consciousness of perfect rightness in "Judgment [on West Indian Immigration] is

their own personal judgments. Life must be so apt to be charged with emotion, leading to

much easier if one feels like that. And it is opinions, often violently held opinions, going

intriguing to attempt to identify some of the for some people in one direction and for others

many factors and circumstances in others, as in the opposite direction". The Broadsheet "has

well as in ourselves, which lead to such diversity been discussed by the Council, and many amend-

of opinion.

ments have been introduced in consequence. In

It needs to be more fully recognized that a such a broad field unanimity could not be

Broadsheet limited to less than 10,000 words, expected, but there has been a wide measure of

cannot but in some ways be inadequate for agreement with what the General Secretary has

presenting a complicated subject. Yet the more here written."

the words the fewer the readers. One may

remark, too, that it is a salutary experience to produce a Broadsheet which must pass through

P06TCRIPT: "Colour Prejudice and Violence" was debated in the House of Lords on November 19th. The relative Hansard Report (Vol. 212. No. 11. pp. 632 to 724) affords

the critical filter of an always helpful but never- most interesting and valuable reading. No one among the

theless outspoken and varied Council of professional people. Responsibility for statements in

bishops took part. No peer seemed to show any awareness that there might be relevant biological aspects of this difficult problem.

2S7

