EUGENIC MEASURES IN THE THIRD REICH*
By FELIX TIETZE, M.D.

IF I venture to read a paper in English to objective science, i.e. applicable to each

an English audience I want first to group of individuals connected with each

apologize for my boldness to do so as a other by procreation, without any depend-

foreigner. Further I owe you an explanation ence on race in the anthropological sense of

as to how my humble person might be a kind the word to which this group belongs"

of mediator between English and German (I926). Now, let me quote Adolf Hitler:

eugenics, and why therefore I seem to be " The national state has to put race into the

entitled to give here in England a lecture on centre of life and to care for its purity." *

the subject " Eugenic Measures in the Third And: " The state is only the means to an

Reich." You all or most of you know the end, this end being the preservation of the

little but important and masterful book What racial existence of men." t And: " The

is Eugenics ? by our honorary president, quality of a state cannot be valued according

Major Leonard Darwin. This book I had to the civilisatory height or the power of

the privilege to translate into German; the this state within the rest of the world, but

translation was published in I93I under the only according to how its organization works

title Was ist Eugenik ? and proved a great in favour for its own nation." t And:

success. I translated also other eugenic books "W77Vho speaks of a mission of the German

and articles from the English into the German nation on the earth must know that it can

language, and was a delegate of an Austrian only consist in the formation of a state which

Eugenic Organization to the International sees its highest task in the preservation and

Federation of Eugenic Organizations. It is the promotion of the most noble portions of

this association with eugenics that emboldens our nation, even of the whole of mankind,

me to crave your indulgence on this occasion. which are still intact." §

Before entering into the details of recent When this bible of present day Germany

German legislation, I want to explain what to speaks so, the sense of race and the sense of

me seems to be the fundamental difference eugenics therefore are totally altered. Race

between the German and the English con- is the Nordic race in the anthropological

ception of eugenics. You know Galton's sense, or at least the " German race,"

definition, that " Eugenics is the science although such a thing does not exist; and

which deals with all influences which improve eugenics-or as it is exclusively called in the

the inborn qualities of a race, also those that Third Reich, " racial hygiene "-is only the

develop them to the utmost advantage." science concerned with the promotion of the

Before the Third Reich it was also clear in German nation or the Nordic race. By this

Germany that " race " here was not used in restriction the German " Rassenhygiene"

the anthropological sense. Thus, Fritz Lenz, excludes itself totally from what is called,

a pioneer of eugenics in Germany (and now internationally, eugenics.

professor of Eugenics at the Berlin Univer- Among the legal measures introduced by

sity), said: " To influence in a favourable the Third Reich in connection with eugenics

sense the hereditary character of a popula- the first, and one of the most conspicuous,

tion is the task of racial hygiene in- the was the Law for the Prevention of Hereditary

stricter sense, being a hygiene of the heredi- Disease of July I4th, I933. As you know-

tary characters" (I93I). Still clearer is the for a translation of this law was published in

formulation by Grotjahn: " Eugenics is an

* Mein Kampf, i6th ed., 1932, p. 446. * Substance of a paper read at a meeting of the

Eugenics Society on Tuesday, January 17th.

t Ibid, p- 433. JIbid, p. 435. § Ibid, p. 439.

105

io6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the EUGENICS REVIEW *-the essential items Nation (Marriage Health Law) ofOctober i8th,

are the following: Anyone who is heredi- I935.* . It states that a marriage must not be

tarily ailing may be made barren (sterilized) contracted if either of the partners (a) is

by surgical operation, if in the experience of suffering from a transmissible disease, or

medical science it is with great probability (b) has been declared incapable of managing

to be expected that his progeny will suffer his or her affairs and placed under the pro-

from severe bodily or mental hereditary visional care of a guardian, or (c) is suffering

disorders. Hereditarily ailing in the sense of from a mental trouble which makes the

this law is anyone who suffers from one of marriage undesirable in the interests of the

the following diseases: (i) congenital feeble- community, or (d) is suffering from a

mindedness, (2) schizophrenia, (3) periodic " hereditary disease " in the sense in which

(manic-depressive) insanity, (4) inherited the term is used in the Law for the Preven-

epilepsy, (5) inherited St. Vitus's dance tion of Hereditary Disease. Before a marriage

(Huntington's chorea), (6) inherited blind- is contracted the engaged persons have to

ness, (7) inherited deafness, (8) severe produce a certificate from the health office

inherited physical malformation. Further, to the effect that they are not subject to any

anyone suffering from severe alcoholism of these disabilities. Such a pre-nuptial

may be sterilized. Competent to make the health certificate was always a demand of

proposal is the person who is to be sterilized, many eugenists and seems to be a very

but in the case of irresponsibility or in- important measure in the interests of

capacity of this person the proposer is the eugenics, if applied in the right sense.

legal representative, further the medical Rightly, a semi-official article in the V6lkische

officer of health, and for the inmates of a Beobachter (the official party paper) stated:

hospital, institution or prison, its director. " Before the enactment of this law persons

So the sterilization is a compulsory, not a who on account of their weakmindedness,

voluntary measure. Before the Third Reich prodigality or alcoholism had been declared

all the experts were agreed about the fact incapable of managing their affairs were

that the experiences of science were still not allowed to marry with the consent of their

sufficient to grant such a measure; it was legal guardian. However, it is against the

the political issue which made them change interests of the national community that

their mind.

such persons should marry. Further there

Another step which to the German legisla- are persons who suffer from mental troubles

tion seems to be a eugenic measure, which, but who for some reason or other have not

indeed, is such a one from the standpoint yet been declared incapable of managing

which I explained in the beginning of my their own affairs, and others who in con-

paper but would not be considered so in this sequence of pathological heredity have

country, was the Law for the Protection of become criminals. It is obvious that the

German Blood and German Honour of state must not leave to them the responsi-

September I5th, I935, forbidding marriage bility for the foundation of a family. The

and sexual intercourse between Jews and present law is a necessary complement to

citizens of German or related blood and con- the previous law for the prevention of

taining the famous regulation that Jews are hereditary disease. The purpose of marriage

forbidden to employ in their households being the production of healthy children, it

female citizens of German or related blood is morally unjust to bind a healthy, repro-

under the age of 45 years. Every German ductive individual to a sterilized one. On

author on eugenics considers this a eugenic the other hand, there is no objection against

law. two barren individuals entering into a life-

Very important is the Lawfor the Protection community."

of the Hereditary Health of the German

* I933, 25, I79.

* An English translation by myself was published in Marriage Hygietne in 1936 (p. 372).

EUGENIC MEASURES IN THE THIRD REICH

I07

But as the certificate to be produced requirements. The loans are to be refunded

before the marriage is contracted is granted in amounts equivalent to I per cent. per

by the health office (advisory office for month without interest; e.g. for a loan of

hereditary and racial problems) there is a I,OOO marks, io marks are to be refunded

certain danger as to the proper use of the every month to the Government. An

law. Again here the fundamental difference additional decree of September I5th, I935,

between eugenics and " racial hygiene " altered by the decree of August 3ISt, I937,

might produce the denial of such a certificate introduced the granting of child premiums

in cases in which from the genuine eugenical for families who had to bring up children

standpoint no objection could be raised. after the fourth child. Such child premiums

The two laws for the prevention of heredi- are either paid once up to IOO marks for each

tary disease and for the protection of the child after the fourth, or they are regular

hereditary health of the German nation are payments of IO marks per month for each

the most important measures of negative child after the fourth.

eugenics in the Third Reich, i.e., such After having explained the importance of

measures as should prevent the production these three measures-the Law for the

of undesirable descendants. The most im- Prevention of Hereditary Disease, the Law

portant measure to increase the number of for the Protection of the Hereditary Health of

children of parents whose constitutional the German Nation, and the Law for the

health seems to guarantee healthy descend- Promotion of Marriages, to give you an idea

ants is the Lawfor the Promotion ofMarriages of the German conception of racial hygiene

(Section V of the Law for the diminution of and to justify my argument at the beginning

unemployment of June Ist, I933, altered by of this paper, I want to quote from an

the Law of March 28th, I934).

article written by two of the most prominent

According to this law the national govern- German eugenists, Alfred Ploetz and Ernst

ment granted marriage loans up to I,000 Riidin, on what seem to them to be some of

marks to young people who wanted to the eugenic consequences attained in Ger-

marry, but would have been unable to marry many since the Fiihrer took power on

without this help. From August Ist, I933, January 30th, I933.*

to the end of February, I934, about 200,000

such loans were granted of an average They summarize these as follows:

amount of 620 marks. The purpose of the Education of Germany's young people.

law was not only to promote marriages and Repression of the Jewish portion of the popula-

the production of descendants-the official motivation of the law estimated an increase

tion. Decrease of unemployment. Safeguarding of the nation in its racial climbing-

of marriages of 200,000 a year-but also a up by withdrawal from the League of Nations,

decrease of unemployment by those in- declaring null and void the treaties of Versailles

creased marriages. One of the conditions for the granting of a marriage loan was that the prospective bride had to give up the paid

and St. Germain,
by occupation of the Rhine District, by the German-Japanese-Italian agreement against communism,

job in which she was employed up to the by the creation of the German-Italian axis,

time of marriage. (This condition was by the re-union of Austria with Germany, and

dropped on October Ist, I937.).,

so creating Greater Germany.

Moreover, furniture, utensils, linen and I leave it entirely to you to decide how far

the other requirements of the newly married these measures may justly be called eugenic.

couple and their prospective children were

intended to decrease unemployment by the increase in work necessary to supply these

* Archiv fur Rassen- und Gesellschafts-Biologie, I938, 82, I85.

enics Review, VoL XXXI, No. 2.

