PAUL BLOOMFIELD
Captain Barclay

C APTAIN BARCLAY, THE great pedes- our world of mainly small families, cousins

trian, was a son of Robert Barclay, fifth don't seem to care for each other particularly.

of Urie, by his second wife Sarah Allar- The Barclays and their cousins have found each

dice. His father's first wife and cousin Lucy other irresistible; it is true the choice has been

Barclay had borne him a daughter, another wide, and the background (one may mention

Lucy, who in 1777 married the Birmingham without cynicism) comfortable. When the late

gunmaker Samuel Galton and was the grand- Isabel Fry said of the innumerable cousin-

mother of Sir Francis Galton.

marriages of her clan: "We all knew each other

so of course we all married each other" someone

The Barclay Family

might have pointed out that there would have

The Captain's grandparents had also been been no "of course" about it, but for the peculiar

cousins, for Robert Barclay, fourth of Urie, had character-not peculiar in any disparaging sense

married a daughter of that formidable Ewen -of the people she was talking about.

Cameron of Lochiel who had killed one of his The Galtons before Sir Francis remained

enemies in battle by biting him in the throat, and Quakers even after their obstinate adherence to

whose wife Jean was one of the many long-lived gunmaking had led to formal excommunication

children of Robert Barclay, the Apologist of the by the Birmingham Meeting. Their cousin

Quakers. Ewen Cameron himself lived to be Robert Barclay joined the army (the 23rd Regi-

ninety. Since, too, the Apologist's father, ment) in 1805; he had a passion for hunting and

Colonel David Barclay had fought in the wars of shooting, went to dances, trained the great prize

Gustavus Adolphus brandishing a sword which fighter Tom Cribb, and was constantly making

other men could hardly lift, it does look natural or losing large sums of money in wagers: nothing

enough that this remarkable inbred stock should Quakerish about him except his blood and his

have gone on producing men of unusual bodily fine personality. Though he remained known to

vigour. Such a man, certainly, was Captain his contemporaries as Captain Barclay, he is

Barclay, born 1779, died 1854 from a kick given found under Allardice in the reference books

him by a horse: at seventy-five he still seemed a because on his mother's death he added her

long way from dying of old age.

name to his own, believing he had become heir,

The Barclays are one of the most interesting through her, to the three Scottish earldoms of

families in England; they are also the equal Airth, Strathern and Montieth. His cases were

oldest, being one of the only two-and much the heard in 1839 and 1840, but the claims were not

more distinguished of them-which can be established.

traced back to a pre-Conquest Englishman.

From the other family, Arden, there may Barclay's Athletic Career

possibly have sprung the mother of William It was in 1796, the year before his father's

Shakespeare. The Barclays, derived from the death that Barclay started his athletic career.

Gloucestershire Berkeleys, with their royal con- "When only fifteen years of age, he entered into

nections, their record as leading Quakers, their a match with a gentleman in London to walk six

wealth got from banking and brewing, and not miles within an hour, fair TOE AND HEEL, for one

least their fertility, have never had a poet or a hundred guineas, which he accomplished on the

Prime Minister, but they have been yeast to the Croydon road . . ." The quotation is from W.

whole vast Quaker cousinhood, and their genius Thom, whose valuable little book Pedestrianism

has announced itself under such names as Bux- is the chief source for. Barclay's performances

ton, Fry, Wakefield, Forster-and Galton. In and includes a chapter more or less dictated by

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1962,54, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

him on his method of training. Thom, by the miles in a thousand successive hours. He had

way, takes it quite for granted that Barclay's no incentive to speed; in the first week his aver-

aptitude was inherited, as he makes clear when age for the mile was fourteen minutes fiftty-four

alluding to the pedestrian feats of the Captain's seconds, in the last, twenty-one minutes four

father, who once walked from Urie to London, seconds. His weight by the end had dropped two

a distance of 510 miles, in ten days, and on other stone and four pounds to eleven stone. His strat-

occasions did 210 miles in three days and eighty- egy, as one would expect, had been to walk at the

one miles in sixteen hours. Thom also tells us beginning of one hour and at the end of the next,

that Barclay's grandfather was known as "the but even so by the last week he was getting no

Strong."

more than seventy-eight-minute intervals for rest

When walking, the Captain took compara- and sleep-which was a severe test of endurance

tively short steps and had an air of leaning more after five weeks on the move.

than slightly forward. Fully grown he was about In 1811 we hear of 100-mile walks twice a

six foot. His weight in 1809 at the beginning of week, and in 1812 of sixty-six-mile walks three

his most famous walk was thirteen stone four times a week, but after that Barclay devoted

pounds. This was the time when he did a thou- himself more and more to the management of

sand successive miles in a thousand successive his estate; perhaps he had at last got bored with

hours. Though running was not his line, in 1804 pedestrianism. He kept up his games and sports,

he ran two miles in eleven minutes fifty-seven his cricket, shooting and hunting to the end of

and a half seconds. (Champions to-day can do his life. In 1841 he went to the United States

this in under nine minutes.) His earlier feats to study farming methods there, and published

included a walk of 110 miles in nineteen hours an account of his visit when he came home. He

twenty-seven minutes and another, Urie to had married Mary Dalgarno in 1819. They had

Boroughbridge in Yorkshire, 300 miles, in five an only child, a daughter, who has many

days. Nothing more vividly suggests what an descendants in America through her second son.

unusual creature he was than the record of his When Barclay died he was succeeded at Urie by

-"behaviour" really seems the motjuste-in the his cousin Charles.

summer of 1808, when he was on the point of going overseas with the Walcheren expeditionary force as aide-de-camp to Lord Huntley. He got up at 5 a.m., walked thirty miles to shoot grouse, dined at 5 p.m., walked sixty miles to his house at Urie, where he attended to some business matters, walked sixteen miles to a dance at Laurence Kirk, back sixteen miles to Urie by 7 a.m., and spent the day shooting. After a few days' rest, fresh as paint, he packed and went off to the wars.
The British diversion against Napoleon's flank is commemorated by the well-known lampoon:

During his life-time Barclay enjoyed considerable celebrity, expecially in the years 1809 to 1811, at the peak of the great Tom Cribb's
career, for it was known that this amazing
bruiser and national hero had gone up to train with him in Scotland. Since Cribb had only once been beaten, his first and last defeat (by George Nichols in 1805), it could be felt that by taking him up Barclay merely showed he knew what horse to put his shirt on, and that Cribb needed no help from him while he was getting into shape to meet the redoubtable American negro Molineaux. Actually the two men were in natural

The Earl of Chatham, with his sword drawn, sympathy with one another, and nobody could

Stood waiting for Sir Richard Strachan;

say that Barclay cramped Cribb's style. Cribb

Sir Richard, longing to be at 'em, Stood waiting for the Earl of Chatham.

has been described as bearing "a character of unimpeachable integrity and unquestionable

Though the historian Fortescue considers we humanity." After twice worsting Molineaux he

gave Napoleon rather a fright-for what use that remained unchallenged for ten years, though the

was to our Austrian allies-the Walcheren weight he was putting on behind the bar in his

expedition proved a failure, and Barclay was West End public house (see Conan Doyle's story

soon home again. It was in the following year The Lord ofFaulconbridge) might have led a bold

that he set out to walk a thousand successive man into temptation. In 1821 he was voted

26

CAPTAIN BARCLAY

Champion for life. The first encounter with four-mile run in flannels, then a draught con-

Molineaux had brought him £400-and Barclay cocted as follows: Half an ounce each of cori-

£10,000. Be all this as it may, the best advertise- ander seed and sugar-cane, one ounce each of

ment for Barclay's method of training was caraway seed and root liquorice, these ingredi-

himself.

ents dissolved in two pints of cider and boiled

down to "one English pint." Having drunk this

Training Methods

-presumably hot-and rested heavily covered

What was that method? We shall be correct if on a bed for half an hour, the trainee is rubbed

we guess it was different from Dr. Barbara dry; afterwards he goes for a gentle two-mile

Moore's. It is just over two years since this walk in an overcoat, and so to breakfast, this

modem pedestrian walked the 871 miles from time a roasted fowl.

John o' Groat's to Land's End in twenty-two Then, except for the purge, da capo for the

days, doing about four miles an hour for eleven next month.

hours a day, and "sustaining herself on raw As to diet, Barclay believed above all in beef

vegetables, fruit, nuts, fruit juices, honey and and mutton. "The lean of fat beef cooked in

milk." The Annual Register says of her: "Of steaks, with very little salt, is the best, and it

Russian birth, aged fifty-six, a 'scientist-dietiti- should be rather underdone than otherwise."

cian' and fanatical vegetarian, she believed that if "Biscuit and stale bread are the only prepara-

we could discover the right diet we should live for tions of vegetable matter which are permitted to

ever, and she did not seem to realize what an be given . . . Vegetables, such as turnips, carrots

unmitigated disaster this would be." By common or potatoes are never given, as they are watery

consent her feat for a woman of her age was and of difficult digestion." No fish, no butter, or

magnificent, so there is no question here of cheese or eggs, except from time to time the raw

odious comparisons or veiled insinuations that yolk of an egg in the morning. "And it must be

fruit juices are not all that some people allege. remarked that salt, spiceries, and all kinds of

During his travels in France before the Revolu- seasonings, with the exception of vinegar, are

tion, Arthur Young had noticed with pleasure prohibited."

that even the less well-off French were addicted Drink. Always cold. Best of all, old home-

to vegetable soups and fruit, but a quarter of a brewed beer (not bottled), and no more than

century later (and for long after that) the British three pints of it per day. If the trainee didn't like

had no idea of cooking green vegetables inter- malt liquor he could have half a pint of red wine.

estingly, and the insular tradition that it was Water never undiluted, spirits never, nor milk

unhealthy to eat much fruit died hard. But to either, "as it curdles the stomach."

come to Captain Barclay's system.

Three months after the purge the trainee

The trainee had to start with a good purge: should be seen to be fit from the firmness of his

three doses of from one to two and a half ounces flesh and the smoothness of his skin.

of Glauber's salts at four-day intervals. Then to Barclay's method worked-for those whom it

work. Up at five every morning, run half a mile suited; and evidently Dr. Barbara Moore did

at top speed, then walk six miles at a moderate nicely on her fruit juices, etc. Let us recall here

pace. Seven o'clock breakfast: underdone beef- that Wendy Lewis, an eighteen-year-old hair-

steaks or mutton chops with stale bread, washed dresser from Liverpool, followed in Dr. Moore's

down with old beer. Six more miles at a moder- tracks and came in three days later, having kept

ate pace, half an hour's rest lying naked, and up her strength with steak-and-kidney pies "and

four more miles before dinner (the same fare anything else I could lay hands on." Then when

as breakfast). Then the run and the walk as at Mr. Butlin of the Camps offered two £1,000

the beginning of the day, and bed at eight. prizes, one for each sex, to the winners of a race

After running two half-miles and walking over the same route, John o'Groat's to Land's

twenty-two the trainee had had a strenuous day End, Wendy, coming in second, took only six-

of it. teen and a half days. She got her prize, for the

When a month was up came the sweat. First a absolute winner was a man, James Musgrave, a

27

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Doncaster glass-packer, who made the distance people probably realize from so many records

in fifteen and a half days, going at a shade over nowadays depending on a split second.

fifty-six miles a day.

The essential issue was, by a fair analogy,

Could Barclay on his beefsteaks have bettered summed up on January 31st of this year by Mr.

that? Given his constitution and fitness he might Peter Burrell, Director of the National Stud. As

have done, either on the beefsteaks, etc. or on reported in The Times he said that "records were

some other diet and more up-to-date methods of still broken, but this was because of improved

training. When Galton in his Inquiries into tracks, training methods and the different style

Human Faculty (1883) alluded to his cousin's of riding races; in other words through environ-

famous 1,000-mile walk, he went on to write as ment, not heredity. So there was a further prob-

if he believed that the fitness of the "better lem common to breeders of all animals, that of

housed and fed" part of the population had so keeping up the standard after the peak had been

far increased, in less than a century, that it was reached."

greater "faculty" rather than improved methods Captain Barclay was an all-round sort of

of training which accounted for the athletes of English (or Scots) country gentleman, and it is

his own day breaking so many records, including unlikely he would have wished men to be bred

Barclay's. This is giving evolution more than its and conditioned to be nothing more than record-

due. There may be learned ways of reckoning the breaking pedestrians, as horses are bred for

outside limit of faculty for pedestrianism if men racing. But, modem training methods would

were bred for it. A limit there must be, as most have fascinated him.

28

