COMMENTS AND CRITICISMS.

Problems of Reconstruction.-Now that the Report of the

Empire Settlement Committee has been issued, the United

Empire Journal urges the immediate creation of a Central

Authority, representative both of the Overseas Dominions and

the Mother Country, to deal with the whole problem of home

and Colonial Settlement. From the eugenic point of view it is

desirable that such a body should be in working order before

the War is over, since it would afford openings-in forestry, for

instance-for many of those disabled sailors and soldiers whoTh

it is essential, both for their own and the national welfare, to

re-establish in civil life in a position enabling thtm to marry

and rear families.

N. A.

Disabled Soldiers in Canada,-In a recently published

Report of the Children's Bureau of the United States Depart-

ment of Labour, it is pointed out that in Canada insurance on

the lives of soldiers is carried by various municipalities, and

that the Government has undertaken as part of its military

system the re-education of the disabled soldier in some suitable

occupation which will enable him to resume, or take up, the

responsibilities of family life.

Presumably, the re-education is given, as in France, before

discharge, which obviates many of the difficulties attendant on

our own system, in which it is given after discharge.

N. A.

The Fight against Tuberculosis.-The last activity of the

Y.M.C.A. is a Red Triangle Farm Colony, which is in the

nature of a double experiment in that it provides agricultural

and industrial training for disabled soldiers suffering from slight

tubercular trouble. In cases of accidental tubercular affections

such a colony must prove a distinctly eugenic agency, both in

its individual and its national aspects.

N. A.

Social Hygiene in War Time.-The Secretary of War for the United States has taken speedy and decisive steps to

:232 EUGENICS REVIEW.

protect the American Army, so far as possible, from the moral

risks inevitably attendant on military life, and has called upon the

-State and local authorities for prompt and effective co-operation.

The two main questions of alcohol and prostitution have been

treated in very summary and drastic fashion. Strict regulations

have been issued as to the sale of all forms of intoxicating

liquors in or near military camps, and for the suppression of

all houses of ill-fame, while the presence of individual prostitutes

in such neighbourhoods constitutes a legal offence.

In this work the American Social Hygiene Association is

taking a very active part, firstly, with the Commission on

Training Camp Activities, which deals with the conditions of the

-camps and also with the provision of recreational facilities;

secondly, with the medical departments of the Army and Navy,

which are seeking to provide adequate means for the diagnosis

and treatment of the venereal infections; and thirdly, with the

Public Health Service, in the control of these infections in cities

and communities accessible to the camps. Here the special work

^of the Association lies in the education of public opinion, and

one may reasonably hope that, in the present awakening of the

public conscience to its dangers and responsibilities, such a work

will have enduring results.

One other vital point deserves mention. The Association

has earned great credit for its excellent complementary work to

the safeguarding of men, in organising all available forces for the

moral protection of girls, in order to avert that wave of casual

prostitution, born of war hysteria, which has been so regrettable

a feature in our own country.

N. A.

