INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF EUGENIC ORGANIZATIONS

A Survey of the Zurich Conference

By C. B. S. HODSON, F.L.S.

IT was decided in New York that the SOCIAL EVENTS

International Federation of Eugenic Or- The kindness of the Swiss hosts made

ganizations assembly should meet bi- possible a number of interesting visits to the

annually; owing to the depression it was plant-breeding experiments in the Institute

only in March of this year that an invitation directed by Professor Ernst, and to the

was forthcoming from Switzerland through beautiful show of transmission of feather

the kind offices of two constituent organiza- colour which has resulted from the work of

tions-the Julius Klaus-Stiftung and the Professor Steiner. Some were able to see

Swiss Psychiatric Society-and the meeting Dr. Hanhart's local- studies tracing the first

was arranged for July i8th to 2ist in Zurich. appearance of certain mutations in isolated

Our hosts made the novel arrangement of valleys, the results of which will be most

holding the meetings in an hotel, the Wald- illuminating for the genetics of man. Pro-

haus Dolder, housing all the foreign delegates fessor Schlaginhaufen demonstrated some of

there and in a couple of neighbouring hotels. the most interesting skulls from prehistoric

It was an admirable plan, no time being sites on which he has been worldng in the

wasted in journeys, while the lovely parks on Julius Klaus-Stiftung, which he directs. The

the mountain-side and the new swimming- usual friendly hospitality was demonstrated

pool gave opportunities for peaceful recrea- by an excursion and a dinner given by the

tion in the few free hours available Pro- Julius Klaus-Stiftung.

gramme arrangements were facilitated by a One of the three evenings was enlivened by

preliminary meeting in Berlin in April be- a film brought by Dr. Steggerda from the

tween the President and several European Yucatan jungle villages in which he has been

members, and despite the short notice over working amongst the Mayas; and his run-

fifty scientists assembled.

ning commentary added to the interest of

Business transactions were of interest the picture.

chiefly in passing constitutional changes

which will allow of wider expansion of repre- DIAGNOSIS AND GRADING OF OLIGO-

sentative membership. Programmes of three PHRENIA

of the four research committees were re- As in previous years the conferences were

viewed and extended; in particular the limited to a few topics-namely feeble-

work of Standardization of Human Measure- mindedness, the analysis and genetics of

ments progresses-physical measurements mental traits, twin studies and reports on

being formally transferred to the Inter- eugenic progress in certain countries. The

national Congress of Anthropology and Eth- discussion on mental deficiency or oligo-

nology, while psychological measurements phrenia was restricted to two major ques-

are receiving attention by national com- tions, diagnosis and grading. Professor

mittees in England and the United States. Rudin, President of the International Feder-

The physiological problems which begin to ation of Eugenic Organizations, described

attract interest were relegated to a new the distinction made in Germany between

sectional committee.

oligophrenia as a psychiatric condition and

2I7

2I1

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

what his school describes as normal stupidity. tests. A comparative study is urgently re-

Professor Berry gave an account of his long quired.

researches and submitted the theory that

mental defect can best be described as failure TESTING ABILITY AND INTELLIGENCE

of development of the central nervous system The second day began with a study of

a condition which, as such, passes by in- psychometry, Dr. Mj0en opening with a

distinguishable grades from a pre-embryonic demonstration of his methods of testing

type in brain development to something musical ability. His work is too well known

which can best be characterized as less than for repetition here, but the demonstration

the highest development known. He finds of five of his twenty different tests created

somatic and functional characters corre- so much interest that discussion ran through

sponding biologically to the various grades the whole morning. Concentrating mainly

of lack of neural development. Dr. Rudolf, on the degree to which training would affect

of Brentry Colony, Bristol, gave a lucid test of performance, Dr. Mj0en gave evidence

explanation of the way in which legislation from re-tests, proving quite conclusively

has govemed both the terminology and that certain of the most diagnostic factors

method of certification of mental deficiency remained unchanged. Indeed, he had two

in Great Britain.

cases of brothers, one of whom was a pro-

Eminent workers in this field were present fessional musician, yet was in each pair

-namely Dr. Wildenskow (Denmark), Dr. graded slightly below the sib who had fol-

Jens Smith, Professor Maier and Dr. Brugger lowed another calling. There is probably no

(Switzerland), and Dr. Tietze and Dr. work extant that has given such careful

Hamburger (Austria). The ensuing dis- analytical examination of three generations

cussion was very lively, and the German with collaterals for a number of families.

psychiatrists did not succeed in convincing The results demonstrate most clearly the

those present that they had any valid psy- importance of characters in collaterals for

chiatric criterion for the alleged distinction ascertainment of the true genetical constitu-

between normal and pathological dullness. tion of the family; such demonstrations

It would appear that legislation in both have been shown in the studies of oligo-

countries has covered and to some extent phrenia, but lack of factorial analysis has

controlled the purely medico-biological treat- rendered these latter somewhat ambiguous

ment of the question. Denmark, with com- hitherto.

plete legislative control, has avoided this Professor Spearman gave a lucid exposition

pitfall, the Danish psychiatrists frankly ad- of his analysis of intelligence into general and

mitting that an arbitrary line is drawn below special factors, and asked for help in the

which lack of intelligence is regarded as attempt which was being made, both by

warranting social control. Several speakers national committees and by a committee

urged the evolutionary importance of this of the International Federation of Eugenic

outlook; it might be hoped that, generation Organizations, to bring greater order and

by generation, the point of poor develop- clarity into methods of psychological

ment might be slightly raised if and as the measurement.

average intelligence of the population rises Dr. Steggerda, who has just been appointed

progressively.

chairman of the International Federation of

Time did not allow of a full discussion on Eugenic Organizations Committee, gave an

grading, but nothing contradicted the im- account of the difficulties of psychological

pression left by a study of recent European studies of non-European races, based on his

researches that higher grades are included in own work amongst the Mayas in Yucatan,

oligophrenia in Europe than under the term whites and negroes in Jamaica, Indians in

mental deficiency in England and the United Arizona, and some other groups. Both he

States. The only comparable base line still and Professor Rodenwaldt stated that there

appears to be provided in the Binet-Simon could be no doubt as to wide racial

INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF EUGENIC ORGANIZATIONS 2I9

differences in mental faculty. For instance, Professor Ride of Hong Kong demon-

in music the tests satisfactory for Europeans strated his elaboration of Wilder's method of

would fail altogether to elicit the much finer palmar print notation. He has found distinct

discrimination common in the yellow races racial differences which can be studied by

and negroes. It would appear that a careful this Method. Dr. Reichl, Vienna, followed

and sympathetic study of the manner of life with observations on his recent work. In-

of any people should make it possible to heritance of finger and palmar pattern have,

eliminate those aspects of European tests, he stated, recently been used to establish

such as speed, which are wholly inapplicable cases of doubtful paternity in view of the

in some other cultures.

regular transmission of dominant patterns.

TWIN STUDIES

Reports on eugenic work were of such outstanding interest as to absorb three sessions.

The afternoon was devoted to papers on In addition to the President, five experts

twin studies introduced by Professor Dr. came from the Reich, Dr. Ruttke, Dr. Astel,

Freiherr von Verschuer of Berlin, the first Dr. Loeffler, Dr. Kiirten and Dr. Gross,

problem to be tackled being methods of accepting the invitation of the International

differentiation of identical and non-identical Federation of Eugenic Organizations to give

twins. From a study not yet published he an account of the practical working of the

gave a chart showing the unreliability of new measures. Dr. Ruttke, directing popular

judging from the chorion. In 52 cases with education in protection of heredity, gave a

double chorion, I2 proved to be identical clear outline of the whole policy, which may

and 40 non-identical.

be briefly summarized as (a) unification of

He proceeded to describe an interesting State control throughout the nation, (b)

series of cases of tuberculosis in twins which abolishing unemployment (shown to have

have been studied since the work published disintegrating effects on the sense of

by himself and Diehl in I933; amongst parental responsibility and family life), (c)

identical twins concordance was found in 69 de-urbanization, which removes large families

per cent. of cases, and amongst non-identical with self-supporting parents and good family

pairs in 26 per cent. of cases.

history to peasant holdings which will be

He was followed by Dr. Sanders, Director entailed, (d) revision of marriage laws,

of the Medical Statistical Section of the new making marriages for social or economic ends

Dutch Institute for Human Heredity, Eu- liable to be annulled, (e) the creation of

genics and Race Biology (this section is bureaux for advice on heredity and marriage,

located in The Hague). Eight cases of homo- (f) provision of loans for young persons of

sexuality in twins were reported from his sound stock who desire to marry, a measure

recent investigations; the identical twins which goes hand in hand with the exclusion

were concordant with one exception in which the homosexual twin was an epileptic, the condition being attributed to forceps delivery; the only pair of non-identical
twins were discordant.

of women from those industries which can be
served by unemployed men, (g) the sterilization law, which is sufficiently well known to be omitted here. Dr. Ruttke explained that
the exclusion of criminals was determined

HUMAN GENETICS
A session was devoted to human genetics, in which a few outstanding pedigrees were shown, the most puzzling case being a family with spasmodic paralysis and muscular

in order to remove any sense of degradation being connected with the operation; both in the courts and by popular propaganda the
ideal is put forward which has made steriliza-
tion successful in California, that the citizen

dystrophy; Dr. Sanders referred to this who accepts the operation with a sense of

condition as possibly cryptomeric, and cer- responsibility for posterity merits the esteem

tainly one of which further cases would be of the community. In regard to compulsion

required for proper elucidation.

he stated the fact not so widely known that

220 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

patients may accept institutional treatment enthusiasm for the ideals of working for a

of segregation if they prefer it to steriliza- fitter race, of which the most striking ex-

tion. Finally, (h) the Danish plan (also ample is the numbers of young men and

largely used in Switzerland) of castration for women coming to ask questions at the

habitual sex offenders has been enacted as heredity advisory bureaux.

obligatory, the objective being double, both De-urbanization, marriage and family

the cure of the condition in the individual, grants to families of good stock and control

and the protection of society. This last is of immigration and emigration form part of

not necessarily regarded as a eugenic measure. this work; in immigration the possibility of

Dr. Astel, director of the protection of industrial absorption is taken into account as

heredity for Thiuringer, followed with a full well as personal and family suitability.

account of the methods adopted there. In- A number of searching questions were

tensive popular education and propaganda exchanged with the different speakers. The

havebeensystematicallyundertaken. Courses Dutch in particular showed hesitancy in

of instruction are given to the lawyers and accepting the findings of transmissibility in

physicians concerned in public health work, regard to certain diseases as an adequate

to the teaching profession, and to all civil criterion for sterilization, while these coming

servants. Laws of heredity are taught in from countries such as Switzerland, where

schools; material is issued to the Press; over the operation is a practical possibility and

250 lectures attended by thousands have been increasingly practised, found less difficulty

given in less than twelve months. A play in accepting the German point of view. In

contrasting good and bad inheritance is fact, between those critics who alleged that

touring the provinces, and has been a success. Germany was going too far and those

An exhibition is being shown in one centre (notably the French) who suggested that the

after another.

categories should include more types, the

The results of this preparation are satis- protagonists of the new eugenic era in

factory, in so far as the Sterilization Courts Germany appear to hold a middle course.

are meeting in that area with little opposition. Reports of growing work and increasing

About one-third of the cases have come in interest were given from every country

voluntarily; less than IO per cent. ask for represented. These will be published in full

an appeal, and these, after discussion with in the report, which will appear in the

the physicians concerned, have been reduced autumn, and will be obtainable from the

to 3 per cent. He finds real and growing Secretariat, price 2s. 6d. per copy.

SCIENTIFIC BOOKS

Current and Standard ENGLISBH, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature
in Chemical, BioloAical, Medical and Physical Science supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order. CataloAues post free on application.
MEDICAL and SCIENTIFIC LENDING LIBRARY.
Annual Subscription, Town or Country, from One Guinea.
PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION

H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd.,
Telephone: Museum 7756

136 GOWER STREET
LONDON, W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 8.

