CONTROL OF MENTAL DISEASE
The Functions of Experts and Poor Law By the Reverend J. C. PRINGLE
(Secretary of the Charity Organization Society)

S much has been said and written about the Report of the Mental Deficiciency Committee* that a writer who
wishes to add anything to the discussion
must say bluntly, " Yes, but I want to say something, too: do let me do so!" The present writer desires in particular to shout
out something very loud to his fellow members in the Eugenics Society. It is from the point of view of the practical social worker -extremely practical-immersed in it every

by all and any means to secure that local
authorities shall provide more beds for mental deficients, and that every kind of pressure shall be brought to bear upon those local authorities who are backward in this matter. Having so decided, the
C.A.M.W. is particularly concerned to tell
all persons with red herrings to keep off.
In a practical world they feel that it is right even to suppress lines of thought and
inquiry which might conceivably give a

day and all day, and with lamentably little conceivable member of a conceivable local

time to acquire even a reasonable academic authority a chance of moving for delay in

equipment-that he craves their attention. building the suggested new institution till

Remembering the tradition of the the said line of inquiry had been somewhat

Eugenics Society and the master-thought of further pursued. With the officials of local

its existence, what is its role in the crisis-- authorities who are members of the

for it is a crisis-produced by the appear- C.A.M.W., with the Board of Control whose

ance of this Report and its not too badly duty it is to put pressure upon the local

founded statement that we are breeding authorities, this is a matter of immediate

to-day twice as many mental deficients as urgency, of getting certain spending resolu-

we were less than a generation ago? The tions through finance committees, and of

importance of this question lies in the riding off individual obstructionists but too

fewness of the groups on this island who well known to them.

necessarily take any serious notice of the The function of the Eugenics Society, as

incident at all.

I conceive it, is an utterly different one. It

There is an important body, the Central has expressed its sympathy with the

Association for Mental Welfare, with its C.A.M.W. in its struggles, and may well

quarterly publication and its annual con- abstain from expressing any doubts about

ference, which, being at least technically a all these bricks and mortar, but it should

voluntary body, can write to the Press and surely then proceed to the activity its own

carry on propaganda if so minded. It is, tradition demands of it, the formation of

however, rightly and naturally dominated opinion. The Society exists first of all to

by representatives of local authorities, and, think in a clear, consistent, and informed

still more, by the question of what it is that manner, and secondly, to disseminate these

local authorities, taken as a whole, ought. to thoughts. An example may serve to indi-

do. The C.A.M.W. has resolved to utilize cate the sort of divergence there must in-

such energy, and such articulateness as it evitably be between us and the C.A.M.W.

possesses in a particular direction, viz., At that Association's last Annual Confer-

ence but one, Mrs. Hume Pinsent, speaking

* It is assumed that the reader has read Mr. Eldon Moore's article on the Report which appeared in the last issue of this REviEw.

from the platform on behalf of the Board of Control, deprecated the advocacy of sterili-

17'

I72-

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

zation (a possible rival of extended institu- among the leaders of society and its pro-

tional accommodation) on the grounds that gressive imitation by the other social

it must inevitably result in a great increase grades? While the leaders took a mystical

in venereal disease, since men would know view (that still taken by the Roman Catholic

that these sterilized women ran no risk of Church and by the Japanese, to mention two

offspring. From the point of view of Mrs. educated groups), the people followed them.

Pinsent's campaign for more beds to make The leaders gradually became rationalist on

possible more segregation it was " a hit, a this question, and the people are following

hit, a palpable hit," but as a piece of clear, them-at different speeds, the British

consistent, informed thinking, it is perhaps always well behind-but following (I can

hardly so brilliant. The threat of a greater support this from among my own wage-

incidence of venereal disease is always a earning acquaintance).

first-class method of driving reasoning out of court by substituting terror. When

THE VALUE OF PROPAGANDA

reason is allowed to skulk back on to the I do not mean that the bulk of individual

field, it observes that the kind of man who, couples are figuring out the wisdom or un-

being infected with venereal disease, grati- wisdom of large families. I think they are

fies himself at the expense of a mentally doing what they see their ' betters ' do. I

deficient woman, is not the kind of man am hopeful even about the least cultured

who troubles much about her having off- grade. Among them there is a ferocious

spring. The instances which might occur tyranny of the street. If a woman diverges

-everything is possible-are reasons, we from their code, they mete out punishment

submit, for greater efficiency in the cam- which is usually corporal. When the time

paign for the elimination of venereal dis- comes that large families are barred by that

ease, not for ' bulldosing ' the people who code, large families will not happen. Nor is

ought to be thinking clearly, consistently, this only a question of imitation. It is also

and informedly, about sterilization.

one of propaganda. A tuberculous man,

An American writer in a fine peroration subsisting at the public expense, a decent

to a volume on social services lately asked fellow, claimed the other day that as he was

whether there was any prospect of mail unable to serve his country by earning

laying aside his secular mysticism and wages, he had done what little he could by

applying his intelligence to the elimination begetting six children-an obvious result of

of eliminable hindrances to the progress of propaganda. We are not under any illusion

human society. M. Tarde, at least, would as to the proportionate part which reason,

retort by arguing that man is not so much or knowledge either, will play in human

an incorrigible mystic as an incorrigible affairs. We apprehend that it is likely to

mimic, and that not because he enjoys the be very small.

labour of imitation, but because he fears to What we are out for is first to make it as

be detected doing or being something differ- good as we can, and then as large as we can.

ent from his neighbours. So immense a We want to persuade everybody in any class

change has come over the habits of the who dares to think for himself, to think

Western peoples in the matter of offspring hard how he, and we all, can secure on this

that even crude explanations are not out of island a better race. And we have hopes

court. During a visit to the Continent only that the imitative mass, in all classes, will

a month ago I was informed by first-class slowly but surely follow them. We doubt

authorities, speaking of Germany and whether many people will abstain from

Scandinavia, that birth control had now mating because there is doubt as to the

spread to all classes. It was long since soundness of their progeny. We doubt if

adopted by the peasantry of France.

they would be wise to do so. We want to

May it not fairly be suggested that a con- help them in every possible way to exercise

tributory factor was a change of attitude choice as to whether their mating results in

CONTROL OF MENTAL DISEASE

I73

any progeny, and if in any, in what deficiency. It would bring into industry, on number. We are tempted to hope that a co-operative lines, the advance in welfare fashion can be set up of exercising this which the great Turkish sultans accom-

choice with a full sense of responsibility, plished by the method of janissaries-the

and that this exercise of choice may spread selective collection of the amount of rising

through the community.

generation you require for a particular pur-

We foresee a day when it may require pose. Zola believed that what really irked

far more courage for a mentally deficient, the French workman was that he could not

tubercular, or syphilitic waterside labourer give full rein to the procreative instinct and his mate to bring progeny into the while the capitalist could. By means of his

world than for a similarly afflicted pair of own particular brand of socialism, Zola millionaires; for the simple reason that once promised the removal of this embargo (cf.

the code of the waterside goes against such Travail).

reproduction, as the code of the educated, We do not believe M. Zola can deliver the

so far as they have or obey any, went goods along the lines proposed, but we

against it generations ago, it will be very believe medical science aiding and abetting

largely obeyed.

eugenics propaganda can deliver incompar-

ably better goods, a consciously progressive

VOLUNTARY EUGENICS

human community.

A friend of mine who has now attained eminence in the medical profession, was THE SOCIAL CRITERION OF DEFECT brought up in a remote village of South- Now, to correlate these crude and simple Western Ireland. He assures me that the ideas with the Report: Principal Conclusion

code of the village was a system of volun- No. I (Part III, p. 96) is that " the real

tary eugenics. The young people selected criterion of mental deficiency is a social their mates, but none would have dared in one." Here at once is substituted for tests

choosing to disregard aptitude for the pro- as per schedule by the school medical officer duction of healthy offspring. I venture to a decision by the neighbours, by those who

envisage as the goal of the Eugenics Society have to live their life conditioned by an en-

not an army of officials, lay and medical, in- vironment very familiar to them, that so-and-

veigling certain types into mental and so is " no good " in this environment, that

general hospitals and there sterilizing them his or her offspring will probably be similar, by the latest methods; but a population or that the first baby or the first two babies making the choice for or against parentage, are "' no good " and that it is not desirable

on grounds, so far as may be, supplied by there should be any more.

this Society, and putting that choice into The next findings which arrest our atten-

effect with all the assistance available, tion occur in Section 5 (Part III, p. 99).

whether medical or surgical.

We are told that the ascertained incidence

Bricks and mortar are, with us, clearly a is twice as high as that ascertained twenty

side issue. Like the man who bet he could years ago. " The increase is probably due

eat a calf, I must leave " These 'ere veal in the main to greater thoroughness and

pasties and start on that there calf "-in improved methods of ascertainment." They

this case the Mental Deficiency Report. go on (b) to tell us that the incidence is

Before doing so, the point can perhaps be 6.49 per I,ooo in urban and io.66 in rural

best elucidated by a reference to the works areas, and to add (c) that of all adult defec-

of the late M. Emile Zola.

tives receiving public assistance, 75 per

The exercise of choice in regard to parent- cent. were being relieved by Poor Law

hood would of course be an economic revolu- authorities. " These facts alone [i.e., the

tion on an infinitely vaster scale than it large proportion of the work being done by

would be a revolution in regard to mental Poor Law authorities], in the Committee's

174 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

opinion, render essential a modification of is unquestionably the most up-to-date

the statutory provisions relating to the men- expert, to take charge of the whole

tally defective if any continuity and unity enterprise.

of care and control are to be secured . . ." What are they offering to contract to do?

(p. I00).

-To deal with " that section of the com-

The Committee sat for two years, but it munity which we propose to term the

did not include anv officer or member of a 'social problem ' or ' subnormal ' group.

Poor Law authority or any person reputed This group comprises approximately the

to be acquainted with the operation of the lowest io per cent. in the social scale of

Poor Laws. The Royal Commission on the most communities." Their reason for com-

Feeble Minded, appointed in I904, whose ing forward is that they believe mental sub-

ascertainments afford the basis of compari- normality to be the principal differentia of

son upon which all the findings and pro- this group. It is quite true that they refer,

posals of this Committee are founded, from time to time, in the Report, to this

included the late Sir Charles Loch, the most mental subnormality as something known

distinguished student of Poor Law matters and specific. They say it is largely due to

then living in England, and who-it is well " germinal variation," although they do not

known-took a leading part both in the tell us how they discovered this fact. They

investigations and in drafting the findings say elsewhere that it is incurable. But let

of the Royal Commission. This difference of us for a moment return to their own defini-

personnel might not be thought worthy of tion of mental defect. As we saw, " the real

mention, were it not for the corollaries which criterion of mental deficiency is a social one

follow upon it, both in the findings and -an incapacity for independent social

recommendations of the present Committee. adaptation."

It is not in the least the intention of this It would appear, therefore, that this sen-

article to call in question the arithmetic of tence (p. 49)-" It would appreciably ease

the Committee, but merely to submit one the burden of that other authority (Public

or two minor considerations which could not Assistance Authority) if machinery were

have escaped notice had a Poor Law worker available for the ready transfer to the local

(as, for example, our Mr. E. J. Lidbetter) M.D. authority of persons whose need for

been present at their deliberations.

assistance rose from their being mentally

Perhaps the reader will catch the signifi- defective "-might be read in the other

cance of this point best by the use of an order, viz.-" persons demonstrated to be

analogy. We live in an age of specialized mentally defective by their need for assist-

plants. In tendering for a contract to manu- ance." Elsewhere they say, with truth (p.

facture a particular line of goods-to con- 8i), " Low mentality and poor environment

struct a building, a railway, a harbour, etc. form a vicious circle." The contents of the

-the competing firms are likely to secure group in question show, they tell us (p. 8o),

the contract in proportion as they are in " a much larger proportion of insane per-

possession of these up-to-date specialized sons, epileptics, paupers, criminals (especi-

plants. This Report is a tender to the ally recidivists), unemployables, habitual

British public, on the part of a group-in slum dwellers, prostitutes, inebriates, and

our analogy, " firm "-who believe they are other social inefficients, than would a group

in possession of such a plant, and that, in of families not containing mental defec-

consequence, they can do the work better tives." We can only be grateful to the

than the firm, or group of firms, who have authors of this Report for the candour with

for long been doing it. Quite in the manner which they have told us that they are offer-

of modern business, they not only put for- ing to deal with the dregs of human society

ward their qualifications for being given the -that they believe that these have a com-

contract, but they advise (p. 77) the British mon characteristic, and that that character-

public to engage their Mr. So-and-So, who istic-mental subnormality-is one which

CONTROL OF MIENTAL DISEASE

175

they are specially qualified to deal with, tude of the mental deficiency problem has

but that, when pressed to explain what they been considerably under-estimated in the

mean by " mental subnormality," they have past." But we submit for the consideration

to fall back upon the fact that the clients in of the Committee that there is a reason for

question form the dregs of human society. this, and a powerful one. The handling of

The special plant is the mental branch of this section of the population is so difficult,

medical science. The technicians are doctors so little understood-arouses so much in-

who have specialized in it.

evitable resentment and chagrin, and is, in

Assuming that they are the best people to fine, so unpopular-that it has for long been

deal with this problem, they complain treated as the Cinderella of the efforts of the

bitterly of two things: (i) that the work has community. For a number of years past it

been left for many years to another firm, has been under sentence of abolition, and

or group of firms, namely, the Poor Law in consequence there has been a systematiC

Guardians; and (2) that, notwithstanding and deliberate abstention on the part of the

the fact that Parliament passed an Act in Government to ascertain and set out in

I9I3, by which it intended to transfer the arithmetical form what, in point of fact, the

work from that firm to their firm, the public authorities entrusted with the work were

have so far disregarded Parliament as to doing. The inquirer will readily discover

transfer only a very small fraction of the that, if he wants to know the numbers of any

work from that firm-the Poor Law group that has been dealt with under the

Guardians-to the new firm, the mental Poor Laws, they are not available.. Public

specialists. It distresses them to think funds have not been placed at disposal for

that the public have left this work in the making such ascertainments, tabulations,

hands of so unsuitable a firm, and they say and records.

(p. 47), " The whole Poor Law system is It is not surprising, therefore, that the

designed for other purposes, and is by its numbers in this group were under-estimated

very nature unsuited to the needs of defec- in the past. For political reasons no figuqsres

tives." Again (p. 45), they find that a were kept of the work of the bodies who-

large number of persons who should have as this new group admit-were doing the

been under their care " were maintained or work.

supported by the Poor Law Guardians." It is quite true that this group has been

On p. 40 they tell us that " only 5 per cent. dealt with under the Poor Law because the

of the ascertained defectives are in certified members of it could not support themselves

mental deficiency institutions." Yet, " 56 or adjust themselves, and not especially

per cent. of the whole number of adults because they were mentally deficient. It is

ascertained are in receipt of financial sup- quite true that progress, even great pro-

port from public funds. Of this group, 54 gress, may be made by saying, " Now we

per cent. are assisted by Poor Law authori- are going to think of these people as men-

ties; 25 per cent. are in mental hospitals. tal deficients: we are going to ask a new

,Of the i8 per cent. maintained by local firm-the mental specialists of the medical

M.D. authorities, nearly half are accommo- profession-to try their hand at this task."

dated in institutions provided by Poor Law If the matter is so decided, eugenists will

authorities." Thus, we have a very full wish the new firm the best of luck. But we

and accurate admission of the fact that the ask readers to be very careful to observe that

other firm, or firms, have unquestionably the essential feature of the persons whom

been doing the work, or trying to do the the mental specialists are going to handle is

work, and that the British public have that they are the persons with whom the

continued to entrust them with it, despite Poor Law administrators have been strug-

the passing of the Mental Deficiency Act, gling for a hundred years, and for whom

1913. the Poor Law authorities have built up by

They complain (p. 62) " that the magni- far the greatest part of the services now

176 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

rendered them, whether in institutions or
in their homes. We know very well that the public will
regard mental deficiency as something analogous to tuberculosis or heart disease or arthritis. They will joyfully deliver those held to be suffering from it to the medical profession and think no more about it. They will not know that upon page after page of this candid and painstaking Report it is impossible to be sure whether it is pauperism, dependency, maladjustment that is being spoken of, or something analogous to one of the diseases to which we are accustomed in medical classifications.
The new firm are asking to have the contract transferred to them from the old firm, first because they are specialists, and second because it will bring the whole of one problem under one control. That reads all right so long as we are thinking of mental deficiency as one of the diseases. It is by no means so feasible or satisfactory when we find that the chief symptom of suitability
for being brought under this one control is,
that the individual is generally to be found in the care of the Poor Law or prison
authorities !
The case is made out by speaking very
slightingly of the work of the Poor Law
authorities and alleging that they were designed for something quite different. It is easy to slight them, since they had far the most difficult task of any authority on
this island, and one in which, by its nature, only a very limited measure of success was or will ever be attained. As for the " argu-
ment from design," the contrary is the truth. Boards of Guardians were designed to deal with what the Report calls the
" social problem group," and during the last one hundred years they have built up a
great and in many ways and many places
truly wonderful service to do so. The Report complains, as we saw just
now, that some of the clients meant by Par-
liament to come to the M.D. authority have
been sent to mental hospitals, but it is
careful to demand that the mental hospitals

shall be put under the control of the M.D. authority !
Before we turn to their proposals for carrying out the contract they are so anxious to secure, we would remind our readers that there is another firm in the field for this contract. It is widely held in medical circles that there is a mental factor in most disease and a mental element in all treatment; that it is in consequence undesirable from the point of view of administrative medicine to set up separate authorities or departments of authorities to deal with mental disorder, when, in a few years time, it will become obvious that such departments must be reabsorbed in the general health services under Central Health Committees. It is an example of a common experience, viz., that specialization can accomplish much, but it can be overdone.
PROPOSALS FOR TREATMENT
The reader is invited to draw a distinction between two aspects of these proposals, viz: those concerning the treatment to be given, and those relating to the persons to give it.
HIe will find, perhaps to his surprise, that the recommendations of the Committee make almost no alteration in the treatment given to this subnormal group, but a complete, drastic, and revolutionary change in the choice of persons to give it. A new set of people, experts in the treatment of mental deficiency, are to take over duties which have been performed for a hundred years, and are being performed at this moment, by Poor Law officers. As the ukase has gone forth, we have no doubt that this transfer will take place. We are well aware of the advantages of the new broom, and we have already said, several times, how much may conceivably be gained by bringing in a slightly altered angle of approach, consequent upon the greater emphasis upon a possible mental defect, and the stimulation and refreshment of having to cheer one on in a difficult task, the romantic hypothesis of " germinal variation."
We say " romantic hypothesis not

CONTROL OF MENTAL DISEASE

177

from any wisdom of our own, but entirely a greatly improved manner? These are

through the guidance afforded to us by the indicated at various points in Chapter IV

Report itself, in its extremely able and in- (p. 44), headed " Suggested future alloca-

teresting Section 92 (pp. 8o-8i). In this tion of responsibility for adult defectives,

Section there become apparent two things: and recommendations as to the future pro-

(i) the age-long character of the group of vision for their care, training, and control."

persons who are " subject to be dealt with," There is to be " unified and expert control

and (2) the very small addition to the know- . . . concentration in the hands of a single

ledge, practical and theoretical, available for authority, if possible, a single Committee,

dealing with them which is afforded by this for the purposes of the Lunacy and Mental

hypothesis of mental subnormality. Thus, Deficiency Acts." Everything will be

we are told, "comparatively little has been decided by Medical Superintendents of

done to elucidate how it is related to the Mental Hospitals, and the Medical Officers

problems of insanity, epilepsy, pauperism, of the local M.D. authority. But (p. 53),

crime, unemployability, and alcoholism. " the authority will still fail in their effort

Which are causes, and which results, in if they do not possess on their staff inquiry

this focal group of social problems, it is officers who have been specially trained for

impossible to state from the meagre data the work." " The use of any Poor Law

collected up to the present . . . we have Institution is strongly deprecated, except

comparatively little reliable data relating to those which have been specially designed

the mental endowments and characteristics for the purpose " (p. 68).

of this ' soc'ial problem ' group." All this is WVe have already referred to the specially

very candid and modest. The reader is selected medical expert upon whom the

asked to observe, however, that, while there whole undertaking will pivot (p. 77). We

is here an honest disclaimer of any great learn again (p. 6o), that " It is probable

expectation of success on the part of the that the Local Authority would often make

new firm which is coming forward to under- use of the Supervision Officers as guardian-

take this contract, there are apparently ship officers, or they might employ some

quite sufficient data for taking the contract competent social rescue worker to be guar-

away from the great army of men and dianship officer to certain types of girls, or

women who have given their lives to this a good Scoutmaster to undertake the guar-

branch of service and are engaged upon it dianship of the higher grade boys." We

to-day. The Section ends with the sen- will venture, at this point, to offer a hint

tence: " At the same time it is necessary to to the expert mentioned on page 77. It will,

recognise that this (inherent mental limita- of course, be necessary for him to put out

tion) is not the only consideration, and there in the shop window these new medical

are many other social and economic factors officers and this new type of social worker,

involved." We agree; but we are left won- with their special training; and, no doubt,

dering why the experts on dealing with the the C.B.'s and C.B.E.'s will all come their

social and economic factors, namely, the way. But we would advise him to rise a

Poor Law service, have been weighed in the great while before dawn, now, at once, before

balance and found so completely wanting as it is too late, and buy at any figure, inviting

the proper persons to deal with the group them to come on their own terms, a solid

affected by these factors.

phalanx of stalwart Relieving Officers, male

If the Report is so candid and careful to and female, who have grown grey and tired

describe the group with whom it proposes and sad in handling the group under dis-

to wrestle, as that with which the Relieving cussion. If he is not quick about it they

Officers are at present struggling, what kind will take their pensions and their compensa-

of personnel do they propose to enlist in tions, and move off to the proximity of the

order to render this difficult service in such best golf links. By all means let the boy

178 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

scouts have the C.B.'s, but let the expert island almost entirely by Poor Law Guar-

be sure that the Relieving Officers are near dians and Poor Law Officers, and the Report

at hand, "standing in the shadow keeping bears eloquent testimony to the thanks they

watch upon their own."

have got for it.

WVe cannot help feeling that the assump-

FEW NEW SUGGESTIONS
The proposals in the Report, for the change of personnel, are complete and definite. We now come to the proposals for treatment. Here we are confronted abruptly with the difference between a subject matter which can be removed to a laboratory, a dissecting room, an operation theatre, or hospital ward of any kind, and handled in accordance with the methods of "modern science," and all human affairs

tion made by this Committee, none of whom had Poor Law experience-that the handling of the problem of the dregs of society
by the Poor Law Guardians and their officers has simply been one long tragic
mistake which could not be expected to achieve any result, and from which nothing can be learnt-has prevented their giving adequate consideration to the great questions
of contraception and sterilization in relation to the problem.

which cannot be so treated. To workers

belonging to the world of modern science, STERILIZATION AND "SOCIALISATION"

terms really correspond to ascertained recog- They start a section (p. 87) on " steriliza-

nizable objects; in fact, words function more tion, segregation, and socialisation." By the

or less as they do in the dictionary.

time they get to " concluding remarks "

How different is a word when it emerges (p. 95) they have dropped sterilization, and

from the dictionary, untouched by sorrow merely reiterate that, when their group have

and unsoiled by sin, from what it is when it taken over the task from the Poor Law

has been at work in the milieu of ordinary authorities, " the burden which mental de-

human life, stained and scarred with tears ficiency imposes upon the nation will not

and curses. This transmigration and trans- only be lightened, but will be far less

formation of words is amply illustrated in costly."

the pages of this Report. Thus, we find our We submit that under the Poor Laws a

very old friends, " supervision," " guar- prodigious amount of toil and thought have

dianship," " training," " employment." been given to the institutional treatment of

It is curious that, when the present writer these unfortunates and their ' socialisation,'

once went upon a deputation to the Board and, speaking from the standpoint of that

of Control and the word " supervision " toil, we submit that sterilization should take

cropped up, an eminent member of that its place in the equipment not only of the

Board rapped out with more vigour than community but of the individual himself and

courtesy, " What is the good of super- herself, for dealing with the problem. The

vision ?"

Committee have set out admirably the diffi-

" Supervision," as a dictionary word, is culty these people have in playing their part

valueless, we admit. Supervision as carried as citizens. Quite apart from the question

out by many human agents is a waste of of the supply of socially deficient individuals

money: that we admit. But when one in the next generation, we submit that one

human being is made responsible for of the largest elements in the whole problem

another, and that a wretched and incom- is the tragic failure of these people to keep

petent one, the former may, with a good decent homes and bring up children well. heart and plenty of courage, achieve some- We want to give them a chance of a form

thing. His achievement will probably bear of social life not obviously too difficult for

no relation to " modern science "; in the them. WATe ask for adequate discussion of,

words of the Report, " little will be known and instruction about, sterilization, as one

about it." It has, in fact, been done on this of the methods for which we are indebted

CONTROL OF MENTAL DISEASE

'79

to science, to enable us gradually to elimin- tives, has many a time worked wonders with

ate from our social fabric the melancholy members of the subnormal group; but he

flaws so eloquently described by the has only been able to do so with a " strict "

Committee.

Board of Guardians behind him. Neither

The proposed treatment is to consist of the present temper of the British public nor

"out-door relief, supervision, guardianship, the present attitude of the British politician

training and occupation." All of these are of all Parties, affords him the slightest sup-

qualified in the Report by the adjective port; quite the reverse. In the decades in

" proper.' The present writer has observed front of us, the Organizer of the Unem-

during a quarter of a century that when the ployed will win every time, and the medical

word " proper" -occurs in a document, it expert (p. 77) " will have his work cut out."

has a definite and invariable connotation. When it comes to training and occupation

It means that ' the writer is not acquainted we can be brief. The making of work for

personally with the processes to which he is persons who cannot find it for themselves in

referring, but they are suitable ones to the open market is an old, sad, and ridicu-

mention in this context, if we may rely upon lous story. It is also a terrible life for the

the dictionary significance of the words. It officers in charge. The attempt to do the

will be the duty of somebody else to apply same for persons handicapped by ailments

them successfully to the material in hand.' of one kind or another, is roughly estimated

Obviously, the Mental Deficiency experts to cost three times as much as it does to keep

are not acquainted with these operations. them in idleness. With regard to training,

They say themselves that they have done it is curious that, put forward as a panacea

little supervision work since I9I3, and in the Minority Report of I909, it should

almost no guardianship work. The value of come up smiling in I929. Between the two

their supervision work was dealt with by a dates lies the huge expenditure on training

member of the Board of Control, whom we the disabled men after the war, the failure

have quoted above.

of the vast bulk of which is a by-word. It

Unlike the Mental Deficiency experts, is perfectlv true that the ordinary work of a

Poor Law Guardians and officers have been Relieving Officer and a Poor Law authority,

carrying out all these processes for the for the subnormal group, is fitly dissected

enormous majority of the persons requiring into these five parts, outdoor relief, super-

them; for a hundred years, under present -vision, guardianship, training, and employ-

statutes, on this island; they, or their ment, and it is honest of the Committee to

counterparts, for a hundred ages throughout tell us that they have nothing new to suggest

the story of the human race. (P. 54)-" All possible precautions should
be taken to protect those who are left in the community from the risk of relationship with the other sex." We will only comment with D'Artagnan, " That is an order more
easy to give than to execute." A Relieving Officer with the power of the purse behind him, an unlimited devotion to his unhappy

except a slightly altered point of view, and an entirely new personnel who will have had the great advantage of attending certain courses of lectures.
We conclude where we began. For our part, we propose to throw our strength into propaganda, for a community consciously choosing throughout its ranks to rear up a

clients, a magnetic influence over the rela- selected, and, as we hope, better race.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 3.

