THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
EDUCATION AND EUGENICS.
By M. W. KEATINGE,
Reader in Education in the University of Oxford.
LEADING biologists have recently warned the advanced wing of the eugenist party that violent interference with the composition of society, while not impossible, is beyond a near limit unjustifiable in the state of present knowledge. As an illustration of such a warning we may take a statement of Professor Bateson. " It is evident that while the elimination of the hopelessly unfit is a reasonable and prudent policy for society to adopt, any attempt to distinguish certain strains as superior and to give special encouragement to them would probably fail to accomplish the object proposed." . . . " It must suffice to point out that whereas our experience of what constitutes the extremes of unfitness is fairly realisable and definite, we have but little to guide us in estimating the qualities for which society has or may have a use, or the numerical proportions in which they may be required."' It may well be believed that the position here adopted is too modest. The educational systems on which all civilised communities spend much thought and large sums of money are based on the assumption that the more thoughtful and experienced persons in each generation are in tolerable agreement as to the kind of knowledge, of outlook on life and of disposition as resulting from the acquisition of this knowledge that should be possessed by the average individual, while a committee of the leaders of any profession, of, say, doctors, or lawyers, or schoolmasters, would not disagree to any great extent in their estimate of the qualities most desirable in the ideal doctor, or lawyer, or school-
master. Further, if it is the case, as this paper will attempt to
1 Mendel's Principles of Heredity. W. Bateson, 1913, p. 305.

-98 EUGENICS REVIEW.
show, that the aims of eugenics can best be attained through education, these aims will in the main be dictated by the educationist rather than by the biologist. It will therefore be taken for granted that we are not wholly without social ideals, and that these are based on a knowledge of what is fitting. Our present task is to decide the relative value in attaining these ideals of the method of direct attack advocated by eugenics and the more indirect methods of education.
In comparison with the treatment of the problems of segregation and sterilisation the subject of this paper may well seem dull; for it aims merely at an analysis of the relations that exist between current doctrines of heredity and the process of education. It will suggest no violent assault on or glorification of the sexual rights of the individual but rather will deprecate the crude suggestions that sometimes are made in this connexion as likely to excite prejudice against rather than sympathy for the eugenical movement. Of these suggestions one illustration must suffice, taken from a paper by C. Ehrenfeld, of Prague. He demands a
new procreative hygiene and sex morality': would have boys studied very carefully through all the school grades and have all modes of education adjusted to bring out all the best points in their characters. Those boys found to be superior should be allowed to revert to the primitive conditions in which the best male qualities, courage, prowess, and idealism, were stimulated to win the female, and a few such carefully selected youths
should be freed from the limitation of monogamy and allowed more than one mate of the other sex.'
With the validity or the reverse of this demand we are not here concerned, but rather with the likelihood that it might give' offence to some readers and cause amusement to others, but in neither case would issue in the modification or development of any practical educational activity. Apart from this defect the statement is in itself remarkable as the only expression of opinion by a man of science that the writer has been able to discover in which any useful connexion between education and eugenics is even suggested. As a rule indeed the modern biologist asserts his disbelief in education as a biological factor.
1 Die konstitutive Verderblichkeit der Monogamie und die Unentbehrlichkeit einer sexual Reform. Archiv f. Rassen und Gesellschafts-Biologie. 1907.

EDUCATION AND EUGENICS.

99

A recent Harveian Oration' on the Inheritance of Mental
Characters reaches the following conclusion, " The manifest bearing of these truths on the principles of education indicates that the right object of education is to fit human beings for their social existence, to make them good citizens and to afford those with gifts above the average the opportunity of developing them. Education modifies and largely makes the individual, but it does not affect the biological evolution of a race." Another writer says, referring to Galton's proof that characters such as vivacity, popularity, conscientiousness and humour are inherited, " The result is of great importance practically; it shows how little room is left in the development of the individual for the effect of environment even on the intellect or mind in the broadest sense of the word. The kind of mind is irrevocably decided before the child is born. Hence the hopes held out of improving the race by education . . . are illusory."2 And again, " If man is to any appreciable extent the creature of his environment then improved conditions will improve the race. But if, as the study of heredity suggests, though it would be rash to say it is proved, man is almost entirely the product of inborn factors which are scarcely affected by environment, then improved conditions mav only encourage the propagation of the degenerate." To quote another writer, " It is comparatively easy to improve the condition of the individual by improving
his environing conditions-cleaning him, educating him, lead-
ing him to higher ideals in his physical mental and moral life. But as this is easy so it is impermanent. All this is modificational and has no effect on the stock. This is not opposed by the eugenist; it simply is no part of his province for its effect is not racial."3 Indeed, the same writer attempts to show that education though it does not help the cause of eugenics certainly can hinder it. " A race desiring progress would foster mutation. As a matter of fact our social custom leads us to look with disfavour upon most youthful traits that seem unusual or out of the ordinary. It would be difficfilt to devise a system of
1 H. B. Donkin. I9I0.
2 Doncaster. Heredity in the light of recent research. 1910, p. 49. 3 W. B. Kellicott. The social direction of human evolution. 1911, p. 30.

IOO EUGENICS REVIEW.
education which could more effectively repress than does our own the development of unusual mental traits. In this connexion 'abnormal ' or 'eccentric' may often mean a mutation in a profitable direction."
One final quotation from Dr. Carveth Reid' will suffice with those already given to indicate the position which seems to be adopted by present-day thinkers. "Education is the beginning of all culture and of the higher human life, and for. tunately it is now so necessary to the sustentation and defence of each generation that more and more care will certainly be given to it: so that it can do no harm to mention that in the opinion of most biologists it does nothing to improve the breed: that if this be true it does some harm by enabling many to live who would otherwise have been eliminated, and by increasing the amount of formally trained ability with which original genius must contend before it can obtain recognition; and that the higher education of women especially, tasking their organisms to the utmost in order to prepare them to get their own living, or for any other purpose except marriage, is likely to unfit them for marriage and for maternity." If we add to this the warning of Karl Pearson that if you educate a race which is degenerating you get no results commensurate with the efforts expended, it seems tolerably clear that the eugenist does not give education much encouragement and that biology will not throw its weight into the scale when an attempt is made to direct more money from the Exchequer into educational channels. The remarks that follow will attempt to show that the authors quoted are under a misapprehension as to the nature of education and have overlooked some important relations in which it stands to problems of heredity; that if, as some of them suggest, education is not merely indifferent to eugenics but actually harmful, this indicates at least a definite relationship, the nature of which might be reversed; that far from being' indifferent or harmful to eugenical processes education of the
right kind is the main avenue by which for practical purposes the problems of eugenics should be approached and the chief instrument by which the aims of the eugenist can be effected;
1 Natural and Social Morals, p. 305.

EDUCATION AND EUGENICS.

IOI

finally, that although our acquaintance with the aims of human existence is small and our grip of social problems is weak, we have some knowledge of the types and quality of mind and capacity that might be accepted as desirable in a civilised community.
A science of education propounds and seeks to answer two main questions. (i) Who shall be educated, (2) What kind of education shall be given to those selected for this privilege. The first problem is largely one of administration, the second one for the school, but to neither can an answer be given except in terms of heredity and selection.
Beginning with the administrative problem " Who shall be educated? " we see the full significance of this question if we imagine a community which is convinced of the value of the education that it is prepared to supply, but which has at its disposal only a limited education fund and consequently wishes to ascertain how this can best be expended. Is the fund to be distributed over the entire population, or are certain classes, financial or social, more likely than others to respond to education and to make a greater contribution to the national welfare ? The answer given to this question has varied from age to age. The educationalists of the Renascence and the century and a half that succeeded it were generally of opinion that the really important person was a prince or a nobleman, and accordingly with considerable uniformity they wrote treatises on the education of princes and noblemen. Even as late as the eighteenth century we find Defoe producing a tractate on the education of a prince. The reason for this selection of princes was not primarily eugenical. Princes were considered not the most educable, but the most influential of mankind. In the society that these writers had in view education could make itself felt only from above. It was aristocratic in its nature; a chosen few could spread ideals, could set the fashion in certain directions considered desirable, and through their influence in dispensing honours could give a " survival value " to the standards of behaviour or to the knowledge that they had been taught to
respect. In the long run and indirectly the approval of leaders in fashion has a distinct bearing on the eugenical problem, but

102 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the doctrine that is the opposite of the " Prince " theory, the doctrine that education begins from below, stands in a far closer relation with it; for it starts from the position, not clearly enunciated, but always in the background, that all men are equal. This, indeed, it conceals behind the specious phase "equality of opportunity," without pausing to consider that opportunities are quite as much subjective as objective, that they are produced by a reaction upon external circumstances of the person who finds the opportunity, and that no matter how carefully circumstances are equalised certain favoured persons are " selected " for the opportunities that they afford. For Rousseau, as for the modern labour member who demands that state funds shall be spent on elementary rather than on secondary education, the doctrine of equality is the guiding principle; for the educational reformers of the Long Parliament, as for those of the French Revolution, the doctrine that there was a favoured class whose education, more than that of any other, would yield a good return to the community was anathema; for the self-made factory owners in the early years of the nineteenth century the success that they had achieved seemed to them possible for every poor lad to whom facilities for self-culture were afforded. And yet these very factory owners were themselves illustrations of inequality, for from among a host
of others they had been selected to discover the opportunities
that circumstances offered. They were indeed the result of a long series of selective influences which had operated generation after generation among their ancestors, who in many cases were farmers in the Yorkshire dales. Nowhere is this more clearly shown than in the most interesting of them, the socialist Robert Owen. Owen believed firmly in the power of education to produce characters of any kind, and to convert the feeble into the forcible. " According to the machinery used for the purpose, the character," he says, " will be well or ill manufactured and the individual will become inferior, mixed or superior in his qualities." Unfortunately for his theory one element, at least, in the conditions of Owen's success is given to us in a tell-tale
sentence at the beginning of his biography. His father, we are told, was an artisan and his mother was the eldest of the large

EDUCATION AND EUGENICS.

103

family of a very respectable farmer, and was remarkable for her beauty as well as for her qualities of mind. Here at once before our eyes are eugenical conditions. A family from which Owen's father had been able to select his wife because it was large and which had been selected for survival and for good repute because it was respectable. In short, our State when it puts to itself the question, " Whom can we most profitably educate?" finds that modern doctrines of heredity give it this answer in no equivocal terms. "If vou want men who will be leaders, if you want men with driving power, if you want men who will stand with your enemies in the gate, you must educate that class in which the principle of selection has acted most directly and with greatest force." Education considered from the standpoint of the individual educated has directive power; it can give interests, and can substitute a desirable interest for a bad one, but it will not turn a feeble character into a forcible one, it will not produce virility where this does not exist or grit where it is wanting. In these directions its action will be ameliorative but not very marked. The character which would have indulged feebly in vice may be led to indulge in virtuewith equal feebleness; the person who has no power of leadership will be converted not into a force that will drive others in the direction that he approves, but into a voice crying in the wilderness and deploring that people will not follow his lead. Education, let it be repeated, has directive power, vigour is produced by selection.
In which class of society is the selection in marriage for which we are searching most markedly to be found? Let us divide the community into three divisions, the artisan and labourer class, the class of small traders and small professional men which has no reserve of capital and for whom in each successive generation the struggle for existence is intense, owing to its higher standard of life and culture, and the well to do classes with a reserve of capital which renders their continued existence relatively safe. In the first of these classes there is practically no selection for marriage, as far as the man is concerned. All labourers marry if they will, and, in the opinion of many, the earlier they marry the better, since deferred

104 EUGENICS REVIEW.
marriage implies that at a time of life when their energies for manual work may be flagging they will still be hard pressed by the claims of a growing family. How far does the labourer select his wife with care, and on what principles? This is a question not easy to answer with any certainty, but there seems reason to believe that no very great effort is made to secure in the wife sterling habits of mind or character.
In the rich class with a considerable reserve of capital, again, any mlan marries who wishes. The standard of living may be high, but the standard of unearned income is equal to it. Consequently there is no selection for marriage. We cannot assume that marriage implies in the man superior grit or reserve force; and if, further, we ask on what principles the rich select their wives, we are driven to the conclusion that ornamental qualities, usually, are the determining qualities. An an extreme case of this we find our young men of wealth marrying chorus girls, a process which when stated in terms of selection means that they are selecting for the most superficial qualities girls who frequently have been driven to their mode of life because their fathers have been selected for failure owing to the absence in them of those qualities which the State most needs. By the method of exclusion, therefore, we are driven to the professional classes with no reserve of capital behind them as the class of society in which selection is most likely to be found. In these classes the men are all selected for marriage. The standard of living and of culture is so high that only those with marked qualities of endurance and intelligence contrive to earn an income which permits of marriage with prudence, and owing to the deferred age at which
marriage takes place there is a further process of selection in the choice of the wife, a choice in which good sense and a due recognition of the mental and moral qualities which are of real value in life must play a considerable part. It may be added that in this classi a process of selection is taking place on the female side also. Those girls who are lacking in what are considered characteristically feminine qualities, and who therefore would make indifferent mothers, tend more and more to secure a training for professional life of some kind. In many cases they are

EDUCATION AND EUGENICS.

IO5

averse from marriage, or at any rate do not feel drawn towards it or to lay themselves out for it, thus making it more likely that the choice of the man selected for marriage will fall upon a person who is eugenically suitable.
It is, of course, true that these tendencies towards deferred marriage have their reverse side. The increased demand for comfort and the undue deferring of marriage which it
entails leads to very small families, and thus the supply of
children from this source may be insufficient in the next generation to supply the demand of the community for leaders. In consequence it is necessary to cast the educational net wider and to capture for a higher education those sports and freaks in the mechanical classes who have qualities of intelligence and endurance markedly superior to the average of their fellows. But this topic lies beyond the limits of this paper and it remains only to point out this disquieting fact, that such sports when they have been found and when they have been suitably educated will, indeed, be of use to their generation, but cannot be depended on to breed true and supply leaders to the next generation. For the tendency always will be for their children to revert to the general level of the class from which the parents come, a class which is ex hypothesi less sturdy intellectually than the professional class. This position seems more than justified by the very large number of instances in which self-made men of real ability appear to pass on to their children few, if any, of the qualities which have enabled them to survive in the struggle for existence. Whether there is any counter-process or antidote for this tendency, and whether this counter process can in any way be furthered by educational means may be discussed later.
Our State then is justified in expending a larger portion of its educational fund on the children of the professional class than on those of the labourer class, and principles of heredity play an important part in guiding its choice. It must not however be forgotten that the position as it has here been set forth holds good only of a complex and rigidly stratified social system such as is found in wealthy European countries, and that increased education of the right kind applied to the whole com-
munity would in the course of years by introducing ideals of

xo6 EUGENICS REVIEW.
perfection do much to leaven all classes with a spirit of healthy selection in marriage.
II. We may now turn from this administrative problem to the problems of education proper and ask what guidance is given to educationalists by an analysis based on educational principles. Before proceeding it will be necessary to establish a few positions. In what follows it will be assumed that acquired characteristics, though in the long run they may possibly tend to modify inborn qualities, are not inherited from generation to generation in any very marked or easily observable degree.
The qualities produced by education being acquired characteristics are therefore not directly reproduced in the offspring,
and it is this non-inheritance of the qualities acquired at school that gives to the schools of a community and to the persons who teach in them their paramount importance. In the absence of the inheritance of acquired characteristics it is the teaching staff which insures that the acquired qualities of one generation shall be transmitted to the next, and we thus have two distinct channels of heredity, one physical, transmitting inborn qualities, and the other social handing down through the educational system the culture of one generation to the next. That these two channels should stand in a proper relation to one another is of the utmost importance, and it is (a) because they tend to lose touch with one another, and (b) because the true connexion between them is not realized that biologists depreciate the eugenical significance of the school. It will facilitate the development of the argument if we inquire which kind of heredity is of the greater efficiency in producing vigorous exponents of any art, science, or moral standpoint.
For education to be effective there must be in the child some disposition or inherited instinct to react upon it. Education in music will afford an illustration. The best instruction in music given to a large number of children who have no natural gift for music will produce only musical mediocrities,
and the higher the class of music taught, in other words, the more it differs from the musical standards of the children's parents the feebler will be the impression made by the instruc-

EDUCATION AND EUGENICS.

107

tion given. No matter how good the instruction may be the result will be little more than a superficial symbolism which never will result in the enthusiastic promotion of music or the production of new musical compositions of the first class. On
the other hand, if the tendency to music is a strong inborn instinct in the child, teaching of moderate quality and quantity will produce a very marked effect. In this case therefore a strong line of social heredity, i.e., a good staff of music teachers, divorced from a strong line of physical heredity is markedly ineffective, while the reverse of this combination is as markedly efficacious. Most efficacious of all are the conditions when we find a gifted son taught by the father whose inborn qualities he inherits as in the case of Wolfgang and Leopold Mozart; for here the inborn qualities of the son are surrounded and stimulated by an environment that exactly suits them and enables the processes of imitation and suggestion to operate to their fullest extent. An extreme case will serve as a further illustration. The influence in a school of a good music teacher upon a number of only moderately gifted pupils will, in succeeding generations, prove to be almost negligible from every standpoint in comparison with the influence upon the society of their time, of a family of, say, four or five musical children, who have been brought up in musical surroundings, have drunk in traditions of music with every pore and go forth into the world ready to promote musical interests, and in turn to found families in which this particular art will be cultivated with zeal.
It thus appears that in comparison with physical heredity, or unless it is backed up by physical heredity, social heredity may cut a very sorry figure; and, indeed, under certain conditions it may prove far more futile than it has yet been shown to be. It is a corollary of the position that acquired characteristics are not markedly inherited that a stock tends to acquire an immunity against those influences in its environment whose action upon it is harmful. Of the persons dwelling in an insanitary neighbourhood some are more liable to disease germs than others. These contract disease and die, in many cases before they have produced offspring, leaving the survivors to hand on to their children the inborn quality of resistance to the

io8 EUGENICS REVIEW.
disease. The next generation is consequently more immune and in so far as it is not it is subjected to precisely the same process of weeding out. Finally an almost complete immunity is produced, a state well illustrated by the power of the negro to live with impunity in malarial districts, to the deadly influences of which the European who does not take the greatest precautions readily succumbs. Just such an immunity against the traditional education of a country may be produced if the two lines of physical and social heredity do not stand in an intimate relation with one another. This immunity will grow from generation to generation, and its growth will be proportionate to the existence in conjunction with one another of the three following factors. (I) A subject matter of instruction that is out of relation to current needs or antagonistic to current sympathies. (2) Teachers who are sufficiently skilled to impress effectively this subject matter of instruction and the attitude of mind which it involves on those of their pupils who are in
sympathy with it, but who (3) have insufficient social prestige
and influence to make the value of these ideas felt throughout
the community. If the ideas or ideals that are put forward by an educational
system are purely traditional and arbitrary, or too remote from the needs of every day life, or if the attitude of mind and modes of thinking inculcated are at variance with the crude methods by which practical men feel their way towards a comfortable income and matrimony; if the moral code which is taught is too far in advance of that in common use, even though on abstract grounds it may be desirable, in other words if it stands in little relation with current practice it will biologically be a drawback to the individual to have come under the influence of the educational system, and as a result immunity to this knowledge or this attitude of mind or of feeling will gradually be produced. It is because of this progressive immunity against educational influences that much of the education of the past has been so amazingly ineffective, and the process is so subtle and so little realised, that the danger from it is great. A few concrete
instances will make the position clearer. The school of the older type laid inordinate stress on the classical languages, and

EDUCATION AND EUGENICS.

lOg

in particular upon the abstract principles of grammar and syntax that underlie them. Some pupils responded to this type of teaching, others did not. Those who did went through the ordinary stages of a school and university career and
became schoolmasters or fellows of their colleges. They seldom, unless they happened to inherit it, became possessed of a substantial income, and they frequently remained unmarried. Those who did not respond to the educational influences provided, who were in fact considered the stupid members of their families, went into commercial life where by assiduity and the possession of sound qualities on the perceptual level they frequently reached positions of affluence. They married relatively young, and in turn sent to school, to be subjected to the same educational influences that they had themselves as boys rejected, children whose inborn characteristics rendered them immune to the efforts of their teachers. These teachers, no doubt, marvelled at the ever-growing stupidity of the boys sent to them from certain social classes, little realizing that the cause was simply this: the subjects taught and the attitude of mind encouraged had no survival value, and immunity against them was slowly, but surely, being produced. The writer can himself instance the careers of the sons, three in number, in one family of his acquaintance. Of these sons two were distinctly less clever than the third and failed to respond readily to the customary educational influences. The third was what would at school be called a clever boy, took scholarships in the ordinary course of nature and went to a University. He is now, at middle age, a schoolmaster on a small salary and unmarried. The two others, on leaving school, responded readily to the commercial stimulus, have now assured positions in commerce,
are both married and are sending sons to our great schools, all of them quite immune to the intellectual influences of these establishments.
If the argument be transferred from the sphere of intellectual alertness to that of morals it needs little proof to show that in many communities if an ideal, of, say, scrupulous honesty were inculcated in schools, and if it were effectively adopted by a certain number of pupils, it would certainly hinder

I IO EUGENICS REVIEW.
them from making their way in a society whose conduct was guided by principles of another kind. As long as the knowledge and the standards supplied by education are not those on which the community sets a value, educational effort will be sterilised by this immunity which is acquired against it, and the process can be stopped in two ways only, (I) by teaching only those things and giving only that social outlook which are commercially effective in life; (2) or, far preferably, by having in a society a teaching staff of such intellectual, moral and social influence that, with the aid of the acknowledged leaders of thought, it can force on a whole community the ideals and the outlook that it considers right, and thus by giving them a survival value, insure that the pupils who come to their schools shall progressively from generation to generation be by nature more fitted to receive them and to act in accordance with them.
In the foregoing remarks the case against social heredity, and therefore the case that, if the conditions are bad, can be made out against the effectiveness of educational activity, has been stated with emphasis; but it must not be imagined that the statement is in sympathy with the contempt of the eugenist for education which already has been mentioned. Even for aggravated cases of ineffectiveness, such as the production of immunity to education, a remedy has been suggested, while the distrust of education evinced by the biologist is an absolute one. Let us examine its validity.
As far as the existing generation is concerned it may well be granted that the province of education is merely directive, that it has to utilize to the best and to guide into profitable channels the inborn instincts and aptitudes that are provided for it as raw materials to work on, and that given third class material it will not convert it into first class capacity. Thus much may be conceded to the biologist; but when we turn to the generations that succeed we find that a new factor, one that, most surprisingly, he has overlooked, has entered into the
situation. The biologist forgets, or at any rate no biologist has yet stated explicitlv that the education received by the individual, the way in which inborn qualities have, some of them, been repressed, some of them developed and intensified, cannot fail

EDUCATION AND EUGENICS.

III

to affect the manner in which he either selects or is selected in marriage. Unless the veneer of education has been of the feeblest and most superficial kind and is cast off as soon as schooldays are over, the ideals, and tastes, down to the smaller habits of preference in food and in dress, cannot fail to con-
dition the choice made or acquiesced in by the pupil when the time for marriage arrives. It is here that biologically the schoolmaster comes by his own; it is here that for the first time he is able to affect the race, indeed cannot fail to affect the race, in a manner which will either be eugenic or the reverse. A person educated to a certain social position will almost certainly marry a person of the same social position; his attitude to religion, to literature, to art and music, to political life will lead him to choose al mate who, to a greater or a less degree, is in svmpathv with his views and tastes, and thus his choice is largelv conditioned by his upbringing.
A striking proof of this general position that there is a tendency for persons of similar characteristics to be drawn together is afforded by Professor Karl Pearson's statistics, derived from observation of I,ooo to I050 cases of husband and wife. These show that the correlation between them for stature, span and forearm is upwards of *2. To quote Professor Pearson, " We see at once that between the same physical characters in the husband and wife of adult children there is
a most remarkable degree of resemblance, greater than that of great-grandparents to their great-grandchildren (about '19), and probably greater than that of first cousins to one another. We could hardly want stronger evidence of assortative mating in man."' Further evidence is afforded by the statistics of the correlation between the length of life of husbands and wives in the Wensleydale district, in Oxfordshire, and in the Society of Friends, which amounts to *22. In moths a still more remarkable correlation is to be found. By the courtesy of Professor Poulton I have been able to observe in the Hope
Department of Zoology, at Oxford, some specimens of Epitoxis albicinata (Hampson), a day flying Syntomid moth. Of eleven pairs of this moth caught in coitu on Bugalla island in the
1 Biometrika II. p. 373.

11I2 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Sesse group, north-west Nyanza, and on the shore near Kampala by Dr. G. A. H. Carpenter, six show very marked resemblance of degree of spotting on a black background.
A consideration of this indisputable fact of homogamy leads us to two further questions. (i) How far is it desirable that like should marry like? (2) If it is desirable, in what way can education further the process, and with what possible results? The first question can be briefly answered in Karl Pearson's own words' " I had previously found in Mr. Galton's family records that the correlation in stature between husband and wife
was og, but between father and mother of adult offspring
*i8, . . . that is to say that homogamy is a factor of fertility "; and it is thus clear that if we wish unions to be fertile, that is to say, if we wish to combat a falling birth-rate among the desirable classes, the fostering of homogamy may well be one of the elements that will operate in the direction desired. Before proceeding to answer the second question, namely, how the selection of like by like may profitably be fostered by education, it will be well to consider more generally what are the best conditions of selection and how can education further them.
For selection to take place under the best conditions two things are needed. (i) The production of offspring on a larger scale than is actually necessary to carry on the affairs of the community. (2) The existence in considerable numbers of persons who differ widely from one another in respect of inborn characteristics. Unless these two conditions are provided selection will be feeble. At the present time both these conditions are badly supplied, for the birth-rate among the professional classes is falling heavily and the course of social development seems to produce in members of the community uniformity and likeness rather than diversity. What can education do to promote both these conditions?
i. The restriction of offspring in the professional classes, in so far as this is intentional and is not due to other causes, is largely due to a false standard of comfort and to ignorance of what is true culture. It is the first business of education to supply knowledge and disseminate ideals. It can hardly com-
1 Biometrika II. p. 373.

EDUCATION AND EUGENICS.

11I3

plain if it is asked to lay stress on simplicity of life, if it is requested to conduct its operations so that on leaving school its pupils shall realize that the pleasures which are the best for the individual and the community are at the same time the least expensive, indeed, that true culture is scarcely compatible with ostentation and luxury. Indulgence in the pleasures of art, of literature, of classical music, of conversation, can now be enjoyed at a less cost than at any time in the world's history. It is not to these that the rise in the cost of living is due, but to a senseless desire for motor cars that are unnecessary, for travel that has no object, for food that is superfluous, for drink that is hurtful and for clothes whose beauty varies inversely with their cost. The introduction to modern society of truer and saner standards is the work of education. Once this work is done the financial pressure will be relieved and the large family will once more be seen among our professional classes.
2. The second desideratum for selection is the existence of strong variations and sports; of persons who are unlike their
fellows, who do things in their own way, who in some respects are eccentric, who embody a tendency to run counter to prevailing fashions. Here, it may be feared, that the action of education has in many cases been harmful; for it has often tended unduly to repress originality and independence. Our great boarding schools tend to turn out boys who resemble one another in general habits of mind to an amazing extent. The
type is a good one, but it is uniform, and it may well be asked whether the State will not in the long run suffer from the disinclination of the carefully trained men of the upper classes to do anything, or to think anything, for which there is not already a precedent.
To this it may be replied that education has a twofold duty in this connexion. Its aim should be partly to make people like one another for the sake of unity and homogeneity in the State; for when communities struggle with one another it is the most homogeneous society that, other things being equal, will prevail; and partly to bring out to the greatest extent the essential differences that exist between man and man. The manner in which this should be done can only be glanced at;

l I4 EUGENICS REVIEW.
for we are concerned not with the manner of encouraging individuality but with the reason for doing so; here it must suffice to say that wise opportunities for specialisation, the arrangement of school studies so that they give ample scope for the exercise of ingenuity and imagination, the abolition of uniform examinations for boys below a school leaving age of i6 or I7, and above all a complete absence of artificiality.
We have seen that like tends to marry like. This tendency is however not always found, for frequently there are circumstances that interfere with it, and among these is the frequent failure of education to bring out the essential characteristics of the individual, and to make it clear to himself and to the world at large what his strong points are. The result is that the strong variation, who in the interests of the heterogeneity of the society, should be wedded to a strong variation of a similar kind is swamped by the indifferent qualities of his mate, or at any rate does not breed true. It is here that a badly devised system of education may do disservice to eugenics. It may select a feeble characteristic and develop it in a spurious manner, so that its possessor gives the appearance of possessing it to a strong degree whereas he really does not. If then, as a result of this process, persons with the appearance of similar qualities are attracted to one another the following undesirable positions may arise. (I) A person with a true inborn quality which has been developed may be led to marry a person who has that quality only to a slight degree, but through education has been able to give it the appearance of strength. As a result the breeding will not be true, and if the possessor of the strong inborn quality is a strong variation in a good direction his marriage will be a disaster for the community, for his inborn quality will be swamped. (2) If both the persons have the quality only to a feeble extent and are brought together by the artificial enhancement of its external manifestation less harm is done, as no very strong quality will be swamped in the mating, and the couple and their offspring will tend to foster the appreciation of the quality in the community; but even here there is the danger that the quality in question may have been developed at the expense of some stronger inborn quality, and thus that

EDUCATION AND EUGENICS.

I I5

the general result of the process will be to increase the similarity
rather than to accentuate the difference between individuals. These remarks must draw to a close. They are but a
skeleton outline of the points of contact between eugenics and educational theory. Many matters have had to be treated too briefly for their full force to be brought out; one, perhaps the most important, the education in the individual of the will to develop himself in the direction indicated by a good inborn tendency, has been wholly omitted, and here education is of paramount importance. But sufficient has been said to show how unjustified and unintelligent is the statement of the biologist that education cannot affect racial development and to indicate (i) that the educator, the thinker and the reformer by working upon social opinion until certain qualities are demanded imperatively and thereby acquire a survival value, may secure through selection the prominence in the community of persons with the qualities that they desire; (2) that by going for essential qualities and developing individuals on the lines of their own strong tendencies the growth and permanence in the society of
strong variations may be fostered; (3) that it is in this indirect
manner, rather than by the more direct methods now frequently suggested, that the eugenical improvement of society must be promoted.

