BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS of NUCLEAR FISSION*

By J. F. LOUTIT, D.M., F.R.C.P.
Medical Research Council Radiobiological Research Unit, A. E. R. E., Harwell

M R. President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I have already made my excuses to the secretary in the preliminary -negotia-
tibns that went on between us, but I feel that I must make some further excuses to you. I can in no sense be regarded as an authority on eugenics, still less on genetics, but in virtue of a practice in experimental radiobiology one comes to know a little about the subjects of one's colleagues. Within the Radiobiological Research Unit we have geneticists of various sorts who are undertaking the present research work in this field.

are formed as a result of this fission-process, and it is mainly from these radio-active fissionproducts that the hazards of the process, from the biological point of view, arise.
10.-

Principles of Nuclear Fission
The title I am speaking to is " The Biological Hazards of Nuclear Fission," and, if I may, I shall write in one line the principles of nuclear fission.
235U +1 n49oA+144B + 21n If one has a fissile atom like uranium, 235U, and bombards it with a neutron, one gets fission of the uranium atom. This produces daughter-products, which can be -called A and B, and more neutrons than were put into the reaction. One starts with 236 mass units on one side and ends up with 236 on the other side. The daughterelements are born with mass numbers of about 90 and about I40, and the excess of neutrons produced by the reaction permits continuation of the process as a chain reaction.
The daughter-elements, fission-products, are unstable and highly radio-active. In virtue of their radio-activity they decay to different elements of the same mass number, emitting beta particles and frequently gamma rays as well, and this continues until stable elements are ultimately formed. Therefore whole chains of radio-active atoms
* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on October i9th, 1955.

-= = - -K -

__-

.

__

_
TO T0~~~~

-_ _-

n-30

Z20 X

z

MASS NUMER
Figure i -Yield of fission products from U235 as a

function of mass number. [From J. Anier. Cheni. Soc.,

I946. 68, 2437.1*

From Figure i it can be seen that the massnumbers, go and I44, of the fission-products A and B are not constant. Plotted vertically are the percentages of the atoms formed against horizontally their mass-numbers. The graph is bi-modal with peaks at massnumbers between go and ioo and around I40. The fission-products, therefore, in greatest atomic abundance are in that part of the periodic table where you may have elements with mass-numbers of ioo or so
and I40 or so.

Ionizing Radiation
This process of fission is something relatively new in our history. It extends back, as you know, for a matter of ten years or slightly longer; but we have had experience

I4I THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October, I956. 48, 3.

I42 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with radio activity and with ionizing radia-
tion, alpha and beta particles and gamma
rays, for the last sixty years. Thus both physically and biologically we have an
accumulated experience of this form of physical energy. We know, first of all from
accidents, that these radiations are highly damaging to persons operating high-energy machines or to those handling radio-active substances. The early physicists and the early radiologists came to suffer themselves from the tools they were using. Furthermore, even without accidents, we have learnt that chronically excessive exposure to radiation leads to disease. This has been seen in man clinically and in animals in the experimental laboratory. The lesions that historically were the first to be detected were superficial. In those early days of X-ray machines, the energies of the rays produced were very much lower than is the rule now. The radiations were thus very much less penetrating than those of modern machines, whose X-radiations are comparable physically and in their biological action with
y-rays.

chemistry was about 1905. These were his hands in I954, so he still manifests the damage which is characteristic, but he has fortunately managed to avoid losing all his fingers, as many radiologists have done.
The characteristic lesion is a thinning or atrophy of the skin, with patchy thickening
M.A : ...

Effects of Radiation on the Individual
The early workers using soft X-rays suffered mainly with damage to the hands. Heavy overdosage with X-rays causes burns which in appearance are quite similar to the ordinary thermal burns with which we are all familiar. The great difference between radiation-burns and thermal burns is that the radiation-burn takes longer to manifest itself-not a matter of minutes as in the case of thermal burns, but frequently a matter of days before it shows up as a redness or a blister - and equally it is slower to heal. The result of the healing is seldom as good clinically as the result of the healing of a thermal burn.
In addition to. the acute effect, one can also get from continued over-exposure to radiation of this sort a chronic form of dermatitis, and Figure 2 shows the hands characteristic of the radiological worker of some forty to fifty years ago. This man was a radio chemist and his first essay into radium

Figure 2, a and b.-Hands characteristic of the radiological worker fifty years ago.
and warty proliferation, and deformation of the nail due to malnutrition of the nailbed. Later the atrophic areas may crack and give trouble in healing. The warty processes
may go on from simple warts to malignant
cancers of the skin. This man has suffered in this way and various digits or parts of digits have had to be amputed.
This is the manifestation, acute and chronic, of the superficial damage to the skin, but when one is working with penetrating radiation like gamma rays one finds not only are the hands involved, because they are closer to the source, but there is an effect on the deeper tissues and on the body as a whole. This manifests itself chiefly in certain tissues which are more radio sensitive than the rest Gf the body. Notable amongst these is the bone marrow, which is the site of manufacture of the red blood corpuscles and white blood-cells. Thus with over-exposure

BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS OF NUCLEAR FISSION

4~~~~~~~~4

". RAA12

...

. 4'

I43

tt E f.~~~~~~~~~~~~.
RWt t -:40#~.4e.
*1~~~~V1

.:1e .4

IA

Figure 3.-Section of normal bone marrow.

Figure 4.-Atrophy of marrow due to radiation.

to hard radiation, both acute and chronic, severe damage to the bone marrow may occur, resulting in atrophy of this tissue also.
Figure 3 is a histological section of reason-
ably normal bone marrow, and the dark spots are the nuclei of the cells of an active marrow producing both red and white elements for the peripheral blood, but Figure 4 shows the atrophy of marrow as a result of radiation. The active cellular material is reduced to a few small strands and the vast bulk of the marrow-space is filled with extravasated blood.
Finally, if one avoids both the acute and
sub-acute effects of damage to the marrow one is liable, as with the hands, to get a malignant transformation of the bloodforming tissue, the condition of leukaemia.
Figure 5 shows the appearance of the peripheral blood in a case of leukaemia. There are far more white cells (leukocytes) in proportion to red corpuscles than there

should be and most of the leukocytes are of atypical malignant form.
I have noted that radium workers such
as chemists were exposed to the gamma rays emitted by the radium and could be affected by the radiations penetrating from without, but before the hazards were properly appreciated these men were also subject to the risk of getting the radium inside them either by inhalation or ingestion. Radium being an element like calcium is absorbed from the lungs and the intestine and is then deposited in bone.
Most of our knowledge concernilng internal contamination of the body with radio-active
materials is derived from the medical
history of the luminous dial painting industry in America. It was the practice there of the operatives, who used this luminous paint made of radium salt and zinc sulphide, to use a paint brush and, like children, they pointed the paint brush with their lips. Therefore, as the paint in this case contained

144 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
In I942 came the practical demonstration of the efficacy of the fission process for nuclear reactors, and within a few years for atomic weapons. In the case of reactors, the knowledge of the hazards from the luminising industry and from industrial and medical

p..... a , ea.un

non-union. [From Martland,H. Amerl..... J _Cancer,
,931.15,2435]

Figure 5.-Peripheral blood in a case of leukiemia.
radium sulphate, they got radium on their
lips and inevitably swallowed some. Consequently a few years after the beginning of this industry in the United States there was a series of deaths amongst the present and past radium dial painters.
Figure 6 shows the sort of things that happened when radium was deposited in the bones. It caused irradiation of the bone marrow, so that the most severely affected cases died with aplastic anaemia. The less severely affected cases suffered with bone disease, which resulted in spontaneous fracture of the bones. Here you see a thigh bone in which there is an old spontaneous fracture with malunion, and a recent fracture.
As in the case of the hands, so with the bones also, this chronic form of disease is likely to lead on to cancer of the bone. Figure 7, taken from an American publication, shows a case of one of these dial painters with a malignant growth of the jaw. This person was assayed physically and found to contain only i 1 micrograms of radium, so that even minute amounts, by ordinary chemical standards, of radioactive substances like radium can cause a cancer.

........ ..............~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~.......... ... ^-...
.s ... ..a... .. ..h ........ ......b n.
putS sfaraioog wa togodue n
I3. 2435
expoures in routienegamo reacto opemratiowns etherinathelgi frcursonuSnittetdsoandthis couthrywt Wen-kniow. hoeerFromocclnS.,Asion . awalcci,
dents arising in the use of experimental assemblies and from the effects of the atomic weapons in Hiroshima and Nagasaki that fission, uncontrolled from the point of view of health and safety, can cause overexposure to radiation.
The medical history of the populations of Hiroshima and Nagasaki has now been fully recorded both by the Japanese themselves

BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS OF NUCLEAR FISSION '

145

and by the Americans. As with radiotherapy, in many industrial fields but there has never

in which large doses of radiation are given to been any suggestion that I know of, that

various parts of the body as treatment, we over-exposure to radiation, either acute or

have, initially following massive doses a chronic, can lead to impotence, but it can

state we call the radiation syndrome. If we certainly lead to sterility.

exclude colossal doses which can result in In Hiroshima and Nagasaki there have

sudden death, radiation with doses of been, as well as acute manifestations,

several hundred units (rontgens) leads within delayed effects in those who were heavily

a few hours to " radiation sickness " with exposed at the time and who may or may

nausea and vomiting. If the doses are not not have had symptoms such as those I have

described and from which they subsequently

recovered. These delayed effects are similar

to those seen from over-exposure to occupa-

tional radiation. Just as leukeemia has

occurred in the occupationally over-exposed,

so many of the survivors of high doses of

radiation at Hiroshima have subsequently

died from leukeemia.

Again; many of the survivors who received

high doses have since suffered from cataract

-opacity of the lens of the eye. The lens

is thus a radiosensitive tissue.

Women pregnant at the time of these

explosions, if they did not abort-and some

of them did for many good reasons, only one

Figure 7. Chronic radium poisoning in a person of which was radiation-in a few instances containing only I 5 micrograms of radium. [Evans, bore children who were microcephalic. This

R;D. J.Indust. Hyg. 1943. 25, 23.1*

has also been reported following radio-

therapy of pregnant women, which is

too large that initial stage subsides, but occasionally necessary.

several weeks later the effects on the bone

marrow and other radiosensitive tissues becomes manifest. From this there may be

Genetic Effects of Radiation

recovery if the dose is not too great.

Lastly, we have the possibility in irradiated

In addition to damage to bone marrow people of gene-mutation. Here I come, to

there is damage to the gut, another radio- the ground with which you are probably

sensitive tissue, and to the generative glands, more familiar than I; but it seems to me,

testes or ovaries. Compared with the effects who in matters genetic is but an informed

on the bone marrow and gut, which may layman, that here is a subject of which the

determine life or death, the effects on the horrors have been over emphasized. I have

gonads may be of less immediate significance purposely, up till now, talked about what

but to the survivor of considerable impor- I think of the horrors of radiation, the

tance. Damage to the reproductive glands effects of over-exposure on the individual.

leads rapidly to early sterility, or to a In genetics we seem to find a subject which

severe degree of infertility, and may lead to is charged with emotion, and even the most

permanent sterility. I would stress, of sober scientists have on occasion seemed to

course, that sterility and impotence should regard the genetic effects of radiation as

not be confused. Some rather loose thinkers spelling doom. August personages have

and talkers are apt to do so-even as others pontificated on the horrors that are in store

confuse weapons and reactors. The threat for us. Politicians have had to take the

of impotence has led to anxiety in the worker matter up and the Press have found in this a

146 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sensational new story. From some of the
journals one gets the impression that we
are Gadarene swine rushing to racial
destruction. How true is this picture that we get from
the popular Press and what do we really
know about the facts of the genetic situation?
There are two aspects from which we can
approach this in a scientific fashion, from the physical aspect and from the genetic aspect.
So let us try to keep to the simpler things
first, the physical aspect. The World is radio-active to a material
extent. If it were not, we would not have uranium, radium, thorium and other natur-
ally radio-active elements, and I understand that the world is getting less and less naturally radio-active with time as measured
in geological terms. Nevertheless, in spite of this natural radio activity we seem to have evolved from primordial protoplasm up to
our present state. As well as the uraniums, the radiums and
the thoriums in the earth, we have a certain amount of natural radiation reaching us from outer space. This is known as cosmic radiation.
Lastly, right inside ourselves we have
radio-active material. Potassium is one of the essential elements of intra-cellular protoplasm and a small fraction of natural -potassium is radio-active. Thus, in spite of radiation from outer space, in spite of radiation from the earth around us, particularly bricks and concrete, and in spite of radiation from potassium inside us, we have become what we are.
This dose of radiation can, by modern methods, be readily measured. In areas such as London near sea level without granitic rock it amounts to about three units (rbntgens) per generation, but there are areas in which the natural radiation is much higher. At high altitudes, the Andes, Himalayas and so on, the component of dose from cosmic radiation rises considerably. Similarly there are areas with outcrops of granite and similar rock where there is much more radio-active material than in sedimentary rock. Therefore in the various parts of the inhabited earth there is a range of natural background radiation to which

different populations are exposed. This may
vary from place to place by about a factor
of three, so that while we here have about three units of radiation per generation, in other places this may rise to about ten.
In spite of that, we have not yet detected,
maybe for want of looking, any deleterious genetic effects in these areas where there is a
high' natural background. There is a key
there. I repeat, we have not looked, and I
think that now the genetic effects of radia-
tion are more generally apprehended we should forthwith take every step within our
power to look at populations, our own and others, and particularly those living in these
areas of high natural background. What do we know about the genetic
aspects?-Here we are on much more un-
certain ground. First of all, shall we say, just as there is a natural background of
radiation so there is a natural background of
gene mutation. Each of our genes, as far as we know, is mutated periodically at an extremely low rate. We do not know necessarily the relation between this natural
rate of mutation of individual genes and
natural radiation. We know from the
experimental animal, and the experimental plant, and the experimental bacterium, and the experimental virus that one can put up the rate of mutation by irradiating the animal, the plant, the virus and so on. Therefore it seems a universal law that
radiation stimulates mutation. In the case of the insect and the plant and
so forth we can measure the amount of mutation per unit of radiation dose, and in most of the species of plants and animals that have so far been investigated we find that, in order to double the natural rate of mutation, something like thirty to fifty units of dose of radiation is necessary. If we apply that figure to man, which is perhaps a dangerous extrapolation, we would conclude that one tenth of the natural mutation was due to natural radiation.
However, there are geneticists who rightly claim that man, with his longer life span and his longer generation time, cannot arbitrarily be compared with insects whose generation-time is a few weeks, or with

BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS OF NUCLEAR FISSION

I47

bacteria whose generation time is a few In Drosophila, the fly that geneticists

minutes, and they claim, in the absence of conveniently study, to a considerable extent

evidence to the contrary one cannot exclude that all natural mutation in man is due to ionizing radiation. If all the natural muta-
tion of man were due to the natural radia-
tion, then the doubling dose in man's case would be about three rontgens. However, as the doubling dose for several different forms of life including at least one mammal, the mouse, is found by experiment to be about thirty rontgens, this view is perhaps pessimistic.

the function of the genes is known. In man, only about a dozen or so genes with a specific single action are identifiable. Most of our characteristics I am told, our size and shape and colour and our intelligence, are controlled by many genes, so that the mutation of one gene in such a complex is not likely to have any detectable immediate effect. While we can score some gene mutations by the appearance of a character-

Are there other agents besides radiation istic disease or abnormality, determined by

which can cause mutation? Undoubtedly that gene, in most instances gene mutations

there are. Increasing daily are the discoveries pass entirely undetected. But we are what

of chemical mutagens, and amongst these we are in virtue of our complexes of genes-

we have coal tar products. One rather non- and we believe that we have evolved to this

serious journal has suggested that, if hitherto state by a process of selection of the good

we had had only nuclear energy as a source and profitable genes and by elimination of

of power, coal on being discovered to-day the deleterious genes.

would have been hailed as a wonderful We have heard, and we still hear, much of

boon, as it was only necessary to burn the natural selection. If I understand aright,

stuff to get energy. I would answer, also this has largely been investigated in the

in lighter vein, that there would be those wild, and in the wild nature selects for

who would claim that coal with its carcino- strength and cunning. Under modern condi-

genic by-products would be lethal to the tions of civilization-even primitive civiliza-

individual and lethal to the race by virtue tion-nature must select for characters and

of the mutagens.

properties which are not necessarily the

We still cannot assess how the natural same as those in the true feral state. Physical

incidence of cancer in the individual, or the strength, fleetness of foot and keenness of

natural incidence of gene mutation in the sight are not as important to civilized man

race is related to exposure over the years to as to primitive man in the struggle for

known chemical mutagens such as the coal existence. With increasing knowledge and

tar products. Moreover, there are many civilization natural resistance to disease is

other factors of which we still are largely not the factor that once was necessary to

ignorant. We do not know in the case of allow man to reach the age at which he could

man, as we do from genetic and cytological reproduce. By advances in sanitation and

studies of some lower animals, how many improved public health, by new discoveries

genes we have to mutate. Assessments can in clinical medicine and the basic sciences

be made and reasonable answers given we must in recent centuries and decades have

between io,ooo and IOO,OOO; thus, as with markedly altered the desirable criteria for

the mutation rate, so with the number of ourselves as individuals. We must now be

genes we have assessments which vary by a capable of even greater variation than ever

factor of ten. Two factors of ten can before in the history of natural selection.

together make a factor of IOO by which we With populations under altering environ-

can be in error. On the physical side we ment there must be a continual change in

know the variations to within a factor of the properties for which there is positive

two or three, so that the physical data are selection, and I take it that the properties

relatively firm compared with the genetic that we regard to-day as desirable may not

unknowns.

be so in even one hundred years from now.

I48 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I hope that in the future generations, gramme. Do we want to give up diagnostic

either naturally or artificially, we will select radiology, or do we say that the benefits

for increased mental ability, perhaps for of diagnostic radiology outweigh the possible

increases of those desirable personal charac- genetic hazards? We have television sets,

teristics which are difficult to define but we want bigger and better television sets,

which make for tolerance and for general and that means that higher voltages will be

peaceful living; so is it a bad thing that involved. Even television sets emit radia-

there is a possibility of an increased muta- tion. It is minute to the individual, but if

tion? With an increased mutation rate we every family has a television set this will

will more quickly attain the equilibrium contribute a not incalculable amount of

of the particular type selected and if change radiation to the whole population. Do we

in our physical and mental characteristics is regard television as something to be desired,

desirable with change in environment, a or something that should be scrapped

certain increase in the mutation rate, I because of its potential hazards on the

postulate, may not be the horror claimed in genetic side?

some quarters.

Each day we are going in aeroplanes

However, if we regard radiation as a real which fly faster and higher, and the higher

horror, if we do not accept my thesis that a up we go, and the more people who go up

slight increase in mutation rate may be good there, the more we are exposed to cosmic

rather than bad in a changing world, then radiation and the higher genetic dose of

we have to consider what we have already radiation we will be getting. Do we want to

got in the way of radiation other than go higher and quicker, or are we satisfied

natural background or present-day atomic with trains and ships? Do we regard high

energy. With our improved civilization we altitude flying as a modern benefit, or do

are certainly getting radiation from other we regard it as a genetic hazard to our race?

things as well, and we have to decide These and other problems will have to be

whether, like atomic energy, we want them, considered along with our atomic energy

whether they are beneficial and whether programme. We have to add diagnostic

their benefits are greater than their defects. radiology and high flying, and luminous

I have talked about X-rays. We have dials of watches to the atomic energy pro-

made an analysis of the national dose of gramme. WVe have to decide which contri-

radiation that we are getting from diag- butes most to our standard of living, 'which

nostic radiology. At the present time that are the things we want to keep in our future

dose is many times that which we are getting life, and balance them against our potential

nationallv from the atomic energy pro- genetic hazards.

