MATERNAL EMPLOYMENT AND THE WELFARE OF CHILDREN
AN ACCOUNT OF A SURVEY IN PROGRESS*
By J. W. B. DOUGLAS, B.M., B.Ch., & J. M. BLOMFIELD

Maternal Employment in the Nineteenth of women. It " . . . prevents them from

Century

forming the domestic habits usually acquired

IN the nineteenth century maternal employment was, with good reason, regarded
as an evil. " The habit of a manufacturing life being once established in a woman, she
continues it, and leaves her home and children to the care of a neighbour or of a hired child, sometimes only a few years older than her own children, whose services cost her probably as much as she obtains for her labour. To this neglect on the part of their parents is to be traced the death of many children; they are left in the home with a fire before they are old enough to know the danger to which they are exposed, and are often dreadfully burnt."t It was noted in Manchester during the cotton famine in I862 and in Coventry during the trade depression of i86i, that infant mortality declined although the general mortality increased. This was attributed to the decreased employment of women who were therefore better able to look after their children, and it was concluded that " neglect of their homes by mothers at work in factories is apparently more fatal than starvation." During the
siege of Paris in I870-7I also, the infant death rate fell, whereas the general death rate doubled.t
At the beginning of the present century evidence given to the Interdepartmental Committee on physical deterioration emphasised again the evils of the employment

by women irn their station. Few can sew,
bake or cook; a vast number of these females cannot make or mend or repair a single tear. A girl who has been accustomed for years to
a manufacturing job cannot cook a dinner of the plainest description. In consequence the man she marries has no home but the
beer shop." It is indeed not surprising that in the
nineteenth century the employment of women was disastrous for their children. The working week was 60-70 hours and time cribbing was rife. The only holidays were Sundays, Christmas Day, Good Friday and four bank holidays. Wages were insufficient to permit the employment of a responsible child minder.
Bad though these conditions were, it is likely that they were an improvement on those of women working in their homes before factory employment became widespread. Even so, there is no doubt that during the last century many infants perished from neglect and mismanagement that were a direct consequence of the employment of their mothers outside the home. They were stupefied with opiates and left in the care of children scarcely older than themselves, who were removed from school for this purpose. Their mothers, having so little to do with them, often became indifferent and accepted their death with resignation, if not with relief. And in many instances the death

* A paper read by Dr. J. W. B. Douglas at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on December I2th, 1956.
t Chadwick, E. Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population of Great Britain. London, I842. Clowes.
p. 1I39 quotes from the report of The Committee of Physicians and Surgeons at Birmingham.
t Newman, G. Infont Mortality. London, I906.
Methuen. p. 227.

of a child, through insurance, would bring financial gain to the parents.
Maternal Employment To-day
The black record of married women's employment in the nineteenth century may

69 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July, 1957. 49, 2.

70 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

well account in part for the prejudice against their employment to-day. While it is felt that women should be free to work if they so wish,'many believe that a child deprived in this way of his mother's attention, will suffer for it mentally, if not physically.
In recent years earlier marriage and a diminishing excess of women over men have meant that industry increasingly has to satisfy its need for women workers from those that are married. Thus, although the size of the female labour force has not greatly changed, the proportion of those working who have young children has greatly increased. Some information on the present position is given in the I95I Census (cf. One
per cent Sample Tables Part II. I952. Table
X6 p. 262) where the numbers of women in employment with children under one year of age are recorded and also the numbers of children in the families of employed women classified by marriage duration. From these a minimum estimate of the number of employed women with young children may be obtained, but there is no information on the ages of the individual children, or on how they are looked after while their mothers are away from home.
Much of the prejudice against women's work to-day arises from the feeling that the mother is the right person to look after her child and that he will suffer if she does not do so. Yet such evidence as there is for the adverse effect of maternal employment on the child's development is indirect-from the study of delinquent and otherwise abnormal groups-and no figures are available to show what -proportion of the children of employed women are likely to be affected or at what ages or in what circumstances maternal employment is likely to be most harmful.
A Child Health Survey
An opportunity to study these questions was provided by a longitudinal child health survey which started in I946 and has continued until the present day. This survey is sponsored by the Institute of Child Health
(University of London), the Society of
Medical Officers of Health and the Popula-

tion Investigation Committee. The sample is 5,386 children all born in the first week of March I946 and drawn from every part of this country and from every type of home. background. Information on many aspects of the growth, health and development of these children during the succeeding years has been gathered by health visitors, school nurses, school doctors and teachers through-
out the country. Owing to the help given by local public health and education authorities, losses have been small and in eleven years only six per cent of the children originally enrolled have been withdrawn from the survey or are untraced.*
Throughout the survey we have been interested in the extent to which women are engaged in paid work, and a continuous record of this is available for the whole eleven years of the inquiry. We also have details of who looked after the children while their mothers were away from home and of the use made of nurseries and daily minders. The following paragraphs deal only with the pre-school period. Further details will be found in a forthcoming report.t
Few women started work until their children were six months old, at which time three per cent were employed. By the time the children were one year, four per cent were working and this proportion increased to 15 per cent at four years. Approximately half these mothers were in part time employment, i.e. working less than thirty-five hours a week. These figures, of course, refer to women whose children were born eleven years ago and to-day the proportion working
would undoubtedly be higher.f
Many women were employed for short periods only and, in all, 26 per cent went out to work at some time during the first four years of their children's lives.
In general, as would be expected, the extent of employment was greater in the
* For further details of this study cf. Douglas, J. W.
B. and Blomfield, J. M. " The Reliability of Longitudinal Surveys." I956. Milbank, Memorial Fund Quarterly. 39, p. 227.
t Douglas, J. W. B. and Blomfield, J. M. Children
before Five. Allen & Unwin (in the press). I The I95I Census One per cent Sample Tables show
41 per cent of women with children under one year of
age as working (see Table X6 p. 262).

MATERNAL EMPLOYMENT AND THE WELFARE OF CHILDREN I7I

urban areas and greatest of all in the northern mother's work on the health and develop-

County Boroughs and London. In Wales ment of her child, we have matched each

relatively few mothers went out to work. child whose mother was working for twelVe

Social group differences in maternal employ- months or more during the pre-school years

ment lay in the type of work done rather than with another (the control) who came from

in the proportion working. However, only the same type of home background but

I2 per cent of the small group of wives of whose mother had never worked.

professional and salaried workers went out The children of working mothers at first

to work while their children were under four sight appeared to have an excess of lower

years. In all other social groups approxi- respiratory tract infections as compared with

mately double this proportion were working. their controls, but this was explained by the

Part time work and short periods of work larger number attending nurseries and getting

were more often encountered among the their coughs there. Hospital admissions also

poorer women. In general the type of work were more frequent among these children

done by wives followed that of their hus- than among their controls, but only at times

bands.

when the mothers were working. In addition,

In looking at the characteristics of women once they were admitted to hospital, the

who went out to work it was convenient to children of working mothers stayed there

take only those who were working for at longer. It is likely that both the more

least one year during the first four years of frequent hospital admissions and their longer

their children's lives. These women were ii stay were necessary because they could not

per cent of all those in the sample. They be cared for at home.

were distinguished by having few children In height, the children of working mothers

during the survey years and by having their were not stunted as compared with their

own parents living with them. It was pre- controls, nor did they show an excess of bad

sumably these two conditions which made it habits, nightmares or other signs suggestive

easy for them to go out to work.

of emotional upset. It is, however, early yet

Health visitors had difficulty in making to say that these children have not suffered

contact with the working mothers and when from their mother's absence from the home.

they did so found them often inefficient and To reach a final judgment we will need to

unwilling to listen to their advice. In con- follow them through adolescence and give

trast, their record of attendances at child them much more searching tests than we

welfare clinics was only slightly less good have so far been able to do. This we hope

than that of non-employed women.

will be possible.

At the time of this survey women were still

able to get the benefit of the day nurseries set up during the war, many of which have

Summary

since been closed. Even so, only I7 per cent This paper gives a brief account of the

of the two year old children whose mothers early years of a study which, among other

were at work went to them. Much has been things, should throw light on the extent to

said about the dangers of infection in which the employment of mothers outside nurseries and this is borne out by this the home affects the health,' growth and

inquiry.* During their stay in nurseries, but development of their children. An examina-

not before or after, the children were much tion of the record of a national sample of

more likely to contrAct whooping cough, 5,386 children of pre-school age gives no

measles and other infections of childhood. reason for believing that the children of

In attempting to assess the effects of the employed women are in any way at a dis-

advantage. This group of children is, how-

* Douglas, J. W. B. and Rowntree, G. Supplementary Natal and Child Health Services. Population
Studies (I949) 3, p. 205.

ever, still under observation and it is too early yet to reach a final conclusion.

