HABIT AND ENVIRONMENT AS MAKERS OF SPECIES.*
By MARTIN A. C. HINTON.
In the Hebrides, the Orkneys, the Mergui Archipelago, the islands off the coast of Siam, or any other group of islands inhabited by small mammals you will, if you look for it, find evidence of a remarkable phenomenon. One or more species of Rat, Mouse,
Squirrel, or Shrew will be found distributed over a great many of the islands and if you make a careful collection of these mammals from each island you will find on studying them closely that while the
specimens from any one island are all precisely alike they differ to a greater or less extent from those collected on the other islands or on the adjacent mainland. If you proceed to analyse the characters which distinguish the insular races from each other you will find that they fall into three groups. Firstly there are differences of absolute size or in the characters of the dentition and skull, which may be correlated with differences of nutrition or special food habits. Secondly there are differences in the proportions of the body, in the colour, or in the quality and density of the pelage which may be correlated with differences in climate and temperature. Thirdly there are differences in insignificant characters such as the presence or absence of spots which seem to be the result of colonial segregation.
If now you go to a great continent and make corresponding collections of the mammals from as many stations as possible you will find in the case of more widely ranging species precisely the same phenomenon that you observed in the islands. Notwithstanding the perfectly continuous distribution of a species you will find that it is split into a number and often a very large number of local races which differ from each other in exactly the same ways as do the island forms. Let me give you an example from a case recently investigated by Major Ingoldby. The common African Squirrel Heliosciurus rufobrachium ranges over the greater part of the continent from the Southern border of the Sahara. It varies directly with its environment, being darkcoloured, nearly black, in the rain-forests; redder and brighter in the thinner marginal forests; greyer and lighter in the grass-lands; yellower and still more pallid on the fringes of the deserts. Other characters such as size, proportions, qualitv of pelage and the size of the skull show a similar tendency to vary from belt to belt and from place to
place. Isolated colonies like those on Mount Kenya and Mount Elgon show those insignificant variations which may be regarded as the
*Address delivered February 2nd, 1927.

11 THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
normal products of segregation in mammals. When one knows how to read the characters of this squirrel one can describe the physical condition of the locality from which any given specimen came without knowing either the name or the whereabouts of the locality. That- is a feat which has been performed by Major Ingoldby many times during the last few months.
That is one case. I could give you many such, relating to almost all the orders of terrestrial mammals and drawn from every continent of the globe. I am supposed to be a systematic zoologist; let me tell you a trade secret as to how it is possible to maintain a staggering output of new species and subspecies. One studies the map carefully and sends a collector to a chosen spot. In due course the collection arrives; one or two striking forms immediately attract attention; they are found to be distinguishable from their representatives in adjoining areas either by colour (when they are regarded as new subspecies) or by differences of size or in the skull and teeth (when they are made into new species). These striking forms serve to show the general tendency of variation in that particular place and knowing that that tendency will to a greater or less extent affect all the species of mammals living in that locality one begins a laborious comparison which usually culminates in the desired result on every third day. Now the philosophical zoologist, grappling with some awful group that no man can now understand, is inclined to curse myribbon-matching name-coiningfriends. But the philosopher is wrong; he should bless the ribbon-matcher for putting before him a great truth. The systematist' s interpretation of the facts may be open to question; but the characters upon which he relies, even when very small ones, are real things.
If you analyse the characters which distinguish the local races of continental subspecies from each other you will find that they are precisely those which distinguish island races from each other and they fall of course into the same three groups. One thing you observe on the continent that does not occur in the smaller islands; the distribution of the species is usually continuous and the races intergrade with each other. On large islands like Ceylon, where as many as five distinct races of one species may occur, you may, of course, observe intergradation too. Another thing that you observe on continents or on large islands with rich mammalian faunas is (that great fact discovered by my ribbon-matching friends) the tendency to vary in a given direction in a given station is not peculiar to one species or genus but is shared more or less by all the mammals living in that station.
Now nutrition, special food habits, climate and temperature and segregation are all to be counted among the many factors which constitute that complex thing which we call environment. If you want to see how complex an environment can be, go and study the simplest possible case. Go to the Great Central desert of Arabia-nothing can be more uniform. You will find there living side by side four wellmarked though closely related members of one genus of Gerbils Meriones the animals called by the Arabs "Jirds. " Two of the four live right out on the open sand where they subsist upon exactly the same food; one strictly nocturnal wears an usually heavy coat to protect it from the extreme cold at night and it has extravagantly en-

HABIT AND ENVIRONMENT.

111

-larged auditory bullae because it relies chiefly upon hearing for defence-; the other is diurnal, scampering about on the burning sand all through the day except at high noon when even it is forced to retreat to its burrow; it wears an extremely thin and pale coat, just enough to protect it from the sun, and its auditory bullae though large are not extravagantly developed, defence being gained by sight as well as hearing. The remaining two forms are subspecies of a much less highly specialized species which lives in the little fields of lucerne which border two tiny rivulets at Hufuf; they are rat-like creatures with small auditorv bullae and quite normal coats. The two races of this animal owe their differentiation entirely to segregation, the two rivulets being separated by an interveining limestone ridge of desert character upon which no such species could exist. That uniform desert of Arabia is thus really a very complex environment; high light intensity is about the only uniform thing in it and that has resulted in the bleaching of nearly all the mammals of the region to an extent approached only in the western portion of the Central Sahara. Quite apart from the effects of local differences of soil one sees that at night it constitutes one kind of environment, by day another, that the condition on the surface of the ground is different from that below itand so forth.
Facts such as those I have endeavoured to put before you teach us that, within certain definite limits fixed by inheritance for the time being in each particular genus or species, most and perhaps all mammals
are plastic creatures; they are ready to respond and do respond to all ordinary demands made upon them by changing factors in the environment, I believe that most of the living species and subspecies recognized by systematists are of quite recent origin; they have had of
course their forbears and their analogues in Pleistocene times, but precisely in their present form they are no older than are the precise local conditions in which they now happen to live. Determine the age of that belt of grass surrounding the rain-forest of Central Africa and you have determined the age of every mammal actually
peculiar to it. In the course of comparatively few generations the characters imposed by the special environment become fixed; and so long as that special environment remains unchanged the form subject to it either breeds true to its special type or else progresses slowly along the line of development initiated by the environment. Thus it happens that we may visit a place from which some special form was described a century ago and collect topotypical material which matches the original type down to the smallest particular.
As the result of nearly thirty years work upon fossil and living mammals I have gained the impression that each mammalian phylum has been slowly differentiated from a central stock by a long series of gently graded variations called forth for the most part by the environment and by the special uses of organs and special habits found
among mammals. Apart from extravagant characters, like the tusks of Ba'oirussa or the strap-like teeth of Mesoplodon layardi; or from those trivial things which result from segregation, I have seen no special character in any mammal that cannot be correlated either with a particular function or a special environment. "Mutations" as

112 1121THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
understood by the Mendelians seem to me to be entirely absent from wild mammals. The variations from type which distinguish subspecies are, although naturally smaller, of precisely the same kind as those which distinguish the species genera and still higher groups; and in all these systematic groups these variations affect the same organs in much the same way though to different degrees. It seems to me that even on the narrow basis of recent mammalogy we have abundant grounds for inferring that character acquired in consequence of such variation as I kave described do in the long run become truly heritable characters.
The theory for the inheritability of acquired characters of this sort rests, however, so far as mammals are concerned, upon the solid foundation of palaeontology: and it is doubtful whether any evidence that can be brought from zoology, experimental or otherwise can materially affect the issue. It may confirm; but it can never refute the theory. I say that deliberately; because there are two cardinal and insuperable difficulties in the way of the zoologist and experimenter. Firstly his work and observations are restircted to one time-plane,the present; secondly he cannot reproduce the natural environment of a terrestrial mammal in his laboratory-for even the simplest of such environments is a compound of infinite subtleties beyond the reach of our analysis.
If you want to get a glimpse of the solid foundation upon which Neo-Lamarckism and the theory of the inheritability of acquired characters are based you cannot do better than study the evolution of the Ungulate foot, first worked out and described by W. Kowalevsky in three great papers published in 1873. In those works Kowalevsky showed that the highly specialized and reduced feet of living horses, ruminants, and swine, have been developed from the feet of a generalised tetradactyle ancestor by gentle gradations, by the gradual adaptation of each particular bone and each particular facet to a special mechanical purpose, by the increased growth of the useful portions of the foot skeleton, and by the gradual atrophy, fusion, and obliteration of parts, which have lost their function. Time will not permit me to discuss this subject now; but I will say that during the 53 years which have elapsed since Kowalevsky published his results palaeontology has gathered an almost incredibly vast store of materials illustrating the history of the Ungulata. It has brought to light crowds of genera and species undreamt of in 1873; it has bridged practically all the gaps in the series described by Kowalevsky; and it has shown that what he supposed to be a single phylum is in almost every case a compound of several or many parallel phyla. But great as are these increments to our knowledge and materials, no single fact has been discovered which is not in harmony with Kowalevsky's theory, and no single foot has been found that is not susceptible to both illustration and explanation by the light of the theory he established.
Had time permitted I should have liked to have described to you in detail the evolution of the cheek-tooth and of the jaws and muscles which hold and work those teeth, in two entirely distinct groups of rodents viz. the Hare and Pikas on one hand, and the Voles and Lemmings on the other. In each of these groups you would have seen an example of those cases, which so often confront us when studying living

HABIT AND ENVIRONMENT.

11s

and fossil mammals, in which what is essentially a primitive type has contrived to survive in spite of the keen competition put up by more highly organised rivals. In every one of such cases the primitive group
has acquired the power of living cheaply upon food so coarse, so difficult to digest, so uninviting and so little nutritious as to be despised
by all mammals able to get anything better. That has led to far reaching modifications of all the organs of digestion and of all structures in relation with those organs. The first organs to be modified are the teeth; low crowned and tubercular to begin with, they became progressively taller; then their crowns undergo a characteristic but
gradual process of simplification and they are finally transformed into even growing prisms. But even in the most highly specialised teeth
of modern Hares and modern Voles the crowns, when quite unworn, show, though often in a reduced condition, the ancestral tubercular caps-a circumstance quite inexplicable on any theory other than that
of descent with continuous and progressive modification.

