ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

Memorandum submitted by the Eugenics Society

(x) Object of the Memorandum

and apply it. To no nation is a high human

The object of this memorandum is to put before the Royal Commission the importance of taking qualitative, i.e.

breed more necessary than to our own, for we plant our stock all over the world and lay the foundations of the dispositions and capacities of future millions of the human

eugenic, considerations into account when

race.

devising a positive population policy. The word eugenics (eu-good, gen-race or stock), first used by Sir Francis Galton in I883, was defined by him as " The science
which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of the race; also with those that develop them to the utmost
advantage." This memorandum also seeks to draw the
Royal Commission's attention to a restatement, in terms of the demographic and social trends of to-day, of how the aims of eugenics can be realized in what we believe to be an acceptable social policy.

There are two essential ideas in the above quotations: that the inborn qualities of future generations should resemble the better rather than the worse moiety of the nation to-day; and that our imperial and world responsibilities impose on us a special obliga-
tion to foster the valuable inborn qualities of our people.
Galton was a cousin of Charles Darwin and his outlook was much influenced by the evolution theory. "Evolution," he wrote, " is in any case a grand phantasmagoria, but it assumes an infinitely more interesting
aspect under the knowledge that the intelli-

(2) The Standpoint of Galton

gent action of the human will is, in some small measure, capable of guiding its course."

Galton's conception of what eugenics if' And in another context: "What nature

and what it aims at has been partially lost does blindly, slowly and ruthlessly, man may

sight of in the controversies of later years. do providently, quickly and kindly."

Two short quotations will show that his Though much has changed since Galton's

outlook is apposite to-day.

time, his principles are as apposite to-day as

(a) Let us for a moment suppose that the prac- they were sixty years ago. But they need tice of eugenics should hereafter raise the to be re-stated in terms of the present demo-

average quality of our nation to that of its graphic situation and of current social

better moiety at the present day, and consider the gain. The general tone of domestic

standards.

and social life would be higher. The race as a
whole would be less foolish, less frivolous, (3) Eugenics and Differential Fertility

less excitable, and politically more provident than now. Its demagogues who " played to the gallery " would play to a more sensible gallery than at present. We should be better

Though clearly aware of their importance, Galton was less preoccupied by problems of differential fertility than later writers

fitted to fulfil our vast imperial opportuni- such as Karl Pearson. Indeed, the word

ties. Lastly, men of an order of ability which is now very rare, would become more frequent, because the level out of which they rose would itself have risen.
(b) The faculties of future generations will necessarily be distributed according to laws of heredity, whose statistical effects are no

" eugenics " unescapably implies a challenge -to define what we mean by " eu " in terms
of human values and human types. In the
period before the last war, some people found their definition ready-made for them in the Registrar-General's figures. Appended is a

longer vague, for they are measured and ex- diagram from the report of the i9ii census,

pressed in formule. We cannot doubt the existence of a great power ready to hand, and
capable of being directed with vast benefit as soon as we shall have learnt to understand

published after Galton'S death, showing trends in fertility between I85I and I9II in eight social classes (Vol. XIII, part II,

92

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

93

STANDARDIZED TOTAL FERTILITY OF EACH SOCIAL CLASS
PER CENT. OF THAT OF THE GENERAL POPULATION FOR MARRIAGES OF VARYING DATES
Census of England and Wales, i9ii. Vol. XIII, p. xciii (Diagram i6)

Class I. Upper and Middle Classes. Class II. Intermediate between Middle and Skilled Working Classes (Includes Shop-keeping Trades).
Class III. Skilled Workers. Class IV. Intermediate between Class III and V (Includes some Skilled and Unskilled Workers). Class V. Unskilled Workers. Class VI. Textile Workers.
Class VII. Miners. Class VIII. Agricultural Workers.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

p. xciii). A striking difference is seen organized civilizations, it was no part of his

between these classes: class I, which com- outlook that biologically inferior races should

prises the upper and middle classes, has be persecuted or suppressed But this stand-

throughout the period the lowest fertility. point has been adopted by a later generation

This class was widely regarded as the main and has done great harm to the cause of

repository of cultural values, and its low eugenics. Under the title of " race hygiene,"

reproductive achievement was looked upon the dogma of race superiority has been

by many people as an ominous sign, por- espoused in Germany, where, in recent years,

tending racial decay. Such a view was the young have been indoctrinated with-

readily taken by persons who were nurtured " aryanism," anti-semitism and aggressive

in a classical tradition. In ancient Greek nationalism. Analogous views have been

valuations of humanity, the existence of put forward in America by writers who were

slaves and barbarians played an essential actuated by colour prejudice. Eugenics is

part; Plato's " Republic " was organized on also regarded by some as a preoccupation of

a caste system. The biological attenuation cranks who wish to control human matings

of the Registrar-General's Class I is widely by stockyard methods.

regarded as an exaggeration. While we hold Because of these perversions, eugenics has

it desirable that our population should be come to be regarded in certain quarters as

more largely recruited from the first four of politically and biologically suspect. Galton's

the Registrar-General's classes than at pre- simple and dispassionate statement has been

sent, his classes are not regarded by us as forgotten. It is our aim to re-direct atten-

rigid castes and the reversal of the present tion to Galton's standpoint which, fortified

trends is not the sole aim of eugenics. One by advances in the science of genetics, has

of its aims is to secure the largest number of gained in cogency and in relevance to affairs

births from -the most intelligent families in of the present day. The word " eugenics"

every social and economic class (intelligence needs to be rehiabilitated.

being the most important differential about

which exact knowledge is attainable). Care- (5) Eugenics and the Expert

ful surveys-e.g. by Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts The contrast between the liberal and the

at Bristol-have shown that the least in- authoritarian application of eugenic prin-

telligent families have on the average some ciples turns much on the use made of the

three times as many children as the most expert. The authoritarian system employs

intelligent, fertility declining evenly from compulsion and invests the expert with

one extreme to the other. The reversal of powers. At one end of the scale is com-

this adverse trend in differential fertility pulsory restriction of births; at the other,

(the persistence of which must result in a quasi-compulsory child-bearing. Or, if

steady fall in the general level of intelligence) actual compulsion is ruled out, there are

must be among the primary objectives of severe penalties at one extreme and valuable

any eugenic demographic policy.

economic and other incentives at the other,

(4) Perversions of Eugenics

whose application is highly discriminative. The whole machinery depends on experts,

Galton regarded eugenics as a means by from whose certificates result abhorrent

which persons with valuable inborn qualities vetoes or coveted privileges. Thus, a German

could make a larger contribution to posterity can be compulsorily sterilized by order of a

than persons less well endowed. He thought eugenic court. And his marriage can be

of the members of any community or race vetoed. Such methods are contrary to a

as varying in respect of valuable inborn social philosophy which concedes freedom of

qualities. While he believed that the dif- choice and independence of action to the

ferent branches of the human race were individual. A liberal system of eugenics

unequally equipped with the inborn charac- would make use of the expert; but his

ters that produce and sustain highly function shoiuld be advisory only. He should

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

95

be readily accessible to everyone. His The fifth attribute has figured prominently

existence should be widely advertised; but in discussions of differential fertility. There

he should not be invested with powers. are good reasons for thinking that certain

(6) Five Standards of Eugenic Value

combinations of qualities, physical and psychological, produce infertility and that

As remarked above, the word " eugenics other combinatiois produce fertility.

inplies a challenge-to define what we mean Through several generations, infertile con-

by " eu."' " A considerable list of qualities,)" nexions produce diminishing numbers of

wrote Galton, " can be easily compiled that children; childless couples or couples pro-

nearly everyone would take into account ducing a single child become increasingly

when picking out the best specimens of his frequent. If the connexion as a whole is

class. It would include health, energy, man- wealthy, the wealth becomes concentrated

liness and courteous disposition." The list on a small number of persons or on a single

might be extended by each of us in accord- person. The heiress is often the product of

ance with our system of private values. such a connexion, and a case has been made

There are, however, five characteristics as out by Galton that, as a result of the ten-

to the excellence of which nearly everyone dency of peers to marry heiresses, the former

will agree.

" marry" not only wealth but infertility,

(a) Sound physical and mental health and thus hastening the extinction of their lines;

good physique.

and R. A. Fisher has argued that the " social

(b) Intelligence.

promotion of infertility" occurs widely in

(c) Social usefulness:, the individual all strata of society, resulting in a tendency

should be a valuable and co-operative for strains containing ability to mix with

member of his community with moral those marked by infertility, thus leading to

qualities which make him a good the sterilization of ability. B3iologically

citizen.

harmful social fashions are also set.

(d) The individual should be free from But if there are psychological traits which

genetic taints, i.e. unlikely to carry or lead to infertility, there are converse traits

transmit familial diseases and defects. which do the opposite. Philoprogenitive-

(e) It is desirable that he should be a ness,* when combined with the first four

member of a big, united, and well- qualities above enumerated, is an attribute

adjusted family and that he should be. which all must agree to be desirable. Families

fond of children.

* Dr. Spencer Paterson has proposed four new words

Let us briefly consider these qualities.

-two nouns and two adjectives-genophilia, genophobia, genophilic, genophobic. He writes: "I think

the.There can be little disagreement about

that these words should be defined as follows. Geno-

first two. A community of sound and robust people is preferable to one of physical weak-

philia: Love for children; an attitude of mind which welcomes large families. Genophobia: A dislike or shunning of children; an attitude of mind which fears

lings, and intelligent people are preferable or shuns the advent of children. Similarly, genophilic

to morons.

But the first two qualities do

and genophobic, used of persons, policies, legislation,
etc."

not necessarily connote the third. A man Examples of the use of these words are as follows:

can be a fine physical specimen and intelligent; but he can also be an idler, a parasite

The policy of building four-roomed houses is definitely genophobic.
A eugenic policy is one which seeks to make good

or a criminal. The first three qualities do stocks genophilic and bad stocks genophobic.

not connote the fourth. A woman physically and mentally above the average who plays

Genophobia is spreading from urban to rural areas. Madame de S6vign6, that arch-genophobe I The nearest current word to " genophilic " is " philo-

a useful part in her community can also be a carrier of haemophilia; or she may have

progenitive"; but this has no obvious converse and it cannot be applied to policies, legislation, etc. The
two adjectives epitomize phrases thus facilitating the

near relatives suffering from hereditary processes of thought. They focus attention upon

physical and mental illnesses of which she may be a probable carrier. So may a man.

important tendencies and implications in any population policy.- They may be found useful by the Royal Co on.

96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in which the five qualities are combined are moral qualities and philoprogenitiveness it

big, united and well adjusted. Their mem- can be said that they are in considerable

bers are successful in life, with little or measure determined by heredity, though not

nothing in the way of inherited wealth. in accordance with simple Mendelian prin-

They make good in a variety of callings, and ciples shown in the transmission of a single

often spread themselves throughout the gene. The best scientific evidence in the

world. They take a pride in their name and human field relates to intelligence; that

in their " clan " and periodically have large general physical and temperamental qualities

reunions where people belonging to three or are also inherited is a matter of common

four generations assemble. This faith and observation rather than of scientific demon-

belief in one's stock has important psycho- stration in humans, though in experimental

logical corollaries. It connotes biological and domesticated animals the importance of

vitality, a philosophical optimism, a posi- heredity is unquestioned by every investi-

tive attitude to life. It adds something gator and breeder.

important, though less easily definable than That environment produces important

the others, to the four characteristics first effects in man is obvious; nevertheless, con-

described.

siderable differences between people would

Other qualities could be added to these continue to be seen even if the environment

five and, as Galton remarked, each of us were uniform for everyone. In other words,

could compile his own private list. It is in people who are to-day remarkable for

terms of these five, however, that we mainly physical, mental and moral qualities are the

understand the meaning of the particle ones who are most likely to transmit a

"eu."

favourable hereditary endowment of these

Only the fourth of the above-listed qualities; but where the environment is

characteristics is concerned solely with bad, deficiencies are not in themselves proof

genetic qualities. By definition, environ- that the hereditary endowment is poor.

mental factors are excluded. In the others

-i.e. physical health, intelligence, moral (7) A Eugenic Policy Which is Socially

qualities and a positive attitude to children

Acceptable.

-both genetic and environmental influences Let us consider from other aspects the

are concerned. Since Galton first wrote five qualities mentioned in the preceding

about eugenics, enormous advances have paragraph. How accurately can they be

been made in our knowledgq of plant and estimated ? How much are they correlated ?

animal genetics. The principles of Mendelism Is there any simple and observable social

have been discovered and the gene has been index of their joint occurrence which could

demonstrated to have a locus on the chromo- be made the basis of a practical eugenic

some. Mendelian principles have been shown policy ?

to operate in man; but the human being is (a) How accurately can eugenically valu-

a bad subject for investigation partly because able qualities be estimated ? Let us take

of the length of the human generation and them in the order above given.

partly because human matings cannot be (i) Physical Health or fitness can be

experimentally controlled. Nevertheless, the estimated for certain specific purposes. Life

occurrence in successive generations of cer- insurance companies have learned how to

tain defects and diseases-most of them rare take into account a miscellaneous assort-

-has been shown to conform closely with ment of factors in calculating risks. The

expectations based on simple Mendelian family history, the different physical systems

hypotheses, and in some cases an accurate of the body, and the individual's habits are

estimate can be made of the probability of surveyed: all bear on the probable length

such abnormalities being further handed on. of life. Minor abnormaIities, some of them,

Of such widely distributed conditions, how- perhaps, of congenital origin, such as errors

ever, as physical robustness, intelligence, of refraction or deafness, have here little

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

97

relevance except in so far as they may pre- Thus, for eugenic purposes, only one of

dispose to accidents.

these five qualities can at present be quan-

The fighting services have evolved a very titatively estimated, namely, intelligence.

complicated system of grading and assess- (b) How much are desirable traits cor-

ment, and during this war the number of related ?

categories has been much increased. Minor There is a big literature dealing with

impairments of the sense-organs, whether genius and it has been widely, though by

congenital or the results of disease or acci- no means unanimously, contended that

dent, are here important. A man may be geniuses are often mentally unstable or

put into a low category for reasons which physically defective. Accurate studies have

have nothing to do with his genetic fitness, been made of children of high and of very

such as the loss of an eye or of two or three high intelligence. It has been generally found

fingers in an industrial accident.

that such children are above the average in

Physical grading and assessment are being increasingly used in industry, again for the

physique. But this may be partly due to the fact that they probably come from homes

specific purpose of fitting the man to the which are better than the average and have right job. The fact, however, remains that, been well nourished and cared for.

for genetic purposes, there is no accurate or generally accepted method of assessing

Yet there is a certain amount of evidence pointing to the conclusion that desirable

physical health and fitness. physical quotient.

There is no

traits are positively associated-i.e. tend to occur in the same persons. What is certain,

(ii) Intelligence is the only one of the five characteristics which is quantitatively measurable. The intelligence quotient tells us something of importance about the child or the adult, though critics are not lacking to point out that general intelligence tests take little account of character and that they may miss special aptitudes and abilities.
(iii) Social usefulness is diffi-cult to predict and impossible to express in a quotient. Character is here an important factor. This

however, is that these correlations are at best small. Thus, in many individuals some desirable qualities will be present and others
absent. There is little likelihood of any single scientifically controllable test being devised which would provide a single index
of an individual's eugenic value.
Eugenic merit is thus a difficult matter to
evaluate accurately. Different qualities,
some valuable, others neutral, others harmful, have to be balanced against each other. There is no simple biological index.

can only be assessed by personal knowledge of the individual. As a leading psychiatrist now working in the Navy recently remarked
of psychological tests in general: " Unfortunately we have no tests for guts."

(c) Is there a simple social index of the joint occurrence of eugenically desirable traits which could be made the basis of an
acceptable social policy? We think there is. The five qualities above

(iv) Genetic qualities of relatives, valuable considered have as their confluent and resultant

and harmful, call for an assessment of the expression the couple who, in a community

individual's pedigree. In at least one which provides good prospects for the future

authoritarian country the subject's pedigree welfare of children, which encourages family is investigated as a preliminary to deciding life and inculcates a sense ofits responsibilities, whether or not he should be allowed to get produce by intention and design a largefamily

married. But there is as yet no scale of and providefor it a hapy and a healthy home.

qu,antitative measurement.

Let us consider what is implied in this

(v) Lastly, philoprogenitiveness.can be re- achievement.

cognized when obvious; but large families To plan the births of a well-spaced family

are all too often the result of improvidence demands intelligence, foresight and restraint;

rather than of this attribute.

to produce deliberately a family large enough

98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for, or in excess of, replacement implies a Upon the argument here put forward the

love of children, a sense of duty to the com- American and British Eugenic Societies are

munity and a belief that it is worth pre- at one. Both stress the need for a favourable

serving, a desire to perpetuate family tradi- environment wherein eugenic selection can

tions, and an optimistic or positive attitude operate.

towards life; to provide a good home calls

for the power to make a success of marriage (8) Four Characteristics of a "' Favourable

and of life outside the home. All these are

Environment "

desirable qualities, and the emphasis is on (a) The removal of social and economic

the moral ones. But the choice here freely deterrents from parenthood.- This subject is

exercised, of producing a large family, should further discussed in section io below. At

be made in thefull light of all relevant medical- this point, however, we would make one

and genetic factors. When these factors are observation. It has been contended by

seriously adverse, children will not be some that conditions should be created

wanted by morally responsible parents; and wherein a married couple would say: " We

they should be discouraged by precept and cannot afford not to have children." In

public opinion when moral and prudential other words, the bachelor, the spinster, the

qualities are absent in the parents.

*childless couple should be so penalized as to

This statement brings out the importance make their economic position worse than

of the environment in a properly considered that of parents with numerous children.

eugenic policy. In an unfavourable en- We do not support this extreme view. Some

vironment wherein parenthood is attended people are temperamentally or genetically

by serious economic handicaps, wherein the unfitted for parenthood. These are be-

prospects for children are bad, and wherein having in a praiseworthy manner by refrain-

birth control is widely practised, it is next ing from having children. They should not

to impossible to effect replacement in be penalized. The sexes may be numerically

eugenically desirable ways. Because the unequal; women may continue to out-

potential parent loves children, he will number men after this war. As long as the

shrink from bringing them into a world prevailing sexual mores continue, marriage

which holds for them poor promise. His for some women may be impossible, however

philoprogenitive instincts turn in upon much desired. Such women should not be

themselves and are stifled. Sir William penalized. We advocate equalizing as far

Beveridge's five " giants "-Disease, Ignor- as possible the social and economic status

ance, Squalor, Idleness and Want-sterilize of parents and non-parents; not the favour-

parenthood in large masses of the population. ing of the one beyond the other.

Where these evils prevail, the improvident (b) The inculcation of a eugenic conscience.

and feckless contribute freely to the next Every adolescent should be taught and

generation; those who cannot use the pre- every parent should realize that he has a

vailing birth control. methods beget large social and a national obligation to have

families; and sexual, dissociated from enough children to replace the generation to

parental, instincts determine the course of which he belongs, provided (the eugenist's

reproduction. A voluntary system of proviso to the demographer's purely quanti-

eugenics cannot work successfully, under tative formula) that the children are likely

conditions of extreme poverty, malnutrition, to be normal, healthy and useful members of

ill-health and isolation. A community which the community. The teaching we have in

desires to encourage philoprogenitive in- mind includes the elements of British and

stincts must provide good prospects for world demography. We would like to see

parents and for children in all classes. These these made common ground in all forms of

views have been well put by Mr. Frederick secondary education, and covered by the

Osborn in his book, Preface to Eugenics.* County Colleges of the future.

* Harper & Brothers, New York, 1940.

(c) The establishment offacilities by which.

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

every engaged or married couple can obtain "carry" hereditary diseases or defects, to

the most up-to-date scientific guidance on be voluntarily sterilized. We support the

genetic problems. To the question: " In recommendations of the Brock Report on

view of such-and-such a family history, sterilization.* Though not yet implemented,

ought we to have children ? " a careful and the Brock Committee's recommendations

informed answer should be available for all, have received very widespread support.

free. The provision of an answer demands There are reasons, as yet unpublished, for

an examination of the individual concerned, supposing that the legal risks run by a sur-

of his family pedigree in respect of the dis- geon in sterilizing, at his request, a genuine

tribution not only of abnormal but also of sufferer from hereditary disease are less than

normal persons, and of the actual or proposed have been supposed. The operation has, in

partner and his pedigree. The information fact, been frequently done without legal

required is usually both voluminous and mishaps and has been warmly welcomed by

complicated. If the health services of the the subject concerned. Sterilization is a

future are organized to meet the needs of complex subject upon which we could supply

the family as a unit rather than of the further written or oral evidence if desired.

individual as a unit, the provision of guidance The principle of voluntary sterilization in

on these matters should become a function appropriate cases has been approved by the

of the health services. At present the Royal College of Physicians. We would like

Eugenics Society undertakes this work, but to see the College specify in greater detail

perforce within narrow limits. (See Section than is given by the Brock Committee in

II (3) below.)

what medical and genetic conditions it

(d) Universal accessibility of knowledge as regards sterilization appropriate.

to how pregnancies can be regulated-whether

by the treatment of subfertility to promote (g) How Far Could Parental Instincts, Dis-

births or by the dissemination of contra-

sociated from Sexual, Effect Re-

ceptive knowledge to space or even prevent

placement ?

them. Without this knowledge and power, the family is often unplanned, couples failing to secure desired pregnancies or, the more
usual event, having children whose birth is unwanted or eugenically undesirable. Information about birth-control should be in accordance with the family's religious beliefs, and these should be taken into account by those who advise. The Royal Commission will have received evidence about the " safe period." We have given this matter some consideration. While we do not believe that conception is impossible at any stage of the cycle (or supposed cycle), we hold that the chances are so much reduced during certain days as to provide a large measure of

It is argued by some that the perpetuation of the species primarily depends on the
sexual functions by which animals are im-
pelled to mate when they are entirely
unconscious of parental feelings; that, through physiological sequences, the parental instincts only reveal themselves when they are called for-i.e. when the young are born; and that these instincts are not continuously present and operative in the human being to a sufficient degree to ensure perpetuation of the species after contraception has severed them from their sexual precursors. In other words, it has been contended that philoprogenitive instincts are alone too weak to

protection against unwanted pregnancies. * A copy of the Report (minus appendices) was

Women for whom " appliance methods " are forbidden on religious grounds should, if

attached to the Memorandum. The other documents attached were (i) a list of authorities, associations, etc., which have passed resolutions in favour of giving legal

they want it, be given information on the. safe period and the guidance necessary for-

effect to the recommendations of the Report; (2) Better Unborn, a pamphlet describing " forty-two families which could be said to belong to the C3 element

its effective application.

of our population"; and (3) a letter to the Week-end

We also think that it should be possible for persons who suffer from, or probably

Review by a hereditarily deformed man whose sterilization had been secured through the help of the Eugenics Society.

ioo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

effect racial survival and that a universalized crease of planned and "wanted" preg-

knowledge of how to prevent pregnancy will nancies. Children were an economic asset in

cause race suicide.

the past, both in field and factory. A recent

This argument cannot at present be dis- Russian law confers marks of very high

proved. Nevertheless, we believe that the prestige as well as substantial economic

philoprogenitive instincts of normal men and benefits on parents of very large families.*

women are powerful and operative impulses, May it prove necessary to supplement

much influenced by precept and example, philoprogenitive impulses with others based

whose alleged weakness has been falsely on economic or social self-interest? The

deduced from the fact that their free expres- question cannot be answered, though light

sion is restricted by a host of social impedi- might be-thrown on it by detailed studies of

ments and economic deterrents. Indeed, differential fertility.

these deterrents have caused an aberration Is any social, economic, religious or occu-

of philoprogenitive instincts. A love of pational sub-class of the population in this

children has resulted in a restriction of their or in any other country replacing itself by

number, good prospects for a few being means of pregnancies which are for the most

preferred to poverty or only modest pros- part planned and wanted ? We do not

pects for many. Even if conditions were know the answer; research in this direction

favourable to unrestricted voluntary parent- would be welcome.

hood, some selfish couples would deliberately

avoid having children as they do to-day. In (io) Social and Economic Changes Needed to

time, however, the processes of natural

Equalize the Position of Parents and

selection, which determine survival, would

Childless Persons

change; the emphasis would be displaced To equalize the position of the parent

from the sexual functions, where it has (irrespective of the number of children) and

rested up to now, to the parental.

the childless adult, many changes and adjust-

But would parental instincts, un-rein- ments are called for. The Royal Commission

forced by considerations of self-interest, be will have taken evidence from many sources

strong or widespread enough to effect re- on these subjects. As to several, it will placement ~As previously remarked, we receive from its expert committees better

favour the equalization of the economic- and information than we can supply. We add

social conditions of parents and childless a few brief notes.

couples. Under these conditions, the valu- Family Allowances. These are desirable

able philoprogenitive instincts would mainly for many reasons other than eugenic. If

determine reproduction and would have the the positions of parents and non-parents are

best chance of spreading throughout pos- to be genuinely equalized, allowances should

terity. But if it were to turn out that, begin with the first child and an equal against such a background, reproduction fell additional allowance be given for every sub-

short of requirements, it might prove necessary to attach positive incentives to parent-

sequent child. We would stress, however, the need that allowances should be in some

hood, while at the same time penalizing the childless. It has been argued that the high birth rates which have been recorded during
this war are in part attributable to the fact that pregnant women and mothers of young children are not called up for national service.

considerable measure proportional to the income of the family, and if a flat-rate scheme be adopted, it should be supplemented by an additional allowance proportional to income up to a certain level beyond which

It is difficult to assess how much truth there
is in this contention. But if it has any basis, it provides an illustration of how motives which have nothing to do with philoprogenitiveness can result in the in-

* We are inclined to predict that the Russian Government will be led by experience to take eugenic considerations into account in administering this law. The Order of " Heroine Mother" would hardly be appropriate for a moronic mother of ten or more mentally subnormal children, some of which have to be reared at the expense of the State.

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

further increments should not be necessary. The war interrupted an investigation of the

The flat-rate scheme would satisfy minimum subject promoted by the Society. The re-

standards and would have no eugenic effects. moval of arbitrary restrictions on early

Indeed, if not supplemented as suggested, marriage in certain occupations and profes-

its effect in some directions might be sions (including the Civil Services, Local

dysgenic. The size of a Civil Servant's Government Authorities, peace-time estab-

family, for instance, is not affected by the lishments of the armed forces) might be a

fact that he may earn £3,000 at the age of matter for legislation, central and local.

6o, but by the income he receives between Child-bearing. The cost of maternity ser-

the ages of 25 and 40. If his income at vices should be made as low as possible or even

that period is to be further taxed to provide provided free in all income groups; and the

for the flat-rate scheme, it is highly probable worries and stresses of childbirth should, as

that his family will be even smaller than at far as possible, be removed. Home-helps

present. But the supplementary scheme we should be provided during confinement and

have suggested will avoid this danger. at times of family crisis, and pregnant and

Different views are held as to whether nursing mothers in employment should be allowances are best paid in cash, in kind, or financially helped on a generous scale. We

partly in cash and partly in kind. These support the recommendations of the Royal

must be largely speculative as we have no College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists

experience on which to base our judgment. on this subject.

It is still more difficult to say whether any
one of these three ways would be eugenically
preferable to the others. The supplementary and graded allowance,
over and above the flat rate, might be supplied as part of a system of income-tax liabili-
ties and rebates, or as a compulsory insurance scheme, wherein payments and benefits would be stratified according to income levels up to a certain maximum. Towards such a
supplementary scheme, the state would not make any contribution whatsoever. What, in effect, would be involved would be a redistribution of the collective income of individuals and families between certain income levels. We wish to point out, however, that while identical re-distribution could be effected either by insurance schemes or by income-tax rebates, the former method pos-

Education. -We welcome the Education Act (I944), having recognized in the costs of -what has been called a " good education " *one of the main deterrents from parenthood.
Housing. Schemes for housing and town planning should provide adequate variation
in size of house to accommodate families of
varying numbers. Schemes should offer facilities for the care, recreation and upbringing of children and should help large families by providing creches, nursery schools and similar services. We favour schemes for facilitating the residential mobility of families as the number of children augments, without increase in rent charges. The subject of housing is intricate and tech-
nical. We have- no special knowledge of it, but stress its important demographic aspects.

sesses an important advantage, for it would be obvious to all that contributions were ii. Misceliane.us

derived solely from the groups benefiting- We would like to be allowed to submit

contributions and benefits being in propor- observations on four other subjects

tion. On the other hand it would be impossible to convince many people, even some of considerable intelligence, that the income-tax rebates were not a gift to the rich from the
state.
Encouragement of early marriage. We

(a) The Social Problem Group. (b) The type of person who to.day seeks
genetic advice (note by Dr. C. P.
Blacker). (c) Health examinations before marriage.

favour such eiacouragement, though we have (d) The establishment of an Imperial In-

no special views as to how it should be given.

stitute of Demographic Studies.

I02 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(a) The Social Problem Group. This term was first used by the Wood Committee (I929) which had been asked to investigate the incidence of Mental Defect in England and Wales and to make recommendations as to how the problem could best be dealt with. Six areas were carefully examined by Dr. E. 0. Lewis from whom, we understand, the Royal Commission has received evidence. Here are two passages from the Wood Report:
There is yet a further reason which renders it essential for us to consider this marginal group. The two groups of mentally defective and retarded children are not merely contiguous groups; there is scientific ground for thinking that a causal relation exists between them. The findings of our investigation ... point to the conclusion that the majority of the feebleminded are to be found within a relatively small social group, a group which may be described as the subnormal or social problem group, representing approximately io per cent of the whole population. Most of the parents in this subnormal group are themselves of poor mental endowment and would no doubt have been classed, when children, among the dull or retarded. Similarly, the dull children of the present generation, who form a large majority amongst children in this subnormal group, are the potential parents of many feeble-minded in the next generation. Therefore, from the stand-
ppint of the prevention of many social evils it is of the utmost importance that the problem of the education and social care of the borderline retarded child should be effectively tackled.
Let us assume that we could segregate as a separate community all the families in this country containing mental defectives of the primary amentia type. We should find that we had collected among them a most interesting social group. It would include, as everyone who has extensive practical experience of social service would readily admit, a much larger proportion of insane persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals (especially recidivists), unemployables, habitual slum dwellers, prostitutes, inebriates and other social inefficients than would a group of families not containing mental defectives. The overwhelming majority of the families thus collected will belong to that section of the community which we propose to term the " social problem" or " subnormal" group. This group comprises approximately the lowest IO per cent in the social scale of most communities.
The Wood Report was published in I929. Fourteen years later, the social problem group was again brought before the public eye by problems arising from the evacuation

of children from bombed areas. Here is an extract from a report* on the subject:
The effect di evacuation was to flood the dark
places with light and bring home to the national consciousness that the " submerged tenth " described by Charles Booth still exists in our towns like a hidden sore, poor, dirty, crude in its habits, and an intolerable and degrading burden to decent people forced by poverty to neighbour it. Within this group are the " problem families " always on the edge of pauperism and crime, riddled with mental and physical defect, in and out of the courts for child neglect, a menace to the community, of which the gravity is out of all proportion to their numbers.
The social problem group has, we think, interest for the Royal Commission because of another feature not mentioned above, namely an abnormally high fertility. " Two common types in this group," say the Wood Committee, "are the unmarried women of child-
bearing age admitted two, three or more times to the maternity ward of the workhouse, and the recidivist of the criminal classes. Those two types alone are the parents of a not inconsiderable number of the mental defectives who become social dangers and economic burdens; and probably this is the most serious offence of these parents against the community."
It is uncertain whether the social problem group is primarily the lower end of a continuous curve of distribution or a distinct sub-population with features that differentiate it biologically from those of the rest of the population. If the io per cent of the population which is lowest from the point of view of intelligence or any other socially desirable quality is arbitrarily cut off and studied in isolation, it will inevitably present many of the features of- the social problem group. Furthermore, natural selection will promote the combination of socially desirable or socially undesirable qualities in the same persons. On the other hand, it is possible that genetic factors interacting with lAd environmental conditions have, owing to a kind of vicious circle, more or less isolated a sub-population.
We do not feel that existing evidence as yet permits a decision in favour of either
* Our Towns: A Close-up. Oxford University Press,
'I943.

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

I03

hypothesis. This indecision makes careful "During the last fourteen years, I have

research all the more necessary. In either been much consulted by people who write to

event, however, it is inevitable that the the Society for guidance on genetic problems

group should be one of high fertility.

affecting marriage and parenthood. Many

The Government's proposals (Cmd. 6550) factors have to be taken into account in giving

for National Insurance suggest how further an opinion. Not only must a careful pedigree

light could be thrown on this subject. It is be obtained; the individual should also be

proposed to appoint a Minister of National seen and examined. For obvious reasons,

Insurance, and (para. I57) " Under the new the Society cannot undertake to give these

scheme a wide network Df local offices will elaborate services free to all comers, but I

be established at which the public may lodge undertake to provide them for persons who

claims, seek information or guidance, and are members of the Society.

obtain payments of certain benefits." It is " The Society has produced a Schedule of

also proposed to draw up a Register of In- instructions about how a pedigree should be

sured Persons. Paragraph 37 reads:

drawn up. I am in the habit of sending this

Under the new scheme it will be necessary to document to persons wanting genetic advice,

obtain and classify information about the whole at the same time asking them to carry out

population so as.to enable every person to be placed in his or her appropriate insurance class.
After that it will be necessary to compile and maintain one or more central registers, in which

the contained instructions. Recipients are asked to return the schedule to me when completed. I then arrange for the inquirer

the insurance record and status of every insured to come to see me with his married or

person will be entered and kept up to date. The register will be an essential feature of the scheme for several reasons, first to record classification and transfer between classes, second to facilitate

betrothed partner. " I would here like to be allowed to make
some general remarks about the people I

enforcement of the payment of contributions, have seen in this way.

and third so that the record of any insured person " The average person who seeks guidance

in relation to contributions and benefits can be
ascertained when necessary. .The task of organization involved in compiling and maintaining the register is obviously one of the first magni-

in this sphere is a morally responsible and conscientious individual who generally comes from the middle class. His family history

tude, but it is an unavoidable step and one often exhibits qualities markedly above the

which must ultimately promote efficiency and average as well as the black spots which

economy. (Our italics.)

cause the misgivings. In the majority of

This register should yield valuable infor- cases, the good qualities have, in my opinion,

mation about the Social Problem Group. outweighed the bad and after pointing out

Machinery will have to be created to check that it is impossible to guarantee of any

the careless admission of claims and the mating that the children will be normal, I

irresponsible distribution of benefits. If the have advised them to take the risk and have

people in question do, in fact, present mul- children.

tiple social problems, the fact should show up "In most cases, the abnormality which is

in the records of the national register. It causing concern, while generally recognized

would be a good thing if the Royal Com- as hereditary, does not conform in its inci-

mission could recommend that special atten- dence to the simple Mendelian hypotheses of

tion be devoted to this matter by the Minis- dominance, recessiveness and sex-linkage.

try concerned with National Insurance, so In some instances, the hereditary nature of

that information which would enable us to the abnormality is doubtful. (Not all fits are

form a true estimate of the nature of this the expression of idiopathic epilepsy; not

group is not ignored or buried in files.

all forms of- amentia are primary.) In many

(b) The type of person who to-day seeks cases the couple are obviously of good type,

genetic advice. The following is submitted by capable of making good parents.

Dr. C. P. Blacker, Honorary Secretary of the " The predominance of socially valuable

Eugenics Society:

persons among those who to-day seek guid-

I04 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ance on eugenic questions provides an We do not believe that compulsory

example of the differential effects of propa- examinations are yet practicable in this

ganda. In the last twenty-five years the country. Nor do we believe that it is

population of this country has heard much feasible to ask doctors to produce certificates

about the functions of parenthood. Much of fitness for marriage. (The most that is

has been said about birth control, about possible for a doctor- is to give a declaration

over-population, about threatened depopula- that, to the best of his knowledge, the indi-

tion, about hereditary diseases, about the vidual is free from certain diseases such as

health of mothers and children. The first to venereal diseases and tuberculosis.) But we

be reached by such propaganda are the do believe that, without asking for certifi-

scrupulous, conscientious and intelligent cates, people should get themselves examined

elements of the population; the last to be before marriage. Many doctors, however,

touched are the feckless, improvident and are in doubt as to how they should conduct

stupid. The last-named are the people at such examinations, and very delicate ques-

whom the propaganda is aimed; yet they tions are raised.

are the last to respond.

To help the medical profession in this

" Two lessons, it seems to me, are to be matter, the Society has. produced a Pre-

learned from the above. The first is that nuptial Health Schedule which provides the

great care must be taken in giving genetic necessary guidance. The documents have

advice. If the good qualities shown by the been in fairly continuous demand since they

inquirer himself and discernible among his were prepared in I936, and the British

relatives are not taken carefully into account Medical Association is in the habit of

and balanced against the bad, if in other words referring inquirers to us.

the problem is hastily or cursorily surveyed (d) An Imperial Institute of Demographic

and pronounced upon, there is a danger of Studies. We regard the collection of com-

the community being deprived of children prehensive and accurate data on human

who would be valuable assets to posterity. reproductive trends as a vital task of the

" The second lesson is that the principles of future. This need Would, in our view, be best

negative eugenics should be known by those achieved by the creation of an Imperial

who administer the social services. If it is Institute of Demographic Studies with

true that large families (often decimated by ample funds and staff. We would like to see

high wastages) are born to subnormal and such an Institute established on a high level

irresponsible parents, it is also true that -perhaps depending from the Privy Council

many of their pregnancies are unplanned and as does the Medical Research Council.

unwanted. Such parents are grateful for Demographic methods throughout the empire

guidance and help; but they often, lack the could then be co-ordinated by frequent

qualities to help themselves. Hence the need conferences with representatives of the

of eugenically enlightened social services." Dominions and Crown Colonies; and re-

(c) Health examinatiins before marriage. search could be promoted and collated. The

Various proposals have been made about Institute might well bring this country into

health examinations before marriage, and in a position of world leadership in the matter

certain countries such examinations are com- of demographic methods. Such a creation

pulsory. The question has been discussed in would be a really worthy legacy of the Royal

the House of Lords (November I7th, I934: Commission, and would give it unquestioned

Speech by Lord Kilmaine).

historical importance.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVII, No. 8.

