THE EUGENIC HYPOTHESIS*
(i) Positive Eugenics
By FREDERICK OSBORN

M OST large families in the United States slowly drying up all social advance at its

today are found among people who source. The outlook for what we believe to

are isolated and outside the main be our advanced form of civilization would

currents of American life. Those in the remote then be dismal indeed. It is this genetic

rural areas, whose isolation is geographic, do aspect of present birth differentials which is

not present a eugenic problem. They are so disturbing to the eugenist.

simply following the customs of their group, The present situation is not fair to either

and there is not any evidence to indicate group of parents. Some lack the knowledge

that these people or any other large popula- and the means for restricting the size of their

tion groups differ from other people in the families, and others, who are now in the

average of their genetic possibilities.

majority and may want more children,

But there is a serious eugenic as well as cannot have more than one or two without

social problem with respect to the large a very serious fall in their level of living,

families which are found scattered through- unless they have inherited wealth.

out the industrial and urban populations. Fortunately this situation is changg,

Too often the children in such families do though all too slowly. The proportion of

not receive the care, nor the food, nor the parents in a position to restrict the number

education which we think of as the American of their children to those they actually plan

heritage. At the same time, in the same for is increasing as contraceptives become

sections of the population, the parents who more available and more effective, as

give their children the best opportunities for voluntary sterilization is increasingly used

sound growth rear on the average no more to prevent the perpetuation of transmissable

than two children.

hereditary defects or to safeguard health,

This uneven distribution of births within
each sectional and social group is generally considered a handicap to the improvement of society. A large proportion of each new
generation has to be re-educated to higher
standards than those of its parents. If present differentials were reversed, and a
majority of children benefited from the best parental care, as well as from the advances in the American environment, social
improvement would then more certainly have a cumulative effect, each generation
better than the last.
Society is even more handicapped if, as at present may well be the case, the next
generation is being bred in too large a proportion from parents who have less than average genetic potential for intelligence and for other socially valuable characteristics. If this process should continue, we would be

and as the change to family limitation
becomes more nearly universal. There is also today a trend toward helping
parents meet the cost of raising children, as' shown in public recreation, free school
lunches, income-tax reductions for each
child, scholarships for the higher education of able children, etc. It is reasonable to hope that this trend can be given much further impetus that the financial and personal
hardships of raising a family of four or five or more children will be substantially reduced.
Among the limited number of people who are living under conditions of a generally freer choice as to the number of children they will have, there is frequently a reversal of the usual birth differentials. As examples, people at the highest rental levels have more children than people at the rental levels immediately below them. The most success-
ful college graduates have more children than

* See page 8.

do college graduates who are less successful.

3I

32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

College presidents have more children than subject to the social and psychological

do college professors.

pressures favourable to having children.

There is also evidence that the parents The eugenist wants, therefore, to see those

with the larger number of children in the conditions brought about and is justified

above examples provide, in general, an in trying to further them. If his efforts were

above-average bringing up, and there is some in conflict with other socially desirable ends,

evidence to indicate (and none opposed) that he would have to wait for more evidence

they give their children the probability of a as to the importance of what he wants to do,

genetic inheritance capable of a better than for it would be difficult to decide which was

average response to the environment. the more important, the immediate needs

It appears that under conditions which at of the present generation or the long-term

present affect only a small proportion of the needs of future generations.

population, a eugenic selection of births may Fortunately the first steps to be taken are

actually be taking place, wholly voluntary, not in conflict with present social needs.

the result of a new type of environmental Important changes are already under way

pressures.

because the public has recognized their

There is certainly a possibility that these desirability for other than eugenic reasons.

pressures can be given better direction and The extension of birth control to the whole

can be brought to bear on a majority of the population has not had to wait on proof of its

population instead of only on a minority. eugenic desirability. The desire to help

parents meet the cost of rearing children

The Eugenic Hypothesis

springs from the recognition of the entirely

It is possible to develop in the United new conditions which result from the

States a social and economic environment industrial revolution and the fact that

in which individual parents will plan and children no longer contribute to the family

have children in numbers proportional to the economy but create an almost intolerable

ability of the parents to provide a favourable economic burden for the average family if

environment for child nurture and develop- there are more than one or two. The eugenist

ment. Such a situation would also make for can with confidence join in the work of

a eugenic selection of births, because parents changing these conditions.

who had the ability to provide a favourable The final task, that of creating social and

home environment would tend also to possess psychological pressures such that parents

and pass on a better than average genetic most able to contribute to society will have

endowment. These favourable selective the larger fmilies, must be approached with

forces would operate through individual caution. But here, too, the social and

choices within each community, within each eugenic needs seem to be very similar. It is

ethnic group and within each social class. essential to satisfactory social progress that

Under such conditions, each generation in each generation the major proportion of

of Americans would see a substantial re- children should be born to parents who are

duction in the proportion of defect and a most fitted to pass on the best of the social

substantial increase in the proportion of heritage; and there is a great deal of

men and women of a high order of socially evidence to indicate that these same parents

valuable characteristics.

are the ones most likely to pass on to their

Making the Eugenic Hypothesis a Reality

children a supenor genetic potential. Both social and eugenic considerations

We cannot even test the eugenic hypo- therefore demand that society develop to its

thesis effectively until a much larger number utmost all those influences which will make

of people than at present are actually living the job of having and rearing children

under conditions of real freedom to have compete successfully with all the other

as many or as few children as they want, interesting and valuable jobs which now

and until a larger proportion of them are offer themselves to able and ambitious

THE EUGENIC HYPOTHESIS

33

people. It is a matter of keeping clear the however, be controversy as to proper means

normal emotional channels, and of keeping of promoting this goal.

through all the early years a sound balance Psychological changes to influence the

between the satisfactions provided by attitudes of parents are less well understood.

children and the satisfactions to be found in They will have to be introduced with caution

other interests. If this can be done, then the and continuously tested. The idea of training

conflict between having more children or young people in the attitudes and interests

having more material possessions will prob- which will increase their feeling for children

ably resolve itself in the majority of cases. is likely to be generally acceptable. But the

The dangerous effects of the uneven spread
of birth control are already recognized.
Probably no further proof is needed that this condition should be remedied as rapidly as possibk. The almost impossible burden which modem conditions put on the average family if it has more than one or two children

relation of this idea to other goals and procedures in education is more complex.
The major aim of eugenics is to increase the proportion of children born with a high hereditary potential for being good and able citizens. The eugenist believes that by acting

are so evident from various recent studies on the eugenic hypothesis this aim may be

that the effort to lessen the economic burden attained, and that by the same measure our

of larger families should be expected to social heritage of attitudes, beliefs and

receive strong public support. There may, knowledge will be vastly improved.

POPULATION STUDIES

Vol. V. No. 3

Edited by D. V. GLASS
CoENws

March 1952

H. B. M. MuRPHr. The Assimilation of Refugee Igrants in Australia ELzAn4ETH STADULI. The Resettlement of Displaced Persons in the United Kingdom G. W. ROBER. A Life Table for a West Indian Slave Population Jutzy BERENT. Fertility and Social Mobility C. WATON. Birth Control and Abortion in France since 1939

SUBSCRIPTION: 30$. nd Per volume of the's parts

Published for the POPULATION INVESGATION COMruITE by the CAMBEUDGE UNIVERsIy PRES, 200 EUSON RoAD, LONDON, N.W.i.

ugenu sReview, VoL. LIV, No. 1

