REVIEWS OF BOOKS

BIOLOGY

of highly complex cells or tissues. We find

Deuchar, Elizabeth M. Biochemical Aspects of Amphibian Development. London, 1966. Methuen (Monographs on Biological Subjects). Pp. ix + 206. Price 30s.

ourselves facing not merely end-products, in the form of differentiated cells, which are clearly of enormous complexity, but also a basic controlling system which is itself rather highly complex, since the DNA of the genes exists

IT HAS ALWAYS been a main objective in most in higher organisms in the form of chromosomes

areas of experimental biology to formulate the which contain at least protein, RNA, and quite

problems in terms which allow them to be possibly lipid, and even carbohydrate, in addition

tackled, if not solved, by the methods of bio- to the nucleic acid which we should like to

chemistry and biophysics. Experimental embry- regard as ultimately the conductor of the whole

ology has followed the same path. It finds itself, orchestra.

however, in a position of considerable difficulty. The amphibian embryo was the favourite

It has been comparatively easy to translate experimental material of embryologists for

such biological processes as digestion, meta- several decades after they first tried to find how

bolism or nervous conduction into chemical or to approach processes of cellular differentiation

physical terms. Even the processes of heredity- and morphogenesis in physico-chemical terms.

if one is content to reduce them to the mere It has also been the subject of extensive investiga-

transmission of "hereditary factors" from one tions on embryonic metabolism, and of some of

generation to the next-presented no insuperable the recent molecular biological approaches.

difficulties. Embryology, however, has at least Dr. Deuchar, in attempting a short monograph

one foot in the field of morphology, or form in of about 65,000 words on the biochemical

entities of far more than molecular size. Most aspects of this type of embryo, has therefore

of morphological biology, which includes com- taken on an exceedingly large task. She has

parative anatomy and much of evolution theory, acquitted herself very well. The material is

and which was for so long the central kernel of clearly organized, largely in terms of the

the subject, is still quite out of reach of physico- sequence of temporal stages. It will be useful to

chemical methods. Embryology is on the the biochemical readers, to whom the book will

borderline. Some parts of it, such as the meta- make most of its appeal, that there is a short

bolism of embryos, present no great intellectual and very clear outline description of the morpho-

difficulties, though still plenty of problems which logical development of the embryo, which

are not yet solved. Needham's monumental provides a sound basis on which the later

Chemical Embryology, published thirty-five years descriptions can rely. It is fortunate again that

ago, provides sufficient evidence that this aspect Deuchar has had the sense to begin her descrip-

of the matter is by no means unapproachable. tion of the embryo long before fertilization, i.e.

Coming right down to the present day, the new with the formation of the ovum. In the very

methods, which go under the name of molecular short term of one life history the cytoplasm of

biology, for the investigation of the synthesis of the egg is of little less importance than its

particular specified proteins and its genetic nucleus, a point which is too often forgotten by

control, have recently been widely applied to enthusiastic geneticists. The coverage carries

embryonic systems, and we are clearly still in on from oogenesis right up to the time of

an early phase of an "information explosion" metamorphosis.

on these aspects of developmental processes. The treatment throughout is well balanced in

The difficulties arise when we try to face up to emphasis on different questions, and the facts

the problems, not of the metabolism or synthesis and the interpretations put on them (and

of defined molecules, but of the transformations Dr. Deuchar's evaluation ofthese interpretations)

160

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

are clearly and succinctly expressed. Attention is paid to items which appeared in the literature only less than a year ago. Naturally in the space available it was impossible to provide a complete coverage of all published items. The limitations ofa short monograph have also made it necessary for Dr. Deuchar to be a bit cavalier in her treatment of some still highly controversial subjects, such as the relationship of mitochondria to the synthesis of yolk granules, or the interpretation of work with artificial inducing materials. There are a few places in which she does not seem quite to have grasped the crucial issues of the most recent work. For instance, there is no reference in the index to ribosomes, and her discussion of the nucleolarless mutant of Xenopus gives what has now turned out to be a rather misguided account of nucleolar function. However, it would be almost impossible for any book, even with the minimum time expended on its printing and production, to be fully up to date with the most recent advances. Dr. Deuchar's monograph will certainly provide an extremely valuable introduction to the whole subject, though the specialists will then wish to go to fuller accounts of the detailed fields which she sketches in.
C. H. WADDINGTON
GENETICS
Whitehouse, H. L. K. Towards an Understanding of the Mechanism of Heredity. London, 1965. Arnold. Pp. xii+372. Price 55s.

The evidence presented covers the whole field of genetics. Roughly half the book deals with those classical experiments and observations which led to the basic concepts in genetics, the remainder is concerned with recent evidence regarding the chemical nature of the gene, the
genetic code, and current ideas concerning gene action. The evidence is well assembled and presented in a readily accessible manner.
The book has been carefully written and great trouble taken to avoid scientific inaccuracies but, perhaps because of the complex nature of the subject matter, it is not light reading. Mention might have been made of allosteric activation (as distinct from inhibition), and more time spent on the effects of hormones in regulating gene activity (apart from work on insect larvae); the most convincing experimental evidence in favour of the Lyon hypothesis is not mentioned. However, apart from a few such small points, the book forms a very extensive coverage of the subject, and the author states quite clearly in which fields our knowledge is still far from complete, as for example the organization of chromosomes particularly with regard to their replication.
In summary, this is a scholarly presentation of the evidence for current beliefs concerning the mechanism of heredity. It fulfils an important need and should prove particularly valuable to University students and those concerned with teaching genetics.
ALAN E. H. EMERY

IN RECENT YEARS there has been a tendency in some textbooks of genetics to allow modern ideas concerning gene action to overshadow the experimental evidence upon which basic ideas in genetics are founded. Little consideration for

Luth, Paul. Schipfungstag und Mensch der Zukunft: Die Entwicklung der modernen Genetik. Diisseldorf-Ko1n, 1965. Eugen Diederichs Verlag. Pp. 350. Price DM 14.80.

example, is usually given to the chiasmatype THE AUTHOR, a German physician, describes

theory or to the evidence which led to the in his preface how he had to learn human

rejection of the idea that genes were discrete genetics as a medical student under Hitler and

entities arranged on the chromosome like beads how he later on set out to clarify and purge his

on a string. Dr. Whitehouse deals with these ideas. The result is a creditable book, which

matters and many others in his book, the purpose describes not only the historical development of

of which has been to present the important genetics and evolutionary theory but also the

evidence upon which current beliefs concerning racialist and antisocial movements which were

the mechanism of heredity are based. The main and still are a product of the misunderstanding

emphasis is on experimental evidence and little and falsification of some of the results of those

space is devoted to speculation and conjecture. sciences. The English reader may find the book

161

