362 EUGENICS REVIEW.
concile ourselves to the continuance of the conditions which seem to threaten to destroy our civilisation as they seem to have destroyed so many others, namely, by bringing about deterioration of our stock. Thirdly, although reasonable men may perhaps regard the socialistic plan of society as a hopeful experiment and as one that ought to be given a trial, no impartial person will regard the success of the plan as so well assured that we can afford to stake upon it the whole future of our race, holding ourselves absolved by the hope of it from the duty of giving careful consideration to all other eugenic possibilities. W. McD.
Woods, FREDERICK ADAMS. The Influence of Monarchs: Steps in a New Science of History. New York. The Macmillan Co.; 19I3;
price 8s. 6d.; pp. xiii., 422. READERS of Dr. Adams Woods's " Mental and Moral Heredity in Royalty" will not be slow to welcome this continuation of his interesting researches and the further elaboration of his striking plea for a fuller recognition of the decisive influence on the course of affairs of the hereditary personal qualities of the great family (in a biological sense) which is known as European Royalty. He would not, perhaps, himself contend that he had absolutely proved by his statistics that the quality of rulers is the chief factor in a nation's advance or decline, or that the verdicts of historians are essentially just, and that " historiometry " is an " exact " science; but it may be admitted that he has made his positions exceedingly probable, at any rate for the period he reviews, viz., from the later Middle Ages to the French Revolution. And he has certainly provided a salutary antidote to the mechanical theory of history which ascribes everything to " conditions " and nothing to the personalities of the actors in the drama of history, and has too easily been accepted as the only " scientific " view. No higher praise could be bestowed on Dr. Woods than that he worthily continues the criticism of this theory which was so brilliantly initiated by William James, in his essay on " Great Men and their Environment " in the " Will to Believe." To come more specifically to Dr. Woods's present argument, he finds that "between the mentalities of the rulers and the conditions of their realms " there is deducible from his data, the verdicts of historians, the correlation of *6o or more, which, in view of the character of some of the data, he justifiably regards as very high (p. 247). The only considerable exception to the rule is found in England, where national prosperity has of late proceeded independently of royal influence. He suggests therefore that "the real differences among nations, as among the individuals who compose them, are caused by arrangements of chromosomes within the gametes," and looks " upon these great statesmen as born and not made, and . . . . the nation as much favoured by certain forces almost hidden and unsuspected as yet, forces in-born in their nature, such as may well be acting all the time without easy detection-differences brought about by natural selection, by immigration and emigration, by differences in net fertility, sexual selection, the formation and development of the caste system, and other eugenic or aristogenic movements but little understood " (p. 238).
Clearly Dr. Adams Woods's researches are eminently deserving of eugenical approval, royal patronage, and democratic denunciation! To promote, however, their scientific completeness there are a number of further problems he should endeavour to solve by his methods -as, indeed, he has already begun to do. As it is evident that royalty can only influence national welfare where this institution exists, to what influences are national progress and decay to be ascribed under republican or quasi-republican (as in England) forms of government? Probably it will be possible here too to trace personal and hereditary influences (of governing families, etc.) with some definiteness. Again, what is the social value of institutions which either secure the survival of the strong

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

363

and government by the able, but only by violent civic struggles between

the aspirants to power (as in Oriental monarchies and Latin American

presidencies), or aim at so subtle a system of checks and precautions that

no man can control everything, and government can be securely carried

on by mediocrities (as in old Japan, the Chinese mandarinate, and the

older British universities)? Lastly, might not much instruction accrue

from studying the anomalous cases of illustrious men too great for their

country, who failed because they were not properly supported, such as

Vercingetorix in Caesarian Gaul, Arminius in' Augustan Germany,

Skanderbeg of Albania, Walleusteiu the Bohemian, and, above all, the

great family of Hamilcar Barka, which so nearly changed the course

of history and gave to the supine and short-sighted traders of Carthage the

victory over imperial Rome. It seems probable that in the end all these

apparent exceptions would only deepen our appreciation of the power of

personalities in history and of the absurdity of trying to do without them,

and so lead science to correct an error into which only gross ignorance of

its own history could have betrayed it.

F. C. S. SCHILLER.

Wallin, J. E. WALLACE. Experimental Studies of Mental Defectives: A Critique of the Binet-Simon Tests and a Contribution to the Psychology of Epilepsy. (Education Psychology Monographs, No. 7). Warwick and York, Inc. Baltimore, U.S.A.; 1912.
THE ingenious scale devised by the late M. Binet for measuring the intelligence of backward school children of Paris assumed that mental efficiency could be measured in terms of age. By actual experiment he found that most normal children of four could just repeat three figures from memory, name common objects such as a knife or a penny, distinguish the longer of two unequal lines, and give their sex. At six they could just repeat sentences of sixteen syllables, define common objects in terms of their use, distinguish pictures of ugly and pretty faces, carry out three simple commissions successively from a single instruction, distinguish morning from afternoon, and give their age. At nine they could repeat the days of the week; at ten, the months of the year; at twelve, seven figures or twenty-six syllables. A list containing about five tests suitable for each age from three to thirteen was accordingly drawn up. A child of eight who can answer all the tests for the age of six, but fails for those of seven or eight, is said to have a mental age of six; and to be backward or retarded by two years. A retardation of two or more years denotes mental deficiency such as would qualify a child for admission to special schools.
The scheme has been taken up enthusiastically in America and elsewhere, and has even appeared in the regulations published in this country by the Board of Education. American investigators have applied it to groups of a thousand children; and, as an inference from their results, (somewhat hastily obtained, it must be confessed), have declared enthusiastically in favour of the value of scale.
Dr. Wallin has been more cautious. He realises that the Binet-Simon scale is not " a wonderful mental X-ray machine," and that it has suffered considerably from being " victimised by the indiscriminate exploiter " before it had been perfected by its ingenious inventor. His book contains one of the most thorough studies of the scale that has been published in the English language; and his analysis does not hesitate to criticise the imperfections involved in assigning certain tests to certain ages or in calculating the mental age according to certain arbitrary rules from the results obtained. He has further used a second series of tests of a more experimental nature (dynamometer, form-board, ataxiagraph, and others) with a view to studying the underlying problem of variation in mental and physical traits.
His conclusion is as follows: " While it does not scale different grades of intelligence with the degree of accuracy which would be desired,

