SOME RECENT STUDIES OF INTELLIGENCE
A Survey of the Society's "Occasional Papers"
By H. J. EYSENCK, Ph.D.
Psychological Department, Maudsley Hospital

T HIS brief survey of the second, third, innate quality. (2) People with lower in-

and fourth " Occasional Papers on telligence tend to have more children than

Eugenics "* must open with a word people with higher intelligence. (3) The

of appreciation to the editor of the series for intellectual level of the population is de-

his success in bringing together authors of such high eminence in their professional

creasing in consequence of these facts at a rate of approximately I15 to 2 points of I.Q.

fields who, although they are dealing with per generation-possibly a little less, possibly

matters of great complexity and great diffi- a little more. (Step (i) is not strictly speak-

culty, yet write with a clarity and concise- ing essential for this conclusion; even if

ness rarely found in social scientists. Add to intelligence were entirely due to environ-

these qualities the paramount interest of the mental factors, (3) would follow from (2)

subjects dealt with-Intelligence and Fer- alone. However, on this basis the problem

tility,j The Trend of National Intelligence,,, would cease to be a eugenic one, and become

Psychological Approaches to the Biography of educational, and in Burt's and Thomson's

Genius§-and the great value of these pub- formulation step (i) is included in the argu-

lications becomes apparent.

ment, as it undoubtedly ought to be.)

The importance of these contributions is The consequences of such a decline are

increased by the fact that each of the authors shattering in their implications. A loss of a

describes large-scale experimental studies few points of I.Q. per generation may not

which he himself has personally carried out appear very serious, but, as Burt shows, " if

or directed; these studies were started the rate [of loss] assumed continues, then in

several decades ago, and the authors are able little over fifty years the number of pupils of

in their discussions to deal with the critic- ' scholarship ' ability would be approxi-

isms and objections which have been voiced mately halved and the number of feeble-

in the meantime. Some of these criticisms minded almost doubled." It is doubtful if

are brought together in an article by Julian civilization as we know it could survive such

Blackburn, and in reviewing the original a catastrophe.

papers it will be convenient to deal with this Both Burt and Thomson are modest in

article also, as well as with the reply by Sir evaluating their data. They do not claim

Cyril Burt.l1

that their work, or the similar researches

The essential point of Burt's and Thom- carried out by Cattell, Fraser Roberts, and

son's argument is probably well enough others, definitely prove their contention;

known to eugenists to need no more than what they claim is that all the available

cursory mention. It might be presented in a evidence points clearly to the existence of a

series of steps: (i) Intelligence is largely an grave problem, and that the time has come

for some very large-scale investigation to be

*Published jointly by the Eugenics Society and Hamish Hamilton Ltd.
t By Sir Cyril Burt. Pp. 43. Price 2S.
: By Professor Godfrey Thomson and other authors.

carried out to assess the exact amount of the decline, preferably by the testing of total populations, rather than samples, and by

Pp. 35. Price 2S.

actual direct comparison of different genera-

§ By Professor Lewis Terman. Pp. 24. Price is. 6d. n Population Studies, 1, 2, I947, " Family Size, Intelligeace Score and Social Class," by J. Blackburn. Pp. I65-76. By C. Burt, pp. I77-86.

tions. It is difficult to see how that conclusion can be controverted, and there would be very few psychologists nowadays who would

2I

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

not be found in agreement with Burt and
Thomson in this matter. In the article cited above, Blackburn sets
out the main arguments which might be
adduced against this consensus of opinion. His first point is that the authors whose
work he criticises have underestimated the effect of environment on intelligence. Burt, in an appendix to his pamphlet, enumerates
the many diverse ways in which psychologists have tried to evaluate the relative contribu-
tion of nature and nurture, and Blackburn
cannot truly be said to have added anything
to the general argument. He shows, indeed,
that environment contributes something to intelligence test scores-a point on which
Burt was one of the first to insist from the
very earliest days of the testing movementbut he fails to show any reason for believing
that this something amounts to more than 50 per cent of the total variance of general intellectual ability, as claimed by Burt. Indeed, Burt is if anything excessively conservative in mentioning this value; many people would put the contribution of innate factors nearer to 8o per cent of the
variance. Blackburn's other criticisms relates to the
estimate of Burt and Thomson of the correlation between intelligence and fertility, which
is put by them in the neighbourhood of - 0-2. His argument here appears to rest in
the main on a statistical fallacy; he quotes figures from restricted ranges of ability in which lower correlations are found between intelligence and fertility, and argues from these figures to the total population without using the proper " correction for selection " formula of Pearson's. Burt in his reply shows that when this is done the results fall in line with his own. Thus it does not appear that the conclusions drawn by Burt and Thomson can be regarded as in any degree invalidated.
While the two pamphlets reviewed so far deal with roughly similar problems, Terman's paper describes the history and the most recent follow-up studies of his monumental work on genius, in which approximately i,ooo highly gifted California school children were observed and tested during the period from I922 to I946. This work was

reported in four large volumes, the latest one of which has only recently appeared, and
is summarized on the last few pages of this
pamphlet. The results are so fascinating that no one
interested in the natural history and social
importance of intelligence should fail to
acquaint himself with the paper. As might have been expected, the total group of
children in their adult lives are very much
more successful than would have been an
unselected group. But perhaps even more interesting than this finding is another one
which contrasts a successful and an unsuccessful group of " geniuses " in terms of
their outstanding character-traits. In order
of greatest difference, these are: perseverance, self-confidence, integration toward goals, and freedom from inferiority feelings. In terms of recent personality research, it
appears therefore that the general personality trait labelled " neuroticism " is of very great importance in the success or failure of equally intelligent persons in life. It is reassuring to note that the non-neurotic,
successful group had fewer divorces, more marriages and more children (I.7 as against i12) than the neurotic, failure group. If " neuroticism " is an inheritable quality, as
many psychologists believe, this may suggest that the racial stock is getting progressively less neurotic; this ought to be followed up by research on less intelligent and less highly
selected groups. It is reassuring to find that plans are being
made to ensure the continued follow-up of the entire gifted group at least until I970, by which time the ultimate fertility of the group and its sum total of accomplishment
can be more accurately assessed. We may
emphatically endorse Terman's concluding
remark: "Enough has already been learned to demonstrate that children of I.Q. I40 or above are potentially a nation's most precious asset. The demonstration that this is true should be well worth the i5o,ooo dollars which the research ... has cost to date." And the hope may perhaps be expressed that similar large-scale researches may be begun in this country also, for the greater advance-
ment of the social good.

