C. P. BLACKER,
M.A., M.D.
Voluntary Sterilization:
The Last Sixty Years

1. TIME FOR RE-ASSESSMENT 2. ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY BETWEEN 1929 AND 1934
3. THE BROCK COMMITTEE (1934)
4. THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION (1934-1939)
5. CAUSES OF FAILURE

1. TIME FOR RE-ASSESSMENT

advocated birth control. Among these Havelock

IN A SHORT introductory article published Ellis was prominent. But public opinion was

in the October 1961 number of this REvIEw, unreceptive, uninformed and hostile. On moral

I drew attention to how ideas on the possi- grounds the reaction was not unlike that now

bilities ofvoluntary sterilization have broadened. evoked by artificial insemination; and on ad-

During the early years ofthe century the measure ministrative grounds it was argued that the

was mainly discussed in terms of its usefulness effects of a workable scheme on the incidence of

in checking what seemed to be an increase in the mental defect would be imperceptible.

number of mental defectives. But the horizon The issue was taken up in 1929 by the Eugenics

broadened. Possibilities were recognized of Society which advanced proposals which had not

sterilztion being welcomed by wider circles, before been seriously formulated. These pro-

for example by people who had recovered from posals had a mixed reception, but they attracted

mental disorders, by those afflicted with physical attention and provoked discussion. In three

infirmities deemed to be hereditary, and by years (1929-1932) public opinion was swung to

mentally and physically normal people (so-called the extent that a concerted petition for an

carriers) who were afraid of transmitting to their official inquiry was submitted to the then Minis-

children hereditary infirmities which afflicted ter of Health by three weighty organizations.

their relatives but not themselves.

This petition was sympathetically received and

Since the end of the second world war, how- in June 1932 a Departmental Committee was

ever, the qualitative criterion of morbid inheri- appointed. This Committee produced in 1934 a

tance has been superseded. The quantitative report unanimously recommending that volun-

possibilities of sterilization have been explored tary sterilization be legalized along the lines

for controlling fertility in under-developed earlier advocated by the Eugenics Society.

countries; and people have been voluntarily Suddenly the Society was heavily re-inforced. A

sterilized in numbers which were unheard of Joint Committee was formed, and much effective

during the inter-war years. A new assessment of propaganda was done. Up till 1936 the prospects

the potential benefits of sterilization in western of legalization seemed good. But adverse factors

countries is due.

set in. Events in Germany generated a distaste

I have been asked to summarize the develop- for sterilization; and political opposition from

ments in Great Britain during the last sixty years. the left was re-inforced by the counter-propa-

Briefly, these have been as follows: before 1914 ganda with which certain religious groups had

the possible benefits of sterilization were recog- responded to the departmental committee's

nized by a few far-seeing writers who also proposals. The movement for legalization lost

9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1962,54, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

impetus as the threat of war loomed larger. The cerned with mental defectt and insanity; the

war in 1939 put an end to all articulate demand second with the prohibition of marriage of

and, since 1945, there has been no revival of the certified mental defectives and insane persons

demand.

(unless these had been sterilized or, on other

But since that year the issue has been raised in grounds, were known to be infertile); thethird

a new form and in a big way outside Europe. with "pauperism and crime."

Hence the story falls into two parts. The first During 1929 it occurred to certain members of

covers the period 1929-1934 when the Society the Eugenics Society that an effective reply to

was acting more or less alone; the second, critics who reproached us with being too much

covering the period 1934-1939, followed the concerned with theory and too little with practice

publication of the Departmental Committee's would be for the Society to take an initiative in

report.

starting a hospital, or endowing some beds in a

hospital, wherein priority would be given to

2. ACTIVMTIES OF THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
BETWEEN 1929 AND 1934*

candidates for voluntary sterilization.+ This proposal was raised before the Council.

Under the presidency of Major Leonard Darwin (son of the illustrious Charles) the Society had, in the nineteen-twenties, concerned itself with the possibilities of voluntary sterilization.

Dr. R. A. Gibbons, long an advocate ofvoluntary sterilization, quoting an opinion of Sir Travers Humphreys, contended that the legal position as to this measure was so uncertain that the project of endowing a bed would receive little support.

A Draft Bill to Legalize Sterilization In 1929 a draft Bill was drawn up which, as seen in to-day's retrospect, had an oblique preamble and peculiar objectives. The preamble was worded as follows: "An Act to prevent the practice of sterilization when morally or socially objectionable, thus safe-guarding its use for the better preservation of the races." The draft Bill was divided into three parts. The first was con-

The argument carried weight with the Council
which favoured, as a preliminary, the establishment of the legality of voluntary sterilization. Sir Bernard Mallet, who had succeeded Major
Darwin as the Society's president, supported
this view. I well remember a meeting in December 1929, convened by Sir Bernard in the
Society's rooms then located at 20 Grosvenor Gardens. At this meeting Sir Frederick Willis, than whom few people were better qualified to

* Sometime in the future it will be accepted as a self-
evident proposition that death control must be balanced by birth control (or, as some prefer to call it, control of conception). The proposition will appear to be so selfevident that it will seem inconceivable that anyone could ever have disputed it. Births will soon be controlled by

express an opinion on the issue of legality, was present by invitation. Sir Frederick fully confirmed Dr. Gibbons's view.
Early in 1930, a recommendation that the Eugenics Society should take an initiative in

means of which to-day we know nothing.

getting voluntary sterilization legalized was

An interest will then arise in the early efforts to control the balance between births and deaths-in developments

accordingly submitted to the Society's Council.

of the idea that such control is necessary and of the

methods of control earlier used. Among the latter is sterilization the history of which may, a hundred years from now, become the theme of research theses and monographs.
Hence the events described in this section may have some historical interest. The Society has played a notable part in the story which may be worth putting on record. I write some thirty years after the events I describe. Most of the people whose names appear in the story are now dead. But fortunately minute-books, annual reports and many of the relevant documents survived the war. These were tied up in large parcels which since 1939 have reposed in a basement of the Society's headquarters. I have selected from and rearranged this material in chronological order and have prepared an annotated copy of this article giving references to the relevant

t At fairly regular intervals the terminology of psychiatry is purged, much as are the political leaders of certain countries. Current terms are outlawed and expressions, sometimes unwieldly and circuitous but held to be free from pejorative innuendo, are substituted. In this article I will use the terminology current during the period under discussion.
Several of the persons mentioned below have since received titles. Their past and present designations will be given when they are first mentioned in the text. Thereafter they will be named as they were known at the time.
For an account of the inner history of how this subject came to be raised and adopted by the Society, see THE EUGENICS REvmw, January 1930. 22, 4, 239-247. The Sterilization Proposals: A History of their Develop-

surviving documents.

ment.

I0

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

This recommendation was conveyed in a memorandum signed by Dr. R. A. (now Sir Ronald) Fisher, Professor J. S. (now Sir Julian) Huxley, Dr. J. A. Ryle, Mr. E. J. Lidbetter and myself. The recommendation was unanimously approved by the Council which then appointed the Society's COMMITTEE FOR LEGALISING EUGENIC STERLISATION. This at once embarked on an active career. It was largely because of my participation in these preliminary activities that I was appointed in 1931 as the Society's General Secretary.
The possibility of getting the legal issue settled by a test case was early explored by the Committee. The matter was put to a solicitor who submitted that the cost to the Society would be substantial and that the outcome would be uncertain. The judgement would be as noncommittal as possible. After a conference with the solicitor, the project was abandoned.
The Committee, of which Sir Bernard Mallet was chairman, expanded as its work progressed and eventually included nearly thirty people.*
Eugenics Society's Pamphlets Literature setting forth the Society's case was prepared and distributed. We produced several pamphlets with covers of diverse colours. Our basic statement was set out in what we called our "buff pamphlet" entitled Eugenic Sterilization. A substantial demand quickly arose for this publication of which, during 1930, some 10,000 copies were sent out, mostly to applicants. Indeed, the demand was so great that, in 1931, a second edition was produced the expenses of which were met by a donation from Lord Riddell. This second edition contained the text of a comprehensive Bill which dealt with the voluntary sterilization of three groups of people,
* In May 1932 the committee consisted of the following persons: Sir Bernard Mallet (Chairman), Mrs. Mary Adams, Dr. K. B. Aikman, The Lady Askwith, Mr. Cecil Binney, Dr. C. P. Blacker (Hon. Secretary), Dr. C. J. Bond, Professor A. M. (now Sir Alexander) CarrSaunders, Lady Chambers, Major A. G. Church, Miss E. Corry, Mr. D. Ward Cutler, Mr. W. L. (now Sir Leslie) Farrer, Dr. R. A. (now Sir Ronald) Fisher, Dr. R. A. Gibbons, Hon. Mrs. U. Grant Duff, Mrs. C. B. S. Hodson, Sir Thomas (later Lord) Horder, Mrs. Eva Hubback, Mrs. R. Hussey, Professor J. S. (now Sir Julian) Huxley, Dr. R. Langdon-Down, Wing-Commander A. W. H. (now Sir Archibald) James, Mr. E. J. Lidbetter, Miss Hilda Pocock and Dr. J. A. Ryle.

namely mental defectives, mental convalescents (a term proposed by Dr. R. Langdon-Down to denote persons who had recovered from any form of mental disorder), and normal people
who wished to "avoid the risk of transmission to children or to remoter issue of a transmissible defect seriously impairing physical or mental health or efficiency."
A second pamphlet produced by the Committee attracted attention. It was entitled The Law as to Sterilization and was written at the Committee's request by Mr. Cecil Binney who, at this time, was much in demand as a speaker on this topic. His thesis was that the sterilization (albeit at his request) of a person deemed to be mentally defective was unquestionably illegal; but the position of other applicants turned essentially on what could be held to be a misdemeanour. Sir William Russell had remarked: "The word misdemeanour in its usual acceptation is applied to all those offences for which the law has not provided a particular name"; and "it seems to be
an established rule that whatever openly outrages decency, and is injurious to public morals, is a misdemeanour at common law." Later Sir James Fitzjames Stephen, commenting on this passage, had remarked: "It is inevitable that when men claim to exercise authority over their fellows, in broad general terms, and on grounds which have never been clearly or systematically expressed, there should be an extensive debateable land in which it is hard to say what is legal and what is not." The pamphlet contained a full discussion of the possible relevance of the
Offences against the Person Act of 1861 which this year (1962) is just over a hundred years old. Indeed, it reached the statute book many years
before anyone had thought of surgical sterilization and some thirty-six years before anyone was actually sterilized.
The most disturbing criticism of the Committee's policy was privately delivered by a keen supporter of the principle of voluntary sterilization. Dr Havelock Ellis wrote in December 1930 that, by raising doubts as to the legality of voluntary sterilization, the Committee were defeating their own ends. The nature of the operation, especially of vasectomy, was such that it was absurd to invoke the relevance of the Offences against the Person Act. The Commit-

11

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tee should ignore such archaic enactments and after a well-planned ascertainment conducted by

should encourage surgeons to continue to Dr. E. 0. Lewis, had assessed the number of

sterilize bona fide candidates who were compos mental defectives in England and Wales at about

mentis; it should offer to support such surgeons 300,000, or 8 56 per thousand of the population

financially if, after becoming members of the of the time. This was approximately twice the

Eugenics Society, they were involved in legal rate (4-56 per thousand) given by a Commission

difficulties. If, declared Dr. Ellis, it was a maim (the Royal Commission for the Care and Con-

to be vasectomised, it might be held to be a trol of the Feeble-minded) which had reported

maim to have one's hair cut, as happened to some twenty years earlier. The Wood Committee

Samson; indeed the Society would be doing less drew attention to the high fertility of the "Social

harm if it sponsored a Conumittee to legalize Problem Group" (a term invented by that Com-

voluntary decapillation.

mittee) and, after a full discussion of how far

Subsequent events, such as the attitude taken the ascertained increase was apparent rather than

up by medical defence organizations and the real, concluded that it was "hard to believe that

experiences of Sweden before and after passing there had not been some increase of mental

an enabling act, have not confirmed Dr. Have- deficiency during this period" (the last twenty

lock Eflis's pungent criticisms (reinforced later years).*

by Dr. Marie Stopes) which received careful The period (1929 onwards) was furthermore

consideration by the Society's Committee and over-shadowed by the world depression when

later by the Brock Committee.

"prevention rather than cure" was a much-

In 1931 the committee produced its "blue sounded theme, and when people were looking

pamphlet" Better Unborn. This quoted about for ways of reducing public expenditure. The

forty authenticated cases of irresponsible parent- attitude of the Society was also influenced by the

hood by individuals of "borderline" mentality; findings of Mr. E. J. Lidbetter's monumental

and it brought out the deplorable and socially genealogical survey (supported financially by

burdensome conditions of many of their chil- the Society) the chief findings of which were

dren. The pamphlet also contained the draft published in 1933 though they had been made

text of a restricted Bill "to enable mental defec- fairly widely known before.t This survey, like

tives to undergo sterilizing operations or steri- the Booth Survey (Life and Labour of the People

lizing treatment upon their own application or in London. 1891-1903, Macmillan. 18 volumes)

that of their spouses or parents or guardians." has not received the attention it deserves. It

(Major A. G. Church, M.P., had expressed awaits re-discovery by a later generation.

willingness to introduce under the ten minutes Sterilization was widely opposed both on

rule such a restricted Bill, covering only the moral and administrative grounds. The opposi-

position in respect of mental defectives.) The tion on moral grounds was generally similar to

pamphlet also contained expressions of approval the opposition to birth control. The hostility on

of the draft Bill by some distinguished contem- administrative grounds was largely based on

poraries among whom were Sir Charles Sherring- the manner in which sterilization had sometimes

ton, Professor F. H. A Marshall, Professor been advocated as a money-saving alternative to

William McDougall and Mr. H. G. Wells.

segregation. (The mis-statement of the issue is

reminiscent of the way in which, to-day, the

The "Social Problem Group" On re-reading this and other literature of the period, I have been struck by how different from now was the climate of opinion. The general theme of those days was "the sterilization of the unfit." The main candidates were high-grade

world's population problem is sometimes described as soluble either by restricting the rate of
population growth or by increasing world resources.) Those responsible for administering
the services for the mentally subnormal were nervous of the clamour for economy. Steriliza-

mental defectives and borderline cases. The country had been shocked by the appearance of a Report (of the Wood Committee) in 1930 which,

* Wood Report, Part Ill. p. 38.
t Heredity and the Social Problem Group. Edward Arnold.

12

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

tion, they reiterated, is no alternative to segrega- Committee-was that people who could afford

tion. If there is such a thing as a professional to pay surgeons' fees could get themselves steri-

standpoint, that of the medical staffs of mental lized. (Indeed, one doctor had written a book

hospitals was then opposed. Opposition was suggesting that vasectomy-the operation by

more or less orthodox.

which males are sterilized-could produce re-

The Committee put forward the argument that juvenating effects.) But the policies of hospitals

sterilization should be regarded not as an alter- were largely shaped by governors and governing

native but an auxiliary to segregation. The two committees which might include religious objec-

should'be complementary. Certain passages in tors and who might also hold that the waiting

the Wood Report about how the institution or lists of surgical departments were filled by people

colony for mental defectives should be treated as whose needs were urgent. Hence the rich could

a flowing stream rather than as a stagnant pool pay their way while the poor could not. In this

were here relevant and were used by the Com- connection the Society made use of the following

mittee.

letter, which appeared in the Week-end Review of

These pamphlets and other literature con- May 14th, 1932, and which was printed as a

tained particulars of the Eugenics Society; new single-page leaflet:

members were in this way enrolled.

Sir,-I was born with a deformity of my hands

The Committee's proposals, later endorsed by the Brock Committee and now commonplace, then had a novel emphasis; and some leading doctors who had previously been opposed be-

and feet, by which I have been much handicapped during my life. I was assured by a doctor on marrying that this deformity would not be transmitted to my children. I have had six children of whom the last, born a year ago, has precisely

came supporters of the Committee. Prominent the same affliction as myself. Having little con-

among these was Dr. R. Langdon-Down. Support was also given by certain organizations among which were the National Association for
the Feeble-Minded, the National Union of

fidence in birth control methods. and not wishing any more children to be born handicapped like myself, I wrote to the Eugenics Society, asking if it could somehow get me sterilized. I could not afford to pay any fee to a surgeon and could only

Societies for Equal Citizenship, the Women's just raise money enough to pay my railway fare to

Co-operative Guilds Congress and the Conservative Women's Reform Association. But at
this time the Board of Control, though having

any place where this operation could be done. The Secretary of the Eugenics Society did all he could to get me taken into a General Hospital, where I could be operated upon, but no hospital

stated in an Annual Report that "mentally would take me in because of the small legal risk

deficient patients create centres of degeneracy and disease which welfare work can never reach," was tacitly opposed. It held that the
prohibition of marriage of mental defectives was

which is thought to be involved when a sterilizing operation is performed. Eventually the Eugenics Society raised a small fund for me, and I was successfully operated upon as a paying patient in a hospital. I should say that the operation was

a more practicable innovation.

painless and had not the slightest effect on my general health or married life; it has relieved both

Parliament and Sterilization

my wife and myself of a terrible anxiety. I would be grateful if you would publish this letter, because

On July 21, 1931, Major A. G. Church, then I think your readers ought to know that the

Labour Member for Central Wandsworth, introduced under the ten minutes rule the Bill which had been published in our blue pamphlet. The

Eugenics Society in trying to get voluntary sterilization legalized is only trying to make available for the poor what is now the privilege of the rich.
Yours faithfully,

Bill was vigorously opposed by another Labour

"HEREDITARY DEFORMITY."

member who said that it was permeated by anti- The Labour party's attitude was ambivalent.

working class sentiments. The vote was 167 to 89 Some shared the standpoint of Major Church's

against the Bill-a rather better result than Parliamentary opponent that the Committee's

Major Church expected. But the first step was objectives were "anti-working class." Others

taken. The subject was raised in Parliament. supported the argument of the last paragraph of

An argument of which the Committee made the above-quoted letter. As time passed, the

use-an argument later stressed by the Brock second view gained ground. By 1937, there had

13

ER-C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

been formed an active NATIONAL WORKERS' COMMITTEE FOR THE LEGALIZING OF VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION. The president was Mr. Ernest Thurtle, M.P., the chairman Mrs. Harold Laski
and the honorary secretary Dr. Caroline Maule.
But hopes were raised by Major Church's initiative. During the next year (1932) WingCommander A. W. H. James, M.P., an active and fearless supporter of the Society's main activities, formed an all-party PARLIAMENTARY STERILIZATION COMMITTEE consisting of the following ten members: The Duchess of Atholl, Mr. Vyvyan Adams, Mr. C. T. Culverwell, Mr. Holford Knight, Mr. G. Lambert, Mr. W. Mabane, Mr. G. Mander, Sir Basil Peto, Sir Nairne Sanderson and himself as Secretary. In the preliminary stage of the formation of this committee, the Society's comprehensive draft Bill, covering the three categories of mental
defectives, mental convalescents and mentally normal "carriers," was considered at a joint meeting of the medical and scientific committees of the House of Commons. The unanimous view emerged that there was not the slightest prospect of a Bill of such wide scope being passed; a better hearing, it was said, would be given to a Bill limited to mental defectives. Hence the Parliamentary Committee adopted the restricted Bill which, in July 1931, Major Church had introduced under the ten minutes rule.
The Parliamentary Commnittee produced a
sixteen-page leaflet entitled Memorandum upon a Permissive Bill to legalise the Voluntary Sterilization of certain Mental Defectives; and it included the text of the Sterilization Act of Alberta. To this Canadian Act assent had been given on March 21st 1928; and under its provisions, by November 1932 when the Committee's memorandum was published, over a hundred persons had been sterilized. The Parliamentary Committee took an optimistic view of their prospects. They concluded their memorandum with the following words:
It is submitted that since sterilization is already a recognized practice upon grounds of physical health, it is unwarranted that it should remain illegal upon grounds of mental health. The Parliamentary Conmnittee have reason to believe that an act legalizing voluntary and permissive sterilization would be made considerable use of by the public. The Parliamentary Committee have been

impressed and even astonished, at the widespread support that has been found to exist in the House of Commons, and in the country, in favour of legalizing sterilization.
The following was the memorandum's summary and conclusions:
(1) The measures proposed are voluntary and permissive and are not compulsory. (The meaning of the term "voluntary" as applied to a defective is explained in the Memorandum on the Bill which appears on p. 12.)
(2) Sterilization is proposed for mental defectives, for whom it is now illegal, as an adjunct, and not as an alternative to, segregation.
(3) A large proportion of mental defectives (over 50 per cent according to most authorities) owe their condition to hereditary taints in their ancestry.
(4) Probably not more than 10-15 per cent of all defectives have parents one or both of whom are defective. This will be the measure of the possible reduction which could be effected in one generation by preventing all defectives from breeding.
(5) But nevertheless all authorities agree that no defective, whatever the causation of his defectiveness, should become a parent. It is terrible to think of a normal, sensitive child being brought up by a defective parent.
(6) It has been authoritatively recommended that institutional accommodation be provided for one-third of the total estimated number of defectives in the country and that the remaining twothirds live under guardianship or supervision in the general community. Sterilization is applicable to a proportion of these cases.
(7) The operation of sterilization involves negligible risks to life and leaves the physical, mental and sexual powers unchanged.
(8) Sterilization has been in effective operation in other countries and in one part of the British Empire.
(9) Sterilization, properly safeguarded against abuses, can therefore be employed as an economical and humane extension of the principle of preventive medicine.
But by the time the Parliamentary Committee's memorandum was published (November 1932), the Brock Committee (see below) had been appointed (June 1932) and was beginning its deliberations. The Parliamentary Committee decided not to press its case until after the Brock Committee's report had been published.
A Conference on Sterilization Another event which formed a landmark during these early years was a single-day conference convened on May 23rd 1932 by the Society's

14

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

Sterilization Committee at Caxton Hall, West- as a preventive measure having regard to its

linster. During the morning and afternoon sessions, the different aspects of the Society's
proposals were explained and discussed. The
chairmen and speakers included Sir Allan

physical, psychological, and social effects and to the experience of legislation in other countries petting it; and to suggest what further inquiries might usefully be undertaken in this connection.

Powell, Sir Thomas Horder, Dr. R. Langdon- Apart from its able chairman and Mr. Frank

Down, Mr. Cecil Binney, Professor R. Ruggles- Chanter, its secretary, the Committee consisted

Gates, Professor A. M. Carr-Saunders and of seven carefully selected persons.*

others. The evening session took the form of a In the course of the second half of 1932 and of

public meeting at which Lady Askwith took the 1933 the Committee held thirty-six meetings and

chair and Lord Riddell was the first speaker. In took evidence from sixty witnesses thus amassing

her introductory speech, Lady Askwith stressed a large volume of evidence. Among these wit-

the humanitarian aspects of the Society's pro- nesses was the Eugenics Society which was repre-

posals. These, if correctly understood, would sented by Dr. C. J. Bond, Dr. A. J. (now Sir

appeal to all lovers of children and especially to Aubrey) Lewis, Dr. R. Langdon-Down, Dr. E.

women. "It is noteworthy," she said, "that when Mapother and myself. The Society had been

Major Church introduced his sterilization bill asked by the Committee to give evidence upon

on July 21st 1931, not a single woman Member the investigations carried out abroad upon the

of Parliament had voted against it." The Com- inheritance of mental deficiency. The memoran-

mittee produced as its "grey pamphlet" (36 dum which embodies this evidence was printed

pages) a report of this conference.

as an appendix to my book, Voluntary Steriliza-

Many meetings, some of them convened in the tion.t The Departmental Committee, moreover,

private houses of members of the Committee, promoted a large-scale and original investigation

were held during the period 1929-1932; and into the children of 3,733 mental defectives

Mrs. Cora Hodson, Miss Hilda Pocock and I which was the most comprehensive of its kind

defended the Society's position in numerous ever undertaken. Information was sought from

debates.

all the mental deficiency authorities in the

3. THE BROCK COMMIYTEE (1934)
Doubtless as a result of the activities of Wing-
Commander James's group in the House of Commons and of the Eugenics Society's activities outside, a trio of important organizationsthe County Councils Association, the Association of Municipal Corporations and the Mental Hospitals Association-decided to take a joint initiative. They combined to submit, in February 1932, to the then Minister of Health, Sir Hilton Young (later Lord Kennett), a request that the problems and possibilities of sterilization be investigated by an officially constituted body.
The minister complied. After four months' deliberation he appointed, on June 9th 1932, a

country. Their responses were better than had
been expected and the report on this inquiry, in the preparation of which Dr. R. A. Fisher played an important part, was published on pp. 60-74 of the Committee's main document. This inquiry, which provided an important milestone, has scarcely received the attention it deserves.
In January 1934-just over two years after the Committee had been appointed-the Brock
Report" (as it quickly came to be called) was published. Briefly, it condemned compulsory sterilization but recommended that voluntary sterilization should be legalized for the three categories of people who had been included in the Society's comprehensive Bill as set out in its "buff pamphlet": namely mental defectives,

strong Departmental Committee under the chairmanship of Mr. L. G. (later Sir Lawrence) Brock. The terms of reference of this committee
were:
To examine and report on the information

persons who have suffered from mental disorder, and people believed to be carriers of (or likely
* They were: Wilfred Trotter, R. A. Fisher, A. F.
Tredgold, Miss Ruth Darwin, E. W. Adams, R. 1l,
Crowley and E. 0. Lewis.

already available regarding the hereditary transmission and other causes of mental disorder and deficiency; to consider the value of sterilization

t 1934. Humphrey Milford.
I Report of the Departmental Committee on Sterilisation. 1934. Cmd. 4485.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to transmit) grave physical or mental disabilities. (11) Daughter; at school, but of very low men-

These recommendations differed in only two respects from those earlier put forward by the Society. The Society had advocated that steri-

tality. (12) Son; at school and of average intelligence. (13) Daughter; aged 9, has never been to school;
M.D.; now in Institution.

lization should be made possible for mental (14) Daughter; now aged 8; never been to school;

defectives and mental convalescents who owed their abnormalities to morbid heredity; the Brock Committee more radically recommended that it be made available for all mental defectives

in M.D. Institution. (15) Son; aged 5, recently admitted to M.D.
Institution. (16) Daughter; aged 4. (17) Daughter; aged 1.

and convalescents irrespective of heredity. Also It would be impossible (says the N.S.P.C.C.

the proposed safeguards differed in that the Report) to exaggerate the tragic possibilities

Brock Committee recommended that the subject's application, backed by two medical certificates, be approved by the Minister of Health.

which are still likely in this family's history. The children now in Institutions are likely to go back to their place of settlement on reaching the age of sixteen years. Doubtless, all will have benefited

The Society had not thought it necessary to call from their stay and training in the Institutions,

for the authorization of the Minister of Health. It was a source of satisfaction to the Society that the Brock Committee included in the first paragraph of their first chapter the following acknowledgment:
To the Eugenics Society we are indebted for a summary of the chief researches which have been made in foreign countries. Their memorandum, which was clear and complete in its arrangement

but it is extremely doubtful whether they will make satisfactory citizens and more than likely that they will themselves produce deficient offspring.
Miss Hilda Pocock, then a member of the Society's staff, took a remarkable initiative. She obtained particulars of this family, travelled to their home in Yorkshire, and persuaded all the members who were locally accessible (at home and in institutions) to consent to being filmed.

and detached and critical in tone, has been of The family appears in a film later produced by

great assistance to us.

the Society. (We did what we could to help this

I here mention parenthetically another feature family, co-operating for the purpose with the

of the Brock Report of which the Society took N.S.P.C.C.). During the ensuing years, we paid

advantage. The Report's Appendix II (pp. 80-91) quite a large annual premium to insure ourselves

is a memorandum submitted by the National against the risks of actions for libel. But we

Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children received nothing but goodwill from the family.

(N.S.P.C.C.). The following particulars are Sir Lawrence Brock was naturally interested in

included of a Yorkshire family:

this film. He agreed that the main impression

HULL AND EAST RIDING DISTRICT. Case No. 794M.

made by the family as a whole, and by the old father (born in 1880) who, in response to a

Father born 1880; mother born 1883. The paternal question, deplored the size and burdensomeness

grandfather was feeble-minded; two great-uncles of his family, was one of pathos.

were certified insane and a maternal uncle was

epileptic. This woman has given birth to the

following:

(1) Daughter; died of convulsions 1

in infancy

These two

4. THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON VOLUNTARY
STERILIZATION (1934-39)
The Brock Report had been expectantly awaited

(2) Son; died of convulsions in in- illegitimate by many organizations which had postponed

fancy (3) Daughter; certified M.D.* In an Institution. (4) Son; certified as imbecile. Died at age of 11.
(5) Son; certified as M.D. In an Institution. (6) Daughter; certified as imbecile.

decision until its publication. It was widely com-
mented on in the press which, as a whole, received it with sympathy. It quickly brought about a veering and crystallization of informed

(7) Daughter; died at 11 months.

opinion. It facilitated the taking of decisions by

(8) Son; certified as imbecile. (9) Daughter; in service. (10) Son; died in infancy.

those public and medical authorities which, puzzled by the differences between experts, had earlier been hesitant and non-committal. Here

* M.D. is an abbreviation for "mental defective". was the most authoritative communication on

16

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

sterilization that had appeared up till that time years (1934-1939) which followed its appoint-

in any country.

ment. The Committee was fortunate in securing

Among the earlier-hesitant organizations had Lord Horder as its chairman and Sir Francis

been the Central Association for Mental Wel- Acland, M.P. as its vice-chairman. It will be seen

fare, led by Miss Evelyn Fox-a most dynamic that each of the four constituent organizations

lady-and by Dr. A. F. Tredgold, one of the above-mentioned appointed three members; and

leading authorities on mental deficiency in this there were seven additional members which in-

country. In consultation with the Eugenics cluded the indefatigable Wing-Commander

Society the Central Association took the initia- James. The Committee's first secretary, Mrs. M.

tive in convening a JoINT COMMITTEE ON VOLUN- D. Silcock, who deftly guided the Committee

TARY STEiLIZATION (J.C.V.S.) containing re- through its formative stages, was in February

presentatives of itself, of our Society, of the 1935 replaced by Mr. J. Verney Quilliam. The

Mental Hospitals Association and of the Nat- latter had earlier had wide experience of political

ional Council for Mental Hygiene. The Royal work.

College of Physicians, which, in October 1934, One of the Joint Committee's first activities

had endorsed the recommendations of the Brock was to appoint a drafting committee under the

Committee, appointed a representative to serve able chairmanship of Dr. A. F. Tredgold. This

on the Joint Committee without powerto commit committee, after much discussion and consulta-

the parent organization. Their representative tion, produced a draft of a Voluntary Steriliza-

was Lord Dawson, the president of the College. tion Bill which embodied exactly and in detail

Lord Dawson had long been an eloquent and the recommendations of the Brock Com-

quite fearless supporter of both voluntary steri- mittee.

lization and birth control. His attitude was Mr. Quilliam spent much time in travelling the

noteworthily courageous in view of his connec- country and addressing meetings, so that it

tions with the royal household. The Royal became necessary to appoint an assistant secre-

Medico-Psychological Association likewise tary, Miss L. R. Gait, who dealt, in his absence,

appointed a representative. On June 27th and with the massive office correspondence. The

July 19th 1934, moreover, the County Councils Eugenics Society was the main financial sup-

Association and the Association of Municipal porter of the Joint Committee. It placed at the

Corporations respectively passed resolutions Joint Committee's disposal the rooms on the

approving the recommendations of the Brock second floor of its house (those now occupied Committee; and later (November 21st 1934) by the International Planned Parenthood

these two powerful associations vigorously sup- Federation), and all the Joint Committee's

ported the Joint Committee whose speakers meetings were held in our library. The Society

(Professor J. S. Huxley, Wing-Commander contributed 80 per cent of the Joint Committee's

James and myself) had opened a discussion total income during the six years of its existence

before a large audience which assembled for the (£3,140 out of £3,902).

Public Health Congress at the Royal Agricul- A Handbook for Speakers was produced

tural Hall, Islington. (It will be remembered that which Mr. Quilliam and others found useful in

these two bodies, together with the Mental persuading numerous organizations to pass

Hospitals Association, were the ones which, in supporting resolutions. The following is a list of

February 1932, had petitioned the Minister of the Joint Committee's members as published in

Health to appoint the Brock Committee.)

1937. It is followed by another list of the organ-

Suddenly the Eugenics Society felt itself widely izations which had expressed support by the supported and fortified. The Society's Council same year:

dissolved its own COMMITTEE FOR LEGALISING VOLUNTARY STERILISATION which became

JOINT COMMITTEE ON VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION (1937)

merged in the Joint Committee.

LIST OF MEMBERS

It would be tedious to describe in detail the

Chairman:

activities of the Joint Committee during the six The Lord Horder, K.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P.

I7

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Vice-Chairman: Rt. Hon. Sir Francis D. Acland, Bt., M.P.
Central Association for Mental Welfare Miss Evelyn Fox, C.B.E. A. F. Tredgold, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P., F.R.S. (Edin.) Mrs. J. Cooke Hurle
Eugenics Society C. P. Blacker, Esq., M.C., M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P. Mrs. Rosamond Hussey R. Langdon-Down, Esq., M.B.
Mental Hospitals Association Alderman W. Locke Alderman J. C. Grime, M.B.E. L. T. Feldon, Esq.
National Council for Mental Hygiene R. D. Gillespie, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P. Miss Doris Odlum, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. E. W. Neill Hobhouse, Esq.,
M.D., M.R.C.S., F.R.C.P.
Additional Members J. D. Magor Cardell, Esq., M.B.,
B.S., F.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. Wing-Commander A. W. H. James, M.P. W. L. Platts, Esq. Viscount Dawson of Penn, G.C.V.O.,
K.C.B., K.C.M.G., M.D., P.R.C.P. Major Richard Rigg, O.B.E., J.P. R. Worth, Esq., O.B.E., M.B. Mrs. Patrick R. Green, J.P.
Secretary: Mr. J. Verney Quilliam Asst. Secretary: Miss L. R. Gait Offices: 69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1 Hon. Auditor: D. Brummer, Esq. Bankers: Barclay's Bank, Ltd., 78 Victoria Street,
S.W.1
STANDING SUB-COMMITTEE General Purposes Committee
Mrs. P. R. Green, J.P. (Chairman) Dr. C. P. Blacker Mr. L. T. Feldon Miss Evelyn Fox Wing-Commander James Dr. R. Langdon-Down Dr. E. W. Neill Hobhouse Mrs. Rosamond Hussey
Drafting Committee Dr. A. F. Tredgold (Chairman) Dr. C. P. Blacker Miss Evelyn Fox Wing-Commander James Dr. R. Langdon-Down Mr. W. L. Platts Mr. L. T. Feldon

LIST OF AUTHORITIES, ASSOCIATIONS, ETC. which by March 1937 had passed resolutions in favour of giving legal effect to the recommendations of the Brock Departmental Report:
I
The County Councils' Association The Association of Municipal Corporations The Royal College of Physicians The Royal College of Surgeons The Royal Medico-Psychological Association The Association of County Medical Officers of
Health The Society of Medical Officers of Health The Standing Committee on Psychological Medi-
cine of the Medical Women's Federation The Central Association for Mental Welfare The Mental Hospitals' Association The National Council for Mental Hygiene The National Association for the Feeble-Minded The Eugenics Society The Mental Hospitals Matrons' Association The Women Public Health Officers' Association The National Council of Women The National Council for Equal Citizenship The National Women Citizens' Associations The Conservative Women's Reform Association The Women's Co-operative Guild The National Conference of Labour Women The Magistrates' Association The Baptist Union of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland The Church of England Advisory Board for Moral
Welfare Work British Social Hygiene Council, Incorporated Church of England Temperance Society National Association of Women Pharmacists Federation of Working Girls' Clubs
II
Organizations connected with the Welfare of the Blind The Prevention of Blindness Committee The National Association of Blind Workers The Association of Workshops for the Blind
The Rossendale SocietyiforVisiting and Instructing
the Blind North Counties Association for the Blind The Keighley & District Institution for the Blind The Rochdale & District Society for Visiting and
Instructing the Blind The Royal Leicester, Leicestershire & Rutland
Institution for the Blind Gloucester (City) Blind Association Liverpool Workshops & Home Teaching Society
for the Out-Door Blind Lindsey Blind Society Croydon Voluntary Association for the Blind The Warrington, Widnes & District Society for
the Blind Barrow, Furness & Westmorland Society for the
Blind

I8

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

Hull & East Riding Institute for the Blind Kent County Association for the Blind Gloucestershire County Association for the Blind County Borough of Darlington-Committee for
Promoting the Welfare of Afflicted Persons Bournemouth Blind Aid Society Coventry Society for the Blind East Suffolk County Association for the Blind Cambridgeshire Society for the Blind Bumley & District Society for the Blind The Birmingham Royal Institution for the Blind The West Ham Association for the Blind Wakefield District Institution for the Blind Hampshire Association for the Care of the Blind County Borough of Bury Blind Persons Commit-
tee Institution for the Blind of Dewsbury, Batley &
District North Western Counties Association for the Blind Warwickshire Association for the Blind (through
Warwickshire County Council) Eastern Counties Association for the Blind

The Churches and Sterilization
An initiative was taken with the Churches. Mrs. Cora Hodson and Mrs. Rosamund Hussey, both active members of our Society, undertook, in December 1934, to establish liaison between the Joint Committee and various religious bodies. No less than twenty-eight bishops were interviewed of whom eighteen were reported as favourably disposed, five as non-committal and five as definitely hostile. The Roman Catholic Church was actively opposed; and an organization, the League of National Life, supported by many Catholics, initiated counter-propaganda. I recall that at this time I engaged in several debates against Dr. Laetitia Fairfield, a most able but invariably courteous controversialist. An idea of the interest taken by the Churches
may be obtained from the following exchange of

letters, which may have historical interest,

III published by The Times on June 17th and 21st

Summary of other Organizations

1935:

College of Nursing (Branches) &

Nursing Associations

.. 37

Insurance Committees .. .. 20

Mental Welfare Associations

19

City & County Councils

.. 11

Women's Co-operative Guilds

80

Various organizations, representing

Politics, Health, Teachers, Unem-

ployed Associations, Friendly

Societies, Women's Citizens Asso-

ciations and Women's Labour Or-

ganizations.. .. .. .. 108

Total Organizations .. . .. 335

March 10th, 1937

Two points are noteworthy about this tri-
partite list in which, it will be noticed, the British Medical Association does not appear. The first point is the number of women's organizations.
Of the twenty-eight bodies named in the first Group (among them the Mental Hospitals Matrons' Association), nine are composed solely of women; and in the third group of 335 organizations, over half were likewise composed, eighty being women's co-operative guilds. The second noteworthy point is the particular interest shown by organizations connected with the blind. Thirty-two such associations are named in the second group as having passed supporting resolutions.

SIR,-The Report of the Departmental Committee on Voluntary Sterilization became known to the public in January of last year. Considerable study has now been given to its contents by most of the organizations interested in the nation's health. A group of associations, representing local authorities and medical and other societies concerned with the mentally afflicted and child welfare, have combined to prepare a Measure to give effect to the recommendations of the Report and have urged upon the Minister of Health its speedy enactment.
With the scientific and sociological aspects of such a measure we are not in this letter concerned. Important moral and religious issues are, however, involved. Conceming these there is difference of opinion among the adherents of the various Christian communities.
The Church of England as a body has expressed no authoritative judgement on voluntary sterilization. There is, no doubt, some divergence of opinion on the subject among its Bishops, clergy and laity. The Church of England Advisory Board for Moral Welfare has, however, passed the following resolution:
That in the opinion of this Board there is no moral principle which would compel the Church to oppose legislation on the lines of the Brock Report. That in view of the uncertainty of results that would follow from such legislation the Church should not actively urge the introduction of such legislation. On the other hand, if legislation is passed, the Church should accept responsibility for the social care required.
Of the Free Churches' Assemblies none has as

I9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

yet had the question before them. The Council of the Baptist Union, however, have passed unanimously a resolution in favour of the proposed legislation, and those Free Church leaders who have expressed an opinion have without exception declared that they see no religious objection to the recommendations of the Report.
It is generally known that Roman Catholics, though they are not opposed to voluntary sterilization when it is undertaken for the benefit of an individual's own health, nor even in principle to its being inflicted as a penalty, are, since the issue of the Papal Encyclical of 1930, bound to condemn sterilization undertaken with a view to preventing propagation of unhealthy progeny.
We believe that the safeguarding of liberty of conscience is of as great importance to the nation's welfare as any of the benefits which its supporters expect from the proposed legislation. We would therefore urge that in any Bill which may be presented to Parliament a clause be included securing that in every application to the Minister of Health to permit an operation for sterilization a statement should be included by one of those recommending the operation that the person concerned, or his representative, has been afforded a real opportunity of seeking advice from a recognized minister of the religious body of which he is a member upon the moral and spiritual issues involved.
Yours, etc. RICHARD SOUTHWARK MARTIN ROFFEN ALFRED E. GARVIE J. SCOTT LIDGETT A. HERBERT GRAY F. W. NORWOOD
London, June 14, 1935
To the Editor of The Times Sir,-I have read with interest the letter in The
Times of June 17 signed by the Bishop of Southwark and five other eminent divines. The signatories urge that in any Bill which may be presented to Parliament a clause should be inserted to secure that the applicant for sterilization has had an opportunity of seeking advice from a recognized minister of the religious body to which he belongs. May I say that I am confident that the Joint Committee on Voluntary Sterilization of which I am the chairman, recognizing as it does that safeguarding the liberty of conscience is of vital importance to the success of a measure of this kind, will welcome the inclusion of such a clause in the Bill which they hope to present to Parliament in the near future?
Yours faithfully, HORDER
London, June 19, 1935
In March 1935, Mr. Quilliam started a Voluntary Sterilization League; this he believed would

help in his regional work. For sixpence the members received a quarterly bulletin. Cards were also prepared for non-subscribing supporters to sign. After fifteen months some 500 members of the League were enrolled. These and other activities kept the office busy.
The Committee produced an abbreviated edition of the Brock Report consisting of the text of the Report (some sixty pages) minus the appendices (over seventy pages). Lord Horder wrote a short preface wherein he drew attention to a noteworthy feature of the report-the complete unanimity with which the Departmental Committee of nine had reached their conclusions and formulated their recommendations. This abbreviated and attractively produced edition, the production costs of which were met by Lord Riddell, was sold for sixpence. The full report as first printed is now difficult to obtain; but this abbreviated edition is still in stock.
Mrs Hodson and I both wrote books.
Further Pressure for Legislation It was the Joint Committee's object to have its draft Bill introduced in Parliament; and various approaches were considered. The first initiative was taken immediately after the publication of the Brock Report (in January 1934) but before the Joint Committee had become active. On February 28th 1934, Mr. H. (now Sir Hugh) Molson, then M.P. for Doncaster, moved the following resolution in the House of Commons:
That the House considers that the facts set out in the Report of the Departmental Committee on Sterilization indicate a state of affairs calling for action and respectfully requests His Majesty's Government to give immediate consideration to the unanimous recommendations of the Committee in favour of legislation permitting voluntary sterilization in certain classes of cases.
Mr. Molson made a restrained yet eloquent speech. I heard him make it and derived the impression that it was sympathetically receivedmore sympathetically than had been Major Church's speech in mid-1931. But in 1934 the position had been much strengthened by the Brock Committee. Mr. Molson was supported by Wing-Commander James who was cut short by limitations of time, so that no vote was taken.
It will be remembered that the Brock Committee had been appointed in June 1932 by the

20

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS

Minister of Health (Sir Hilton Young, as he then to take action.

was), in response to a request conveyed to him A general election was then not far off (it was

in February 1932 by the County Councils Asso- actually held in November 1935). Thinking

ciation, the Association of Municipal Corpora- things over afterwards we felt that political con-

tions and the Mental Hospitals Association. siderations might have influenced what the Mini-

These three, having got what they had asked for, ster said about the need for assurance that the

resolved that the matter should be followed up. conscience of any substantial section of the

Sir Hilton Young was still Minister of Health, nation must not be offended. It was not the time

and hopes were entertained by some.

to incur the risk of losing the votes of religious

With the assistance of the Joint Committee, minorities.

the three organizations drew up a brief for pre- Though there was no gainsaying the logic of

sentation to the Minister; and on May 23rd what the Minister had said-indeed some of us

1935-sixteen months after the publication of had accurately forecast what his reply would be

the Brock Report-a deputation of fifteen -the outcome of this carefully prepared deputa-

persons was received by him. The deputation tion was a disappointment. Nevertheless the

consisted of five members of the County Coun- Joint Committee decided that it should maintain

cils Association, three from the Association of its activities in the hope that, from some favour-

Municipal Corporations, three from the Mental able quarter, a wind of change might set in.

Hospitals Association and four (Lord Horder, Before the election in October 1935, no less

Miss Evelyn Fox, Mrs. Silcock and myself) from than 544 parliamentary candidates were inter-

the Joint Committee. The Minister received us viewed of whom 259 were returned. Of these 259,

most courteously and listened attentively to 202 had expressed sympathy.

speeches on behalf of the four organizations by Mr. E. W. Cemlyn-Jones, Alderman Martin, Alderman Locke and Lord Horder. Afterwards the Ministry issued a press notice summarizing the four speeches and the Minister's reply. The Summary was worded as follows:

On June 23rd 1936-eight months after the election-an informal conference was convened
in a committee room of the House of Commons. In addition to Sir Francis Acland (chairman), Wing-Commander James and two other Members of Parliament, there were present repre-

The Minister of Health thanked the deputation for sentatives of the County Councils Association,

so clearly expressing the case for voluntary sterili- the Association of Municipal Corporations, and

zation and said he was bound to attach great weight to the unamity of view expressed on behalf of the bodies represented. The presence of the deputation itself indicated a substantial advance

the Joint Committee. At this conference it was
agreed that Wing-Commander James's all-party Parliamentary Committee of 1932 should be

in public opinion and further progress would revived. Its task would be now easier. The Joint

depend on the public being assured that the conscience of any substantial section of the nation would not be offended. The deputation would realize, however, that in the present congestion of

Committee would seek support from as many members of all parties as possible, and the new Parliamentary Committee would watch for

parliamentary business the introduction of legisla- favourable opportunities of further action. The

tion would not, in any case, be practicable at present.

County Councils Association and the Association of Municipal Corporations undertook to

Sir Hilton Young, an ex-sailor of distinction approach those Members of Parliament who

who had lost an arm in the battle of Zeebrugge, were also members of their respective associa-

conveyed to us publicly (further emphasizing the tions.

point to one or two of us privately) that three On March 16th 1937, thirty-five Members of

years before he had been happy to appoint the Parliament were entertained at a dinner at the

Brock Committee; that he was glad that its House of Commons by Sir Francis Acland,

report had been unanimous and constructive; Wing-Commander James and Mr. Ernest

and that personally he was in agreement with its Thurtle. Lord Horder, Dr. Tredgold and I

recommendations. But he firmly told us that the addressed the gathering after the meal. A lively

moment was not propitious for the Government discussion ensued in the course of which we were

21

£t-D

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

searchingly questioned. We had the impression Report was published, the German National

that several Members who had previously taken Socialist Government had introduced a sten-

little interest became potential supporters. lization law, which included compulsory clauses.

Wing-Commander James felt that his group had By 1938, rumours and reports were reaching this

been strengthened.

country of how things were shaping in Germany.

The Joint Committee and Wing-Commander In questions and discussions at meetings these

James's committee had their last Parliamentary developments were increasingly raised. We all

innings on April 13th 1937, less than a month heard more of the argument about the thin end

after the dinner. Success in a ballot enabled of the wedge.

Wing-Commander James to introduce a motion Some impetus was thus lost. What virtually put

on the civil estimates in supply; and arising from an end to the Joint Committee's public activi-

the estimates of the Ministry of Health he made ties was the discovery that it had been over-

his case. The discussion was by order and custom spending. Early in 1938 a crisis arose. The

restricted. The Minister of Health-by this time Eugenics Society, which had contributed the

Sir Hilton Young had been replaced by Sir greater part of the Joint Committee's funds, and

Kingsley Wood-was no more encouraging than had placed at the Committee's disposal the

his predecessor. He drew attention to the fact second floor of its house, was turning its atten-

that the British Medical Association had not tion to other things. An increasing fraction of

gone on record as supporting the Departmental my own time was taken up by the Population

Committee's recommendations; but at the same Investigation Committee and by other activities

time he urged that education and propaganda outside the Society. Our second floor was also

should be sustained.

needed for another purpose-the accommoda-

After this second expression of Parliamentary tion of the Family Planning Association.

aloofness, it was decided that a private member's At a meeting ofthe Joint Committee's General

Bill, depending on the luck of the ballot, would Purposes Committee held on February 2nd it

provide the best opening. The ballot was held in was recognized that drastic retrenchment was

October 1937; but the luck did not come.

necessary. Mr. Quilliam and Miss Gait left us.

During the second half of 1937 Mr. Quilliam I became the Joint Committee's Honorary

continued to tour the country. He also planned Secretary from the period February 2nd to

to organize four large conferences in Man- October 1st 1938 when the appointment was re-

chester, Newcastle, Birmingham and Leeds. newed for another year-October 2nd 1938 to

Difficulties arose in the first two places and the October 1st 1939. But on September 1st 1939 I

conferences did not materialize. In Birmingham, was called back into the army and by September

however, a conference was held on November 12th I was in France. The Joint Committee

24th with Bishop Barnes (a big draw) in the broke up.

chair; and in Leeds a conference was held on

November 29th with Professor Maxwell Telling 5. CAUSES OF FAILURE

in the chair. I addressed both conferences and, There were, I think, four. The Joint Committee

with the assistance of Mr. Quilliam and my made a good start in 1934 and 1935. It ieceived

chairmen, dealt to the best of my ability with its first check in May 1935 when the Minister of

both friendly and hostile questions. Some of the Health, Sir HiltonYoung, politely but firmly con-

latter had by this time to do with Nazi practices. veyed toastrong deputation that the Government

Indeed, both inside and outside Parliament, would not take the desired initiative. Secondly,

the tide was setting against us. During 1938 the events enacted in Germany, including the com-

shadow of impending war was darkening the pulsory use of sterilization, were poisoning the

political horizon. Immediate problems clamour- air and making more difficult a reasoned advo-

ing for parliamentary time diverted interest cacy of voluntary sterilization. Thirdly, the

from remoter issues of population and eu- Joint Committee, which for some twelve months

genics. And another influence was making itself had been getting diminishing returns on its

felt. About the time (early 1934) that the Brock activities (in the way offavouring resolutions and

22

VOLUNTARY STERILIZATION: THE LAST SIXTY YEARS
promises of support), encountered financial September 1939 caused the Committee to disdifficulties and was compelled drastically to cur- integrate. No serious attempt has since been tail its activities. Lastly the outbreak of war in made to revive it.
.23

