PETER R. COX, JOHN PEEL and CLIFFORD J. THOMAS
The World Population Conference Belgrade, I96g

DURING THE ELEVEN YEARS that have elapsed
since the first World Conference held in Rome
in 1954, several gatherings have taken place so
that demographic questions could be discussed.
The International Union for the Scientific Study
of Population has held meetings in several
countries, and regional conferences have been
conducted under the auspices of the United
Nations. Nevertheless, the need was felt for a
new global assembly, and indeed further
colloquia of this kind are contemplated at
decennial intervals in the future. Such world conferences are not without their
attendant difficulties. The organization tends to be cumbersome. The pace may be slow for the more sophisticated delegates and yet too fast for the representatives of some emergent countries.
The language problem is intensified. Yet they offer unrivalled opportunities for an exchange of views on the widest possible scale, and carry an authority that no lesser gathering can have. The beneficial influence of the Rome Congress was felt in Belgrade, and the general feeling seemed to be that both were well worth while.
The background to the recent discussions is of course the rapidly expanding world population and the plight of the developing countries. The idea had been expressed that the Conference should be held in one such country in order that delegates could see at first hand what the conditions were like. It was indeed fortunate that Yugoslavia was good enough to offer the necessary facilities, which were very good in all respects. While, however, the hosts modestly proclaimed that their own problems were typical of the world population situation as a whole, in their progressive land-and especially in the pleasant parks and streets of its capital-one was spared the painful sights that are to be found in the shanty areas of Africa, America or
Asia.
The arrangement of subjects was rather similar to that of 1954; they were grouped into "plenary"

meetings and "discussion-group" meetings as

follows:

PLENARY

DISCUSSION-GROUP

Al Fertility

Bi Factors and patterns of

fertility in areas where

fertilityisrelativelyhigh.

B2 Factors and patterns of

fertility in areas where

fertility is relatively low.

A2 Mortality

B3 Mortality, morbidity

and causes of death.

A3 Internal migration B9 International migration

as related to economic

and demographic prob-

lems of developing

countries.

A4 Future population B4 Projections of popula-

trends and prospects

tion size and sex-age

structure.

B5 Projections of urban

and rural population,

economically active

population, households

and families.

A5 Demographic aspects BIt Definition and meas-

of labour supply and urement of economic-

employment

ally active population,

employment, unem-

ployment and under-

employment.

A6 Demographic aspects B8 Problems in the pro-

of education

motion of demographic

research and training in

developing countries.

A7 Demographic aspects B1O Population and natural

ofagricultural develop- resources.

ment and food supply

A8 Demographic aspects

of urban development

and housing

A9 Demographic aspects

of savings, investment,

technological develop-

ment and industrial-

ization

AIO Demographic aspects B7 New developments in

of economic growth

the measurement and

analysis of population

growth and structure.

B6 Methods of obtaining

basic demographic mea-

sures where census and

vital statistics registra-

tion systems are lacking

or defective.

B12 Population genetics.

B13 Studies relevant to

family planning.

7

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, March 1966,58, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In order to avoid the problems of unrepresentative sets of papers, and of unco-ordinated discussions, that can be experienced in large conferences where such matters are not controlled, the Organizing Committee, under the chairmanship of Dr. Bernard Benjamin of the United Kingdom, arranged that for each meeting a well-known demographer should be deputed to commission papers on specific subjects; a general background thesis was also prepared to set the scene so that all the discussants could be reasonably well-informed. The meetings each began with a statement by a "moderator" another demographer who had been deputed to summarize the contents of the papers. Finally the usual arrangements for "rapporteurs" were made, and two of the final meetings consisted of their summary verbal statements of the discussions as a whole.
This system of organization worked quite well, if not perfectly, and in particular the background papers, taken as a set, provide a useful textbook and list of current sources of reference. If the moderators spoke, in some instances, for too long and the rapporteurs tended to attribute to the discussions a form and purpose they had really lacked, these were minor defects. A more serious criticism was that the meetings failed to produce much of the spontaneity and free exchange of views that had been noted in Rome, and some delegates felt that on a future occasion an attempt should be made to restore these features.
Fertility
As may be seen from the list, the main discussions on fertility were divided into a general session and two technical meetings, one devoted to the areas of "high" rates and the other to the areas of "low" rates. In this connection it is of interest to note that human fertility was said by one speaker to be the lowest of any animal on earth; he evidently thought it paradoxical that in these circumstances man should have the biggest population problem of all the creatures! In a brilliant summing-up, Professor Freedman listed the many factors with which reproduction is associated. He included among these "social norms"-the traditional behaviour patternand socio-economic structure. The latter is

highly important, because international studies
tend to show that declines in fertility begin to
occur as economic development reaches a
threshold level. They start at the older ages-
indicating an economic cause related to accumulated family size, and in the cities where they are
associated with a higher degree of literacy, better
educational levels and an increase in the pro-
portion of women at work. Family limitation is achieved primarily by abortion (still the most
common method in the world to-day), only to a
lesser extent through contraception, and to a smaller extent still by a rise in the age ofmarriage.
Professor Freedman advanced the hypothesis
that the criterion for a fall in fertility as a
country develops is the shift that occurs from a
predominantly local to a predominantly national
influence on affairs-in other words, when an increase in literacy has improved the powers of communication and the sense of a state, rather than a village, is acquired. It is really the social
aspects rather than the economic aspects of such
changes that influence fertility; many speakers agreed about this. The idea was advanced by the Russian demographers, in one form or another, that as development would of itself bring about a fall in fertility there was no need to take any special action to limit births. But this line was opposed by many speakers, who pointed out that such action could help to speed social and economic development. It would definitely add to the benefits of the trend that might be expected to occur naturally. Thus family planning was a direct aid to general progress of all kinds.
An attempt by a Czech demographer to associate differences in race with disparities in "self-control" and hence with fertility was quickly dismissed by the meeting-one of a number of occasions on which some of the odder notions that were advanced from time to time were suppressed by the weight of learning.
A religious viewpoint was advanced by Father Madigan, who strongly objected to the ideaperhaps crudely expressed by another speakerthat money could be saved by replacing economic aid by the grant of family planning material and instruction to developing countries. He was quietly and authoritatively answered by an Indian speaker who explained how these

8

THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE

countries-or at least some of them-were quite America. Adopting a hypothesis that fertility

aware of their needs and capable of formulating differences are attributable not so much to

them for themselves. The amount of help of class, religion or psychology as to degree of

each kind that they wanted was sought by them local knowledge and the influence of neighbours,

and not in any way thrust upon them by the demographers there are planning a study of

Western powers. Reference was also made to census tracts, i.e. small enumeration regions

the Biblical dictum "be wise and multiply and corresponding broadly to the residential areas

replenish the earth" and its real meaning in a in which such local influences might be expected

historical context. One speaker proposed a to operate.

modern, amended version "be wise, establish Reference was made to the sharp fall in

equilibrium and conserve the earth" which, if fertility in a few countries resulting from the

not so impressive in its literary form, at least widespread use of oral contraceptives, and it

represented good sense.

was noticed that their effects had been felt far

Summarizing the more technical papers on more in countries of low fertility than in countries

the development of fertility in Western countries, of high fertility. Some speakers even raised the

Colombo stressed the importance of avoiding old cry "shall we, in future, reproduce ourselves?"

easy but misleading generalizations. If there which was heard so often in Britain in the

were "rules" there were also exceptions. If class 1930s. This is, for the moment, more a

differences in fertility had declined, there were philosophical question than a real fear, except,

still disparities between religious and ethnic perhaps, for the Japanese, whose net reproduc-

groups; moreover, there was a discrepancy tion rate has fallen to unity or below. British

between the trend in time and the position at a speakers pointed, however, to the fallibility of

given moment. Both he and Sauvy drew atten- the net reproduction rate not only as a predictive

tion to our lack of knowledge of causes and factor but also as even a measure of the true

effects, and this insufficiency, it became evident, current state of affairs; experience in this country

is of two kinds: (a) research that has not yet over the past thirty years has taught much wisdom

been carried out or which, perhaps, cannot be in this respect.

done; and (b) an insufficiently detailed apprecia-

tion ofthe mass ofinformation already available. Two countries to which demographers are

Mortality

prone to refer frequently-namely Eire and The discussions on mortality were divided

Israel-were instanced in relation to (b) by into a general session and a meeting devoted to

speakers from those countries. They complained causes of death and morbidity. On the whole, the

respectively that the true facts relating to the papers descriptive of conditions in the various

Irish, and the Jews, were often distorted; for areas did not seem to offer much that was new,

example, there is no specifically "Jewish" whereas the contributions on method were far

fertility, it was argued, but Jews behave with a more interesting. Thus the idea already mooted

wide range of differences in the various countries in connection with fertility, of studying mortality

in which they live.

by "census tracts", viz. small enumeration areas,

Nevertheless, it is well established that there may offer some promise of fruitful development

are international differences in desired family in due course. Considerable emphasis was also

size, and it was suggested that these should be placed on the importance of accurate measure-

worth further study. Again, why did actual ment in relation to illnesses and causes of death.

family size tend to be above the desired level in The subject of disability does not yet appear to

developing countries but below it in developed have been properly assimilated into demography

areas? Why did the disparity between the two but some speakers made an attempt to bring it

vary according to educational status and reli- closer-for instance one proposed that a statis-

gion? The answers to such questions may become tical analysis should be made of illnesses present

more apparent as the result of a new line of at death but not reckoned by the doctor to have

study now proposed in the United States of contributed to the decease.

9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Close attention to method resulted in the postponing the marriage age. Some speakers

issue of a number of warnings that some of the felt, however, that this solution was hardly

types of approach adopted had their limitations. practicable for many countries.

Thus some drew attention to the dangers of

extrapolation of mortality trends, especially in developing countries; it was felt that the im-

Projections

provements so far achieved had been the easier Although controversy was not sharp, it became

ones to attain and that further progress might evident that not all demographers would make

be much more troublesome. In particular the population projections in the same way in a

difficulties associated with migration to the given set of circumstances. There were indeed

towns might even lead to a worsening in urban many alternative approaches not only of method

health and mortality. An attempt by Kusukawa but also of presentation and interprptation.

to determine how much of past improvements Many speakers emphasized the need to widen

had been due to economic conditions and how the range of choice of projections and indeed to

much to social conditions proved interesting but canvass as wide a variety of expert opinions as

inconclusive.

possible on the future prospects before any

On the subject of the effect on the economy, projections were made.

and on society, of improvements in mortality, The growth of public attention to population

a paper was contributed by Myers on the likely questions, and the need for forward planning of

increase in the cost of social security, especially all kinds, has provided an increasing amount of

pensions in retirement-unless pension ages are work for demographers, and hardly any regarded

raised as a consequence.

this as a cause for regret. Indeed, many speakers

welcomed this trend. They felt that the demand

Migration

should be met by the best possible efforts of the most skilful demographers. The expert would be

If a decline in fertility helps economic and ill-advised to refuse to act because it would only

social advance, it may equally be said that low follow that the task would be allocated to less-

fertility-and mortality too-are a prerequisite skilled practitioners. Nevertheless, when asked

for the general development of a country. High to make a "forecast", the demographer often

rural fertility causes a movement away from the did, and always should, feel a sense of unworthi-

land and into towns that are not yet ready to ness, because, as Mrs. Taeuber said, forecasting

receive large increases in their size. This internal is impossible. The view was frequently expressed

migration is now occurring all over the world, that our prime needs are for better and more

and its identification was a major highlight of precise data, more careful research and more

the conference. The failure of cities to absorb deep thinking on important issues. As Mr.

immigration of this kind attracted much atten- Sauvy said, we now realize our limitations better

tion, and one speaker felt that the answer must than we used to. All the same, we should not be

lie in providing such basic necessities as roads, frightened off the subject of projections because

water and sewage for the shanty areas even if of past failures.

the full range of services, including subsidized The discussion brought out that in France

housing, transport and lighting, cannot be laid and Germany recent projections have been too

on immediately. Others felt that a more funda- pessimistic in respect of fertility: births turned

mental solution must reside in a policy of out to be higher than expected and consequently

industrializing the backward regions of a the population was above the projected quantity.

country. Evidence showed that the trend from On the other hand, in the United States of

the country to the town was not irreversible. A America and in Russia recent falls in fertility

further solution, emanating from a religious affected projections or plans for projections. In

source, was national development armies-a respect of India it was felt that the work done

call-up for social and economic work of the just after the close of the decade was more

State, which would also have the good effect of promising than anything achieved before. But

10

THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE

misreporting at censuses had caused consider- studies or other disciplines. Some speakers

able difficulties in many countries, particularly claimed that demography can now stand on its

in respect of projections made for the developing own feet, but not all appeared to agree. At least

areas; there was, however, no typical pattern of it was widely recognized that population will misreporting. In some places population was always need to be studied as a subsidiary subject

over-enumerated; in others it was under- by many who will specialize in other fields.

enumerated.

The training problem is essentially one of

The lessons to be drawn from the experience demand and supply, with the number of avail-

with projection work in the 1950s could perhaps able teachers continuing to be inadequate in

be generalized as follows:

relation to the numbers of would-be students.

1. Projections cannot have much value if The establishment, under the auspices of the

they are based on inadequate or inaccurate data or inappropriate models. In this respect the position appears to be improving gradually.
2. Rates of decline in mortality have often been under-estimated, and as a result some pro-

United Nations, of special centres in Africa, America and Asia, was a matter of much interest and attracted a good deal of attention. These centres, situated respectively in Cairo, Santiago and Chembur (near Bombay), have the added

jected populations have been under-stated. Here again, the prospects seem to be improving.
3. Unrepresentative projections of fertility have been made in some instances and this has
been regarded as the biggest single cause of error in many projections for different countries. The lesson demographers have learnt from this

difficulties of an uncertain status, doubtful permanence, inadequate money resources and
language multiplicity. Perhaps the most serious problem is that the centres-catering as they do for a standard of education below university level-are not attractive to the best types of teacher.

is to consider past experience over a longer

period and over a wider area than before, and by more sophisticated methods, as a better guide
to the future. 4. The most refined statistical methods cannot
be as useful as might be desired because so many social and economic changes are hard to foresee; in consequence, opinion surveys on fertility expectations are being used in some
countries as a basis for projections. First indications are that these will be of real assistance, but it is rather too early to make a firm judgement.
5. It does not seem very clear to what extent the projections, although generally unsuccessful in the narrow arithmetical sense, have been valuable in the wider sense of offering a reasonable basis for decision-making. It would appear that difficulties of presentation and comprehension have been experienced and that room for improvement remains.

Genetics
The discussions on population genetics were largely concerned with the relationship of the subject to demography and with the data demographers could collect for the benefit of human geneticists during the course of their investigations. This subject was dealt with by Newcombe in the September 1965 issue of the REVIEW (57, 109) and therefore need not be enlarged upon here.
Sutter made an interesting point regarding the number of consanguineous marriages in French villages in the late nineteenth century. It is now realized that these were abnormally frequent, as compared with other periods and other countries. The reason was the adoption of birth control, which had so reduced the number of available spouses that a greater degree of consanguinity became essential if the demand

for marriage partners was to be justified.

Training

On the subject ofthe training ofdemographers, Economic aspects
the question was raised whether the study of On the subject of the relationship between
population is a separate science or whether it population and economic factors such as food remains merely an appendage to general social supplies, power and other human needs, the

11

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

meetings refused to be overcome by the problems and on the whole a pessimistic view was agreed not to be essential. Thus one speaker
felt that world food supplies could be increased up to twenty times if necessary, and another
referred to the stimulus to agricultural production
that population pressure supplied. Economic
progress did not depend solely on population,
however. Yet another regarded the problems of
Africa to-day as attributable to under-population rather than over-population. According to one
view, it is wrong to think of a battle between
two separate factors ofpopulation and resources;
the two can be considered together under the
heading of the Dynamics of Human Societies.
"The future is uncertain only because it is in our own hands," someone said.
Many speakers from the developing countries were, however, less sanguine. One felt that, far
from falling with economic advance, dependency ratios could well rise. Another drew attention to
the bad effects of the terms of trade on the socio-
economic structure of the under-developed
countries and said that a world solution is
needed. While on the whole there was optimism regarding energy and mineral resources, there were naturally doubts regarding the necessary increase in production of the basic necessities and of most things which contribute to a betterment of the standard ofliving. Some participants expressed great anxieties in regard to food, the supply of which is usually considered to be inelastic, since agricultural land, an essential for food production, is a natural resource and therefore fixed in supply. Moreover, as there was much poverty and undernourishment in many parts of the world, there was a considerable backlog of production to be overcome before an adequate minimum standard of living could be attained. For there to be economic progress an increase in the level of income per head had to be achieved.
The production of material goods involves, it was said, the input of natural resources, capital and labour. At any given time the stock of capital was the result of past co-operation between the factors of production; it was a process which had involved an abstention by previous generations from current consumption. In like manner, for output to grow in future

there would have to be increases in production,
including the substitution of the more plentiful for the scarcer factors of production as occasion
arises. Capital expenditure could enable natural resources previously regarded as uneconomic to be exploited, and, in a sense, could create these resources-as when the supply of agricultural land was increased by irrigation and by land reclamation projects.
The problem of economic growth was thus described as being largely one of increasing the availability of capital. Some of the projects necessarily had to be carried out on a large scale; but much of the capital accumulation could be achieved by an increase in productivity, by using labour at present unemployed or underemployed, in conjunction with naturally available resources, to produce capital equipment which would greatly increase the effectiveness oflabour, and also increase the supply of agricultural produce. Outmoded methods of land tenure were often a serious hindrance to improvement of agricultural methods, so that changes in institutional forms were desirable to encourage production for a market, rather than a domestic, economy, with a fuller realization of the benefits of division of labour at both the national and
the international level. No serious shortage of mineral resources
seemed to be envisaged. There were vast known but untapped reserves of the various metallic and non-metallic minerals, including the elements used for fertilizer manufacture, so necessary for increasing agricultural output, and of the fossil fuels required for generating the motive energy for so many manufacturing pro-
cesses and for transportation. There were, furthermore, vast areas of the earth's surface which have not been adequately surveyed for reserves. And in those spheres where shortages of materials traditionally regarded as essential might arise, new synthetic products seemed certain to be developed as a result of scientific advances. Non-traditional food supplies produced by chemical syntheses from mineral raw materials could become of great significance in
the future. Atomic energy promised to be the means of relieving the energy shortages which
have bedevilled so many countries in the past.
An effective programme of economic growth,

12

THE WORLD POPULATION CONFERENCE

however, required an awareness of the short-
comings of the existing methods of production
to develop, and there must be a willingness to
undertake the necessary reforms. Educational
advance was essential, for industrialization
almost invariably involves machinery which
could be operated only by skilled personnel for
whom minimum levels of educational attainment
are necessary, and thus there would have to be
a heavy investment in education.
The importance of aid from the developed
countries to the less developed countries was emphasized; it could make large contributions
to economic growth in these latter areas; but
such aid was a mere stimulant. The capital
needs of the less developed countries were so gigantic that aid, on however generous a scale, would be quite inadequate, and these countries would have to make the major contributions themselves. When the aid programmes of the
developed countries involved the provision, including the operation and supervision, of capital projects for the less developed countries, the recipients must ultimately have personnel of
a sufficient degree of skill and level of education to take over the projects. Population growth, furthermore, was a stimulant, albeit a harsh one, to economic growth since an inevitable reaction to population pressure was greater effort, particularly as media of communication improve and ideas from the more developed countries permeate the less developed, creating aspirations in them for the standard of life of those wealthier countries. Educational advances
seemed likely to have a similar effect. Indeed, there was an interaction between educational advance, industrial progress and population pressure, since industrialization usually promotes urbanization, with less leisure in the transitional stage, at any rate, for the migrant workers, but producing a higher standard of living, the enjoyment of which would tend to engender a desire for smaller families. A more widespread adoption of methods of family limitation could be the result of private decisions by married couples, but in some countries, as public opinion became more attuned to the idea, it would not seem inconceivable that some of the developing countries might decide that resources which were devoted to the retardation of population growth

might have a more beneficial effect on the standard of living than when devoted to accelerating the growth of production.
Studies Relevant to Family Planning
The inclusion, in the conference programme, of this particular session was itself something of a breakthrough in the attitude ofinternational organizations to population problems. At the Rome Conference discussion on methods of fertility control was excluded because of the pressure, within the United Nations, of representatives of Catholic countries. In Belgrade this particular session attracted more attention, in the form of contributed papers and requests to participate in the discussions, than any other.
Indeed the need for increasing attention to methods of fertility control was implicit in the discussion of amost every other major topic. Internal migration was recognized both as a consequence of population growth and as an aggravating factor, high rural fertility producing an exodus from the land into towns where widespread poverty produced low motivation to family limitation. On labour supply and employment it was repeatedly stressed that a high rate of population growth produced an adverse dependency ratio and a consequent drain of resources from industrial uses to the social services. Educational advance, particularly in underdeveloped countries, was for similar reasons seen to be incompatible with high fertility. No hope was offered that increased food supplies could possibly match the growth of world population during the next decade whilst housing development and economic growth were clearly seen to be dependent upon a policy of planned population growth.
Against this background, the discussions on fertility control were both urgent and optimistic. A succession of reports from places as far apart as Taiwan and Mexico described action research projects designed to bring about population control within limited areas and, at the same time, provide research data on the use-effectiveness of different birth control techniques. An increasing number of national governments were reported to be devoting financial assistance to family planning programmes and to the

13

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

support of demographic research, though there be taken of human needs and wishes in regard

was a recurrent plea that more should be to such factors as family size, women going to

attempted.

work and age at marriage. What had to be

On the techniques of population control there decided was whether the right of future genera-

was the traditional division between those who tions to live should take precedence over the

saw the problem as a technological one (of right of the present generation to maintain and

devising better techniques) and the sociologists increase its living standards. This is a difficult

who regarded the problem as one of motivation. ethical question, but he for one seemed to be

It was apparent, however, that both factors are of the opinion that such a precedence ought not

important, and seldom distinguishable, in most to be accorded.

populations but that with the development of It is to be hoped that the next World Confer-

new and more effective techniques the problem ence, whenever and wherever it is held, will

of motivation will have to be studied more show the sentiment of 1965 to have been reflected

closely.

in effective practical action. At least it can be

If the international concern voiced at this said that the plans laid in 1954 have now borne

Conference results in the greater availability of fruit: training activities have produced more

funds for research in population sociology and demographers, and these in their turn have

fertility control (WHO has already begun to produced more statistics. As a result, the attend-

finance such projects) there will be an oppor- ance in Belgrade was double that in Rome, and

tunity to utilize the findings of the sort of project the growth in participation from the economic-

which the Eugenics Society has pioneered in ally emergent countries was even more marked.

this country in devising action projects in More papers had been written and their im-

radically different cultural contexts.

proved quality demonstrated the benefits that

can flow when more facts, and data of better

Conclusion

quality, can be adduced. A higher proportion

What can be said by way of summary of the of the work done was truly scientific in character

meetings as a whole? Dr. Sen, Director-General and fewer of the arguments advanced reflected

of the United Nations Food and Agriculture preconceived opinions of doubtful validity. At

Organization, suggested that from the first to the same time there appeared to be still room

the second World Population Conference there for improvement in two respects: first, some of

had been a change in the nature of the under- the analyses presented betrayed a certain im-

lying sentiment. In Rome much emphasis had maturity of scientific thought; the comments,

been placed on the collection and co-ordination friendly but critical, of the more experienced

of demographic statistics, but in Belgrade the demographers should have done much to expose

highlight was focussed on the critical importance such weaknesses to their authors. Secondly,

of the population question itself, viz. the growth there has on the whole been only a rather limited

of numbers and pressure on resources. This advance in basic demographic science. This is a

seems a fair comment, for the kinds of voices matter that presents greater difficulties and is

that had been raised against population control indeed incapable of control. All that can be said

ten years ago were relatively muted in 1965 and is that the potentialities for progress must

the nature of the argument against special res- become greater as the number of experienced

trictions on births, where it was raised, was demographers grows. The marriage of new ideas

different in character and on the whole weaker. with the new tools of computation now available

As Dr. Sen said, everyone is a person-not just seems to offer more than one avenue for possible

a demographic unit-and the aim should be the development. Yet it is in the sphere of practical

greatest possible realization of human faculties politics that one must hope for the greatest

and the development in the highest degree of advances in human welfare during the coming

all latent potentialities. A generous view should decades.

14

