THE NORWEGIAN EUGENIC PROGRAMME.
(Discussed at meetings of the Eugenic Society of Leningrad.)
At one of the meetings of the Eugenic Society of Leningrad it was decided to devote some time to the discussion of one or other of the existing eugenic programmes in order to arrive at a conclusion on the different attempts that have been made to solve the fundamental problems of eugenics. As a basis for such an investigation it was decided to take the so-called "Norwegian Program," which had been worked out by Dr. Jon Alfred Mj8en, Vinderen Laboratorium b. Oslo already in the year 1908 and which since then has been repeatedly dealt with at various meetings and in periodicials and papers.
As spokesmen in the discussion of the programme were selected from amongst the members of the Society P.I. Ljublinsky, V. P.
Osipoff, L. G. Orschanskv, and Ju. A. Philiptschenko, and it was decided to pursue the examination of the programme in the order of
the sections into which it was divided. Before speaking of the results of the examination of the programme
an exact translation of its text is here quoted.
THE NORWEGIAN PROGRAMME FOR RACE-HYGIENE. (In abbreviated form.)
Submitted for the first time to the public in a lecture delivered in the Medical Association (Medicinerforeningen) in Oslo 1908. It was approved of in principle at the Eugenic meeting in Paris in 1928. Negative race-hygiene. (Reduction of the number of inferior racial
elements).
(a) Segregation (negative colonisation system), voluntary for imbeciles, epileptics and similar mentally or physically defective individuals, compulsory for drunkards, habitual criminals, professional beggars and
all who refuse to work. We should not treat the crime but the criminal. (b) Sterilization. No compulsory sterilization. Voluntary for
certain types, who wish to avoid segregation.

THE NORWEGIAN EUGENIC PROGRAMME. 295
Positive race -hygiene. (Increase of the number of valuable racial elements).
(c) Biological enlightenment. Race-biology in school and university and distribution of informative literature. State laboratory for racebiology and genealogy. The education of women should not be masculine, but should specially include biology (renewal of thefamily).
(d) A taxation, wage and colonisation system favourable to the family. Maternity insurance and other protective prenatal measures for bread-winners. (Positive colonisation system).
Prophylactic race -hygeine. (Prenatal protection of the individual).
(e) Combating racial poisons, (especially syphilis), narcotic poisons, (especially alcohol); and (1) Prevention of racial national diseases as a function of the state. (2) Health declaration before marriage. (3) Classification system and progressive taxation for alcoholic liquors.
(f) Crossings between distant races should-until we have acquired more knowledge-not be advised. In preparing rules and laws respecting immigration this point should have the greatest weight.
(g) Biological registration of the whole nation. (Biogram).
Sections (a) and (b) in the program, which concerns negative eugenics, were subjected to examination together.
P. 1. Ljublinsky drew attention to the necessity for exceptional caution in this question, since the cacogenic influences may here unite with the unfavourable social influences. Segregation he regards as desirable (a) for idiots, imbeciles and feeble-minded, (b) for habitual criminals showing signs of degeneration, mental defectivity or psychopathia sexualis, and (c) for persons suffering from hereditary mental disorders, epilepsy, alcoholism or syphilis. As the period of segrega-
tion required is very long, its application from purely eugenic motives is scarcely possible, while on the other hand sterilization is only perwnissible for eugenic and not by any means for social reasons. It must be performed after previous decision of a council of specialists and with the consent of the person concerned or of his legal representatives. As
is shown by experiments made in the United States, compulsory sterilization offers many difficulties and we can recognise it as per-
missible only in the future, when our knowledge respecting heredity has become more profound. Voluntary sterilization, at the desire of
the person himself, is quite inadmissible, seeing that this measure may be resorted to for demoralizing purposes.
V. D. Osipoff remarked that the proposals of the Norwegian programme, while being entirely sound, are expressed in too crude a form. Terms such as "feeble-minded," "epileptics" and the like are much too summary in character. What is permissible, or even desirable, for one category is not at all necessary for another. Equally subjective in many respects is likewise the expression "signs of degeneration" which P. I. Ljubinsky mentioned. On the whole, the speaker regarded sterilization as permissible in principle for certain definite categories, but he assigned little special importance thereto, mainly in view of the possibility of a negative reaction on the part of the population and also of the possibility of committing irreparable mistakes.

296 EUGENICS REVIEW.
V. M. Bechtereff considered segregation to bei' difficult to carry-
out in practice. Such isolation was possible only fromisocial motives. On the other hand, he deemed that the application of even compulsory sterilization was quite admissible in cases where the production of offspring deterimental to society might be feared. Moreover, such coxnpulsory sterilization would render the community more healthy. In favour of compulsory sterilization there is also the fact that the
negative elements multiply so rapidly.
L. L. Okintschetz remarked that sterilization of women belongs to the domain of abdominal surgery and therefore offers a certain amount of risk. Sterilization of men can, no matter what is said, hardly have a beneficial effect on such persons.
G. P. Selenyj considered that sterilization cannot find great practical application at present and that it is rather doubtful whether it is serviceable for the proposed ends.
Ju. A. Philiptschenko likewise expressed himself against sterilization, pointing out a certain amount of danger in this operation, a possibility of mistakes that cannot be rectified, and especially that sterilization is a kind of negative selection, which in general gives far too insignificant results when employed alone. Meanwhile the propaganda for this measure may easily be harmful to the eugenic idea in its entirety.
After the conclusion of the discussion the members of the Society expressed themselves as being in principle in favour of sterilization and segregation with the use of admissible means. Segregation has been recognised as desirable for certain categories of lunatics, habitual criminals, recidivists and other persons whose reproduction is deemed dangerous to the community for social or eugenic reasons. Sterilization has been admitted as permissible only after the decision of a special council of competent persons and with the consent of the person concerned or of his legal representatives, and exclusively on eugenic and not social grounds. This opinion in favour of permitting sterilization in certain cases was held by a considerable majority of the members, but some voices were raised for the permission of compulsory sterilization, whilst others were for entirely omitting this item from the eugenic programme.
The first section (Section 8.) concerning positive eugenics and, in part, biological enlightenment.
The meeting decided that the introduction of eugenic ideas was desirable first and foremost in the secondary schools, not as a special course but as part of the courses in geography, biology and so on. At the same time it was recognised as necessary that the teachers should make themselves familiar with eugenic ideas, for which object all possible means must by utilized in the form of applications to the public authorities for social purposes, lectures in connection with the courses for teachers and the like.*
The next section of the program, Section D (positive. eugenics)
* The further discussion at the Russian Eugenics Society of this section: Educational Programmes, system of female education, the male and the female psyche, free competition of sexes, co-education, etc., will be printed in another
place in connection with modern education in general.

THE NORWEGIAN EUGENIC PROGRAMME. 297
concerns the problems of taxation, wages and policy with respect to population.
P. 1. Ljubinsky drew attention to the fact that in the post-war legislation in many European countries means are provided for favouring families with a large number of children. It is true that some objections are raised against this policy. It is pointed out that such a policy does not produce an increased birth-rate amongst the ele. ments that are especially valuable from a eugenic standpoint and that it may occasion a high death-rate amongst children. The basis of this policy is the idea that an increase in reproduction in general is on the whole an advantage. The mortality amongst children contributes to the survival of the stronger elements. The speaker deems it possible for us to point to three measures as a "minimum programme." (a) social maternity insurance, (b) pensions to mothers, (c) encouragement of frequency of births in the sphere of communal and state taxation policy.
After the conclusion of the discussion in which P. I. Ljublinsky, V. 0. Osipoff, L. G. Orschansky and Ju. A. Philiptschenko took part, those present expressed themselves in favour of the following measures in this field: (a) social maternity insurance, (b) pensions to mothers, (c) alleviation of the position of those with large families, especially by taking this factor into account in communal and national taxation policy, and (d) other measures for raising the birth-rate, in the direction of an alteration in the system of wages for workmen and officials with a view to their family circumstances.
On passing to the discussion of prophylactic eugenics it was decided for the sake of convenience to divide the first section (Section E) into two headings: (a) measures concerning the contracting of marriages and (b) the fight against preventive and abortive chemicals.
Concerning the first of these points P. I. Ljublinsky gave some particulars about the legislation in this direction both abroad and in Russia. For his part, he deemed it desirable to introduce in Russia the following measures: (a) Registration of marriage only after the second visit to the marriage registry. In the interval between the first and second visit to the registry the persons intending to marry shall be supplied with an explanatory pamphlet for perusal and they shall sign an undertaking to acquire a mutual knowledge of their state of health. (b) The doctors shall be relieved of the obligation of silence as regards venereal diseases. (c) Prohibition against marriages between persons suffering from mental defects.
P. I. Ljublinsky remarked that there was not much to be said for the two extreme views of this problem-the doctrine of complete indifference to the matter and the system of strict measures. Therefore what must be recognised as most advantageous is something lying between the two extr( mes,-a certain system of compromise, of which he himself was an adherent.
The meeting gave its support to this last standpoint. It was decided that certain legislative prohibitions in this field are undoubtedly of service.
Regarding the question of preventive and abortive chemicals the following views were expressed:

298 EUGENICS REVIEW.
P. I. Ljublinsky gave an account of laws concerning protection of workers from industrial poisons and also of legislation directed against narcotic poisons. The speaker considered that it would be advantageous already now to express the desirability of a campaign against alcoholising the nation, especially in so far as it affects the interests of the rising generation.
V. I. Osipoff dwelt in the first place upon the effects of syphilis both on the patient himself and on his offspring, and then proceeded to deal with the narcotic poisons (morphia, cocain), asserting that for combating these latter it is necessary to take measures of international dimensions, the more so because the effects of these drugs are very difficult to counteract.
L. G. Orschansky drew attention to the close connection existing between alcoholism and criminality, especially as regards the more serious crimes, in which alcohol frequently plays an important contributory part.
Ju. A. Philiptschenko pointed out that from the point of view of genetics the influence of alcohol and syphilis is not truly hereditary in character. But these poisons produce long-continued modifications, which are manifestly reflected in the immediate offspring. It is therefore that the campaign against them must come in as one of the tasks of eugenics.
V. A. Schile gave a general picture of the influence of syphilis and regarded the campaign against the venereal diseases as one of the mnost important duties of eugenics.
After hearing the views of the different speakers the meeting decided that the most effective weapons in the campaign against preventive and abortive drugs are to be found in a widely-diffused knowledge of their danger and a most energetic propaganda against such poisons.
The last portion of the program (F) concerns the question of crossings between different races.
After the conclusion of the discussion the meeting decided that, although the question of race crossing is very important, it is difficult to regard is as definitely solved. But in contrast to the attitude
adopted in the Norwegian programme it must be stated that, so long as we have no other data available, we cannot express an opinion against
the crossing of different races and nations. President of R. E. O.'s Leningrad Section. Ju. A. PHILIPTSCHENKO.

