The Cytogenetics of Sex in Man*
C. E. FORD
B.Sc., Ph.D. Medical Research Council, Radiobiological Research Unit, Harwell.

N EITHER CYTOGENETICS NOR even gen-
etics had received their names as branches of biological inquiry in Darwin's day,
though the study of the movements of the chromosomes in mitosis was advancing rapidly at the time of his death and Mendel's immortal contribution to knowledge was already made, awaiting rediscovery. Sex, however, has always been with us. It presented important biological problems then, as now. Darwin took a particular interest in one of them, the consequences of sexual selection, and was led to assemble a considerable amount of information about the relative numbers of the sexes of many species.
The first clues to the nature of the cellular events and mechanisms that lie behind the sex ratio and the determination of the direction of sexual development did not emerge until some twenty years after his death. Then, within the space of ten years, the sex chromosomes, the heterogamety of one sex, and sex-linkage were discovered, Goldschmidt began his classical work on sex determination in Lymantria, and Morgan established the Drosophila Group at Columbia, New York. Goldschmidt's conclusions have been particularly important in connection with subsequent thinking about sex determination and differentiation. Essentially they are: first, that the egg naturally destined to develop into the one sex nevertheless contains within it the potentiality of developing into the other; second, that the phenotypic sex is determined by the quantitative relationship, or balance between the aggregate strengths of multiple male and female genetic determiners; and third, that when these strengths are nearly equal and the balance equivocal, development may proceed as for one sex up to a certain stage,
* A summary of the first Darwin Lecture in Human Biology delivered in London on November 23rd, 1960. This summary also appears in the Institute of Biology Journal. The full text of the Lecture will be published in the Journal of Reproduction and Fertility.

or turning point, and continue thereafter as for the other.
Bridges' equally classic work on the genetics of sex in Drosophila was commenced a little later. He also put forward the idea ofsex differentiation being a consequence of the balance of opposed sets of genetic factors, and he was able to find convincing evidence for the location of the feminising factors on the X chromosomes, and the masculinising factors on the autosomes: the Y chromosome, he found, had virtually no effect on sex differentiation.
This interpretation accounted satisfactorily for the sex phenotypes of several types of fly with anomalous sex chromosome constitutions, among them certain intersexes. This prompted Painter to suggest that some types of human intersexuality might owe their phenotypes to abnormality of the sex chromosomes.
The Sex Chromatin Test
The need for such study was given new point and urgency several years ago when the application of the sex chromatin test to intersexual conditions revealed several anomalies. Sex chromatin is a prominent darkly staining chromatin mass that commonly lies close to the nuclear membrane in suitable cells of normal females, but which is absent from the corresponding nuclei of normal males. It is now believed to be derived from one of the two X chromosomes which may exhibit a different cycle of condensation and staining behaviour from the other at mitosis. Smears of cells from the buccal mucosa are the preparations of choice for the detection of sex-chromatin and in expert hands the distinction between normal individuals of the two sexes is so certain and absolute that it serves as a criterion of sexual normality. Two important findings quickly emerged from its use. Klinefelter's syndrome occurs with a frequency of about 1 per 1,000 of the general population. The

21

EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1961, 53, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

patients have exceptionally small testes and two X chromosomes and of XO cells with only

atrophied seminiferous tubules. Notwithstanding one. Three other kinds of sex-chromosome

their essential maleness, about 80 per cent of mosaicism are now known: XX/XXY, XO/XY

them have sex-chromatin bodies in their buccal and XO/XXX. The identification of mixtures

mucosa cells, as in normal females. Patients with such as these implies either non-disjunction or

Turner's syndrome occur rather less frequently, elimination of sex chromosomes at an early

perhaps 1 in 10,000 of the general population. somatic mitosis. The last kind is particularly

They present a female phenotype, but with short interesting since the only plausible explanation is

stature, one or more of a range of congenital non-disjunction in a normal XX cell at such an

defects, absent ovaries, failure of secondary sex early stage of development that only XO and

development at puberty and primary amenor- XXX cells were included in the germinal disc of

rhoea. In this condition also about 80 per cent of the blastocyst.

patients resemble normal members of the other sex in lacking sex-chromatin. For the anomalous majority in each of these conditions the possibility of "sex-reversal," i.e. development of male phenotype from an XX zygote and vice versa, was seriously considered.

This makes it reasonable to consider seriously the possibility of origin of an XXY soma from an XY zygote, and of an XO soma from either an XY or an XX zygote. However, the genetic evidence provided by colour-blindness tests makes it possible on statistical grounds to ex-

Chromosomes in Klinefelter's and Turner's
Syndromes
Very recently three general methods for obtaining good quality preparations of human somatic chromosomes have been introduced, requiring
specimens of bone marrow, skin, and peripheral blood respectively. Preparations are made from cells incubated or cultured in vitro for periods ranging from a few hours (bone marrow) to ten days or more (skin culture). Use of these methods has demonstrated that the chromatin-
positive Klinefelter cases have an XXY sex chromosome constitution with a total of fortyseven chromosomes; and that the chromatinnegative Turners are XO with forty-five chromosomes. These discoveries immediately accounted for the sex-chromatin anomalies and disposed of the hypothesis of sex-reversal.
The chromatin-negative Klinefelter syndrome is probably aetiologically distinct: the patients have forty-six chromosomes, like normal males. In some chromatin-positive Turner patients the chromosome number is also forty-six but with two presumptive X chromosomes as in normal females. No entirely plausible explanation can yet be offered for the association of the one abnormal phenotype with two distinct karyotypes in this condition.

clude such a mechanism of origin for at least the majority of XXY Klinefelter cases. The alternative is to suppose that abnormal XX ova or XY sperm (or both) are formed and are viable. Nondisjunction is doubtless a universal, if rare, error and may be most frequent during the first meiotic division in gametogenesis. This would account not only for the occurrence of XX ova and XY sperm but for the complementary types of abnormal gamete lacking any sex chromosome at all. If all these gametic types should be viable, three further sorts of abnormal zygote should occur: YO, XXX and, with perhaps exceptional rarity, XXXY. YO individuals have not been detected: if zygotes of this constitution are formed they are presumable inviable. The occurrence of XXX and XXXY cases is now well established.
Eight individuals with forty-seven chromosomes and a presumptive XXX constitution have now been identified. They are all women who have presented no striking clinical features in
common other than a general lowering of mental performance, a feature which is also characteristic of the KLinefelter and Turner patients. Two of the eight are of proved fertility and have a total of five sons, all of whom are chromatinnegative. So there is at present no evidence of a tendency to produce abnormal XX ova, which

Other Sex Chromosome Anomalies

would be expected if a trivalent configuration of

Other chromatin-positive Turner patients,. X chromosomes were to disjoin at random during

-however, proved to be mixtures of XX cells with the first meiotic division of oogenesis.

22

THE CYTOGENETICS OF SEX IN MAN

Two cases with a presumptive XXXY consti- ofJost in Paris have shown that if the gonads of a

tution are known. Both are males and show a rabbit embryo are ablated at a suitably early

strong clinical resemblance to patients with stage of development, that rabbit will develop a

Klnefelter's syndrome. However, both exhibit a female phenotype regardless of its naturally

more extreme level of mental defect than is usual destined sex. He therefore regards the female as

among Klnefelter cases.

the basic or neutral phenotype. Further experi-

Non-disjunction at the second meiotic division, ments of Jost's and other general evidence

or at both first and second divisions, would yield indicate that the differentiation of the Wolffian

a series of other possible abnormal gametic types ducts into typical male internal genitalia includ-

and point to the possible occurrence of zygotes ing epididymis, vas deferens and seminal

with still further kinds of numerical unbalance vesicles, proceeds on each side of the body

of the sex chromosomes. In fact, XXXXY and independently under the local evocating action

XXYY individuals have been reported. Both are of the gonad on that side. In the absence of

male, once again with essential clinical features evocator from either side the Wolfflan duct

of Klinefelter's syndrome.

degenerates and the Mullerian duct transforms

A most interesting and unexpected finding in into Fallopian tube and partial uterus. Trans-

the multiple X-chromosome cases, whether male formation of the external genital rudiments into

or female, is the occurrence of some cells with the masculine form, on the other hand, is deter-

additional sex-chromatin bodies in buccal mucosa mined by a circulating morphogenetic substance

smears. Cells with nil, one and two bodies have normally liberated by the testis. In short, primary

been found in all the XXX and XXXY cases sex differentiation can be divided into three inde-

known at present, and in the XXXY case some pendent phases; first the gonads themselves, then

cells contained three bodies. On present evidence the internal genitalia, and finally the external

there is no exception to the empirical rule that genitalia.

the maximum number of sex chromatin bodies is one less than the number of X chromosomes. This points to a functional difference between one X chromosome and the remainder and is in accordance with the evidence for differential behaviour of the two X chromosomes at mitosis in normal females that I have already mentioned. Whatever the explanation, this discovery provides an admirable simple method of screening for suspected multiple sex chromosome anomalies among the patients of mental institutions.

One of the two types of XY female exhibits the condition known as testicular feminization Typical affected individuals have a feminine conformation with well-developed breasts but sparse or absent pubic and axillary hair. They may have a short vagina but no uterus. The dominant anatomical feature, however, is the presence of undoubted testes in which there may be a certain amount of active spermatogenesis, lying either in bilateral inguinal hernias, or, more rarely, intra-abdominally. The condition is

Chromosomes and Sex Determination

familial, being transmitted only through females, and there is a marked deficiency ofnormal males

Of the types of patient I have discussed so far, in the affected sibships. The affected individuals

all that have a Y chromosome are unquestionably are about equal in number to their male sibs, and,

male, whatever the number of Xs, and all that like them, are chromatin negative. There is little

lack a Y chromosome are as certainly female. doubt that a single mutant gene is involved which

The simple inference is that the Y chromosome could be either a sex-linked recessive or a sex-

carries masculinising genes and is necessary for limited autosomal dominant. Developmentally it

the formation of the testes. However, two types may be supposed that the normal allele of the

of female are known with chromosomes like mutant gene acts on the third phase of male sex

those of normal males and this might seem to put differentiation and that in the mutant state either

the conclusions in doubt.

the normal circulating morphogenetic substance

The discussion of these cases will be aided if of the embryonic testis is not produced, or that

some of the basic findings regarding sex differen- the external genital rudiments are incapable of

tiation are kept in mind. The brilliant experiments responding to it. However, this evidence for the

23

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

existence of a gene necessary for normal male Two mutually exclusive genetic hypotheses of

development that lies on a chromosome other true hermaphroditism are possible: the gonads

than the Y does not invalidate the hypothesis that (or gonad regions) may be anatomically and

the Y chromosome also bears genes that play histologically distinct either because the consti-

an essential part in the process.

tuent cells are genotypically distinct, or, notwith-

The second type of XY female exhibits an standing their genotypic identity. The first hypo-

extremely rare condition known as "pure gonadal thesis invokes mosaicism. There was no evidence

dysgenesis." Those affected may be tall and have of gross chromosomal mosaicism in the seven

limbs that are disproportionately long. There is chromatin-positive cases. However, all the

primary amenorrhoea and poor or absent observations were made on bone marrow, or skin

secondary sex development. In -the few cases cultures, or peripheral blood, so that there is

where a laparotomy has been performed, no information regarding the chromosome con-

ovaries were absent, but fallopian tubes and stitution of the actual gonads themselves.

rudimentary uterus were present. The one case Nevertheless, if gross chromosomal mosaicism

that so far has been examined cytologically was were a regular or frequent feature of true

chromatin-negative. Some cases are chromatin- hermaphroditism it seems unlikely that it would

positive, but in none of them is the chromosome have been identified only in one out of eight

constitution known. It may be that this condi- cases, and that one the sole representative of the

tion presents the naturally occurring analogue in chromatin-negative state. The possibility remains

man to the rabbits with experimentally ablated of a more subtle type of chromosomal mosaicism

gonads. If so, the occurrence of both chromatin- perhaps involving the transference through

positive and chromatin-negative forms is under- structural change of a portion of the Y chromo-

standable. Most of the cases are sporadic, though some to another chromosome.

there is a familial history in some of them. If any form of mosaicism is excluded in all the

However, whether a genetic factor is involved or XX cases, or even in some of them, it would

not, the question of the masculinising action of become necessary to reject the hypothesis that

the Y chromosome is not affected: on the evi- the Y chromosome is essential for development

dence presented so far it is still possible to assert of testicular tissue. The alternative is to suppose,

that presence of the Y chromosome is necessary with Goldschmidt, that there are multiple oppos-

for normal male development but not sufficient ing genetic factors involved in sex determination,

to ensure it.

and, in particular, that there is a sufficiency of

masculinising factors in the normal chromosome

True Hermaphroditism

set of the female for their aggregate strength

True hermaphroditism provides a further and sometimes to be so nearly in balance with the

final test. In this rare condition, by definition, aggregate strength of feminising factors that

there are gonads of both kinds, or of one kind through chance local embryonic events the scales

and an ovotestis, or two ovotestes. They present could be tipped differently in different regions of

an apparently bewildering array of anatomical the body and different paths of gonadal differen-

variation though all may be reconciled with the tiation result.

three-phase scheme of sexual differentiation I The use of cytogenetic methods during the last

have already outlined. Chromatin-positive cases two years has added much to the understanding

appear to outnumber chromatin-negative cases of the various sorts of human intersexuality and

by about four to one. Seven have been examined more may yet be achieved, but there remain

cytologically and all have been reported to be some problems, particularly that of true herma-

XX with forty-six chromosomes like a normal phroditism, which may require the development

female. The one chromatin-negative case studied of other methods of investigation for their

was claimed to be an XO/XY mosaic.

solution.

24

