HOUSING ASOCIAL FAMILIES IN HOLLAND*
By PEARL MOSHINSKY, B.Sc. (Econ.), Ph.D.
(Housing Sub-Committee, Po.pulation Investigation Committee)

Dutch Housing Progress

and above the number of households in the

TO the student of housing, Holland country.*

presents several interesting features.
The Dutch have grappled with their housing problems with such energy and resolve that, despite the unusually high fertility it still manifests,t the country at present possesses more available dwellings than families to be accommodated.
Although the first Dutch housing act was not introduced until the turn of the twentieth century (I9OI), its original terms were so comprehensive and detailed that, except for minor alterations and modifications, it has remained the basis of policy ever since. From the beginning State financial assistance for the erection of dwellings was exceptionally generous. Advances could be made to cover the entire cost of the proposed building, and a generous period of as much as fifty years was allowed for repayment. It was not until after the war, however, that full advantage was taken of this law. In I920, after the almost complete cessation of building activity during the years of hostilities, the shortage of dwellings was estimated as between 6o,ooo and IOO,OOO out of an existing total of I,380,000o. By the time of the I930 census, the deficit had become a surplus of 50,ooo dwellings over
* This article consists of one section of a report on European Housing that the author is preparing for the Population Investigation Committee. It is hoped that the complete report will be available shortly.
t The birth rate of Holland is still sufficiently high to ensure that the population is reproducing itself. In 1935 the net reproduction rate was I-102, i.e. every I,ooo women were producing X,102 future mothers, compared with 764 in England and 866 in France.
t See Housing Policy in Europe, p. 103. I.L.O. 1930. The estimate of 6o,ooo is also given by H. van der Kaa, General Inspector of Health in The Hague, in his book
Housing Policy in the Netherlands, p. 32. Geneva, 1935.

Housitng Problem Families
This achievement places Holland decidedly in the forefront of European housing progress. The Dutch however have also been pioneers in another direction-namely that of providing accommodation for families whose habits of living make them undesirable and unsatisfactory tenants. Sociologically, these tenants form a heterogeneous collectionthey may be dirty, they may be dipsomaniacs, they may be aggressive and quarrelsome, or they may merely possess unpunctual habits in the payment of rent. Their common quality is that they are difficult to live with. It may appear somewhat contradictory that the principle of segregating people of this character should first have been widely accepted in a country with as strong an individualist tradition as Holland. But from another point of view it may be regarded merely as carrying to the extreme the normal practice of social segregation in a community sharply stratified by social classes-an equally prominent characteristic of Dutch society. For example, most housing estates and residential areas serve quite limited sections of the population, and strenuous objections are usually raised against any proposal to build municipal estates near wealthy districts.
The alleged intention of these schemes of segregation is reformative. Their purpose is stated as being " to level those families up by teaching them how to live in a better
* H. van der Kaa, op. cit. This surplus does not
necessarily indicate an equable distribution of supply between the various social classes. In I930 there were still 9-6 per cent. of all dwellings overcrowded (i.e. more than two to a room), which implies that there must still be a shortage of lower-rented dwellings of sufficiently large size.

'73

I172 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

way .... and to make them well-behaved families and desirable tenants,"* or even just simply " to teach them to live in a better home."t Occasionally, however, a more
material note is to be detected, and it is suggested that by this means it is possible for the municipality to avoid the rapid deterioration of municipal property by people who have been accustomed to slum living.4+
Although colonies for housing "asocial" families have been in existence in Holland only for fifteen years or so, the problem was already being discussed in the immediate pre-war years, as part of the general question
of re-housing slum tenants. The first colonies to be formed were accommodated in temporary quarters. For example, as early as I9I7,
Amsterdam families who were considered " asocial " in character were housed in a disused school, under the supervision of two pensioned policemen. In the following years, one or two additional groups were set up, but again in temporary premises. The first permanent colony was not erected until I923, when io6 houses, called the "Controle Woningen" were built by The Hague municipality. The example of The Hague was soon followed by Amsterdam. In 1924, official support was granted to the first of the Amsterdam colonies, Zeeburgerdorp, which was built in i926. The estate comprised fifty-five concrete houses, each with living-room, kitchen, W.C., and one to four bedrooms. In addition, generous communal facilities were provided, including a bath-house, laundry, club-rooms, free health services for all on the estate, and even a day nursery for children between the ages of one-and-a-half and five years. All these amenities were free, with the exception of the use of the laundry apparatus, for which a small additional charge was made. It is interesting to notice the inclusion of day-nurseries in the scheme, since in Holland creches are not usually to be found in planned housing estates. One reason for this is the generally accepted view that the family
* See recent report, issued by the Housing Department of Amsterdam (mimeographed, undated).
t Hague Housing and Town Planning Dept. Private
communication.
I See Amsterdam report, op. cit.

provides the most desirable environment for the child. Another, arising no doubt out of the first, is that the special housing law of
Holland (Woningwets) arranges for financial assistance for housing in the narrow sense
only, and is rarely extended to cover general communal and social services. The provision of creches in these special communities is justified, however, on the grounds that the
child of socially abnormal parents will find a better environment in a well-equipped nursery than he could possibly obtain in his own home, and more care and attention can thus
be bestowed upon him during the formative pre-school years.
To the poor and overworked mothers of
the families inhabiting the colonies these creches were particularly helpful. Holland is one of the few European countries where large families are still frequently to be found. According to the I930 census figures, over half of all families had two or more children, and over one-third had three or more children.* Since there is at present a considerable differential fertility between social classes,t most of the large families occur in the poorer sections of the community, from which tenants for the " asocial" housing groups are drawn. Thus, the number of children per family in the Amsterdam groups is given as five, and those in The Hague Controle Woningen as 4-6.6

Flats or Cottages?

Unlike their Italian counterparts, each dwelling in the Dutch schemes for accommodating
undesirable families consists of a separate
house, which is built as solidly and as well as ordinary municipal houses. Throughout Holland the small family house has remained
both the ideal and the prevailing type,
contrary to what might have been expected in so small a country, where flat building

* These figures apparently refer to children of all

ages, since no age limits are given in the official publica-

tions.

t For a fuller treatment of differential fertility, see

J. H. van Zanten and T. van den Brink, "Population

phenomena in Amsterdam." Population, vol. II,

Nos. 3 and 4. (1937-8.)

t Privately supplied figures. The average size of the

families in The Hague group shows considerable

f5l.u5ctfuoartiIo9n2s7

from and

year to year, the highest the lowest 2 8 for 1935.

figure

being

HOUSING ASOCIAL FAMILIES IN HOLLAND

would at least have the advantage of The " Controle Woningen " in The Hague

conserving space. Two factors however have militated against the building of blocks of flats-in the first place, the difficulty of providing adequate foundations for large-
sized buildings in a soil that is frequently waterlogged, and secondly, the persistence

About a year after the Zeeburgerdorp estate was built, the municipality considered it so successful that the larger and betterknown colony of Asterdorp was planned and
erected. This consisted of I32 houses, with individual and communal accommodation

of the family tradition. In Holland, almost as much as in England, the house is considered the family " castle," and the care and attention bestowed upon all housing problems reflect this fact. Although some large towns, particularly Amsterdam and Rotterdam, have a considerable proportion of their dwellings in the form of flats, it is still true to say that throughout the country the single-family house predominates. Un-

similar to that at Zeeburgerdorp. Neither of these Amsterdam estates however possess the rigid classification incorporated in The Hague " Controle Woningen." Here the io6 dwellings are subdivided into three social classes as follows :*
Ist class dwellings - 38 2nd class dwellings - I4 3rd class dwellings - 54

fortunately, the last available general housing Third class tenants were, of course, those

census was taken in I919, and it is not easy considered most " asocial " in behaviour,

to tell whether there has been any con- while first-class tenants were the least ab-

siderable alteration in the position since normal, and the degree of control exercised

then. In I9I9, flats comprised over ninety over each varied accordingly. For this pur-

per cent. of all the dwellings in both Amster- pose, the colony was built in fan-shaped

dam and Rotterdam, and just under seventy formation, with the supervisor's house in

per cent. in The Hague. But if we exclude the middle. The third-class group were

the six largest towns,* ninety-three per housed in the centre, and had to pass through

cent. of all dwellings were in the form of the supervisor's lodge to reach their own

single-family houses while the figure for the dwellings. They were thus subject to con-

whole country, including the towns, was as stant supervision. Second-class tenants were

much as seventy-two per cent.t At present, placed towards the outside of the group, and

emphasis continues to be laid on the necessity while they too had to pass the supervisor's

for more one-family houses, in discussions of lodge, they were not under continual sur-

housing problems. Even in Amsterdam, the veillance. First-class tenants lived on the

new town plan includes a large number of outside, and their dwellings were more

dwellings of this type. Since the object of the normally set out along two streets. They

special schemes for undesirable families is to could enter their homes independently, and

-inculcate standards of " normal" living, it is enjoyed a considerable amount of freedom.

natural for them to have been planned as indi- The houses varied in their provision of com-

vidual homes rather than as blocks of flats.+ fort too; those on the inside (third-class),

* Namely, Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Hague, Utrecht, Haarlem, and Groningen.

for example, were without gardens at all; those on the outside possessed individual

t Census data, quoted by H. van der Kaa (op. cit.). plots of the popular type. For all tenants

I Although in the provision of light and air there is
little difference between Dutch filats and houses, private gardens are considered an invaluable adjunct to healthy

on the estate a curfew was imposed, and baths were compulsory (and free) once a

and happy family life. Van der Kaa thinks that gardens provide the necessary fresh air and exercise for children, and in addition form a centre of interest for

fortnight. The families were subject to re-classification at intervals, and the lower

adults, and a helpful factor in the fight against alcohol- categories might work their way through the

ism, immorality, etc. It is not yet usual to find such amenities as bathrooms or central heating in the lowerrented dwellings, since it is apparently considered more

various grades to qualify eventually for a normal municipal dwelling. In the Amster-

important to devote the additional cost of these luxuries dam colonies, too, tenants whose social

to the provision of roomier and separate dwellings.

(Op. Cit., pp. 22-7.)

* These figures are for I923, when the scheme started.

174 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

behaviour showed sufficient improvement

No. ofbedrooms per house*

would eventually be rewarded by transfer

I. 2. 3. 4.

to an ordinary estate.

Zeeburgerdorp 3 i6 25 I2

Selection and Accommodation of Families

Asterdorp ... - 43 35 48

Although there is no legal compulsion for Most housing experts who have visited families to enter these colonies, the deter- the estates agree that they are well-built

mining factor is the absence of any other and attractively laid out.t

dwelling at a suitable rent that the tenant

could afford. Thus, in practice, most people who inhabit the special dwellings have little

Rents and Subsidies

choice in the matter, and once they accept Financially the schemes are not successful.

tenancy they are naturally obliged to con- They are run at a loss, and both rent and

form to the regulations attached. All appli- social services are subsidized by the authori-

cants for municipal houses have to submit ties.+ But it is claimed that the cost to the

to an examination of their home circum- community would be greater if such families

stances, and it is by this means that the were not subject to general supervision and

undesirable group are selected. Such families reformative influence, since they include

are then not allowed to inhabit the ordinary many fathers who would probably other-

estates until they have been subjected to the reformative influence of the asocial colonies,

wise be in prison, and wives and children who would be in public institutions or infirmaries.

and have shown that they are capable of The rents charged appear to be lower than

improvement. In Amsterdam, each colony those generally prevailing for working-class

is in charge of a woman inspector who keeps dwellings in the same towns. A recent list

close social contact with families in her care, of average municipal rents in Amsterdam

and gives advice when necessary on all matters connected with housekeeping prob-

ranges from 3 0 florins to 6-50 florins per week.§ In this list, the rents of the asocial

lems, children's education, etc. She is also responsible for the collection of rent, and

colonies are given as a minimum of 2 75 florins and a maximum of 3*50 florins, the

reports to the authorities periodically on average being about 3-25 florins per week.

home conditions.

The mean annual rent for workers' dwellings

The houses provided are built on one floor only. They contain a varying number

is given by the Amsterdam municipal yearbook as 325 florns per annum (Jan. I938),

of bedrooms, suitable for families of different which suggests that the higher figure of

sizes, since under the terms of the Dutch housing law, each dwelling must contain a

6 50 florns in the municipal list is the more usual one. This means that the rents of

sufficient number of rooms to enable children dwellings in the special colonies are only

of different sexes to sleep in separate bed- slightly more than half the usual figure.

rooms.* Thus, in addition to living quarters
which may consist of one kitchen-living-room or a separate kitchen and living-room, up to

In the Controle Woningen, there are wider variations, due to the three-fold classification employed. But even here the figure for

four bedrooms are provided, in houses which

are either fully detached or semi-detached. * Figures from the Congress Report on Housing for

The following figures of the sizes of houses in Special Groups, p. 9 (Holland). Published by Interna-

Zeeburgerdorp and Asterdorp convey an idea of the generous accommodation pro-

tional Federation for Housing and Town Planning, Stockholm, Igog.
t See for example Elizabeth Denby, Europe re-housed,

vided, particularly when compared with the I938.

one-room dwellings built for families of this type in Italy.

t In Amsterdam, for example, the subsidy allowed on each dwelling is sixty guilders a year, which is ten more than the present maximum for ordinary municipal

* The original limit was fourteen years, but this was dwellings.

considered too high, and has since been lowered to § Privately supplied by the Nederlandsch Instituut

twelve years.

voor Volkshuisvesting en Stedebouw.

HOUSING ASOCIAL FAMILIES IN HOLLAND

I75

the first-class dwellings is lower than the is slow. In all the colonies it has been found

average. The scale is as follows :*

that a number of families remain for years,

Third-class dwellings-3 30 florins per week

Second-class ,, -3 8o ,

First-class ,, -5'*oo

.it

Consequently, the worker who lives in an

asocial colony and who is in regular employ-

ment, pays a lower proportion of his income

in rent than is common in Holland, where

rents for the lower-income groups appear

to be unusually high. The most recent

investigation gives the average figure for the

lowest-income group in Amsterdam (I934-5)
as 25 * 8 per cent. of income.t Families in the

special colonies however would have.to spend

only about half this proportion if in regular

employment, and even if the family income

were not regular (which is more likely among

the families classed as " problem " cases

than among ordinary workers), the rent

would rarely form a higher percentage of

income than is usual in large towns in

Holland.

apparently resisting with success all the beneficent influence of the special housing
facilities. Some of these individuals are no doubt cases for the psycho-pathologist;
while others are just mentally backward.
It has been agreed that even for those families
who appear incapable of improvement, schemes of supervision are worth while, since it is possible to ensure for them healthy dwellings and decent environment, which, in addition to benefiting the people concerned, are considered to possess a wider
social significance. Recently it has become increasingly diffi-
cult to find sufficient people to fill the
colonies. J. L. Flipse, Director of Housing in Amsterdam, gives the present figures of
occupation as 69 dwellings in Asterdorp out of a total of I32 and 24 out of 55 in Zeeburgerdorp.* That is, only about fifty per cent. of the houses are occupied at present, compared with eighty per cent. in I933.

Results of Schemes

Similarly, in the Controle Woningen, 53 out of a possible io6 were in occupation in

The effects of these measures on different December I936, while a year later the number

famnilies appear to vary considerably. In had dropped to i8, compared with I02 in

Amsterdam, 43 Zeeburgerdorp families and I924 and IOI in I925.t How can this

IOI Asterdorp families have been drafted to decline be explained ? Is it due to a general

ordinary dwellings. Figures are not avail- improvement in the standard of behaviour

able of the number who have passed through and housing, or to the fact that families

the estates, but when we consider that the who would previously have been forced to

former colony consists of 55 houses, and has inhabit the controlled colonies are now able

existed for thirteen years, and the latter of to find other accommodation ?

I32 dwellings built twelve years ago, we Both of these explanations probably con-

may conclude that either a very small pro- tain a measure of truth. The present housing

portion of families qualify for ordinary surplus has undoubtedly meant that many

dwellings, or that the rate of re-classification tenants who would otherwise have been

forced to apply for municipal houses have

* From article entitled " New quarters and the development of flats in Amsterdam," filed in the library

found satisfactory accommodation elsewhere,

of the Housing Centre; undated but recent.

even though at higher rents. They thereby

t Enquiry conducted by the Bureau van Statistiek, avoid the somewhat humiliating investiga-

Amsterdam, into the budgets of 184 families. The
figures were kindly sent to the author by the Director of the Bureau, Dr. R. Claeys, and are as follows:

tion into their sociable qualities. At the same time, with the rapid disappearance of slums,

Income category

Proportion spent in rent the kind of social behaviour that is associated

Under 1,400 f. per annum 25 * 8 per cent.

1,400-1,9001f. ,,

20 3

1,900-2,900 ,, .. . I6-*5 ,

and frequently engendered by them also disappears. In Holland, large sums of money

2,900-4,000

,,

... I3'4

4,ooo-6,ooo ,, ... 12'9

* In a letter to the author dated May I939.

6,000-12,000 ,,

... 09 ,

t Figures supplied privately by the Director of The

12,000 fl. and over ... ... 10 ,,

Hague Housing and Town Planning Department.

I76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

have been devoted in recent years to the estates had been placed in the hands of

abolition of slums,* and clearance is being skilled psychiatrists, for a scientific investiga-

carried out in most districts in conformity tion into the causes of their maladjustment

with the building development plans that all to be made.

communes with more than IO,OOO inhabitants Admittedly, territorial concentration of

are required to prepare. Thus, since the "abnormal " families does facilitate detailed

" asocial " category of the population ap- control and direction of the lives and educa-

pears to a large extent to have been a product tion of children. But the number of children

of unsatisfactory housing conditions, the involved necessarily diminishes with a de-

improvement in these is itself leading to a crease in the number of families housed, and

diminution in the size of this special group. the task of supervising them individually

Those who remain " social problems " can if they were to live in scattered communities

hardly be regarded as a group at all. They is thus more practicable than formerly. It is

are rather a heterogeneous collection of questionable too whether specialized educa-

families, each with its individual pecu- tion can make up for the double environ-

liarity of behaviour. It does not seem that mental disability from which these children

the method of dealing with this remainder suffer. In addition to a somewhat abnormal

by means of special housing facilities and home environment, the stigma of being in a

specially trained housing inspectors is a specialized colony must exercise an un-

particularly satisfactory one, since ade- desirable influence on the development of

quate treatment involves knowledge of a youthful minds. As far as Holland is con-

variety of specialist problems not usually cerned, however, the whole question will soon

within the province of a single individual. become one of academic importance alone.

It has been found in practice increasingly Present indications suggest that within a

difficult to obtain women who will take on comparatively short time the asocial estates

the task of readapting this mixed collection will have virtually disappeared. The Director

to a new social environment. These who do of Housing in Amsterdam has already an-

try find the work so exhausting and difficult nounced his intention of proposing that

that the Amsterdam authorities have been Asterdorp be closed, and only the smaller

led to recommend a restriction of their period estate retained.* In The Hague, the authori-

of service to five years. Probably the results ties have almost closed down the Controle

would have been more satisfactory if some Woningen as a special scheme, and at present

of the families still housed in the controlled only a dozen or so of the houses are being

used for the purpose for which they were

* For the purpose of building new dwellings to replace originally intended. The rest are classed as

slums, contributions are made by the State to cover the ordinary municipal dwellings.

deficit in management, in addition to ordinary advances for building the dwellings. The deficit may not be more than fifty florins per annum, half of which is borne by

However interesting the Dutch schemes may have been, therefore, the fact that they

the State, and the other half by the local authority. The condition of this award is that the number of
dwellings erected must equal those evacuated. From

are proving short-lived suggests that they are no more than a temporary expedient,

1925-37, the State contributed 313,277 florins for suitable to a certain stage in the progress

11,437 dwellings, under the terms of this special regulation. In addition a subsidy is given for slum tenants in rural areas who are owners of their own

of re-housing, but now rendered superfluous by the great advances made during the past

dwellings, to make it possible for them to build new decade.
ones. For this purpose, the Treasury makes a lump sum

grant up to a maximum of 300 florins, and requires the
commune to contribute the same amount. Between
1928 and I937, 65,535 florins have been granted in

Summary Great progress has been made in Holland

respect of 23I dwellings of this type. Altogether, in the provision of adequate housing facili-

therefore, the Treasury has been involved in an expenditure of 378,8I2 florins since 1925 for slumclearance subsidies. Local authorities have contributed

ties since the beginning of the century, particularly durn1g the post-war period. In

a similar amount. (Figs. from H. van der Kaa, op. cit., and privately.)

* Communicated by J. L. Flipse to the author.

HOUSING ASOCIAL FAMILIES IN HOLLAND

addition, experiments in accommodating " special groups " have been carried out. Arrangements for one such group, the " asocial" families, are discussed in the pre-
ceding article. In essence the scheme consists of segregating the families, providing them with adequate accommodation, and subjecting them to varying degrees of supervision.

Several schemes are described in detail and the results assessed. While their educative influence is admitted, the general rise in
Dutch housing standards has led to a steady dwindling of the size of the group, and the families which remain cannot be regarded as
constituting a distinct housing problem as such.

JOURNAL OF THE
ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY
First Issued in 1838
The annual volume consists at present of four parts, each of which contains two papers read at Meetings of the Society, with full reports of the discussions thereon; also Miscellaneous statistical articles, Reviews of statistical and economic books, and' Notes on matters of
current interest to statisticians.
Principal Contents of Part III, 1939
THE SOCIAL DISTRIBUTION OF UNIVERSITY EDUCATION.
By MAJOR GREENWOOD, F.RS.
Discussion on JUVENILE DELINQUENCY: opened by
Dr. E. C. RHODES.
Recent Advances in Mathematical Statistics: Bibliography (1937-1938).
By H. 0. HARTLEY, Ph.D.

1fI A1PRICE
Each Part

Annual Subscription

I

| (Post free to anypart of the World) 41

Beginning with 1938, the price of each part will be IO/-, and the anlual subscription 41/-.

Obtainabk through any Bookseler or directfrom

THE ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY

4 PORTUGAL STREET, LONDON, W.C.2

rugenino Review, Vol N,No. L

