THE ROYAL COMMISSION'S REPORT AND THE PRESS

By C. P. BLACKER

T HE report of the Royal Commission
had been long awaited ; and before the
date of its publication (June 20th) there had appeared some anticipatory speculations as to its findings.
Banner headlines announced its contents
on Tuesday, June 2Ist, and on that day long factual summaries appeared in most of the newspapers, often accompanied by editorial
comment reflecting first impressions. These summaries were mainly baaed on the care-
fully prepared chapter entitled " Summary and General Conclusions," which appears at
the end of the report; this chapter must have been a boon to journalists. During the rest of the week a continuous flow of comment appeared; and the report was much discussed in the correspondence columns, many letters having apparently been written by people who had read no more than the Press summaries.
The Sunday papers of June 26th published full assessments. Critical comments, particularly bearing on the Commission's attitude to contraception, made their appearance rather late, and the subject remained alive till about the middle of July.
The Press reception was on the whole notably favourable. Among the features which evoked almost unanimous praise were the thoroughness of the report ; the fact that the Commission had not been content to accept current views about fertility, but had themselves initiated important investigations such as the partial fertility census of I946; the care with which the complexities of a many-sided subject had been marshalled and presented; the clarity and the usefulness of the fifty-nine tables and three charts; the interesting and readable character of the text. I did not see any specific comment on an important innovation introduced for the first time, namely, the use made of expert committees; but some of the eulogies just

mentioned could be construed as an expression of endorsement and approval of this procedure which, though it added to the labours of a patient and highly competent
secretariat, undoubtedly contributed to the weight and dignity of the final product. Thus, a feature which, in a long-term view will probably be recognized as noteworthy is the substitution of the size of the family for the net reproduction rate as an index of what the future holds in store. This approach might not have been possible if the Commission had not disposed of the services of its Statistics Committee. A similar claim might be made on behalf of the Biological and Medical Committee, without which the Commission might not have asked the Royal
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists to take responsibility for the important inquiry, conducted by Dr. Lewis Faning, into family limitation and -its influence on human fertility.
When perusing thick folios of Presscuttings it is not easy to devise a system of classification which adequately expresses the reactions of the Press and of those readers who contribute to the correspondence columns. The headings which follow suggested themselves to me as I read. The comments which are quoted should not be taken as in a general sense representative; they are selected and the reader will obtain from them an impression that the Press was more critical than it was in reality. By design I have included quotations from provincial papers.
Financial Difficulties As was to be expected, many papers
commented on the difficulties raised by the financial proposals.
What view the Government will take of the report is not known, but even a Socialist Administration may be expected to scrutinize very carefully proposals which would add substantially to

129

I30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Treasury commitments without any certainty that they will, if adopted, produce the desired result.-Shrewsbury Chronicle, June 24th.
All credit must be given to the Commission for their very practical ideas for preventing Britain becoming a nation of old people, but it is difficult to see how they can possibly be implemented until a much greater degree of prosperity has been restored... .-Hull Daily Paper, June 2ISt.
... some of the recommendations for making our social arrangements less " lopsided " are made at a time when our State finances are so stretched by attachment to doctrinaire theories that it may well be argued that there is not the money to spare for the family building purposes recommended by the Commission.-Statist, June 25th.
Moral Issues Insufficiently Stressed
Much publicity was given to the comments made by the Archbishop of York, Dr. Garbett, to his Diocesan Conference:
" With most of its proposals," said Dr. Garbett, "I find myself in complete agreement. Nevertheless, as a Christian I think there is something seriously lacking in the report as a whole. It makes very little attempt to appreciate the large amount of Christian teaching which exists on the family and, therefore, on population. The references both to the moral aspects of the problem and to the help which can be given by the Churches are very slight."--Guardian, July 8th.
All Christians who have studied the report ... must agree with Dr. Garbett's criticism....
The English Churchman, July 8th.
There is no revolutionary or startling proposal in the report ... which is disappointing because of its failure to make an appeal for the maintenance of the family in accordance with Christian principles. One would expect a Royal Commission in Britain (whose King is officially described as " Defender of the Faith ") to make some reference to the Christian basis of family life which has evolved morally, ethically and socially under the influence of religion.-Glasgow Observer, July Ist.
Commonwealth Policy
The report stresses, in Chapters I2 and I3, the bearings on the Commonwealth of our population policy. Where this feature was commented on it was praised.
We possess ... a priceless asset. There is no export more valuable than British families. The great Commonwealth heritage remains largely unclaimed. Is there not room in the world for double the present British population

without going outside the Dominions ?-Farnham

Herald, June 24th.

W

It is very rightly suggested that Britain's
population problem concerns not only the Government of this country but also those of the Dominions, and that it should be kept under review on a Commonwealth basis. The Commission deserves a round of applause for the job it has done.-News Chronicle, June 2ISt.

Praise of Large Families
This theme is often sounded as part of the last-named which extols Commonwealth policy. Dr. Garbett, in the address just quoted, further said:
There is only one line in the whole of the report which refers to the happiness of motherhood; nor is anything said about the real happiness which often is found both by parentsand children in a large family.-Evening Standard, June 30th.
Reynold's News reported an interview with Mr. and Mrs. Henry O'Hare of Liverpool who had had sixteen children all under I7 years of age; fifteen of the children figure in a photograph which shows the parents and eleven children standing in a row. Mrs. O'Hare and the three eldest children are holding babies.
Some family. And do Mum and Dad always remember their names? They do not. " We have to go through six names sometimes before we hit on the right one," confessed Mrs. O'Hare. " The small ones all look alike from behind." But little things like that just add to the fun, for it is a happy family. " If we had the chance again, we should still have a lot of children," say
both parents.
This family, which has never been a liability on the ratepayers, " collects Britain's largest family allowance-thirteen five-bobs every Tuesday."

Misgivings About Food Resources
The Commission says (para. 277):
The danger that a shortage of foodstuffs entering world markets may continue indefinitely to the serious detriment of countries whose populations have outstripped their own agricultural resources cannot, we think, be rated higher than a possibility which, owing to immediate difficulties that are not strictly relevant, may appear far more probable than it really is.
This optimistic statement appears oversanguine to some. It was contrasted by the

THE ROYAL COMMISSION'S REPORT AND THE PRESS

I3I

Manchester Guardian (June 23rd) with the warnings given by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and stressed by Lord Boyd Orr and Lord Bruce. After considering the different functions of the two organizations (the Royal Commission and F.A.O.) the article concludes that " The divergence between them is not so great as appears at first sight."
Several papers published letters on this subject. Thus a correspondent of the Daily Telegraph (July 8th) writes:
Britain was great, prosperous and secure when her population was much smaller than now. And in any future mechanized or atomic warfare, our best security would be a fit, selfsupporting and technically skilled population stabilized at about 35 million.
Misgivings About the Welfare State
Several papers, while in general supporting the report, express misgivings that, by further State maternalism, individual initiative will be sapped.
Some of the Commission's recommendations will suggest to many that the spirit of mutual sacrifice-so great a cornerstone of family lifewould be undermined by too much " spoonfeeding.".. .-Kent Courier, June 24th.
... the real problem lies in excessive taxation at the outset . .. the decline in population is only a symptom of a financial disease from which the whole economy of the country is suffering, and the remedy lies in allowing the population again to spend its own income instead of persisting with the delusion that the Government can do it more economically.-Investor's Review, July 2nd.
Nor can you apply the suggested remedies and stimuli, all of which are in the long run financial, without first securing a high level of individual and national prosperity. It was individual initiative and enterprise that built up the prosperous population of the Victorian age.Isle of Wight County Press, June 25th.
These comments have much in common with the group first considered, that the report's recommendations are financially impossible.
Size of Family versus Reproduction Rate as An Index
The Commission draws attention to the defects of the net reproduction rate as a

finger-pointer to future trends; and it gives reasons (Chapter 7) for regarding the size of the family as a better index, especially when death and marriage rates are as uniform as they are in Great Britain to-day.
This feature of the report, though of much interest to the demographer, is not one to excite the general public. Nevertheless, several papers commented on how the use of the size of the family as an index suggests a less alarmist and a more stable view of the future than does the net reproduction rate, which may vary much from year to year.
The Commission points out that
the deficiency [of births necessary to effect replacement], computed roughly at 6 per cent, is not nearly as great as the pre-war reproduction rate suggested.-Yorkshire Post, June
2ISt.
... the most startling element in the report [is] the throwing overboard of the reproduction, rate which has for so long been the raw material of population trend arguments.-Statist, June 25th.
Its size of family formula, superseding earlier formulas like the net reproduction rate, and taken in conjunction with the results of its special family census, enables one to see far more reliably just how much increase is needed to bring our population back to stability....R. K. Ensor in the Sunday Times, June 26th.
Mrs. Jay's Reservation
Mrs. Margaret Jay, a member of the Commission, has a reservation about privately financed education. Our present two-deck educational system (consisting of publicly and privately financed schools), she contends, places the middle or professional class parent in a serious dilemma: the only way to remove it is " to cut the knot boldly and to sweep away entirely from the shoulders of the middle and professional classes the burden of privately financed education."
The suggestion has had a mixed reception.
... I prefer the policy suggested in the report to the Caesarian policy of Mrs. Jay's note of reservation.-Sir Ernest Barker in the News Chronicle, July 2nd.
... We couldn't agree more with Mrs. Margaret Jay who advocates the abolition of all school fees.-Correspondent in the News Chronicle, July 7th.

132- THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Objections to Birth Control
It was to be expected that the Commission's recommendation that guidance on birth control should become available through the health services would be opposed by Catholics. Several papers drew attention to the fact that the Commission contained no Roman Catholic member.
Here are three comments out of many:
No comparable document, it may safely be said, has been inspired by such contempt for our ideas, or has asserted so clearly that we represent an alien and retarding element in our civilization.-Reginald J. Dingle in The Tablet, June 25th.
The use of mechanical contraceptives as a means of controlling the rate of growth of population is immoral and is forbidden by Catholicism and indeed by most other religions. ... The recommendations of the report which concern mechanical birth control are a sad commentary on the moral sense of those who have made them.-Statement by Archbishop Downey in the Universe, June 24th.
There is not a spark of religion about it; it is purely pagan, and a dreadful example of the way in which the mind of England has gone pagan. Richard O'Sullivan in the Catholic Herald, July Ist.
Catholics were not alone in objecting to this feature of the report. In The Times of July i8th appeared a letter signed by four officers of the Mother's Union which ended as follows:
As there are many people in this country besides Roman Catholics (who are the only ones specifically mentioned in the report) who have conscientious objections to the using of contraceptives as a method of family limitation, we believe that it is improper for the State to use public funds for instruction in their use.
A reply to this letter appeared in The Times of the following day signed by two officers of the Family Planning Association pointing out that conscientious objections, held by some, to military service do not make it improper to spend public funds on the armed forces.
Intelligence and Size of Family
The treatment of this question by the Commission has evoked much comment, most of it favourable, though not all. Un-

fortunately (and probably unavoidably) the summaries which appeared in the Press gave rise to the misconception that the Royal Commission had contended that all large families were stupid. Thus letters appeared from indignant correspondents who declared that they were members of large and intelligent families.
We are now doing our utmost to drain the nation's ablest stock upwards; and when they have risen, let them become infertile and die out. The reasons for their infertility are not physical but prudential. The results could be ignored only if we disbelieved . . . in the existence and supreme importance of hereditary ability.R. C. K. Ensor in the Sunday Times, June 26th.
A considerable degree of intelligence is inherited. You cannot make it by education, however good: you must be born with it.... Accent has been on environment, not inheritance. We have almost forgotten about " famous men and our fathers that begat them." But now more than ever we need the highest intelligence possible.. .-Ruth Bowley in the Glasgow Citizen, July 2nd.
... intelligence does not depend on inheritance .... It is true that in the past a large portion of the leaders of the community have come from one section. The reason is that they have had the advantages of good food to eat, good education, good training for public life and good example from their parents. In this class stand the Cecils and other families who for century after century have been prominent in national affairs. Each generation has a dying start. For they were the only section of the population to whom permission to take part in public life was an inheritance in itself. Intelligence in that exclusive set had no barriers to break through.-Daily Express, July iith.
Someone palmed off on the Commissioners some rubbish about the comparative intelligence of different classes within the population, and they swallowed it hook, line and sinker.Tribune, June 24th.
Here is an example of how the Commission's argument was misinterpreted as implying that all parents of large families are stupid:
I've got no sense. I'm a man of low intelligence. The Royal Commission on Population says so-the less intelligent section of the population have most children. I've got seven. Would I have them again ? Yes, because I'm dumb. But even if I were sensible I would, just for the fun of it.-Daily Mirror, June 22nd.

THE ROYAL COMMISSION'S REPORT AND THE PRESS

Family Planning
The Commission's recommendation that advice on birth control should become part of the health services was naturally welcomed by the Family Planning Association, which held a Press conference on the day the report appeared. The Association directed attention to this aspect of the report which received much notice on June 2Ist.
The criticisms advanced by Roman Catholics and others were offset by expressions of approval from other quarters.
These are revolutionary proposals which will
probably arouse a stor'm of criticism on moral
and religious grounds, but the fact that they have been made is an indication that the Commission has not been afraid to make a reasonable and realistic approach to a delicate and difficult problem which can only be settled by individual outlook and conscience.-Rochdale Observer, June 24th.
I am particularly glad that the Commission accepted the value of the principle of voluntary parenthood.-Mrs. Gwen Longmore in Reynold's News, June 26th.
Under the head " Good Cause," the Birmingham Gazette of June 22nd wrote:
The Family Planning As§ociation is probably the largest of the several voluntary organizations which for years have been thinking, crusading, and acting on lines now recommended with all the special authority of the Royal Commission on Population. The Commission, in fact, would like the functions of the F.P.A. to become part of the National Health Service.... The country would almost certainly get better value for money, and value of a vital sort, if the Ministry of Health were to use the F.P.A. without absorbing it....
In its issue of June 25th the Economist presents the fullest and most discerning criticism of the report which I have seen, After quoting from paragraph 427, which declares that the spread of contraceptive knowledge represents a big extension of man's control over his circumstance and that control by men and women over the numbers of their children is one of the first conditions of their own and the community's welfare, the Economist goes on to say:
This is much the most flat-footed statement on the subject that has ever appeared in an official document, and there is no doubt that it will be widely welcomed.

The article concludes-" Sir Hubert Henderson and his colleagues are to be congratulated on the outstanding contribution they have made."
The Daily Mail invited its readers to give their opinions on the report. We are told that hundreds responded. Of these, few commented on the proposal that contraceptive methods should be taught as part of the health services. Of those who referred to the matter fewer than 2 per cent expressed opposition.
Housing
The need for more and better houses was more stressed in the correspondence columns than any other feature of the report. Many writers in effect said that the question of raising the birth-rate was much simpler than the Commission had made out in an unnecessarily long and elaborate report. They would give the Commission the simple solution-more and better houses.
" Give us the houses and we will provide the children the nation needs-and that we are longing to have." That is the overwhelming answer of the hundreds of women who have responded to the Daily Mail invitation to give their opinions of the proposals of the Royal Commission on Population. The Commission put the housing question at the end of their report. The women put it a long way in front of all the other plans. Nearly 40 per cent of all the letters received, coming from all parts of the country and all classes of the population, voice the demand for more houses.-Daily Mail, June 25th.
Fourteen experts had their say on family life in this week's ioo,ooo-word report of the Royal Commission on Population. Were they right in their findings? Many Daily Express readers agree with them-but many letters yesterday brought strongly critical views. Only on one
recommendation do nearly all agree .., more
houses will mean more prams.-Daily Express, June 24th.
.. . although the Commission put forward several challenging and valuable suggestions, it did not go straight to the root of the matter. Surely it is obvious that ordinary couples limit their families for two main reasons-shortage of houses and high rents.-People.
Better homes, better help-there is the remedy we need rather than higher state allowances.-" W. L. A." in the Yorkshire Post, June 23rd.

I34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

... housing is undoubtedly the greatest obstacle confronting young married couples to-day.-Sussex Daily News, July Ist.
The " Economist's " Verdict In order to redress, the perhaps unfavour-
able impression produced in the reader by the parade of many critical remarks, I will conclude with a quotation from the Economist, whose article on the report, published on June 25th, opens with the following paragraph:

The report of the Royal Commission on
Population deserves to rank as one of the great State papers of this generation. This does not mean that it says anything very new or startling; on the contrary, its main principles have been widely discussed and accepted for ten years or
more. But more, and more convincing, evidence in support of these principles has been collected than ever before, and they are set out with such objectivity, with such lucidity and with such human understanding that they must carry
conviction to all. The report closes a chapter rather than opens one; but it closes it with
authority.

SOME BIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN SOCIAL EVOLUTION*

By Professor H. J. FLEURE, D.Sc., M.A., F.R.S.

H UMAN biology is difficult because we know so little about the genes we
carry and may pass on. Again, we have very few remains of early man, and any inferences as to the fleshy coverings of the bones are inevitably indirect. Bearing in mind these limiting conditions let us look into a few very general biological characteristics.
Birthplace of Homo Sapiens
Nearly all mankind finds a temperature
of about 65° F. or I80 to i8.50 C. most
comfortable, but needs a certain amount of variation, chiefly downwards, with a fresh wind for example. Probably, therefore, some important phase of human evolution, perhaps of the evolution of Homo sapiens rather than of Homo in the broader sense, worked itself out in a region with temperatures like the above, varied by cool spells.
During the Pleistocene Ice Phases the greater part of Europe and of Asia north of the Himalayas was much colder than this,
* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May 24th, 1949, and subsequently revised.

but during interglacial phases this temperature may have been fairly common in Western Europe. Equatorial latitudes apparently were warm and wet even during ice phases. North Africa, then much less desertic in the west
than it is now, and parts of South-West Asia seem to have had a temperature not very far from the one above-mentioned. It may therefore be that North Africa, as Charles Darwin long ago suggested, and South-West Asia were deeply concerned in the evolution of Homo sapiens.
We know that many hand-axes or coupsde-poing of the early part of the Pleistocene Age have been found, especially in the Western Sahara and near the Nile. They are often finely chipped, and many may be called works of art. It is difficult to think that they were made by a being other than one very near to modern man. The contrast between these tools and the rough flakes used by other groups in Eurasia at that time is very marked. Unfortunately we lack fully established evidence about skeletons of the makers of these
coups-de-poing, though it is possible that the
Swanscombe skull fragment may be called

