LEGAL ASPECTS OF STERILIZATION

By CECIL BINNEY

IT may be hoped that the Report of the This has a bearing on the practical but diffi-

Brock Committee, unanimously in favour cult question as to the law applicable to a case

of eugenic sterilization, will be the pre- of eugenic sterilization; for it is clear that a

cursor of legislation to put its recommen- prosecution might be launched against those

dations into effect; for although, as the performing a sterilizing operation on the

Committee had the courage to point out, ground that it constituted a public mischief,

operations for eugenic sterilization are even and in this case almost any considerations as

now occasionally performed, and can be to the effects of the operation might influ-

secured by those in a position to pay for them, ence the Court. On the other hand, if a prose-

it is obvious that only new legislation could cution were to be brought under the Offences

make possible the general application of such Against the Person Act, whether it succeeded

measures for the purposes approved in the or failed would largely depend on a minute

report. Eugenic sterilization is bound to be inquiry as to the details of the operation,

largely a poor-law matter since the most the statute having been passed with quite

dysgenic elements tend to sink to the lowest other objects and before eugenic sterilization

ranks of society. Even, therefore, if there had been thought of.

were no other difficulty it would be impossible This being so, it is not surprising that to

to effect sterilization on a useful scale with- the question whether eugenic sterilization is

out legislative provision of the necessary illegal, the Committee gives the guarded

funds.

answer that " the legal position in regard to

the eugenic sterilization of persons of normal

AMBIGUITIES IN PRESENT LAW

mentality is less certain, but most authorities

There is, of course, the more formidable take the view that it is illegal." The same

objection that the present law does not coun- is true of sterilization when performed for

tenance even if it does not forbid eugenic other than medical or eugenic reasons.

sterilization-and this not because the law

is prejudiced against eugenics, but simply NO DRASTIC CHANGES IN LAW

because, eugenics being new and the law The recommendations of the Brock Com-

being old, there is absolutely no provision mittee, if put into effect, will not make any

made for it. It would not be possible to give far-reaching alterations in the general law.

a satisfactory answer to the question whether The question whether the sterilization of an

the law distinguishes between sterilization adult for other than eugenic reasons is un-

for eugenic reasons and the same operation lawful will remain an open question, pro-

for a less reputable purpose. That a steril- viding a subject of discussion for theoretical

izing operation, like any other surgical and, it may well be, employment for prac-

operation, is lawful when performed for tical lawyers if the question should arise (as

the health of the patient admits of no doubt; it well might) in some cause cMlAbre. But in

but there is clearly a wide difference between respect of certain classes of individuals

operating to save a patient's life or to cure st,erilization will be permissible, and among

him of illness and operating in the interests these individuals will be many whose steril-

of posterity, a matter on which the operating ization would now almost certainly constitute

surgeon may not have adequate information. a crime, since as mental defectives they are

Nor is it illogical, the law being what it is, not held to be capable of giving to the oper-

that even an adult in possession of his ation that consent without which the steril-

faculties should not be entitled to authorize izing of a human being is against the law.

his own sterilization.

Such an alteration in the law inevitably

27

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

raises the practical problem: who is to decide whether a particular subject falls into the category of those whose sterilization is permissible ? To obviate the difficulty that the legality of an operation performed in good faith might subsequently be called in question, some authority must be established
to give or refuse its consent in every sug-
gested case for sterilization brought before it. The exact nature of this authority is not important subject to the question whether there is to be some decision by a judicial authority or merely ministerial sanction. The former procedure was suggested in the Bill introduced in the House of Commons by Major Church and no doubt responds to a popular appeal for " protec-
tion " against doctors and civil servants. It
is doubtful, however, whether the sanction of the judiciary amounts to very much, except where a case has been seriously contested-as may be seen illustrated in the case
of undefended divorces, the granting of which, but for the possible intervention of the King's Proctor, would long ago have become a merely formal matter: moreover, the application for sterilization would come in any case only before the magistrates' court. It is probable, therefore, that no serious objection will be raised to the Committee's recommendation that sterilization be performed on the authorization of the Minister of Health who, though empowered to hold a special examination, would normally

act on the recommendation of two doctors, one of these a practitioner specially appointed by the ministry.
SAFEGUARDS FOR MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS
The absence of any judicial authorization puts the doctors concerned in a different position from that which they would occupy if carrying out an order of the Court; and the Committee therefore proposes that they should receive the same protection as is granted in the case of proceedings under the Lunacy and Mental Deficiency Acts by section i6 of the Mental Treatment Act, I930, a section enacted in view of the number of protracted and difficult actions previously brought against doctors by persons claiming to have been wrongfully certified. It is less easy to imagine such an action being launched by a person sterilized under the Committee's proposals, since the plaintiff would probably have consented to the operation complained of, but no doubt the Committee is right in saying that the doctors under the scheme proposed will not accept less protection, though they cannot reasonably expect more.
It may be said, therefore, without fear of contradiction, that whatever other criticism may be levelled at the findings and recommendations of the Committee, they have at least put forward a scheme which is easily workable and involves no serious alterations in the general law.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVL No. 1

