CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY

DISTRIBUTION OF NATURAL CAPACITY

The Need for a National Stocktaking,

THE GALTON LECTURE, 1928

By C. J. BOND, C.M.G., F.R.C.S.

B EFORE commencing our study of wvhich decays, and which is, or which may

the distribution of Natural Capacity* be renewed by the infusion of more vigorous

in the population, a few words on the racial characters. The decliie of the

causes of the decay of earlier civilizations civilization or the culture follows later.

from the biological point of view may not be It is also important, when discussing the

out of place.

fall of earlier civilizations, that we should

Periodicity-the cyclical process of ascent bear in mind the fact, pointed out by Major

and descent, of integration and disintegra- Darwin4 and others, that the causes in each

tion, of birth and death-seems to be inherent in the universal scheme of things. Civilizations and nations, like individuals, are born; they pass through successive stages of growth, maturity, and decline, and they eventually die or pass away. We are, however, so familiar with death in the individual, that we regard it as natural and inevitable. The life of a nation or race,

case have been not one but many. Further, as Perry5 points out, a culture may perish
while the population which produced it may
persist at a lower level of existence. Flinders Petrie6 in his book on " Revolu-
tions in Civilizations" gives a chart on page 8o which shows in graphic form the rising and falling waves in the eight stages of early Egyptian civilization. He concludes

on the other hand, extends over a period not that in each phase there has been a stage of

included within individual experience. Hence decay is here less familiar, and is regarded in a somewhat different light. We recall Herbert Spencer's' well-known comparison between the life of the individual and the social organism, and more recently

advance through strife and effort to a period of maximum wealth production. This coincides with the crest of the wave, and is fol-
lowed by a period of decline, and this again (after an interval) by another rise. The
stage of ascent is characterized by autocratic,

Spengler's2 description of human societies
and cultures as necessarily passing through

the summit of the wave by oligarchic, and the falling phase by democratic rule. Petrie

successive stages of childhood, youth, man- also states, and this is important from our

hood, and old age.

present standpoint, that " in every case the

In associating periodicity with the life history of races I merely wish to imply that civilizations and races have, as a matter of historical fact, passed through these successive stages. The periodicity in their case, however, must not be regarded as identical with the same cyclical process as seen in the life of the individual organism. It is also necessary, as MacIver3 says, to draw a distinction between culture and civilization. just as we distinguish between life and organization. It is the life of a people

rise which followed the fall was preceded by the incursion of a new race." Our knowledge, however, of the racial qualities of these invading peoples is very scanty. He also goes on to say that the complete mixing of the population, through the fusion of the new with the old race, occupied some seven hundred or eight hundred years-that is, until the period of maximum ability has
been reached. When we speak of a stage in any culture
when "'Wealth accumulates and men decay," we must remember that some accumulation

* By Natural Capacity is meant the ability to re- of wealth is a necessary accompaniment of

spond effectively to, or to become adapted mentally and physically to, a changing or widening environment in space and time.

every civilization. As Keith7 truly remarks, " Without capital (i.e., biological capital)

6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

we can neither preserve nor absorb know- and Sir Victor Horsley, that advanc-

ledge." In the same way, forms of Govern- ing age, disease, and other injurious

ment-autocratic, oligarchic, democratic, influences exercise their earliest and chief

and plutocratic rule-are, like wealth accu- effect on the more highly organized and the

mulation, accompaniments rather than more recently evolved centres in the brain.

causal factors. They interact with human We also know that the fully grown function-

activities in various fields, and promote or ally active nerve cell does not give rise to

hinder progress. The real factors which new nerve cells. So, too, with the epithelial

determine the rise and fall of nations and skin cells: the older cells die and are thrown

civilizations are the racial qualities and the off and their place is taken by younger, less

innate capacities of the citizens themselves, specialized cells which grow up from

and the way in which these capacities are below.*

exercised.

The life of a nation in the same way is

But what is the significance of the fact normally renewed from below by individuals

that the period of maximum wealth produc- and families of less social achievement per-

tion has, in so many cases, coincided with haps, but of greater racial potentiality. It

the crest of the civilization wave, and has is true that the lowest social groups are to-

accompanied the beginning of the fall? day (in this country) contributing far too

Surely this: that it is not the accumulation large a share to the population. But this

of wealth but the lack of capacity to use is abnormal, both biologically and socio-

wealth to right ends-that is, to ends which logically. These lowest groups contain a

promote racial welfare-which is responsible large proportion of bodily and mentally de-

for the decay. It is the inability to resist fective individuals. They are like the para-

the enervating effects of luxury, the ceasing sitic cancer cells in the individual organism

to put forth effort. It is the loss of these in which specialization and functional

essential qualities, rather than forms of capacity have given place to excessive cell

government or accumulation of material multiplication.

wealth, which have initiated and promoted Thus while decline arising in the more

decline. Thus we are brought back to bio- specialized units is a common feature of both

logical factors as the chief source of the individual and social life, decay arising in

decline of past civilizations and of earlier the less specialized units is abnormal and

races. more serious. It is a sign of disease and

The demands of a growing and complex degeneration in both the individual and the

civilization increase out of proportion to the nation, and indicates the commencement of

growth of the innate mental and moral quali- racial decline.

ties of the people. Social outruns biological Again, we speak of a " natural span of

growth. Meanwhile, as Fisher says8, " The life," which varies in length in animals of

fate of a civilization may be sealed by so different species and in different human

small a thing as the economic advantage of families. Galton's own family descent on

the less fertile stocks" ; in other words, by a his mother's side provides a striking ex-

differential birth-rate exercising a dysgenic ample. In the human individual longevity

effect on the population.

depends mainly on hereditary qualities, on a

INDIVIDUAL AND RACE
Provided we strictly observe the limitations as to periodicity we may gain some light on the problem of racial decline from a

capacity to resist disease and the wear and tear of life. The same is probably true of different human races.
But while this capacity for continued life

study of the life history of the individual organism. We know from the work of Hughlings Jackson and other eminent neu-

* It is true that when grown in pure culture, under suitable conditions outside the body, highly specialized cells, perhaps even nerve cells, do show some capacity for reproduction. But the fact remains

rologists, among whom I may mention my friends the late Sir Frederick Mott

that when growing in the body under normal conditions reproductive activity is in inverse proportion to specialization.

CAUSES OF RACTAL DECAY

7

is not renewed in the individual, a people or a race can be rejuvenated by an infusion of new qualities from a more vigorous race.*
Carr-Saunders9 suggests that just as domestication increases the fecundity of wild animals so civilization (a form of domestication) may have increased the fecundity of the human species. In regard to this point, however, we must remember that selective breeding for productivity has played a considerable part in the domestication of animals. Further, although moderately civilized peoples do have, no doubt, large and growing populations, a highly elaborate civilization like our own brings about unhealthy modes of living and artificial conditions of life which resemble the effects of captivity rather than domestication in the case of wild animals, and thus tends to reduce rather than to increase fecundity, both in animals and in the human species. It may be that under the influence of natural or artificial selection, a type or types of the human race will arise which can become highly civilized without losing fecundity. Such would be a very valuable quality from the survival point of view, and might prove to be the deciding factor in race survival in the future.
However this may be, there can be no
doubt as to the increasing value of "capacity
Kfor citizenship " in our modern civilization. IBy " capacity for citizenship " is meant ,-power to contribute by productive labour or by some other form of useful service to ~;national welfare. This constitutes civic Sworth. But there is another kind of worth
'of equal importance-viz., racial value, thich represents the capacity to hand on hese good qualities through offspring to ucceeding generations.
Civic worth and racial value are not lways found in accurate association in the
ame individual or in the same family. It
s true that, speaking generally, and when ealing with large numbers, they are assoiated; but our trouble begins when we try apportion civic worth and racial worth to
* I am not now considering the possibility of the rrence of rejuvenation in the individual as the ult of organ-grafting or of organotherapathy.

particular groups of the population at differ-
ent social levels. Now, this inverse relationship between
specialization and reproductive capacity is a fulndamental phenomenon runnling throughout life. It has its parallel in the
experience of the stock breeder. It also
probably plays an important part in
the well-known sterility of inter-special hybrids. In the mule, for instance, blending of parental characters occurs in the F.i generation, in which also, though the hy-
brids may possess normal or even increased
vigour, they are sterile inter se. It may also be concerned in the phenomena of domin-
ance, recessivity, and segregation in Men-
delian inheritance.
But in addition to its general genetic interest, this antithesis between specialization and reproduction has considerable im-
portance for us in the study of eugenic problems. For instance, in tracing the transmission of a particular talent in fami-
lies of the same ancestral stock, it is frequently found that the special gift is handed
on by members who have not themselves, achieved distinction, rather than by the geniuses themselves. The same thing holds good in the case of mental abnormalities and defects. A particular defect may be handed on by " carriers " who do not themselves show any abnormality.
There is also the exceptional case of men and women of genius, of creative power, reformers and pioneers in the realms of thought and conduct. In many cases such individuals have been ignored by Society, or they have been outcasts or persecuted. While their contribution to the social heritage of mankind has been very great, their racial legacy, in the shape of offspring gifted like themselves, has frequently been small or even absent. They resemble the highly organized and specialized brain cells which govern and control the individual organism, but leave no descendants.
Thus it comes about that economic status, wage-earning capacity, and position in the social scale, though on the average useful, are not wholly reliable criteria of racial worth. This difficultv, however, is less when we come to deal with the groups at the

8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bottom of the social scale. These lowest with less gifted families, with accompanying

level groups-the mentally defective, the loss of civic status and racial worth.

habitual criminal, the inebriate, and the In the lowest level groups, on the other

hereditary pauper classes-possess no civic t hand, civic and racial value are both lack-

worth. They contribute nothing to national ing, while fertility alone remains. It is true

welfare ;they also possess no racialvalue,but that in these groups (as LidbetterI2 has

are at the same time highly fertile. Though, shown) mating of like with like occurs, and

as Carr-SaundersIo has shown in the case of this tends to bring about some degree of

the mentally defectives, and Goring35 in that isolation, whereas in the group immediately

of the criminal classes, their contribution to above this lowest section-the group which

the next generation according to their num- includes the lower grades of unskilled

bers (absolute fertility) is less than that of labour, the habitually poor, and the slum

the rest of the population.

dweller-the danger of the dissemination of

If then, as in a general way and when deal- inferior qualities is greater. The members

ing with large numbers the evidence com- of this group mingle freely with and inter-

pels us to do, we assume a high degree of marry with members of the groups above.

correlation between civic achievement or Hence a constant deterioration goes on in

social status and racial worth, and if we use the population which, if continued long

wage-earning capacity or social status as enough and on a sufficiently large scale,

tests of social worth, we become liable, ex- must lead to racial decay.

cept in a general way, to certain errors This is the direct biological effect of such

against which we must be on our guard. inter-breeding. But there is also an in-

We do not attach enough importance to those upward and downward currents which are constantly spreading through Society and which disturb the normal association
between civic and racial worth. An effec-
tive social ladder is no doubt (as McDougall-" says) an important agency in the advance of a civilization. It tends to collect good mental qualities in the upper social strata.
But it also leaves the lower strata depleted. Then, if these good qualities (owing to reduced fertility above) are not perpetuated, the ultimate effect of such a social ladder may be to hasten the time when the reservoir of good qualities, from which the life of a nation is renewed, becomes empty. In this way social growth outruns innate capacity, and the ladder becomes or may become a factor in decline.
We see the same thing in the life history of certain families. A family rises in the economic and social scale. It contributes

direct sociological effect of much importance. The support of this economically incapable group is largely borne by the more capable citizens above. Their ability to rear their own families is thereby reduced. If, in addition to bearing this burden, their ability to bear it is also diminished, a double injury is inflicted on the nation.
Thus we must regard the great middle section of the population as the main reservoir from which the life of the nation is renewed; and as long as the " heart of a nation " remains sound incipient decline may be arrested. Our aim must be therefore to increase the relative fertility rate in this large and important group of average citizens, and in those above the average. We may, I think, leave the topmost social group, the so-called " cream of Society,"
outside our immediate consideration. The
present low fertility rate in this small section
is not the direct result of poverty, and if, on

to national welfare. It possesses, in fact, the other hand, it be due to loss of natural

civic worth, and it also shows (or until the fertility, or to a desire to escape the duties

introduction of the practice of conception and responsibilities of parenthood, then the

control, did show) normal fertility. Then race will not suffer if these characters are not

after a period of economic and social perpetuated.

stability of varying length, a period of de- But if our British race is to maintain its

cline sets in, probably from inter-breeding proud position at the head of the nations,

CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY

we must see to it that we do not, among

other good qualities, lose our capacity for

citizenship.

Now, capacity for citizenship in this ad-

ministrative and higher sense is of com-

paratively recent growth in the history of

human development, and like all the more

recently acquired faculties, it is one of the

first to be lost when a nation or a race begins

to decline. Under the conditions now pre-

vailing in the modern world the danger of

gUubrreeldionsginfgrotmhiisnfeersisoern,tiaanlti-qsuoacliailtystolicekss

in in

our own population rather than from whole-

rsale admixture with an allen race. This

capacity for leadership, this organizing

ability, is one of the most valuable of all

racial qualities, especially in an Imperial

people like our own.

It would not, I think, be safe to conclude

that because there is less crime of certain

kinds nowadays that no deterioration is

going on in the mental qualities, or in the

capacity for citizenship, of our population.

The mental make-up which led some citi-

zens to violent, adventurous conduct re-

garded as anti-social and criminal when

practised in the old country no doubt helped

the Botany Bay transportees and the

settlers of a hundred years ago to make

good, and to contribute to the making of a

new nation in the freer atmosphere of the

new Australian continent. The question is

whether the particular kind of criminal con-

duct which is associated with mental defect

shows a similar decline.

No doubt more might be done to develop

the exercise of this capacity for citizen-

ship by instruction in our schools in

the duties, responsibilities and privileges

of citizenship. For it is by education

that a racial conscience must be awak-

ened and a sense of responsibility to

future generations cultivated; for, as Have-

lock Ellis13 has said, it is we who " generate

rthe race and we alone can regenerate it,"

*-that is, in so far as biological factors are

concerned.

>NEED FOR AN ENQUIRY
. We have now considered some of the -causes which have led to the decline of

civilizations in the past. We have also com-
pared the life history of the social and the individual organism. The time has come to ask the question whether all is well with our
own British race, or whether, in view of the
disquieting statements in certain official reports, a fuller inquiry on a national scale, a national stocktaking, a census of the quality
as well as the quantity of the population, is
not urgently called for.
I am indebted to Sir Arthur Keith for valuable information concerning previous inquiries, in which he and our President took an active part. In recent years notice was first drawn to this subject of physical deterioration immediately after the Boer War, by the late General Sir F. Maurice.I4 In the following year the Army recruiting statisticsI5 showed that 40 per cent. of the men offering themselves for military service during the previous ten years had been rejected owing to physical defects. Then
came the Report of the Scottish Royal Commission,i6 and a little later, in I904, the Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Physical Deterioration.'7 This committee, influenced by the absence of all data of comparable value, recommended that a census of the people should be taken in
order to reveal physical defects if present; and they also outlined a scheme.
Nothing, however, was done, and the late Lord Londonderry, replying on behalf of the Government in the debate in the House of Lords, said that one difficulty was a possible objection on the part of parents to any measurement of their children. Later efforts by the anthropological section of the British Association and the Royal Anthropological Institute failed to bring about any
advance.
In I908 the Act was passed authorizing the compulsory medical examination of
school children. This medical examination of (at that time) some two million children of school-age, " entrants " and " leavers," formed the first step towards an anthropological survey. The very important facts thus revealed concerning the incidence of physical defects in the schoolchildren of the country have been forcibly brought to the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

notice of the Government and the public in the Report) that " It is anticipated that the

the valuable annual reports of the Chief Report of the Anthropometric Committee on

Medical Officer of the Board of Education, Physical Measurements will be available in

Sir George Newman.'8

a few months." It is also to be hoped that

It is encouraging to find that the latest this will be followed by a survey of the

report, that for I926, shows a definite im- native intelligence of the children.

provement. The Report states (page i2) In I9I6 the Royal Society called a con-

that the English child is growing in stature ference of the scientific societies of the

and in weight. This is good hearing so country, with Major Darwin as Chairman,

far as the prevention and cure of disease, to which the Board of Education, the Local

better nutrition and better environmental Government Board, the Ministry of National

conditions are concerned, and although Service and the Registrar-General sent re-

mental health and vigour would, if tested, presentatives. This conference again urged

no doubt also show a corresponding im- the importance of such a national survey,

provement, this does not necessarily mean but it recommended that each Government

that any forward step has been secured in department should carry on its own inquiry.

the elimination of innate physical and men- It also became evident that any scheme to be

tal defects. The fact that the condition of complete must include the whole or, at any

the children of pre-school age does not show rate, samples of the womanhood of the

a like improvement is important from this country. In I9I8 came the report of Sir

point of view.'8

James Galloway's Commission,20 appointed

Two lines of action seem to be open to us by the Ministry of National Service. This

in dealing with our child population. We examination in I9I7-I8 of two and a half

may-indeed we must-promote physio- millions (the exact figures were 2,425,184)

logical living, and provide food, fresh air, men of military age, revealed a very un-

sunlight, exercise, and sleep, in order to satisfactory condition as regards the physi-

build up a healthy adult population.I9 If cal state, vigour, and health of this section

we concentrate, as we are inclined to do, of the population. In short, it showed that,

on the children with hereditary mental and on the average, of every nine men of military

bodily defects, we may no doubt save in- age in Great Britain in I9I7-I8 only three

dividual lives that would otherwise have were perfectly fit and healthy; two were on

perished, but, unless we take at the same a definitely lower plane of health and

time, effective steps to prevent the perpetua- vigour; three were incapable of undergoing

tion of these defects we shall be promoting more than a moderate degree of physical

racial deterioration and we shall inflict an effort, while one was a confirmed invalid.

injury and not a benefit on the nation.

In assessing, however, the value of these

While fully recognizing the great work results, we must remember that in a certain

done by the medical inspection of school proportion of cases these defects, if not in-

children, one may perhaps be permitted to born, would disappear, and in fact did dis-

question the accuracy of the inference in the appear under the influence of an open-air

opening paragraph of Circular 576 issued by life, regular exercise, and military training.

the Board of Education in November, I907, On the other hand, we cannot ignore the

" That the mental and moral improvement fact that the standard for peace should be at

of coming generations will be a natural cor- least equal to the standard for war, the ideal

rollary of the physical improvement in the in both cases being a sound mind in a sound

school children which it is the aim of the body.

Board to bring about "; that is, unless we In addition to official and semi-official re-

cease breeding from the less vigorous and ports dealing with physical defects we

lower grade stocks which our well inten- have some evidence in regard to the equally

tioned efforts have kept alive, and have en- important problem of the mental qualities

abled to reach the reproductive age. It is, of the population. Reports2l issued by the

however, encouraging to read (page I3 of Board of Control showed that in January,

CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY

1925, the number of notified insane personis tory and that some deterioration is going on;

under control in England and Wales was secondly, that in view of the urgent need

I3I,55I, while the mental defectives under for accurate data and the great assistance

care numbered I9,376, although these such information would give in revealing

figures do not represent the total numbers in directions in which steps might be taken to

the population. Dr. Tredgold,22 in an im- arrest decline, a survey of the physical and

portant address to the Royal Sanitary Insti- mental condition of the population, or of

tute Congress in July, 1926, pointed out that representative samples of it, should be

there were 50,000 mentally defective chil- undertaken without delay.

dren of school-age, excluding imbeciles and idiots. He estimates that in June, I926,

IMPORTANCE OF MENTAL QUALITIES

the insane and mentally deficient persons So far we have been mainly considering

composed one per cent. of the population, physical characters. But if, as we believe,

and, of great importance from our present the civilization of the future will develop
point of view, he states that in his opinion on psychical lines, then intellectual and

four-fifths of all cases of mental deficiency moral qualities, personality, character, and

are due to inborn causes. Carr-SaundersIo capacity for citizenship will assume a grow-

estimates the number of mental defectives as ing importance in the social environment

between 350,ooo and 380,ooo, or io per of the future. Hence we must endeavour

thousand of the population.

to ascertain the extent to which these essen-

The Reports of H.M. Inspectors of tial mental qualities are present to-day in

Constabulary for I924 show that out different social groups in the population, in

of ioo men who applied for admission order that accurate comparisons may be

to the Police Force in ten years only made between present and future records.

five were admitted as physically and men- It is only in this way that we can find out

tally fit to undertake the responsible and whether mental improvement or deteriora-

onerous duties of a police constable.23 I tion is going on.

should also like to draw attention to the No doubt there are difficulties. It may,

valuable inquiries conducted by Mr. Lid- for instance, be said that it is only possible

better and other observers into the life his- to judge of mental qualities by observing the

tories of a number of families of the pauper behaviour of the individual, man or animal,

and habitual criminal class.

as the case may be; and inasmuch as be-

In addition to these reports and inquiries haviour depends on experience and training,

some evidence of a more general character as well as on innate mental capacities, un-

is available. Thus, Sir A. Keith, dealing certainty is thereby introduced which may

with physical defects, finds from a compara- vitiate the results of the inquiry. It is

tive examination of the skeletons and skulls, certainly difficult in some cases accurately

especially the jaw bones and teeth, of early to assess the relative value of acquirements

and modern inhabitants of these islands, made and capacity to acquire. But the dis-

that very important physical changes have entanglement of these two factors is being

taken place and that some of these changes carried out with increasing success as ex-

are degenerative and detrimental in charac- perience widens. Apart, however, from the

ter. Medical men, too, practising in large difficulty in estimating instructive and tem-

cities, with an experience extending over peramental tendencies, another difficulty of

more than one generation of urban a somewhat different kind might also be

dwellers, have from time to time expressed supposed to minimize the value of any

the opinion that degeneration among city inquiry into mental characters.

dwellers is going on.

We are ignorant, so it is said, of the real

To sum up, we must conclude that there nature of mental operations-i.e., of the

are real grounds for thinking that the physi- working of the mind-and cannot therefore

cal and mental condition of a considerable form any accurate conception of mental

section of our population is not satisfac- manifestations. But without entering on

I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the insoluble problem of the relation between tion of a nervous system of more elaborate

the body and the mind, we may, as Mott has structure and of finer texture. Such a view

said, "regard the brain as a transformer is also in harmony with the recorded subjec-

of cosmic into neural energy."24

tive impressions of men and women of

Light waves and sound waves and other genius concerning the mode of working

external impressions are transformed into of their own minds. It is, at any rate, a

waves of neural energy as they enter the suggestive fact that these psychical mani-

recipient sense organs and pass through the festations, which represent the highest form

conducting channels in the brain. In the of energy known to man, should be asso-

cerebral cortex, the seat of psychical mani- ciated with molecular activity in the most

festation, these are again re-unified with highly organized form of matter (whatever

previously received, memorized impressions may be the ultimate nature of matter), of

into one neuro-psychical whole-one person- which we have any experience or know-

ality. Thus consciousness appears coinci- ledge, namely the human brain.26

dently with this transforming and reuni- This suggestion, that differences in in-

fying process.

tellectual capacity are essentially quzantita-

Although we know little of its real nature, tive, although more suited perhaps to a

we can measure the rate of spread of a neu- philosophical or metaphysical discussion, is

ral wave as it passes along a nerve, nevertheless a subject which bears on our

and we can estimate the retardation which present inquiry. The more complete and

ensues when such a neural wave travels from adequate our conception of the nature of

lower to higher brain centres by a circuitous neuro-psychical energy and its mode of

instead of a direct route. We also know that action, the more accurate will be our know-

these differences in speed, according to route ledge of the working of the human mind,

traversed, are associated with corresponding and the more reliable our estimate of the

differences in the psychical manifestations relative influence of nature and nurture in

which accompany them.

the formation of character and conduct in

The evidence suggests that neural, like our fellow citizens.

electrical energy, consists of energy of only one kind which varies in volume, in inten-

BIRTH-RATE AND BIRTH-CONTROL

sity, and in rate and distribution of flow, I must now add a few words concerning

according to the molecular structure, insu- the birth-rate in different sections of the

lation and complexity of the nerve channels population. Our immediate object is to

and the synaptic areas through which form some reliable estimate of the contri-

the wave passes. If this be so, then bution made by different social groups, not

the corresponding variations in mental only to the numbers but also to the quality

capacity which distinguish genius from of the population. The first is a compara-

moderate intelligence will also depend on tively easy, the second a more difficult, task.

quantitative changes in energy of one and The Registrar-General's statistics27 show

the same kind, and not on qualitative that, speaking generally, the birth-rate is

changes or in energy of different kinds. now lowest in the upper social strata and

High intelligence would be associated not in the professional and salaried groups,

necessarily with a heavier or a larger brain, in the big middle section of society,.

but with a brain which contains a larger and that it rises as we reach the ranks of

number of cortical cells and a more complex unskilled labour. There are two important

system of associated nerve centres and facts about this movement. Firstly, it has

nerve paths.25

grown and is still growing in a remarkable

This conception is in harmony with the manner in recent years, and secondly, in its

teaching of the comparative anatomy and operating on a very large scale. If it con-

physiology of the nervous system in a-nimals tinues at its present rate it must have a

and man, which tells us that psychical evo- very marked effect on the population as a

lution proceeds pari passu with the evolu- whole.

CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY

The modern practice of conception control on the other hand is more prevalent
among the educated and upper and
middle classes, and diminishes as we
reach the unskilled labour ranks, while
it is practically absent in the lowest degenerate sections of Society. This
means that, as at present practised in this
and other countries, the so-called birth-control movement is exercising a dysgenic
effect on the population, by reducing the effective fertility of the more worthy and fit groups, in relation to the less desirable sec-
tions from the racial point of view. The remedy, however, is not, in my
opinion, to be sought in any attempt to curtail28 the spread of knowledge, but in a wider diffusion of such knowledge, in so far as it is sound, to all classes of the population, poor as well as rich. In this world-wide
experiment, so potent for harm and good,
we must, as Major Darwin has said,4 carry on a dual campaign. We must, by awakening the eugenic ideal, and by the " arousal of a racial conscience," bring home to the minds and consciences of our citizens the
double duty-on the one hand, the responsibility which rests on all married citizens of healthy parentage and sound stock to beget
and rear under the best possible conditions
an adequate number of healthy and vigorous
offspring, and, on the other hand, the equal responsibility and duty of avoiding parentage in the case of all who are the subjects
of hereditary disease, and those who have sprung from unsound or defective stocks.
There will still remain, however, the lowest groups: those which include de-
generate, defective, and irresponsible per-
sons, non-responsive to all educational and moral appeals, those on whom, like Caliban in The Tempest, " nurture will not
stick," those without capacity for citizenship and possessing no racial conscience. With such groups other measures must be employed, such as compulsory segregation during the reproductive period of life, while under certain conditions and in some cases sterilization may be desirable.
I believe that adequate knowledge of the
factors which affect fecunditv and of the means of controlling conception are neces-

sary steps in the evolutionary process whereby man will be enabled to exercise a growing influence over human destiny, and by which also the possibility of increasing the racial stock of innate capacity will be brought within human control. If this be true, then we must not condemn the practice of contraception, provided it has no injurious effect on individual or racial health, and provided that its potency for harm when used improperly or for unworthy ends is fully recognized. However this may be, the other alternative-uncontrolled increase and population pressure-must become a serious menace, not only to the peace of the world, but to the standard of life in civilized countries, and to the future of our civiliza-
tion.
KIND OF ENQUIRY NEEDED
We must now consider shortly the form that any inquiry into the distribution of natural capacity in the population must take.
The idea of a national stocktaking seems to have originated in a correspondence between Sir Francis Galton and Florence Nightingale.29 In 1924 Major Darwin formed a small committee to advance this project, and communications have taken place between the Eugenics Society, the Medical Research Council, the officers of the British Medical Association, and the Ministry of Health.
I do not propose to enter into details, and will only indicate the main principles on which in my judgment it should be framed.
Since our object is to ascertain the physical and mental qualities of the citizens, especially in the large middle section which includes the average citizen and forms the bulk of the population, the inquiry must be so formulated as to reveal the incidence of civic worth in association with racial value in the population, particularly in this middle group. The suggestions are:
(i) The inclusion in the census schedules of 193I of the questions of racial importance (as to size of family, etc.) which were included in the census of I9Ii but were omitted from that of I92I. This suggestion has already received the support of the
Council of the Eugenics Society.

14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(2) A review of our present system of birth certification and registration, with a
view to the inclusion of the ages of parents, and of other data of genetic importance.
(3) In addition to the fuller information
which could be obtained from a census of the
whole nation, much might be learned from
an intensive study of a selected sample
or samples of the population. The questions should be so standardized and arranged as to make the answers strictly comparable with the results of future in-
quiries. Such a sample might (as Fisher and Carr-Saunders suggest) be taken from among the school children of a certain age.
The inquiry should include: (a) Ant hropo-
metrical measurements, (b) medical data, and (c) psychological records and scholastic
tests.
The anthropometric data would include stature and weight, eye and hair colour, and other important bodily characters. The medical examination would have reference to development and general health, condition of eyes, teeth, etc., and absence of disease. The mental state would be examined under two headings: (a) Psychological, concerned with native intelligence, and (b) scholastic,
dealing with verbal and linguistic attain-
ments.
This is, of course, merely an outline. The details would require careful preparation. Any suggestion whereby the examination could be so improved as to distinguish
more accurately between capacity to make acquirements, and acquirements made, should receive careful consideration.
If, in addition to this intensive study of a sample (or samples) of children of school age, records could also be obtained from the
whole or from a portion of the industrial population, additional valuable material would be secured.
On June 28th, I927, a deputation, organized by Miss Olga Nethersole and the People's League of Health, and introduced by Lord Burnham, waited on the Minister of Health to urge that all entrants into industrial life, under the National Health Insurance Act, should undergo a medical examination on entry and periodically at subsequent intervals.30 Such an examina-

tion, if strictly standardized, would give valuable information as to the condition of the working class section of the population of both sexes.
(4) At the present time a very large num-
ber of records are being collected by various societies and government and municipal departments in various sections of the population. If these inquiries, which in the aggregate affect large numbers, could be standard-
ized and made comparable among themselves and with future records, much valuable knowledge as to the physical condition of the population would thereby become available.
The results from these four lines of in-; quiry would probably supply the greater portion of the information needed and would be practicable from an administrative point of view. In other directions the intensive study of smaller groups, so successfully employed by Mr. Lidbetter in the case of cer-, tain habitual pauper and criminal families,
might be continued. This was the method!
employed by Galton in his famous inquiry into natural inheritance and hereditary genius.
Such inquiries, however, are concerned with extreme groups. It is equally or even more important that data should be obtained in regard to the distribution of mental and bodily characters in that larger section of the nation which includes the average citizen and forms the bulk of the population. For it is not so much from the extreme types -the men and women of genius on the one hand, or the degenerate groups on the othe -but from the average level of innate capacity of intellect and character in the population as a whole that any true estimat can be formed as to the occurrence of im provement or deterioration.
What is wanted is a census which wil reveal quality as well as numbers, one whic will show in what sections of the populatio civic is associated with racial worth.
HEREDITARY FACTOR IN DISEASE
There is still another aspect of the sub ject to which I wish to draw attention. I a discussion on the biological foundations o sociology twenty-two years ago I spoke o

CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY

15

the pressing need for the teaching of the factor of great importance, and one in which

science of heredity as a part of the medical medical men, trained in physiology, psycho-

curriculum.31 This has not yet materialized. logy and genetics, could render most valu-

We still await the great impetus which able service.

would be given to eugenic progress by en- But before we can hope to secure the

listing the interest and active co-operation interest and the active co-operation of the

of the medical profession in heredity prob- medical profession in eugenic problems,

lems. Moreover, the advantage would be a certain preliminary steps will be necessary:

mutual one. On the eugenic side, because (i) A favourable mental attitude to genetics

medical men engaged in general practice must be obtained in the General Medical

possess unrivalled opportunities for collect- Council, in the medical faculties in our

ing family records of mental and bodily universities and medical schools, in the

characters hereditarily transmitted through Ministry of Health, and in the public medi-

several generations. On the medical side cal services-in fact, in all bodies concerned

the gain would be equally great, for increas- in medical education. (2) Medical students

ing medical knowledge continually empha- must be taught the principles which under-

sizes the great importance of the hereditary lie and the methods employed in, the study

factor in disease.

of genetics in animals and in man. In

Excluding accidental injury, the main short, the study of genetics and of eugenics

cause of death in the large majority of the must form an integral part in the theory

population arises from the action of some and practice of preventive medicine.

poison, either elaborated within the body, In thus drawing attention to natural re-

or more frequently introduced from without. sistance and immunity against disease as a

Now, it is largely the hereditary factor striking example of that natural capacity

which decides whether any individual man which we have been discussing, I am re-

or woman will succumb to auto-intoxication minded of the words of Aristotle, written

or to some microbic poison introduced from more than two thousand years ago: " Men

outside. The same factor also helps to are called healthy in virtue of the inborn

decide the actual organ or tissues which will capacity of easy resistance to those inju-

be primarily affected, and even the particu- rious influences which may ordinarily arise;

lar portion of (for instance) the nervous sys- and unhealthy in virtue of a lack of that

tem, which will bear the brunt of the attack. capacity.'"32

Such, then, is the all-important part played by capacity of resistance in combating

FUTURE CIVILIZATION

disease. Medicine and the medical profes- Since we know so little about the lines

sion would greatly gain by a more intimate along which human evolution is developing,

knowledge of this biological factor, this or of the nature of the civilization which will

capacity of resistance against disease.

form the environment of the future, we can-

It is not, however, only or even chiefly in not, so it may be objected, form any true

bodily ailments that genetic factors play a conception of the mental and bodily qualities

decisive part. The study of mental abnor- which the citizens of the future must possess

malities and mental defects would be simi- if they are to live in successful adaptation

larly advanced by a closer analysis of here- to such a greatly altered mode of life. Thus

ditary influences-and as we have already any artificial attempt to produce such un-

seen, mental qualities will be the deciding known qualities must fail.

factor in the future of our race.

It is no doubt true that we do not know

A working alliance with medicine would in detail what human life will be like even

also be helpful in another direction. The one hundred years hence. But we may be

problem of the rise and fall of nations and sure of this, that the evolution of the human

races is partly a psychological one. In such race will proceed along psychical lines, and

a study the hereditary transmission of both that the environment of the future will be

normal and abnormal mental qualities is a mental rather than physical, social rather

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

than individual, and a world in which brains racial conscience awakened in the mind of

will count for more than muscle. There every citizen capable of responding to such

will be no room for mental deficiency.

appeals, especially in the adolescent section

In such a world and in such surroundings of the population. This will be difficult and

it is also certain that not only intellectual will take time, for the " national con-

power, but moral qualities, character and science " is a very heavy sleeper. But even

personality, capacity to lead successfully the so, the degenerate groups, the irresponsive

social rather than the individual life-in residuum at the bottom of the social scale

short, capacity for citizenship and adapta- will still remain untouched. Segregation

bility to an ever-widening environment in during the reproductive period of life must

space and time-will count for much. One be the main remedy for this group, supple-

of the main characteristics of the citizens of mented where necessary and in suitable

the dominant race of the future will be cases, after judicial inquiry and expert

ability to assess in moral and spiritual advice, by sterilization.

values, and to apply to worthy ends, that In regard to the large middle section,

growth in material prosperity which a con- which includes the average citizen and forms

stantly increasing power of control over the bulk of the population, an attempt must

natural forces ever brings in its train. We be made to increase the relative fertility

have already seen that failure to accomplish in this group by well considered economic

this has been one of the main factors in measures such as family endowments, relief

bringing about the fall of ancient civiliza- in income-tax according to number of chil-

tions and earlier races.

dren, and in other ways designed to relieve

" There are only two ways of righting dis- the present heavy burden of parenthood.

harmony in every department of life. Either Such relief, either by family endowment or

the environment must be widened to allow of reduction in income-tax, must be discrimin-

the exercise of the larger faculties, or the ative, and should, in my opinion, be limited

capacities must be reduced to the level of to the first four or possibly five children in

the narrower environment."33

the family. It would thus tend to reduce

Surely the former is the better way.

the number of children in the too large

CONCLUSIONS

families in the lower groups, and to increase the number in the, at present, too small

We must now sum up the main conclu- families in the middle section of Society.

sions at which we have arrived.

In thus advocating the employment of

In order to deal successfully with any economic measures as a means of promoting

disease the first essential is to know its fertility in the worthier social groups, I am

cause. There can, therefore, be no doubt aware of the objections which have been

that a national survey of the population, a raised by Drysdale and others. If, how-

census of quality as well as quantity, is ever, we really believe that the future of

urgently needed before any reliable com- mankind partly depends on a wise exercise

parisons can be made between the physical of human. control, then surely it is neces-

and mental qualities of our citizens to-day sary that such control should be exercised

and the same qualities some years hence. not only in the social and biological but also

If, as is very probable, such a survey should in the economic sphere of life.

reveal presumptive evidence of deterioration, In this middle section also education on

especially in the field of native intelligence, eugenic lines must be relied upon and will

then we shall at least know how we stand be especially useful. All such eugenic in-

and what steps to take in order to arrest the struction, based on sound biological princi-

decline. Among the many remedial mea- ples, must form an integral part of educa-

sures which have been, or which might be tion and training for life as a whole. Nay,

suggested, the first place must be given to it must (as Galton urged) receive religious

education.

sanction and possess the driving power of a

Eugenic ideals must be established and a religious belief. Indeed, if it were not for

CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY

the wiser attitude taken up by a few leaders this mingling and inter-marrying of the fit

in Church and State in regard to this ques- with the less fit. A stricter demarkation

tion of biological teaching in our schools, along lines of civic and racial worth would

one would be alarmed by the general not only help to form a sounder public

indifference manifested to this vital problem. opinion on eugenic questions, it would also

I look to the spread of a knowledge of facilitate the eventual elimination of the

heredity to bring about a great change in unfit from our population.

our mental attitude one to another. I be- Moreover, it is very important that we

lieve such knowledge will lead to a far better should look at this problem of racial dete-

understanding of the nature of individual rioration from a wide standpoint. It may be

responsibility, and to a truer conception of that, as by the elimination of the unfit in-

the principles which underlie good and bad dividual the welfare of the community is

conduct. It will also, surely, help us to secured, so by the removal of the decadent

realize in what way we can best help our race the evolution of mankind is promoted.

neighbour, and will tend to promote a more If this be so we ought to welcome the extinc-

reasonable and a less barbarous mental atti- tion of the degenerate race-that is, if it be

tude to crime and criminals.

incapable of regeneration and re-birth.

As has been truly said, " Biology is the There is also this consolation. If, as we

science of life " (that is, of individual, believe, the older and cruder method of

national, and racial life), "and the science of natural selection is being gradually super-

life must be pondered (and taught) con- seded by the less wastefulAnd more humane

tinuously and reverently if the art of living method of artificial selection under human

is ever to be developed."34

control, then we may reasonably hope that a

The second suggestion is this. We must kinder and a better way of eliminating both

try to bring about some degree of segrega- decadent races and degenerate stocks will

tion along social, economic, and biological be found, and that that way will be by non-

lines between the fit and the unfit sections perpetuation rather than by extinction by

of the population. Sound and healthy fami- war, famine, and disease.

lies of good stock must not inter-marry with We have already seen that it is imprac-

the hereditarily diseased and the genetically ticable and useless at present to endeavour

defective. For the latter will never volun- to produce genius by breeding with that end

tarily sever their connection with the directly in view. The mountain peaks of

former. This does not mean that the strong genius which arose in Greece in the time of

and healthy are no longer to help, or to take Pericles soared from the tableland of a high

any interest in the weak and the disabled. level of intelligence, among the Athenian

This would be to cease to exercise those in- citizens prior to the Classic Age. If we of

estimable qualities of sympathy and kind- the British race firmly resolved to make a

ness which form the basis of true citizen- wise use of our newly acquired power of

ship, and mean so much for the future of human control, we might, even in the course

mankind. But these virtues must be exer- of a few generations, so raise the average

cised wisely and with due regard to racial level of intelligence in our own population

welfare. Mere benevolence is not enough. as to render possible an outcrop of men and

It must be a benevolence which seeks to pre- women of genius like those of the Eliza-

vent as well as to relieve suffering. Nature, bethan and Victorian Ages.

as we know, is careless of the individual. But this will need a better way of living,

Her concern is with the species and the race. and a new attitude to life. It is no doubt

Man in his desire to help the individual is true that man has grown but little in mental

apt to overlook the race.

stature during historic times. But the

The great problem of the future will be signs are encouraging: the dawn of a new

how best to harmonize individual with racial era is approaching. The power acquired by

interests.

civilized man to control, to-day, perhaps,

Many of our present difficulties arise from only the quantity, but to-morrow the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

quality of human life, will also enable man to change human nature and to raise mental and moral capacity to a higher level. But we are building not for the present but for
the future, and we must exercise patience.
We must think in generations rather than in years.
Finally, whatever may be the future of our British race, we are entitled to regard the future of mankind with confidence and hope. Progress, both biological and social,
has occurred in the past, and it would be unreasonable to imagine that now, when man
is beginning to exercise control, all evolutionary progress will cease.
But this artificial selection under human
control must be of the right kind and it must
be used in the right way. At the present time
it is not being so used. Education on eugenic lines will help to bring about a wiser mental attitude to both social and racial problems and to the way in which they react on each other. Of this, at any rate, we may be sure, that the dominant race of the future will be that race which succeeds in eliminating the unfit and the degenerate from its ranks.
Thus we arrive at our final conclusion: The future of a race depends on the possession of civit, in close association with racial worth; that is, on the possession of qualities of mind and body which will enable a people to respond to the good and to resist the bad influences in the environment, together with the capacity to hand on these good qualities to offspring adequate in numbers to perpetuate the race effectively.
At present our only or main test of racial
worth (in the human species) is the existence of civic achievement in the individual, the family, or the stock, and this, as we have already seen, although statistically useful, is not an entirely reliable criterion.
I will conclude my address with a final reference to the life work of Francis Galton.
We eugenists shall do well to copy his judicial and scientific attitude of mind and his deep appreciation of the complexity of the
problem before us. Ours is a great mission,
and our aim the promotion of human pro-
gress along biological lines. It will need all
our courage, patience, and tact.

Our immediate object must be to bring home to the minds of statesmen, government departments, local authorities, and the public, the fact that our present sociological methods are not based on sound biological principles. All such methods for improving the conditions of life must not only rest on a sound biological foundation, they must also deal with human beings having some capacity of response, if they are to be successful in promoting progress, not only in individual and national, but also in racial life.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
i. Herbert Spencer: Social Statics and Principles of Sociology, Chap. xii.
2. Spengler: Untergang, des Abendland des, Vol I.
3. MacIver: The Modern State, Oxford Univ. Press, I926.
4. Darwin, L.: The Need for Eugenic Reform, Murray, I926.
5. Perry, W. 1.: The Disappearance of Culture, "Eugenics Review," July, 1924.
6. Petrie, Flinders: The Revolutions of Civilization.
7. Keith, Sir Arthur: Concerning Man's Origin,
1927.
8. Fisher, R.A.: The Problem of the Decay of a Civilization, " Eugenics Review," 1926.
9. Carr-Saunders: Population, I925. zo. Carr-Saunders and Caradog Jones: Social Structure of England and Wales, Oxford Univ. Press, I927. ii. McDougall: National Welfare and National Decay. I2. Lidbetter: Report of the World Population Conference, Arnold, I928. I3. Ellis, Havelock: The Problem of Race Regeneration, I9II. I4. Maurice, General Sir F.: Contemporary Review, January, I902. IS. Army Recruiting Statistics Return, I903. i6. Report of the Scottish Royal Commission, I903. I7. Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Physical Deterioration, I904. i8. Newman, Sir G.: Report to the Board of Education, I926, I9. Wheatley, Dr. J. : Public Health, Nov., I925. 20. Report of the Ministry of National Service, I9I9. 2I. Report of the Board of Control, I925. 22. Tredgold: Address to the Royal Sanitary Institute Congress, I926. 23. Report of H.M. Inspectors of Constabulary,
I924.
24. Mott, Sir F. W. : Nature and Nurture in Mental Development, I914. 25. Berry, R. J.: Thte Study of Mental Abnormality, " British Medical Journal," January i4th, I928. 26. Myers, C. S. : Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, I925. 27. Stevenson, Dr. T. H. C. : Fertility of Various Social Classes in England and Wales, Journ. Royal Statistical Society, April, 1920.

CAUSES OF RACIAL DECAY

28. Report of the Special Committee on the Ethics of Birth Control and Medical Aspects of Contraception, National Council of Public Morals. 29. Life of Florence Nightingale, Appendix, abridged ed.
jo. Report of the People's League of Health, 1927.
3I. Bond, C. J.: Discussion on the Biological Foundations of Sociology, " Sociological Papers,"
I906.
32. Aristotle, Categorie, Chap. viii, 9, a, 21. Oxford Trans. 33. Bond, C. J.: Health and Healing in the Great State (Chap. v), I9I2. 34. East, E. M.: Heredity and Human Affairs, Scribner, 1927. 35. Goring, C.: The English Convict, Igig.
Plato: The Republic. Freeman, Austin: Social Decay and Regeneration,
1921.
Rentoul, R. R.: Race Culture or Race Suicide. Parsons, Professor F. G.: The Englishman of the Future. (B.A. Leeds, 1927.) Fisher, R. A.: Thte Actuarial Treatment of Birth
Records. EUGENIcS REVIEW, 1927. Pearson, Karl: The Chances of Death. London,
1897. Bell, A. G.: The Duration of Life and the Condi-
tions associated with Longevity. Washington, 1918. Barnes, D.D., Bishop of Birmingham. Galton
Lecture, 1926. Still, Dr. : Influence of Place in Family. (Lancet,
October iSth, 22nd., I927). Pearson, Karl: National Life fromn the Standpoint
of Science, 1901. Schuster, Edgar. Eugenics.

Galton, Sir Francis: Restriction in Marriage;
Studies in National Eugenics, Sociological Papers, I905; Hereditary Genius; Studies in Natural Inheritance.
Morgan, T. H.: The Physical Basis of Heredity. McDougal, William: Social Psychology; The Group Mind. Blacker, C. P.: Birth Control and the State. Jennings, H. S.: Public Health Progress and Racial Progress. Are they Incompatible? Baltimore. Myers, Professor J. 14.: The Causes of Rise and Fall in the Population of the Ancient World. (RUGHNICs REvIEw, April, 19I5). Ward, L. F.: Applied Sociology. Boston, 1906. Kelly, T. I.: The Influence of Nurture on Native Differences. N. York, I926. Laughlin, H. H. : Eugenics in America. (EUGENICS REviEw, April, 1925). Schiller, F. C. S.: The Ruin of Rome. (EuGENIcs REviEw, 1925.) Whetham, W. C. D. and C. D.: An Introduction to Eugenics. 1912. Bond, C. J.: Our Critic Criticised. (EUGzNICS RzviEw, January, 1914.) Fremantle, Lt.-Col.: The Health of the Nation.
I927.
Carr-Saunders: A Criticism of Eugenics. (EUGISNICs REvIEw, October, I9I5.)
Moore, Eldon: The Spectator, January 14th, 2ISt, 28th, February 4th, I928.
Rathbone, E. F.: Family Endowment. (EUGENICS REvIEw, January, 1925.)
Darwin, L.: Letter to The Times, January I7th, 1928.

MR. JUSTICE ROCHE (Chairman)
DR. NORWOOD EAST, Professor VAN LOON.
Discussion Meeting at 8 p.m., May 9th
ROOMS OF THE LINNAEAN SOCIETY, BURLINGTON HOUSE
Ezaenics Society Announcement

