Three Hundred Years of Demograph

ALTHOUGH CENSUS-TAKING and the keeping of records of births, marriages and deaths are of great antiquity, these particulars
were collected in the early days for practical

Concepts of Random MIting and the Frequency
of Consanguineous Marriages (Dr. J. Hajnal); Factors associated with Age at Marriage in
Britiain (Professor E. Grebenik and Miss Griselda Rowntree);

purposes such as taxation and the establishment Demographic Aspects of Mental Disorder (Sir

of legal title to property, and not in order to study population for its own sake; and although there was philosophical speculation about

Aubrey Lewis); Norms for Family Size in Underdeveloped Areas
(Professor R. Freedman);

population questions in ancient times, it was There was a discussion on each paper and

unaccompanied by any numerical investigation. at the end of the Symposium Professor F. W.

It was not until the year 1662 that anyone went Notestein made a closing statement which was

so far as to analyse some vital statistics in order also discussed.

to see what they revealed, or to pursue specula- Glass's very interesting account of Graunt's

tion about population to the point of making life disclosed some new facts uncovered by his

quantitative estimates. In that year the English- recent researches in addition to giving a clear

man, John Graunt, published his book, Natural survey of existing knowledge. Born in 1620, the

and Political Observations ... upon the Bills of oldest child of seven or more in the family of a

Mortality, and in so doing became the founder city haberdasher, Graunt was himself appren-

of two sciences; statistics and demography. By ticed at the age of sixteen into the same trade.

drawing up the first life table, he was also one He rose rapidly, and held many civic (and

of the originators of actuarial technique.

military) offices; he acquired considerable

The tercentenary of this remarkable beginning culture, moved in a distinguished circle and,

has recently been celebrated in various ways: after the appearance of his book, was elected

for instance, articles on Graunt and his work to the recently-formed Royal Society.

have appeared in a number of publications. A Bills of Mortality were weekly statements

special dinner was eaten, in a City Livery usually showing the sex of each deceased person,

Company Hall, by leading scientists and insur- and giving some indication as to age and cause of

ance men. Above all, the Royal Society held a death; they exist for 1592-95 and for the years

two-day Symposium in honour of Graunt, who from 1603 onwards. Graunt analysed these

was indeed one of its first Fellows; the meetings lists in a critical way, by no means accept-

were organized by two Fellows of the Eugenics ing all they showed, and drew from them far

Society: Dr. P. B. Medawar, F.R.S., and Pro- more than a count from time to time of the

fessor D. V. Glass. Ten papers were read and numbers of the deceased in each area. With

some of them touched upon eugenic subjects, their aid he estimated the size and trend of

although the main interest was demographic. population, and the distribution of people

Here is a complete list of the papers in the according to the lengths of their lives; he took

order in which they were read:

an interest in births, marriages, migration and

John Graunt and His work (Professor D. V. Glass);

statistics of households. At the time of the Great Plague and Great

Actuarial Methods of Mortality Analysis (Dr. B. Fire, Graunt apparently suffered financial and

Benjamin); Some recent trends in Public Health (Professor
J. N. Morris);

other losses, and soon retired; he died in 1674 after a period of hard times. He did not publish

The bearing of Demography on the study of any other significant work. It may well be that

Fecundity (Dr. L. Henry); Genetical aspects of Human Infertility (Professor
L. S. Penrose);

his lack of a formal education, his practical training and his capable mind are responsible for his

Genetical Demography (Professor K. Mather); work, so original in its day and pregnant for

'7
ER-C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the future of man's scientific interests and of the proportionate differences in these rates

achievements.

between social classes for the past fifty years.

In the discussion following the reading of The working classes made less use of the health

Professor Glass's paper, Mr. M. E. Ogborn- service, reported pregnancies later, and used

the Joint Actuary of the oldest Society to trans- the Hospital Services less than the others.

act scientific life assurance, whose bi-centenary Britain was behind Holland and Sweden in

fell in 1962-drew attention to an exhibition reducing infant mortality. Professor Morris

of old prints and documents which was then said that figures for chronic sickness of men in

being displayed in the Royal Society's Library. their sixties had been rising steadily since 1951.

Dr. Benjamin is one of the Chief Statisticians He believed that there should be more study of

of the General Register Office and in his contri- disease in relation to social patterns and

bution he was able to give a comprehensive conditions.

survey of methods of demographic analysis Dr. Louis Henry was not able to be present

of mortality and their development in recent at the Symposium, but his paper was read in his

years. He paid a tribute to those who had absence. He has been responsible for many

brought about significant advances in the study ingenious developments in the statistical study of

of the subject since Graunt's time, and in fertility, and on this occasion was showing

particular to William Farr, who had himself how population and registration statistics may

addressed the Royal Society in 1849. Dr. be used in the measurement of fecundity. Dr.

Benjamin also wrote an article entitled "Measur- Henry considered that differences in fecundity

ing the World's Population Explosion" which may well exist between populations as well as

appeared in the New Scientist for November 1, between individuals; variations in social be-

1962. haviour patterns, e.g. in the length of the lacta-

In the discussion on Dr. Benjamin's paper, tion period and in periodic taboos on inter-

Mr. R. E. Beard outlined the course of some course, have an important effect even where

current research in which he seemed likely by an contraception is practised.

ingenious process of analysis to account for the Professor Penrose's study of the genetical

trend of mortality from lung cancer, in terms of aspects of human infertility was concerned with

variations in the proportion of smokers and in the inheritance of particular defects in the repro-

the average amount smoked, including an duction system, while Professor Mather was

explanation of sex-differences in this respect. concerned with the wider, statistical aspects of

Professor J. N. Morris, of the Medical population genetics. Both emphasized the

Research Council's Social Medicine Research difficulty of assessing gene-frequencies in a

Unit, said there was evidence that coronary group of people and the importance of genetic

thrombosis and lung cancer had reached their studies of large samples of human populations.

peak as causes of death in the middle-aged male In a stimulating discussion, the subjects touched

population. Optimism that saturation point upon included the rate of foetal mortality and

had been reached in these two important and the problem of apparent correlations between

serious diseases was justified because of the family size and intelligence. Dr. Wallis Taylor,

apparent stabilization of the incidence of lung of Manchester University, made the interesting

cancer in men under sixty and the fact that suggestion that genetical information should be

there was no increase of coronary thrombosis collected at the next national census. He

among doctors, whose figures had been the suggested, for example, that it would be of

highest.

value to know the total number of sons and

Professor Morris examined trends in mortality daughters of the father of each family (thus

in infancy, adolescence, middle life and old age. giving the sex-ratio) and that a tally of informa-

It was disappointing, he said, that there had tion on blood-groups (where they were known)

been no appreciable fall in infant mortality would also be useful.

in spite of twelve years of the National Health After an interesting analysis by Dr. J. Hajnal

Service and that there had been no narrowing of the prospects of consanguineous marriages in

i8

THREE HUNDRED YEARS OF DEMOGRAPHY

random mating, in which he constructed some complete social life of a tribe or nation, and

statistical models showing the expected fre- the role of everyone in it, was involved, and*

quency of cousin marriages, Professor Grebenik the transition could hardly be a rapid one.

gave some of the preliminary results of a marri- The Symposium was fittingly concluded by

age survey he organized with Miss Griselda the distinguished American demographer, Pro-

Rowntree three years ago. In an attempt to fessor Notestein, who is the President of the

identify major social factors in the lowering Population Council, founded in the United

of the age at marriage, 3,000 men and women States in 1952. He stressed the need for more

between the ages of sixteen and fifty-nine-some demographic research, more money to promote

married, some not-were interviewed on a it and more collaboration between natural and

national scale by a poll organization. Among social scientists.

the findings were that the brides of professional Now that three hundred years of demography

and managerial men continued to marry at have been celebrated, what of the future? The

later ages than those of other men, and that in prospects have been surveyed in an article

recent years the marriage age of daughters of in the October 1962 issue of Population Index

professional men had fallen more sharply than the quarterly published by the Office of Popula-

that of other sections of the population.

tion Research at Princeton University and the

The survey also showed that 41 per cent of Population Association of America. The article

daughters of non-manual families marry sons foresees that demands for demographic informa-

of manual workers, and 27 per cent of the daugh- tion and studies will increase and that the real

ters of manual families marry sons of non- need for these services will grow even faster in

manual workers. Pre-nuptial conceptions were the emergent countries than the services them-

most prevalent when both parties were from selves. This seems a reasonable expectation, as

manual families, and in the unions of women of also does the suggestion that an increasing

manual families with non-manual men. Lengths proportion of research effort will be devoted

of engagements appeared no shorter in the towards questions that relate to social, econo-

1950s than in the 1930s. Professor Grebenik mic and population policy, and less to theory.

said that in his view the knowledge of the It does seem likely, and desirable, that the trend

possibility of limiting the fecundity in marriage away from abstraction and towards a detailed

had had greater influence than anything else examination of the relevant facts, which has

on the lowering of the marriage age.

already transformed some branches of the sub-

Sir Aubrey Lewis discussed the many difficul- ject, should extend itself to embrace the question

ties involved in assessing the full incidence of interrelations between economic and demo-

of mental disorder of various kinds among the graphic development. These interrelations are

whole population, and surveyed the most signi- evidently vital for the whole future of mankind,

ficant studies on this topic. Some emphasis was because they will determine how soon the present

placed, in the discussion, on the influence of harmful explosion of population can be har-

geographical location and social environment nessed. The article refers to this movement

upon mental disease.

towards the measurement of new factors and

In the last paper of the Symposium, Professor suggests also that the demographer will combine

Freedman gave a list of the available gross his services more and more with those of the

reproduction rates and other measures of sociologist, the psychologist and the economist,

fertility for the economically emergent countries. perhaps even performing these roles himself

The reproduction rate varied from 2f1 in Chile as well.

to 4-2 in the Cocos Islands. He discussed the All these reasonable projections into the future

significance of these figures and the effects of represent continuations of current trends. But

"emergence" upon them, showing how the fortunately the possibility cannot be excluded

norms for family size were adapted to conditions that another Graunt will arise to discover things

of high mortality, and that as mortality fell the hitherto unimagined and so completely trans-

norms tended to adjust themselves. But the form the course of demographic science.

I9

