72 EUGENICS REVIEW.

such a vast question as that of the cyclical rise and fall of civilisations.

Nevertheless, such books as that under review are full of suggestion

to those who take an interest in the wider problems that the contem-

plation of the historical record raises.

A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS.

Chatterton-Hill, GEORGES, Ph.D. (Privatdocent of Sociology at the Univer-

sity of Geneva). The Philosophy of Nietzsche: An Exposition

and an Appreciation. London. John Ouseley, Ltd.; 1912; price

7s. 6d. net; pp. 292.

IN this able volume Dr. Chatterton-Hill has given us a sympathetic

yet discriminating appreciation of that potent, but erratic, genius,

Friedrich Nietzsche. He regards Nietzsche as one of the great forces of

modern Europe, and as a force working, on the whole, for good. He

believes that Nietzsche's message-be strong, believe in life, cultivate an

ideal of strength and beauty, despise the soft virtues, recognise that only

through suffering can anything great be created, reject the mediocre con-

ceptions of democracy and Socialism, beware of the materialism of

science and ideals of mere comfort and equality, look for the coming of

the Over-man, the leader, creator, autocrat-is a message which the

modern world needs. i-1e recognises the violence of Nietzsche's language,

his exaggeration, his furious onslaught on most of the ideals-scientific,

philosophic, sociological and religious-which our civilisation most highly

cherishes. He discounts his perverted view of the origin and spirit of

Christianity. But he does full justice to Nietzsche's originality and power,

the grandeur of his philosophic thought, his intrepidity, his insight, his

poetic charm, and his prophetic enthusiasm. It is not possible in the

course of a brief review to do justice to Nietzsche's scheme of thought,

which has affinities with the general doctrine of eugenics, although it

may be that Eugenists may find him a dangerous ally. Nietzsche is the

sworn foe of democracy, of equality, of the religion of love, pity, and

sympathy, of asceticism, of pessimism. His ideal is one of exuberant life,

of beauty, power, and strength. His hero is the strong man who can

command and coerce, who is not afraid either to suffer or to inflict

suffering. The weak, the timid, the incompetent are to be crushed out

of existence or coerced for their own good. Sympathy is a mistake-it

weakens him who gives and does not help him who receives. Morality

is only to be approved if it can be shown to be more useful to life than

immorality. The justification of humanity is the production of the

superior race-the Over-man. This is the new wherefore ? The cate-

gories of life are aesthetic, artistic-not moral. Science is materialistic,

religion is a worship of the slave virtues, and so on and so on.

All this gives one furiously to think, as the French say. Much might

be said on the other side. Nietzsche is not good meat for immature

minds, but there are some to whom he may be a useful tonic or at least

good red pepper.

J. A. LINDSAY.

Key,

ELLEN. Love and Ethics.
price is. net; pp. 6i.

London.

G. P. Putnam's Sons; 1912;

THE authoress here replies to. some of the criticisms that have been

showered on her former book, " Love and Marriage," protesting that,

in pointing the way to the probable development of marriage in the

future, she was only pleading for a recognition of the development of

the social organism, and, therefore, forecasting what would be one

of the necessary developments of one of the most important of social

customs. Ellen Key is both an Idealist and a Eugenist, and from these

standpoints she considers the existing marriage laws and customs of

society, weighs them in the balance, and finds them wanting. The ideal

of love and marriage she sets before us is perhaps far beyond the

capacity of the average even to appreciate, much less to attain, but

the future development of sex relations will be along the lines she

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

73

projects. There can be little doubt that several generations of education for parenthood may be necessary before a sufficiently stronig feeling of racial responsibility will have developed to supply the necessary control. The Eugenist does not postulate the ideal man, nor does Miss Key postulate the ideal marriage form. As the Eugenist works from the general principle that, as " like tends to beget like " it is necessary to ensure that the better elements in the community propagate their kind, so Miss Key demands that " society must be so adjusted as to make the happiness of the individual subserve the betterment of the race," and asserts that the one thing necessary is "to make ever greater demands upon the men and women who take to themselves the right to give humanity new beings."

Mental Defleiency. London. Adlard and Son; 1912; price is. net;

PP- 93. THIS reprint from the " Journal of Mental Science " consists chiefly of
Dr. Hyslop's account of the provisions of the Mental Deficiency Bill, together with the discussion thereon which took place before the Medical
Psychological Association. It also contains other papers and reports on the same subject. It is of interest to note that the general trend of professional and expert opinion is in favour of the measure, and it is greatly to be regretted that it has not been proceeded with.

A. F. T.

Isaaeson, EDWARD. The Maithusian Limit. London. Methuen and Co.; I912; price 3s. 6d.; pp. xxvii. + 215.
IN the introduction to this book the author says, " I have simply taken up what seems to be an actual tendency in the normal course of evolution, and thought it out to the logical extreme. It has thrown much

light for me upon many of the puzzling questions of the day, and I hope

it may do the same for others." The italics are mine, and serve to point out the fallacy underlying the whole argument of the book, which is a study of the conditions and possibilities of a fully peopled earth. This

condition of a teeming universe will take nobody knows how long in coming, the time must be counted at least in centuries. But the author supposes its accomplishment, and proceeds to discuss certain puxzling
questions of the presentt day, among them women suffrage, the land,
socialism, etc. But will these problems remain in the fully peopled

earth ? The universe having gone through the cataclysmic changes

necessary in reaching that state will have left these problems far

behind, or find it necessary to study them from a totally different aspect.

The book is well written, and deals with a subject of living interest

to all thinkers since Malthus made it current coin; but whether it will be

helpful to the eugenist is another matter.

E. CLARKE.

Ashley, ANNIE. Birmingham Studies in Social Economics; III., The Social Policy of Bismarck. London. Longmans, Green, and Co.; I9I2; price 2S. net; pp. 95.
IN this sane and interesting study Miss Ashley traces the growth of
" State Socialism " and the Historical School in Germany, their association with Conservatism and influence on Bismarck, and his eventual concentration upon insurance legislation. The comparison of the English and German systems is probably matter less familiar to our readers, and here Mliss Ashley is all too brief: we miss especially some
account of the financial basis of the three great German Acts. Some
German errors we have been able to avoid such as separate administrations for the invalidity and sickness insurances, and the class distinctions emphasised by benefits varying with wages. Our sickness insurance is more extensive than Bismarck's, and our benefits better; we may hope that our system will be more popular, as we have left more room for individual initiative in administration than the bureaucratic Germans.

