THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS
and never taking advantage of a fault to lawyer or a good teacher is without question; appear clever at the other man's expense. but we who worked with Bramwell will Some may have thought it strange that always be thankful that he chose business Bramwell should have chosen a business and that we had the great privilege of being career. That he would have made a good associated with him.

THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS:
The Utopia of the Eugenists* By PAUL BLOOMFIELD

MIEL wrote in his wonderful diary:
" Improve man, make him more just,
more moral, more humble, more pure -this is the only reform which has no correlative drawback. Institutions are worth no more than the value of the man who uses them." (" Les institutions ne valent que ce que vaut l'homme qui les applique.")
Governments on the whole behave as if people owed-and, still more, will in future owe-their character and " worth " to institutions, but without going as far as Amiel most of the Utopian writers from Plato to Bernard Shaw have believed that reform, or what we call progress, requires us to pay some attention to breeding. Since piety for the past is a virtue somewhat wanting just now, it may be fair as well as useful to recall the suggestions, made by some of those remarkable prophets, for supplying society with improved men instead of only supplying men with an improved society. It is true that eugenic principles occasionally sound out of tune with the precepts of the great moralists. The discord is usually only apparent, the impression we get being due to the fact that moralists emphasize more the individual's relations to God, eugenists more his ties to past and his responsibilities to future generations of men. At any rate the Utopian writers were moralists themselves,
* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on Septem-
ber 28th, 1948.

some of them in the small flight of the world's greatest.
Ancient Wisdom
The mysteries of kingship early in history bore upon mankind the significance of " blood." Folklore and fairy tales attest to it, and the Bible abounds with genealogies. Plato must not be expected to have fallen into traps which still catch prominent men with less intelligence. He neither regarded the human stock as stabilized, with the good, the beautiful, the capable and the strong reproducing themselves in an invariable ratio to the others, nor did he feel that any blind process of selection could be depended on to populate his ideal republic with an ideal race. So he had recourse to eugenic measures. The brave and the fair were to be encouraged to mate-but not to bring children into the world after the brave were fifty-five or the fair forty. Plato's persistent speculations as to the right age for getting married showed a scientific habit of mind which was soon to be abandoned for hundreds of years; not, indeed that other paragons of ancient wisdom or of mediaeval common sense failed to notice for themselves, as Ecclesiastes had put it, that " to every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven." Though the Jewish sage specified " a time to embrace and a time to refrain from embracing," his exact meaning is obscure.

192 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Plato made himself quite clear. If his mar- if it had crossed his mind-living when he

riage laws had bound posterity we should not did-that before deciding to marry people

have had Napier, the inventor of logarithms, ought to be told anything that was known

son of a boy of sixteen, nor Charles James about their future partner's ancestors' bodily

Fox, and those other brilliant Napiers, who and mental health records; for there is a

were descendants of Sir Stephen Fox and deeper compatibility which concerns the race.

the second wife whom he married at the age A quarter of a century after More's execu-

of seventy-seven. Probably of Plato's guesses tion was born Tommaso Campanella (I56I-

that for the best upper age-limit for men to I626). An intractable Dominican like

procreate is the one least likely to be sup- Giordano Bruno, he was a Utopian writer of

ported by modem eugenists. Still, he was unequal parts who had brilliant flashes of

wise to give thought to this question of age. prescience. Certainly his Civitas Solis would

As it turns out the mother's age, I under- have been one of the most disagreeable of the

stand, is not only a factor in determining the " ideal " States to live in. For using lipstick

frequency of extra toes in guinea pigs, but a girl was sent to the scaffold, if you please!

also, among human beings, in predisposing But in spite of all the nonsense and applied

children to certain mental defects. The astrology Campanella had a remarkable

width of the margin of safety is no reproach eugenic policy. Out of solicitude for the

to Plato's intuition.

preservation of the mean, in which health

seemed to him to lie, he ruled that fat women

The Renaissance

should marry thin men, tall women short

Nearly two thousand years passed before men, and so forth. More striking are these

another great man, or any man, wrote a points: citizens of the sun were to have

second Utopian book. To appreciate the been given a thorough education by the age

liberal-mindedness of this English gentle- of ten-and they lived, we are told, to be

man, Sir Thomas More, who was also a two hundred. We have, then, in this rene-

Catholic martyr, we need to cast ourselves gade monk, a forerunner of Bernard Shaw.

back in imagination to a time when the This is the best of Campanella, better than

terms Catholic and Protestant had not the his arrangement for the State to be governed

meanings we assign to them. It was as a by a council of conjurors presided over by

child of the Renaissance that the Blessed the Metaphysicus, the man who came out

Thomas could allow divorce in his ideal top of all his nation in a general knowledge

State, which was a highly patriarchal one, examination. Yes, but absurd as this may

quite unlike Plato's. In his approval of large sound, it is not as far as all that removed

families More was in accord with Jewish and from Plato's plan for philosophers to be

Christian sentiment, and with the views of kings, and when we come to Galton's own

the Eugenics Society to-day. His more Utopia we shall see that he also, like Cam-

original contribution to eugenic lore was par- panella, picked his senators by means of

ticularly bold, it seems to me. He empha- competitive tests, though not merely tests

sized the importance in marriage of physical of knowledge. Let us not be duped by

compatibility-or how else would one inter- ideological propaganda into believing that

pret his stipulation that before a betrothal the choice of leaders before us is between the

could be clinched " a sad and an honest capitalist, the commissar and the yogi.

matron showeth the woman naked to the The Utopia, Bensalem, in Bacon's famous

wooer," and "a sage and discrete" man New Atlantis was a kingdom with a parlia-

exhibits the wooer likewise to his provision- ment of scientists, a philoprogenitive land in

ally minded? Even to-day physical com- which " the king is debtor to no man buf for

patibility is a neglected factor of human propagation of his subjects." The Ben-

happiness, one that affects children as well salemite who lived to see thirty descendants

as parents. More deserves credit for opening of his body was given the title of Tirsan and

the subject. It would have been phenomenal a feast at the public expense. Thirty will

THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOP1ANS

appear a modest figure if we consider that Lady Temple of Stowe, a contemporary of Bacon's, is reputed to have lived to see seven hundred descendants of her body. Modem eugenists, at any rate, agree with Bacon in approving of large families-provided, of course, they are eugenic. Modern statesmanship, however, is not very successful and even -less discriminating in translating into action such concern as it may have for human fruitfulness. In England the new bloodless revolution of the last decades has hastened the decline of the rate of increase of population in general, and particularly among the educated bourgeoisie on whose side Lord Keynes said he would be found if it came to a class war. The price of thirty cigarettes a week for each child after the first is a mild measure, unlikely to encourage the more eugenic sort of parents to have large families. It is the same five shillings for the third feeble-minded child that ought never to have been born as it would be for the second intelligent and healthy boy or girl which some conscientious couple refrained from bringing into the world. Our democracy has still to work out a just compromise in these matters.
The Age of Reason
The miraculously creative seventeenth century passed; the eighteenth affirmed man's original virtue. This doctrine, so true in respect of our core of spirituality, so false in respect of ourselves as social beings, inspired Morelly's characteristic Utopia, The Floating Islands. In this Arcadia love was to be free. We must make allowances for the superficiality of Morelly's treatment of his subject because, in fact, love had got to be set a good deal more free than it was-from money interests and caste prejudice-before it could be invited to discipline itself a little for the sake of the race. As we shall see, the later nineteenth-century Utopians carried this argument further. Meanwhile the early nineteenth-century optimist, Eugene Cabet, wrote a Utopian book which represented the apotheosis of the steam engine, and he followed it up by founding a Communist Icaria in America. It was not a success, and Cabet returned to France and the fold of Chris-

tianity. For the Utopian Icaria, a place beset with terrible " controls," he had nevertheless laid down some sensible eugenic rules. People with certain diseases were forbidden
to marry, and Cabet, like Campanella, was a believer in the mean, so he wished young men from the mountain heights to be encouraged to court the maids of the plain. Furthermore, sound foreign types were to be " im-
ported" in infancy for inter-breeding with the native Icarian stock.
After Galton
Then came Darwin, and his half-cousin Galton. Their epoch-making books had been published by the time the American Bellamy, the Englishman William Morris and the Austrian Hertzka wrote their so very different Utopias. Bellamy amended Morelly's free love to marriage only by inclination; Morris, who detested Bellamy's materialism but was like him a radical, made the very important point that after marrying (or I had better say mating) by inclination a woman was not to become absolutely dependent on her husband or lover, and Hertzka, a professional economist, agreed with this and went on to work out the financial details. Now although eugenists like families to be united, not the whole time glorying in their right to separate if they want, it is clear that unless men and women are as free in their marriage relations as these Utopian writers made them, positive eugenics could not be voluntary, and if it was not voluntary it would be intolerably despotic, more particularly no doubt for women.
A touch, not indeed of despotism, but of Platonic severity distinguishes the Modern Utopia of H. G. Wells, the first great mentor of the twentieth century. We are in deeper waters here, because Wells was also the first Utopian familiar with Darwin and Galton. He laid down that a couple not licensedbecause not eugenically fully qualified-to produce children would be liable to sterilization after the birth of a second defective child. I suppose the most Galtonian and progressive biological provision in his ideal State was that which obliged engaged couples to show each other their personal

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

health records; an advance on More's plan What kind of people ought we to hope to find

for them just to strip. The next step but one, living there? Not so much, what laws will

and how significant it would be, would con- there be in the new Golden Age, as what sort

sist of declaring their heredity records. But of people will be there to obey them? Nor,

these, of course, would first have had to be again, will the constitution in those days be

compiled.

republican, oligarchical or what you will, but

So lastly Shaw, and back to Methuselah. what qualifications will be required of the

Wells had relied on selection. The lamarckian men and women who are to do the necessary

Shaw declares for a mutation, the effect of work of governing?

will, which shall make us live long enough

not only to be able to learn by experience The Ideal Couple

but to have time to re-create human nature It is nearly sixty years since the publica-

in the light of our new wisdom. I feel sure, tion of the book by which Galton founded the

by the way, that biologists will not have systematic study of human heredity. Lately

heard the last of the hlan vital, etc., even the Eugenics Society has defined as the ideal

when the food-preferences of stick-insects eugenic parents the couple who " in a com-

have been accounted for by normal evolu- munity which provides good prospects for

tionary principles.* God is the great oppor- the future welfare of children, which en-

tunist. And since Shaw's book is by far the courages family life and inculcates a sense of

most read of any I have mentioned except its responsibilities, produce, by intention and

Plato's Republic, I will say no more about it design, a family large enough for replace-

here except that, from Galton on, eugenists ment and provide for it a happy and healthy

have stressed the importance of members of home."

the best stocks living a long time. Longevity On first reading this I at once said to

is transmissible-there are already relatively myself: " Yes, but where are we to find a

long-livers among us. Thus the famous society like this ? " There was, I thought, a

stock-breeder, Coke of Norfolk (a descendant puzzling suggestion that the social climate,

of the great Elizabethan lawyer) who died at the Utopia, must be a prerequisite for pro-

eighty-three, married a second time when he ducing what could only be produced by it.

was sixty-seven, and the average age of But, needless to say, the Eugenics Society

himself and his two successors (the second does not fail to describe the horse which I

and third Earls of Leicester) was ninety; am alleging had been put behind the cart.

their line has taken only nine generations to Their standards of eugenic value for indivi-

span the last four centuries instead of the duals, then, are the following: (i) good

normal twelve.

health and physique; (2) intelligence; (3)

Let there then come an age when everyone social usefulness or good citizenship; (4)

will love life and be able to make the most of freedom from genetic taints; (5) member-

it, and when the fifth Commandment will ship of a large and happy family and fondness

make excellent sense if the word " for " is for children. They are quite ready to

substituted for the word " that." "Honour acknowledge that great contributions have

thy father and thy mother, for thy days may been made to human progress and happiness

be long in the land that the Lord thy God by people who were not up to these standards,

giveth thee."

as by being frail, like Mozart, or tainted, like

Enough if our thought reaches as far as Swift, or very moderately fond of children,

that. like Galileo-who made no bones about

packing off his illegitimate girls to a nunTHE UTOPIA OF THE EUGENISTS nery. And it is not hard to see that in order

For eugenists as for philosophers the to be truly eugenic an individual has got to

cardinal question about Utopia is this: be more than ostensibly good in himself as a

* See J. S. Huxley, Evolution, third impression,
P. 459.

moral and physical being, more than merely good as a phenotype (to use the technical

THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS

I95

word), since all the time he may be carrying harmful recessive genes. To be a sound genotype he must not only possess but also be likely to transmit good qualities. But since the whole good does not lie in genetic potentiality, the point is soon reached when eugenists have to start trying to make up their minds what human values they want brought to light, and not only darkly per-
petuated.
Eugenics and Ethics
We notice meanwhile that of the five eugenic standards only two, or one and a half, relate to ethics, and it seems a little hard to see where sensibility comes in. It would be irrelevant to complain that " virtue "-just like that-does not figure in the list, since it is not, like certain forms of intelligence, heritable. " Social usefulness," which smacks of ethics, is allowed to pass presumably because it goes with health and intelligence more often than not, if only rather negatively. I should, however, like to put in a reminder that " good citizenship " is as unmoralized a quality in itself as intelligence: both can be applied to evil, and for that matter dysgenic ends.
As for large famiies--we cannot want everyone to have them, or before long there would be a really terrible population problem, and even if the overcrowding was with perfect eugenic Venuses and Adonises life would be embarrassed and would not be the good life. Galton was boundlessly indignant with the mediaeval Church for imposing celibacy on its servants, and so depriving the world of their invaluable posterity. I believe he said a little too much; good people, good genotypes, too, sometimes for altruistic reasons choose to remain single. Galton himself married-but had no children. He was justified by his works, and so, no doubt (and by faith), were a good many men and women who have had benefit of clergy. I no more mean this as a complete contradiction of his opinions about clerical celibacy than I should support Campanella's Metaphysicus in compulsorily divorcing Galton and his wife and marrying them off to new partners in case they had only been

mutually sterile, like Napoleon and Josephine.
Very well: the five standards of eugenic value have been affirmed, and accepted as more or less axiomatic. They are, however,
vague in certain respects, so eugenists go on
to make two kinds of inquiries in order to clarify their, position. They ask: What are the eugenically desirable types-exemplifiers as well as carriers of good qualities-and they set about isolating and measuring the qualities which are features of personality. These may not always be measurable; or they may not be innate, but more a product of nurture than of nature, and in this case we cannot exactly breed for them. We shall see that it is impossible to discuss " desirable types " lucidly without considering how they are to behave, that is, without an appeal to certain other standards, namely, ethical ones. The significance of behaviour naturally depends on our ideas of good and evil.
Ethical Standards
Such ideas have been crystallized for us by a handful of great moralists. When Tzuchang asked Confucius what " the five great good qualities " were, Confucius answered "courtesy, breadth, good faith, diligence and clemency." Socrates said one ought never to do harm, even to one's enemies, and that the truth was to be pursued wherever it might lead. On the whole, Confucius and Socrates, who lived much longer and moved in altogether more educated circles than Jesus, were more inclined than Jesus to hold up a sophisticated ideal. Still, they would not have found a great deal to criticize in the Sermon on the Mount if we take it (as not everybody will) to have enjoined simplicity of manners, charitableness, resistance to sensuality, avoidance of aggressiveness and standing up bravely for one's convictions. This is not speaking the language of eugenics. But obviously the " types " who would be " eugenically desirable " and worth breeding for would have to have, among other things, a native disposition to realize the kind of character approved by the great moralists. We have noticed that one and a half ethical qualities, or quasi-virtues, have been treated

i96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by representative eugenists as eugenic. point is that by begging the question he

" Social usefulness " is ambiguous; " fond- involves us in human values, for when he

ness for children," in so far as it means one's says that any couple " that has produced a

own children, is a quasi-virtue which the richly endowed family" has proved its

human race for the most part has in common eugenic worth, he must expect us to have

with eagles and foxes. Of the classic cardinal made up our minds what rich endowment

virtues the only one implicit in the Eugenics itself consists in. "Social usefulness " is

Society's definition of a eugenic couple is the much too vague a criterion. A master spy is

least-how shall I put it ?-generous of socially useful, but his works are not good

them: prudence.

and do not conduce to any kind of Utopia.

The Desirable Types

I wish educationists and others more regularly showed that they noticed that

Not long ago the Society conducted a sym- " society " is not unanimous about values,

posium on eugenically desirable types.* and that a vast amount of " good citizen-

Now it might- appear that the solution of ship " goes to perpetuate the world's ills....

many human problems would be easier if It is a different matter when Dr. Blacker

certain psychological types came to out- suggests that having had two " eugenically

number other types. But psychological sound" children should entitle a couple to

types are not the same as eugenic types, get State aid if they need it. Then we can

because temperament-in the usual sense of admit (without for the moment stopping to

the word, which is in fact not very different argue how the soundness has been reckoned)

from its technical definition-is too com- that this would be eugenic policy-which

plicated to be regarded as a heritable factor. paying five shillings a week for all children

On the other hand again, we should be justi- up to the age of fourteen, born after the first

fied in working on the hypothesis that such- one, is not : it is a measure of social justice

and-such eugenic types, in a favourable or compassion.

environment, will beget more and more of Speaking after Dr. Newfield, Mr. Eley

the desirable psychological types; we shall reasonably envisaged Utopia as a three-class

see in a moment that eugenists do, very society of leaders, lieutenants and other

properly, go reconnoitring across the fron- ranks, with fewer non-conformists and more

tiers of their province. So back to the co-operators than hitherto. With the last

symposium.

part of this I non-conform, as I believe that

Dr. Newfield was squarely for adding the best co-operators are non-conformists

longevity to the five standards, and said that after the causes for their non-conformity have

" the most dependable recipe for long life is been removed. One of the latest analyses of

well known: it is to choose parents belonging psychological type is Dr. Sheldon's, quoted

to long-lived stocks." He was against with great approval by Aldous Huxley in
Bernard Shaw's alternative method-of The Perennial Philosophy. Can Mr. Eley's

(somehow!) creating a long-lived mutation three classes, I wonder, be identified with

as a sport in a short-lived society-not Dr. Sheldon's ectomorphs (whom Plato

because Shaw is a lamarckian of Samuel would perhaps have chosen for his rulers),

Butler's kind and a seer, but because muta- endomorphs (the lieutenants, which they

tions are so often found to be harmful. I will would not have been in Wells's Utopia, on

take Dr. Newfield's third additional standard account of their tendency to run to fat) and

before his second: it is the eugenic value mesomorphs (to whom the routine jobs would

which can be " surmised " from the eugenic fall ) ? I have my own strong doubts about

record of a person's ancestors. Fair enough, all this.

and in keeping with mankind's ancient

appreciation of " a chip of the old block." The Quest for Serenity

The importance of Dr. Newfield's second After Mr. Eley, Mrs. Bosanquet. She

* EUGENICS REVIEW, October I946, p. I33. I seems to me to have had some excellent

THE EUGENICS OF THE UTOPIANS

197

things to say. To begin with she also asks for more inborn co-operativeness, and thenand this is where the interest quickens-she confesses her faith in a factor of a kind of
emotional warmth, a transmissible lovingkindness. She adds a third quality which
may or may not, like warmth of feeling, be a
genetic trait, namely serenity of tempera-
ment. Now I feel she is a thousand times
right to probe in this way, to plumb these
depths. And that they are, even I dare say, for the greatest experts. What, in plain words, am I talking about ? I suppose I am asking with Mrs. Bosanquet whether "serene " people marrying one another and having decently large families will tend to
increase the number of serene members of the community in proportion to the rest. I
should like to ask a little more than that. Might it be in nature for them to be able to do so even if their community does not provide those " good prospects " for children, and does not encourage family
life?
Again, it is most important to be as clear
as possible. Don't we as a matter of fact often think of serenity as something achieved in the teeth of all sorts of trials ? I think we do; it is usually an acquired
quality, one which, like virtue itself, may distinguish persons belonging to any of the psychological types, the endomorph and the mesomorph as well as the more spiritually inclined ectomorph. This is a reason why psychologists who try to measure socially valuable qualities find it so hard to decide whether any of them-apart from a sort of brain-power (Spearman's " g " factor and a number of primary abilities) are specific to particular situations or general, that is inherent in personality. At this point we have
to reckon with the theological principle of grace. (Or call it " x," as Professor Haldane does.) Whatever grace may be, it certainly doesn't " inhere." By their terms of reference the statistical psychologists seem to have to ignore that inner light which, for example, transformed the brutal Cromwellian sailor, Thomas Lurting, into something like a saint. Doesn't the spirit have its mutations, too ? I believe so. And they are sometimes dele-

terious, like the other ones; sometimes, however, not.
Now far be it from me to use mysticism like a spanner for throwing into the works. If seeing the light is a characteristic it is an acquired one, I have already made haste to admit. But this does not quite dispose of it from a eugenic point of view, since those who are illuminated may be impelled to look for kindred spirits and may marry them and bring into existence a very special kind of community such as the Quakers. The Quakers' feelings about family life have had some highly significant results for eugenic breeding.
The Third Force in Evolution
You see I am still wondering about " serenity." There it is. How do we find out whether it can be transmitted ? Suppose we take it as a hypothesis that it can be, the practical question is: How are certain kinds of people, the serene ones, to be encouraged to find each other in the crowd, and to like each other enough to propose marriage ? It can only happen in a rather mysterious way, at any rate at first. There has to be an interposition of something like the Quakerish supra-temperamental enlightenment, a mutual concern for certain values. This, I believe, is what brings out those necessary affinities, those secret affinities-which would be hidden from even the most disinterested eugenist not-in-the-know.
Without trying to make out that there are any other agencies of physisal evolution than nature and nurture, I hope I have sufficiently stressed a moral impulse that enters into the process. To-day still, of course, far too many people think that nature can look after itself and that when one has said " education " and " equality of opportunity" the subject of nurture is exhausted. But there is also breeding, in the now rather unpopular sense, the family sense, the sense in which I have been using it. This we must continue to distinguish and save if we can from foolish insinuations and bad laws. The Utopia of the eugenists would, however, be populated by people drawn together by influences which had

i98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

enabled them to resist and overcome the opposition of an unfriendly society.... There would be my horse before the cart.
Kantsaywhere
To end, a word about Galton's own Utopia, Kantsaywhere-known to me only through Dr. Blacker's very lucid summaries. But is it not by the way very suitable, and very appropriate, that Galton himself should have been born into just one of those Quaker families we have been discussing, whose members picked their husbands and wives with such a care for moral compatibility? Indeed, he was descended from the greatest of Quaker sires, Robert Barclay.
His Utopia was ruled by an academic Senate with an inner cabinet of three. Senators were people who had gained more than seventy marks in four tests: anthropometric, aesthetic and literary, . medical, ancestral. It is a notion full of interesting possibilities. And after all, half marks for ancestors would not disqualify anyone who came out well in the other tests. Every

lineage has to have its genesis. Even in an
un-Utopian society an ambitious man can say with Napoleon, " I am an ancestor," but in Kantsaywhere it would be unnecessaryand for that matter extremely difficult-for him to convulse the world in order to prove
it. One of the beauties of Galton's notion is that it would mean a restoration of pride of race, revised, and would give people such a sense of their inborn dignity that they would not countenance Napoleonic or Hitlerian pretensions. Public opinion would be
intelligent.
Public opinion is something we have seen a good deal moulded one way and another in the last thirty years, largely in the interests of that most formidable of institutions, the modern State. " Improve man . .. this is the only reform which has no correlative drawback." I conclude as I began, with these wise words of Amiel's. " Improve man.... Institutions are worth no more than the value of the man who uses them."
It is going to be hard to persuade people of it, but we must try.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
Edited by Warder C. Ailee, the University of Chicago. In the January 1949 number: ANALYSIS OF SOME PHASES OF MELANOBLAST MIGRATION IN BARRED PLYMOUTH ROCK EMBRYOS. By MARJoRIE
H. Fox. DOMINANCE IN WINTER FLOCKS OF JUNCOS AND TREE SPARROWS. By WlNriPFD S. SABJNE. GROWTH OF PROTOZOA IN GLASSWARE CLEANED WITH SULPHURIC ACID-POTASSIUM BICHROMATE SOLUTION.
By HENRY W. SCHOENBORN. THE EFFECT OF SEITZ FILTRATION ON THE PROTEIN CONTENT AND PRECIPITIN REACTION OF DILUTED
ANTIGEN SOLUTIONS. By ELEANOR DILKs and HAROLD R. WOLFE.
PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY is published quarterly in January, April, July and October Subscription $SIo a year Single copies $3 Canadian postage 20c. Foreign postage 48c.
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS, 5750 Ellis Avenue, CHICAGO
Eugenics Review, Vol. XL, No. 4

