THE INTELLIGENCE OF TWINS
And of the Inmates of Orphanages

By ALEX. H. WINGFIELD, Ph.D.

P ROFESSOR NENTMAN'S article on first and second pairs of identical twins

Identical Twins in the April issue of reared apart, still in the third case the differ-

the EUGENICS REVIEW is one that ence is entirely negligible, being only two

should invoke considerable thought and dis- points. But even in the first two cases

cussion among students of the much-tangled where the difference in I.Q.'s is 12 points,

problem of nature versus nurture. While it seems very unsafe to draw a definite con-

he does not definitely conclude that environ- clusion that there is lhere any very signifi-

ment and heredity have equal effects in pro- cant difference in intelligence. We must

ducing the mental differences found among remember that even the same child, if tested

human beings, he nevertheless allows his twice by this test, will show a variation in

facts to speak in such a manner that this is his I.Q. In sixteen investigations of the

the-logical conclusion to which one is led. I.Q.'s of varying numbers of children who

If the effects of different environment on had been given at least two tests, the median

like heredity (identical twins) are really difference in I.Q. from the first test to the

equal to the effects of like environment on second is 4.6 points, which is the P.E. of

different hereditv (fraternal twins), then the test. It would be interesting to know

such statements as " heredity counts for go the results if these twins were tested again

per cent. of the differences found among in- at the end of another year and their respec-

dividuals " stand very much in need of cor- tive I.Q.'s were compared.

rection. But before making any such radi- While reviewing the results obtained by

cal change in our concept that intelligence the use of the Otis Self-administering Test,

(mental brightness) is a trait that is solely we shall also incorporate the results of

inherited, we must examine most rigidly Muller's pair of identical twins which were

Professor Newman's facts as presented. Of reared apart. Although he used the Army

course, as he himself states, he thinks it Alpha Test and the Otis Advanced Test,

most unwise to attempt to draw any genera- these are group tests quite similar to the

lization from his sparse data.

one used by Professor Newman.

Noting the results of his Stanford-Binet The following table shows us the results

test, we see that while there is a marked arising from their use of these group

difference in I.Q.'s (12 points) between the tests.

TABLE 1.-IDENTICAL TWINS.

NEWMAN-3 Pairs I.Q.'s-Otis Self-Administering Test M U

L MULLRER-IIPPaiir

Case I

Case II

Case III Army Alpha Scores Otis Advanced Exam. Scores

93 III 69 84 IIo ioo I53
183

I56

62

64

i84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

We at once notice that, as far as Muller's Since in twin data it is impossible to

set of twins is concerned, there is practical determine which should be considered the

identity in their scores in both tests. But X-variable and which the Y-variable, the

even the difference of io points in Case III of Professor Newman's twins is not statis-

Otis formula r= i - Y (d2 was used instead

tically significant. We thus may say that in of Pearson product-moment formula. In

two of the cases of identical twins reared this formula cd is the standard deviation of

apart, as far as group tests can ascertain, the differences between the scores of each

we find identical degrees of intelligence, twin pair for the trait measured, and o.y

while in two other similar cases we do not is the standard deviation of the scores of all

find this identity. We also noted that in children in general for the same trait. In

Professor Newman's Stanford-Binet results no part of the study was the constancy of

we had practical identity in one case out of the J.Q. assumed, although most researches

the three.

show it to be fairly constant for the same

It would seem, therefore, that the results child throughout its school life. The tech-

obtained from measurements of intelligence of four sets of identical twins reared apart do not allow us to conclude that the mem-
bers of all such twin pairs will be found to have differing degrees of intelligence.
The errors of measurement in group tests of intelligence are still so large that any result, expressed either in mental age or intelligence quotient, when applied to a single individual is of doubtful significance. For determining the average intelligence of a group, however, they have a fairly high degree of reliability.
In a study of twins and orphans* made at the University of Toronto, mental tests were

nique of partial coefficients of correlation was used to eliminate any possible effect that age might have on the I.Q.'s of the children tested. A negative correlation about - .27, was found between the chronological age and J.Q.
The method of mean differences was also used, since it is very easy to calculate and the results are readily interpreted by nonmathematical people. But this is a rather crude method, since no account is taken of the variability of the scores, and the effect of age on the scores Eannot be eliminated.
It is interesting to note the mean differ-

given to I02 pairs of twins, and also to 29 ences for identical and fraternal twins, as

orphans who had spent a minimum of three determined by Professor Newman at

years and at least 25 per cent. of their lives Chicago and by myself at Toronto.

in the same orphanage. The reliability of

the intelligence measurements was increased by giving two intelligence tests to each

MEAN DIFFERENCES IN I.Q.'S.

individual and averaging the mental ages obtained.
These tests were used:

NEWMAN (Stanford-Binet) WINGFIELD
Results

i. The National Intelligence Test, Scale A., Form I.
2. The Multi-Mental Scale of McCall. 3. The Stanford Achievement Test. A
battery of nine sub-tests. 4. The British Columbia Test in the
Fundamentals of Arithmetic.
5. The' Morrison-McCall Spelling Scale.

* Wingfield, A. H. Twins and Orphans-The

Inheritance of Intelligence.
Dent & Sons.

London, 1928.

J. M.

Identical Twins FratemalTwins

5*9
9*9

6*2 II -

We see that both groups of identical twins are practically similar, while there is a difference of i.8 points between the fraternal groups.
The following are the summaries of the results:

INTELLIGENCE OF TWINS
TABLE II.-RESEMBLANCES OF TWINS IN GENERAL INTELLIGENCE.

i85

GROUP

No. of Pairs

Standard

r for

Deviation Constant Age

Alltwinpairs .. .. .. .. ..

I02

I3.5 75±029

Unlike-sex pairs.. .. .. .. ..

26

I2-9 * 59+ * o86

Like-sex pairs .. .. .. .. ..

76

I3 6 82+ 025

Fraternal pairs .. .. .. .. ..

57

I2 *6 .70+ .045

Identical pairs .. .. .. .. *

45 1I43

90+ -OIg

TABLE III.-RESEMBLANCE OF YOUNGER TWINS AND OLDER TWINS.

TRAIT

Twins-8-I iyears
r for Stand. error Constant Age of Estimate

Twins-12-I5 years
r for Stand. error
Constant Age of Estimate

Gener. Intelligence (I.Q.) .. Stanford Achievement (E.Q.).. Stanford Achievement (A.Q.) .. Arithmetic .. .. ..
Spelling .. .. .. .. Average . . .. .. ..

.7I .64 *82
*89 *85 *782

8og 8II3
3-95
270 4.I8 5.4I

*77 9*I6 *87 5v35
*72 5vIO *73 4.00
*85 4.4I '788 5-60

It is here seen that older twins are no more alike than younger twins in general
intelligence, a lower standard error of estimate signifying a closer resemblance. The

TABLE W.-RESEMBLANCE OF ALL TWIN PAIRS IN NATIVE AND ACQUIRED TRAITS.

E.Q.'s (Stanford Achievement) r = .76 ±.029

I.Q.'s (Gen. Intelligence) r= .75 ± .029

Difference

= .OI ± .04I

A.Q.'s (Stanford Achievement) r= .83 ± .o2I

I.Q.'s (Gen. Intelligence) r=.75±.o29

Difference

= .o8 ± .040

Arithmetic Scores

r= .78 ± .028

I.Q.'s (Gen. Intelligence) r= .75 ± .029

Difference

= .03 ± .040

Spelling Scores

r=.85 ±.O19

I.Q.'s (Gen. Intelligence) r= .75 ±.029

Difference

= .IO ± .035

average r for all the traits shows that younger and older twins are alike in general intelligence and general educational achieve-
ments. In none of the differences found between
the resemblance in general intelligence and the resemblance in trained traits is the difference greater than three times the

TABLE V.-ORPHANS PAIRED AT
RANDOM. Trait. r for constant age.

I.Q.'s ... ... ... - .54

E.Q.'s .79...

...

...

-

A.Q.'s ... ... ... - .79

Arithmetic ... ... - .30

Spelling ...

... - .49

Average ... ... - -58

i86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

probable error of the difference. In fact, in advertently been placed in the fraternal

two of the cases the P.E. of the difference is group.

greater than the difference itself.

The biological principle of homology

maintains that closeness of resemblance in

TABLE VI.-ORPHANS PAIRED TO NEAREST AGE.

a given trait is in proportion to closeness of kinship. This law is generally considered to apply to the realm of physical traits only.

Trait. r for constant age. But since it is noted that throughout the

I.Q2.'s

..... .. .I3 whole scale of animal life we obtain an in-

E.Q.'s ...

...

...

.07

creasing complexity of behaviour with in-

crease in the complexity of the nervous sys-

Arithmetic ... ... . i8 tem, we may, therefore, state that behaviour

Spelling ... ... .35

is a function of the central nervous system.
Now neurological structure is certainly a

Average ... ... .2I physical entity and obeys the law of homo-

logy. Hence we should, a priori, expect

intelligence (which is a function of the cen-

tral nervous system) to obey this general

6. Coefficients of correlation for intelli- law too.

gence among groups exhibiting different When one bears in mind the genetic rela-

degrees of genetic relationship are:

tionship existing among the individuals

GROUP.

CORRELATION.

comprising the various groups given above, one is iiterally forced to draw the conclusion

Physically identical twins .90 that the closer the genetic relationship be-

Like-sex twins ... ... .82 tween individuals, the closer is the degree

Fraternal twins ... ... .70 with which they resemble each other in

Unlike-sex twins ... ... .59 general intelligence. Ergo, intelligence is

Siblings .50...

...

...

an inherited trait.

Parent-child ... ... .30

Such studies of the inheritance of intellect

Cousins ... ... ... 27

as have been made in the last few years,

Grandparent-grandchild ... .I5 with all our refined measuring instruments

Orphans ... ... ... .00

and statistics, tend more and more to con-

Unrelated children

... .00

firm the remarkable prescience of Sir Fran-

cis Galton, when, sixty years ago, he said:

In the study here reported it is to be noted that the word " physical " is placed in front of identical twins. Since the necessary embryological evidence could not be secured to isolate definitely the true group of identical twins, physical identity was the criterion for placing twins in the identical group.
This probably accounts for the rather high correlation found in the so-called fraternal
group, as a few identical pairs may have in-

" I acknowledge freely the great power of education and social influence in developing the active power of the mind, just as I acknowledge the effect of use in developing the muscles of a blacksmith's arm, and no further. . . . To each of us a limit is seta limit, as far as one can see at present, due to heredity rather than to opportunity, and to the intelligence of our parents and ancestors rather than to the educational system under which we were reared."

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 3.

