104 FIRST INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS
means, probably the chief means, of discriminating one class from the other. If idiocy is acquired, there should not be a preponderance of defective ancestry; if imbecility is a congenital defect, there will be (and there is) a preponderance.
LA NOUVELLE REVUE, February, I912. Jacques Daugny: Contre
.la Depoptulation. In France, for the first half of i9Iii, the deatlhs
exceeded by i8,ooo the number of births, and M. Daugny has used this fact as the basis of his stirring appeal against the decadence that threatens his race. He advocates the admission into France of emigration. Already, for the few weeks of harvest, there come Belgians, Gernmans, Italians and Spaniards, only to return and bring up with French money, children, who may, one day, be the enemies of France.
"Would it not be wiser, from all points of view, that the hand of the foreign labourer, since it is indispensable, should contribute not only to the culture of the land, but to its defence ? "
Thie author suggests that instead of transitory work, these foreigners should settle with their families. Already, statistics have shown, that of the million who colonise North Africa for France, the majority belong to other peoples, and that their fusion with French blood has resulted in a I-ace prolific, energetic and mentally capable. There are now, in France, a few such colonies, and in Normandy, Champagne and Burgogne, more would be gladly welcomed.
THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL, March, I9I2. Prof. Gustave Cohn: Thc
Inscrease of Poputlationt in Germany.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ETHICS, January, I912. Harrold Johnson: The Problem of an effective Moral Edutcation in Schools.
THE NATIONAL REVIEW, March, I9I2. George Hookham: Professor Bergson as a critic of Darwin. An excellent article, well worth reading.
POLITICAL SCIENCE QUARTERLY, December, Igii. I. A. Hourwich: The Econiomnic A4spects of Im'nigration.
THE FIRST INTER1NATIONAL EUGENICS
CONGRESS
WEDNESDAY, JULY 24TH, TO TUESDAY, 30TH, 19I2
THE General Committee have extended a cordial invitation to attend the Meetings of the First International Eugenics Congress to-(I) All Societies studying Eugenics, Race-Hygiene and Heredity. (z) Delegates from public bodies occupied in Administration, Educa-
tion, Religion, Medicine and Law. (3) All who are interested in the
various aspects of Eugenics and Social Reform. Arrangements have been made by which the Meetings of the Congress, as well as the Exhibition, will be held at the University of London, South Kensington. Interpreters will be in attendance to assist members who are unfamiliar with the English language.
A full Programme, with complete local arrangements, will be forwarded to all members at least a month before the Meeting takes place.
Afembership is acquired by the payment of [i. Members have the
right to vote; they participate in all the functions of the Congress and receive the publications gratuitously. Persons desiring to attend the Coingress as A ssociates pay io/-. They are precluded from voting and are not

FIRST INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS

105

entitled to receive the publications gratuitously, but they may be present at
all Meetings of the Congress.
Reccipts and Railway Vouchers will be forwarded on receipt of the amount of subscription, which may be paid in cash, by postal money order, or by cheque payable to the Assistant Treasurer of the Congress, 6, York Buildings, Adelphi.
Travelling Facilities.-All the British and some of the Continental Railways have very kindly granted exceptional facilities to members of the Congress. In all cases, the Contgress Voucher (which will be sent together with the receipt for members' subscriptions to each subscriber), must be presented to the booking clerk at the station of departure. Great Britai;
and Ireland : Special retuirn tickets will be issued to members of the First International Eugenics Congress from July 23rd to July 31st inclusive, at the
rate of a single fare and a third from all parts of the United Kingdom.
Hotel Arrangements.-Arrangements are being made for the accommodation of the visitors attending the Conference either for the full period, or per day, for Room and Breakfast, leaving the members to make their own arrangements for Lunch and Dinner at places suitable to their
convenience. The rates for Room and Breakfast are from 4S. to 7s. Early application stating exact requirements is necessary.
Intending members are particularly requested to intimate their intention to attend the Congress, to the Secretary, on the annexed form (page i adverts.) as soon as possible, in order that their names and addresses may be registered, and all subsequent communications concerning the Congress sent
to them.
A banquet of welcome is being arranged at the Hotel Cecil for July 24th, to which the Memnbers of the Foreign Consultative Committees, the readers of papers, and all the officers of the Congress and some distinguished public men and women will be the guests of the Committee. A limited numiiber of Members of the Congress may obtain tickets, 7s. 6d. each, from Mrs. Alec Tweedie, Hon. Secretary of the Reception Committee,
30, York Terrace, Harley Street. As the capacity of the Banqueting Hall is limited, it will be advisable for members wishing for tickets to apply
as early as possible.
The Duchess of Marlborough has very kindly promised a reception for the evening of the 25th, and the Lord Mayor will receive the Members of the Congress at the Mansion House on the 26th, a nuimber of lunch parties are being arranged for the 27th, and a farewell Reception will be held at the
University of London on the 29th. The arrangements are not yet complete, and further suggestioils
as to hospitality can be sent to the Hon. Secretary. The following have promised either to give papers or participate in the
discussions:
i. Thte Bearinlgl itpoul Eugee ics of Biological Research.-Papers: Dr.
Ravmond Pearl (Director of the Maine Agricultural Station), "TThe Inheritance of Fecundity"; Professor R. Punnett (Professor of Biology, Cambridge), "Eugenics and Genetics"; Dr. David F. Weeks (Superintendent of the New Jersey State Village for Epileptics), " The Inheritance of Epilepsy "; Professor Guiseppe Sergi (Professor of Anthropology, the University of Rome), " Heredity and Mutability in lurnan Races"; Professor E. Morselli (Professor of Psychiatry, University of Genoa), " Persistence and Variation of Racial Characters, particularly with regard to Ethnical Psychology"; Professor V. Gruffridi-Ruggeri (Professor of Anthropology, University of Naples), " The so-called Laws of Heredity in Man." Discussion: Professor W. Bateson, Professor J. Arthur Thomson, Dr. Archdall Reid.
2. The Bearing utpon Eugettics of Sociologiccal and Historical Resea, ich.-
Papers: Dr. Corrado Gini (Professor of Statistics, University of Cagliaro), "The Problem of Eugenics from the Democratic Point of View "; Dr. F. A.
Woods (Harvard Medical School), " Some Inter-relations between Eugenics and Historical Research"; Mrs. C. D. Whetham and W. C. 1). Whetham,

iob FIRST INTERNATIONAL EUGENICS CONGRESS
F.R.S., " Race as a Factor in History"; Dr. Ignacio Valenti y Vivo
(Professor of Medicine and Toxicology, University of Barcelona), "A Healthy Sane Family showing Longevity in Catalonia."
3. The Bearing upon Eugenics of Legislationt and Social Customs.
-Papers: Dr. C. B. Davenport (Superintendent American Eugenics Record Office), " Marriage Laws and Customs "; Professor J. L. Kellogg (Professor of Entomology, Stanford University), " Eugenics and Militarism"; Professor D. Starr Jordan (Professor Leland Stanford University; President American Eugenics Section), "War and National Welfare"; Professor Alfredo Niceforo (Professor of Statistics, University of Naples), " The cause of the Inferiority of Physical and Mental Characters in the lower social classes "; Professor A. Loria (Professor of Political
Economy, University of Turin), "The Physio-Psychological Aristocracy and
the Social Aristocracy "; Monsieur Lucien March (Superintendent of the Bureau of the Statistique Gen6rale de la France), " The Fertility of Marriages, according to profession and social class "; Fraulein Dr. Agnes Bluhm (Berlin), " Race Hygiene and Midwifery. DiscussioIns: Sir John Macdonnell, C.B., LL.D.
4. Contsideration of the Practical Applicationts of Etugentic Principles.-
Papers: Sir William Osler, M.D., F.R.S. (Regius Professor of Medicine, Oxford), "Eugenics and the Medical Profession"; Mr. Bleecher van Wagenen (Chairman of the Sterilisation Committee American Breeders' Association), "Report of Recent Investigations as to the effects and practicability of Sterilization "; Dr. H. E. Jordan " Professor of Anatomy, University of Virginia), " The Place of Eugenics in the Medical Curriculum"; Dr. F. C. S. Schiller, " Practicable Applications of Eugenics to Education "; Dr. A. Ploetz (President of the International Society for Race Hygiene, Germany), " The Bearing of Neo-Malthusianism on Eugenics"; Dr. Pinard. Dr. Louis Quinton (Belgium), "The Practical Organisation of Eugenic Action"; Dr. J. Mjbrn (Norway), " Recent Eugenic Legislation in Norway." Discussions: Professor Sadler; Dr. Murray Leslie, Dr. Saleeby.
The Organising Committee reserves to itself the privilege of determining the order and nature of the proceedings of each day.
The Exhibition in connection with the First International Eugenics Congress will include-(I) Charts, pedigrees, photographs, and specimens illustrative of Heredity, especially in man. (2) Relics of Charles Darwin,
Sir Francis Galton and Gregor Mendel. (3) Portraits of Notable Workers.
The Committee desires to make the Exhibition as fully representative as possible of the present state and past history of the science of Heredity and Eugenics. It is intended that the Exhibition shall be International, and it is therefore hoped that contributions will be received froni all the countries taking part in the Congress. The Committee will be glad of an early intimation of the character of the exhibits and the space likely to be
required by any exhibitor. In every case thzis inforniation shouild be seilt anld a
reply awaited before the exhibit is despatched. A Catalogue of the Fxhibition will be published. The Exhibition will be held in the Buildings of the London University, South Kensington, London, S.W. All communications should be addressed to the Seeretary for the Exhibition, Eugenics Education Society, 6, York Buildings, Adelphi, London, W.C.

