C. P. BLACKER
World Congress on The Family

June igth to 2 3rd, i9g8. Paris

T HE ABOVE CONGRESS, which was From the beginning, Catholic organizations

attended on behalf of the Eugenics in France and other countries took a keen in-

Society by Dr. Hilda Lewis and myself, terest in the Union. This interest was noticeable

will be memorable to us for two reasons. The during the conference in Rome (1949): in

first was the initiative of Professor David Mace; welcoming the delegates on the opening day

the second was the tolerance and goodwill shown Mme Pia Colini-Lombardi, a popular and

by the secretariat of the International Union of influential figure in the Union and a perfect

Family Organizations (the I.U.F.O.) and by its hostess in the capital city, reminded us of how

president, M. Xavier Ryckmans of Belgium. the inspiration provided by the holy family in

the world's finest art reflected the central

The International Union of Family Organizations character of the family in Christianity. Through-

The World Congress celebrated the tenth out the world, Catholic welfare organizations are

aniversary of the foundation of the Union deeply concerned with the protection of family;

which began- to exist semi-officially in Brussels and this concern is demonstrated by the large

during 1947 and officially in Paris during 1948. proportion of Catholic member-organizations of

During the inter-war years the Eugenics Society the Union.

had taken an interest in organizations concerned From the earliest days of the Union, an effort

with family welfare, having recognized that, in a was made to co-ordinate in each country the

democracy, eugenic values were recognizable in activities of member-organizations by forming

terms of the performance-test of raising a a representative national committee. The secre-

healthy and happy family. There had been tariat of the British Committee has changed

discussions before the war of the need for an three times. The first honorary secretary was

umbrella organization to comprise and co- Mr. Cyril Bibby, a past member of the Society's

ordinate the miscellaneous voluntary bodies Council to whom the Society owes several debts

which in Britain were concerned with the many of gratitude. The second was Mrs. Eleanor

aspects of family welfare; indeed a movement French, the Secretary ofthe British Social Biology

to establish such a co-ordinating organization Council, upon whom devolved the labours of

in Britain was interrupted by the war.

organizing the conference held in Oxford

The matter was energetically taken up in (September 8th to 14th, 1952). Mrs. French

France after 1945. In that country special was for a short time followed by Miss R6e who

anxieties about the danger of depopulation served the same organization as herself. The fourth

were combined with a general concern (shared person to hold the secretaryship of the British

by most western countries) about the increase Committee is Mr. E. E. Fletcher, housing man-

in juvenile delinquency; the origin of both ager of Heston and Isleworth Borough Council.

troubles was seen to lie in the waning influence A debt is owed by the member-organizations

of the family; and the above-named Union was to the four above-named persons who have

convened. The first of a series of international served the Union's British Committee. Our debt

conferences was held in Geneva, on the theme of is perhaps greatest to Mrs. French who has held

juvenile delinquency, in the summer of 1948. I the secretariat for longest.

was present at this conference as a representative

of the Eugenics Society, and I attended later The Eugenics Society's position in the Union

conferences held in Rome (1949), Brussels (1951) In the last few years doubts had occurred to

and Oxford (1952).

certain members of the Eugenics Society's

179
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1958, 50, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Council as to whether the issues which especially concern the Society were being taken sufficiently into account by the Union. The Society is primarily interested in factors which, through
the exercises of responsible parenthood, can affect the future quality of the population. It is
concerned with demographic considerations, in particular with differential fertility. It sees in responsibly planned parenthood a means by which, in certain rapidly growing populations, the harmful effects of pressure of numbers on the family can be mitigated, and bywhich, innumerically stable populations, valuable inborn qualities can be spread. It was felt by some members of the Society's Council that eugenics and planned parenthood had not received the attention they deserved from the Union, and that important Catholic influences at the Union's centre and periphery made it impossible for these issues to be seriously raised.
The Union's decennial conference in Paris seemed to provide a favourable opportunity for settling this matter. Among the eighteen British member-organizations of the Union are five Catholic organizations and three whose orientation is generally similar to the Society's. These three are the British Social Biology Council, the Family Planning Association, and the National Marriage Guidance Council. The British Family Planning Association is the only family planning association of any country in the world which is a Member of the Union. It holds a unique position. Likewise, ours is the only eugenics society. The position of the British Social Biology Council is likewise unique in the Union. But there belong to the Union several memberorganizations from other countries which are directly or indirectly concerned with marriage guidance. Indeed, the important position of marriage guidance in the Union's programme is attested by the following circumstance: the Union has four permanent commissions with
the following titles: Commission for Family Housing; Commission for the Standard of Living of the Family; Commission on ParentTeacher Relations; and Marriage Guidance Commission. The important status now accorded to marriage guidance is the result of the powerful influence exerted in recent years by Dr. David Mace.

A joint statement
It seemed to the Eugenics Society that its future policy in respect of the Union could usefully be discussed in consultation with representatives of the three above-mentioned cognate organizations. Such a meeting was convened and held in the Society's library on March 12th, 1958. It was agreed that the standpoint adopted towards family problems by the mostly Protestant countries of northern Europe differed somewhat from that prevailing in the mostly Catholic countries of the Continent's centre and south; and that if the Union desired to provide a truly international forum "regardless of race or creed" (as stated in the Union's declaration of Aims), it should be prepared to give a sympathetic hearing to people of all nationalities and religions who were genuinely concerned with the interest of the family. It was therefore agreed to present at the Paris meeting ajointly prepared memorandum on behalf of the four organizations which would stress the importance of population pressure on family well-being. A draft was prepared, circulated, amended, and finally approved. The Union's secretariat in Paris was informed, and we were advised to submit the memorandum to the fifth of five study groups (Sections d'Etudes) between which the essential agenda of the conference had been partitioned. This fifth group or section would be concerned with "Equilibre interieur et Jpanouissement de la famille et de l'enfant". Prominent among the topics covered by this section was marriage guidance; and the president of the section would be Dr. David Mace. We were asked to send to Paris, before the Conference, seventy copies of our memorandum in both French and English. This was done. It will be seen from the memorandum (which follows on page 185) that the sixth section was submitted on its own initiative by the National Marriage Guidance Council; also that the document's modest object was to test whether the Union would be willing to discuss the principle of family planning by means of a method which (conditionally at least) was acceptable to all religious denominations.
Reception of joint statement
The Conference was held in a conveniently placed and well-equipped building profusely

i8o

WORLD CONGRESS ON THE FAMILY

hung with flags, the Maison de la Chimie, near
the Invalides. The attendance was impressive. Over forty countries (including Overseas France and the U.S.S.R.) were represented and over 540 people had inscribed themselves as members of the conference. The five sections or groups
above mentioned met concurrently during the afternoons. Dr. Mace, the president of the
fifth section to which the joint statement was presented, was confronted with a difficult task
which nobody could have discharged better. His section was the most popular of the five and large audiences assembled at all the sessions. Our memorandum, moreover, was one of many submitted to the section. Some nineteen written
communications had been sent in: it was impossible to present and discuss them all during the limited time available. Dr. Mace put his predicament to the section on the afternoon of Monday,
June 16th. He explained that, in the time available, a few only of the submitted communi-
cations could receive the consideration which all deserved. Some people would unavoidably
be disappointed. How, he asked, did the meeting suggest that the selection should be made? It was proposed and unanimously approved that the selection should be left to the sole discretion of himself, his co-president of the section (Professor Osterrieth of Belgium), and the section's two rapporteurs (Dr. Bovet of Switzerland and Professor Rousselet of France). These four decided that our memorandum should be included among those which should be discussed.
The discussion took place at a meeting on the following afternoon (Tuesday, June 17th). It was one of the hottest days of the year, and the poorly ventilated hall was full to capacity. Many Roman Catholic priests were present in clerical attire, several of whom later expressed sympathy with the tone of our memorandum and its main recommendation. Two full papers by American speakers, pre-arranged in the programme, were delivered, translated verbally into French and discussed.
Other papers, including one from a commanding Peruvian lady, were likewise dealt with at length. Dr. Mace had forewarned the section that he wanted to find time for a discussion of our memorandum; but as commonly happens at international conferences when verbal trans-

lations are necessary, the programme lagged
behind the inexorable clock. By the time I was called on there remained but twenty minutes of the session and everyone was feeling hot, tired and irritable. The main point of a speech, which I made as short as possible, was that, in the ten
years that had elapsed since the Union had been formed, many countries (India, Pakistan, Ceylon,
Israel) had acquired independence and that the
most populous of these countries had adopted
population policies. Spokesmen for the govern-
ments of these countries had declared in words never used before that population pressure was a main cause of the degradation of family life.
Spokesmen of other populous but independent countries (China, Japan, Egypt) had said the same. These under-developed but over-populated countries contained about half the world's population and were feebly represented in the Union. From a world standpoint (though not
from a European and still less from a French
standpoint) population pressure could almost be regarded as the most important factor in family welfare. But during the ten years of its life the Union had almost completely ignored these important developments. What, essentially, our memorandum suggested was that the Union should recognize and study the effects of population pressure on the standards of living of families. We had suggested a policy which was designed to be both conciliatory and constructive. We had taken the liberty of quoting the words of the Pope, whose standpoint we hoped we had not misrepresented. I hoped that our memorandum had given offence to no one. My speech was translated by Mr. C. A. J. Thiery (the best English-French interpreter I have ever heard) as I went along. It took about ten minutes.
Dr. Mace then invited discussion. Mr. Joseph Brayshaw (Secretary of the National Marriage Guidance Council) then formally moved that the Section should recommend to the I.U.F.O.'s General Council that the bearings of population pressure on the standards of living of families should be further studied. Mr. Brayshaw's motion was well worded and could scarcely have been more moderate. But to our surprise a storm
broke. A forest of hands went up in requests to speak,
and Dr. Mace was abruptly confronted with a

I8I

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

most difficult task of chairmanship. A series of of the fifth section which, because of its size, was

amendments (not all of which were compatible this time assembled in the capacious conference

with each other) were moved, seconded and hall of the Maison de la Chimie. The recom-

carried by what appeared to be majorities of mendation had been typed out and French and

those present. Several priests spoke. One said English versions were circulated at the meeting.

that, though the memorandum had quoted the Dr. Mace reminded his audience that, on request,

Pope's words, there were reasons for thinking he had undertaken to report to the section on the

that his position had since been somewhat modi- questions raised in our memorandum; that an

fied. Someone suggested that the meeting be agreed formula had been reached that morning

prolonged after six o'clock, and in fact it did by the main participants in the discussion held

not break up till nearly seven. Only one speaker the evening before; and that the text of the

expressed sympathy with the contents of our agreed recommendation was before them. He

memorandum-Madame Genevieve Texier who hoped that this recommendation would be

represented the French organization MaternitJ approved without further discussion. He put the

Heureuse. Finally someone proposed that, in recommendation to the vote and it was unani-

view of the lateness of the hour and the con- mously approved without a further word from

fusion in everyone's minds, the original motion anyone.

and amendments be clarified at a later meeting

of the section. Dr. Mace gladly assented. The Dr. David Mace's position

course of events at this meeting did not encour- The final chapter of the story was enacted at the

age Dr. Lewis or myself to feel that the Eugenics meeting of the General Council which was held

Society would wish to prolong its membership at Versailles on the afternoon of Saturday, June

of the Union.

21st. The General Council is, in effect, the

But next day (Wednesday, June 18th), through Governing Body of the Union, and the meeting

the initiative, resourcefulness and tact of Mr. was attended by between fifty and sixty people.

Joseph Brayshaw, things took a remarkable turn The proceedings were even more laborious than

for the better. Mr. Brayshaw sought out and the meetings of the sections because everything

gathered round himself the half-dozen or so had to be translated into German as well as into

movers of amendments (among whom were two English or French, and some further translations

Catholic priests) and suggested that they should were required of Spanish. Mr. Brayshaw and I

try to combine their apparently differing stand- were present and Dr. Mace, in his capacity of

points in a single composite recommendation to president of the Union's fifth section, was

the General Council which was due to meet on expected to report on the proceedings of his

the following Saturday (June 21st). A cordial section. Dr. Mace had forewarned the secretariat

spirit prevailed. Indeed there was genuine co- that he proposed to raise questions affecting the

operativeness; and after about an hour's friendly Union's future and had received their approval.

discussion agreement was reached on the follow- In submitting the above-quoted recommendation

ing formula which, it turned out, was closely (which was later unanimously accepted) he made

similar to that first moved by Mr. Brayshaw the a noteworthy speech, forthright yet conciliatory,

evening before:

which went beyond his section's recommen-

The Fifth Section [of the I.U.F.O.], having dation. heard the proposal of Dr. Blacker and without Dr. Mace, in effect, said that if the Union

prejudging in any way the fundamentals of the refused to accept the recommendation there

problems, recommends to the General Council of the I.U.F.O. that the different causes of population pressure and all the possible solutions should be studied and that to this end the

would be a risk of its splitting into two-a
Catholic and a non-Catholic moiety. He (Dr. Mace) did not belong to any family planning

task should be entrusted to the Marriage association and was not speaking on behalf of

Guidance Commission.

any; but he had travelled much in Asian

The same afternoon this recommendation was countries which were confronted with acute

submitted by Dr. Mace to another full meeting population problems. Family planning associa-

I82

WORLD CONGRESS ON THE FAMILY

tions had been formed in several; but these
associations were not solely concerned with
family planning as might be supposed. Family
planning was, in fact, one of several activities
undertaken by these Asian associations whose main objective was the well-being of the family. In India, for example, where he had met the leaders of welfare movements, it was believed that family planning was an indispensable factor in a realistic programme directed towards helping
the family. If the Union was to be genuinely international and to embrace, regardless of race or creed, all the nations of the world, its present balance would have to be much changed. Dr. Mace had discussed family problems with a group of Buddhist priests. He hoped that it would not be long before we were welcoming Buddhist priests to our Conferences. Also Hindus and Moslems. Hence the presentation of his section's recommendation marked an important moment in the Union's life: its acceptance could open up a wide future-a future wherein the keynote would be tolerance. Representatives of all faiths and standpoints should be welcomed and heard provided that they were sincerely concerned with the welfare of the family.
Dr. Mace's speech was attentively listened to by all, including three of the Union's controlling personalities who were sitting on the platform in a row-M. Xavier Ryckmans (President), M.
Jean Delaporte (General Secretary) and M. Robert Boudet (Director of Services). From the expressions on their faces it was obvious that this triumvirate approved of what was being said. In a brief reply, M. Ryckmans expressed gratitude to Dr. Mace for having so well stated the case for tolerance. The recommendation of Dr. Mace's section had, he said, been accepted by
the Conseil G&nbral. It would be loyally imple-
mented. Agreement, continued M. Ryckmans, on all background questions was impossible: but each must accept the title of others to their opinions. Tolerance must be reciprocal. Diversities of opinion must not be allowed to cause

schisms within the Union which, he was convinced, would be equal to the tasks ahead. These tasks would be dealt with in accordance withthe Union's Statutes andwouldbe approached in the spirit of tolerance commended by Dr. Mace.
To Dr. Mace belongs the credit of evoking from the Union's Conseil G&neral this important expression of tolerance over an issue on which a split would have been unavoidable.
Our debt to the Union's Presidents and Secretariat In conclusion, a word of appreciation is due to the secretariat of the Union. M. Delaporte and M. Boudet dealt with an awkward problem with conspicuous tact and fairness. The expansion of the Union is largely due to the personal qualities of these two able and amiable men. Much is also owed to their assistants Mlle Helene Gerardin and Mlle Denise Jamois. The Union has also been fortunate in its Presidents. M. Maurice Veillard (a Swiss Protestant) was confronted by difficult and delicate problems during his seven years' term of office. During this period he earned the admiration of all who sat under him. He has been especially appreciated by the British members to whom he has consistently affirmed that a strong British representation was essential for the Union. The British, he believes, form an essential bridge between the countries of central and southern Europe and those of the Scandinavian countries and North America. M. Veillard has always been receptive to what he calls the Anglo-Saxon standpoint and has insisted on due notice being taken of it at the Union's meetings.
Before the Paris Conference British members knew little of the Union's current president, M. Ryckmans, a Belgian Catholic. By the end of it we saw in him a worthy successor to M. Veillard.
I am much indebted to Dr. Hilda Lewis and to Mrs. Jean Medawar (who represented the Family Planning Association) for valued help throughout the conference. Our debt to Mr. Brayshaw is obvious from the above account.

183

