GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

By ELIOT SLATER, M.B., M.R.C.P.

ACCORDING to figures quoted from associated with both sexes. Lastly, the

Deutsche Justiz in the July I935 issue nature of the operation is still misunderstood

of the EUGENICS REVIEW (page go), and thought to have a castrating effect.

some 56,ooo people were sterilized in Ger- Some of these grounds for objection will

many in the first twelve months after the disappear in the course of time; others will

introduction of the sterilization law. If this always be felt.

figure may be taken as correct, it does not Patients to be sterilized seldom protest;

follow that the first year of sterilization will they know that if they did it would have no

be typical of the following ones, or that this effect. Physical resistance must be extremely

rate of sterilization will be kept up. The rare. The law provides for the use of direct

operation of the law is likely with time to force, but this has not yet been necessary.

improve in efficiency, leading one to expect Resistance to sterilization by appeal is

an increased number of sterilizations per statutory and frequent. There have indeed

year. On the other 'hand, in the first year been attempts to organize this resistance.

the standing population of defectives, schizo- In Bavaria pamphlets were printed and

phrenics, etc., will be attacked, the opera- found in Catholic hands recommending all

tions of subsequent years being more patients to appeal in every case. This was,

confined to the yearly increment. Could, of course, an attempt to make the law

however, this figure of 56,ooo be taken as a unworkable. The pamphlet was seized and

probable yearly average, it would imply destroyed. The frequency of appeal has

about two per thousand of the fertile varied much from time to time and from

population being sterilized every year, with place to place, in some areas being as low as

a total expectation of sterilization for the i per cent., in others as high as two-thirds

average individual in the neighbourhood of of all cases where the order was made.

4 per cent.

In many scientific and more liberal circles

there is a strong objection to the compulsory PUBLIC REACTION TO STERILIZATON aspect of the law, partly as a matter of
LAW principle, partly based on reasoned argu-

It is not easy to discover the reaction of ment. In support of this view are quoted

the population to this very definite attack the calculations of Haldane and others,

on their personal and physical liberty. My which go to show that sterilization operates

information, from a well-informed source, is extremely slowly towards the removal of

that there is much resentment throughout characteristics dependent on infrequent

Germany among the common people, par- recessive genes, and the findings of one

ticularly directed against its compulsory scientific worker, that practically all the

nature. Compulsion itself is not liked, and as children of schizophrenics are born before

a police affair is doubly objectionable. The the manifestation of the disease. One

nature of the operation does not improve authority, with whom I discussed the matter,

matters. An attack on the sexual organs is was of the opinion that the law would

calculated to arouse more resentment than operate at least as well if sterilization were

any operation of corresponding severity on made voluntary-that in fact one would get

another part. Among women there is a as good results by propaganda as by com-

definite mortality, not entirely to be elimi- pulsion. Against this one must put the

nated in any double laparotomy, and this opinion of such a well-informed authority as

mortality tends to be exaggerated and Sj6gren of Sweden, who told me that in

285

286 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

his opinion the reverse would be the case. prepared to back it in a court of law, or

Apparently the experience in Sweden with alternatively for the Professor to be able to

voluntary sterilization has been very dis- demonstrate the case as such to a class of

appointing, only a few hundreds having students. Many authorities find difficulty

been sterilized since the introduction of the in fitting their cases into the official scheme

law a few years ago.

of classification-particularly, for instance,

Practising doctors in general are inclined Kleist. According to Kleist's classification

to object to the law, and to the increase in there are a number of separate syndromes,

their duties, and to the increasedly police for instance-motility and confusion psy-

nature of these duties which the law entails. choses, which would by most clinicians be

The doctor must notify all cases of the considered schizophrenic, but which he

hereditary disorders named in the law, as treats as separate entities. As in these cases

far as these become known to him through his researches into the heredity have shown

the practice of his profession. For instance, no connection with schizophrenia, he does not

were he, on a professional visit, to see the hold them to be schizophrenic, nor covered

patient's brother have an epileptic fit, he by the law, nor in his clinic are they notified.

would not be bound to notify him, though Difficulties of diagnosis must necessarily

he could do so if he wished. If the patient occur, and may have unfortunate effects.

himself were to have the fit, and it could not The following is such a case.

be referred to definite exogenous causes, then he must notify. If, on the other hand, the doctor passing casually along the street
were to see a patient of his having a fit, he
would not be bound to report him. Presum-
ably, however, if he were to proceed to his assistance, the duty to notify would re-
appear.
The keenness with which doctors carry out their duties varies greatly from place to place. In small country villages, with only one doctor, he generally does it satisfactorily, because he neither loses nor gains by it. In places with two or more doctors they usually notify only where it is obviously unavoidable. The doctor slackest in notifying will tend to profit at the expense of the others. On the other hand in Thuringia and Baden these duties were carried out with the greatest enthusiasm. In the latter place,

The daughter of a doctor had had in
childhood an obscure febrile complaint, accompanied by some minor neurological signs. At puberty she developed periodical but rare and slight " absences "; but with the years these increased in frequency and severity until they were major
epileptic fits. In the course of treatment her father was informed she would have
to be notified for sterilization. He objected
very much, and took her from doctor to doctor in the vain attempt to get her
recognized as a case of fits of exogenous
origin. At last she was seen by one of the best-known neurological surgeons of the country, who after an encephalography operated on her and removed a large cyst from the brain, with complete recovery and cessation of the fits.

the doctors seemed possessed of the notion Such cases cannot be published, owing to

that the more cases they notified, the better the disrepute into which they might bring

pleased would they be in high quarters. At the law, if they were at all frequent.

length a circular had to be sent round, In the first few months after the law was

telling them that they were only to notify passed, there was a considerable amount of

cases properly capable of reproduction. overcrowding in clinics and hospitals, be-

In clinics, the duty of notification is cause cases of recovery from schizophrenia

carried out conscientiously, and proceeds and manic-depressive psychosis had to be

for the most part automatically. The chief held pending decision on the matter of

difficulties are those of diagnosis. The sterilization. This is the case no longer.

diagnosis should be of such a degree of Once the case is notified, he may be

certainty that the clinician would be discharged and wait at home for the notice

GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

287

of reception into a surgical clinic, or altema- The order for admission to a psychiatric

tively conduct his appeal before the court clinic for examination and report is made in

from home. Only cases where the danger of quite a fair proportion -of cases where the

procreation is really serious, e.g. men in a original notification has not been made from

mild hypomanic state with much sexual such a clinic. The senior assistants at the

desire-should be held till the question of clinics make a very reasonable addition to

sterilization is finally settled and they can their small salaries out of the fees for these

be directly transferred to the surgical clinic. reports. The admission to a clinic for this

In all other cases it suffices for the law to purpose is specially likely to happen where

have been set in motion, and patients are the patient has appealed against the order

subjected to a minimum of delay and for sterilization. The reports in these cases

inconvenience.

are long, exhaustive and reasoned documents.

Cases for sterilization are notified to the For instance, I saw a report on a case of

"Bezirksarzt." He would correspond to congenital syphilis and mental deficiency.

some degree to the English local medical The family history, personal history, physical,

officer of health, though his activities are psychiatric, and psychological examinations

being more and more confined to the opera- were given in detail. The difficult point of

tion of the eugenic laws. He draws up a whether the patient was mentally defective

document, the "Antrag," which summarizes because of the syphilis, or because of heredi-

all available data to enable a decision to be tary defect and only happened concurrently

reached as to sterilization or not. To obtain to be syphilitic, was discussed in full on

sufficient information he is entitled to order general grounds and in the particular cir-

the patient's admission to a psychiatric cumstances of the case; and finally judg-

clinic for a period not longer than six weeks ment was given, in this case that the mental

for examination and report. The " Antrag " deficiency was to be referred to exogenous

is laid before the local eugenic court (" Erb- rather than endogenous causes.

gesundheitsgericht "), which consists of a Interesting here is the fact that a certainty

jurist as president, a " Bezirksarzt," and a of congenital syphilis is not taken legally as

specialist in medical genetics, and they ipso facto precluding a diagnosis of heredi-

reach the decision on sterilization. If the tary mental defect. The patient is assured

patient is dissatisfied with the decision he of a full and unbiased consideration of his

may appeal to a higher court, the " Erbge- case in any reputable clinic. Where the

sundheitsobergericht."

doctor does not prefer to write out the report

If the " Bezirksarzt" is a Catholic, in full, special forms are provided, which if

difficulties of conscience are likely to appear. properly filled in ensure a thoroughgoing

Catholic general practitioners are allowed anamnesis and examination from every

by their Church to make the notification, point of view.

because it does not necessarily follow that Before the introduction of the sterilization

the patient will be sterilized. Also such laws, Germany had no special laws for mental

notifications have an unrelated statistical defectives, and practically no special insti-

significance. The actual order to sterilize is tutions. Hospitalization was much less

another matter, and a Catholic "Bezirks- frequent than in England, and largely con-

arzt" is forbidden by his Church, and fined to idiots and the severer grades of

compelled by the State, to make such defect. Mental defectives, apart from such

sterilization orders. In districts where there special cases as the above, are judged

are two such doctors, one of whom is a principally on social grounds, to a less degree

Catholic, it has sometimes been arranged on school record and least of all on psycho-

that the Catholic hands over the whole of logical tests. A special form is given for

these duties to his colleague. Presumably the latter, which few English or I suppose

the whole matter could be settled by an American psychologists would consider

agreement between Church and State.

satisfactory. It consists of questions on

288 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

orientation of the usual kind, on "school as they come to doctors or hospitals for

knowledge" of the most elementary kind advice on entirely unrelated subjects-e.g.

(Who was Bismarck? When is Christmas ?), for appendicitis-or as they appear as

mathematical problems (simple interest on candidates for financial or social assistance

300 marks at 3 per cent. for 3 years), general at the offices of charity organizations,

questions of an almost philosophical kind church missions, public assistance offices,

(Why do we have day and night? Why are etc. With the development of the marriage-

houses built higher in towns than in the advice centres and related scientific and

country? Why do children go to school?), social institutions, there will be still further

differences (between " mistake " and " lie," ways of ascertainment, until this should

between " Rechtsanwalt " and " Staatsan- become in the end fairly complete.

walt"), composition of sentences (e.g. out of "soldier," "war," "fatherland "), the repe-

APPEALS AGAINST STERILIZATION

tition of a story, the explanation of proverbs Appeals from the order for sterilization

" general moral ideas" (Why does one come before a special court. In many cases

learn? save money? What is truth ?), there will have been a preliminary examina-

memory and attention tests, and notes on tion and report such as has been described.

the behaviour during the testing.

However, many other points have arisen

It is no wonder that the German does not than the question of diagnosis, and a

place much reliance on such tests, considered number of appeals have been reported and

as tests of intelligence. The requirement on discussed in a paper by Bostroem.

which most importance is laid for a diagnosis Bostroem, in his introduction, criticizes the

of mental defect is a persistent failure of haphazard practice of doctors in regard to

the person concerned to maintain any sort notification. There is no point in worrying

of a position in life for himself and his the authorities with 6o-year-old alcoholics

family; if this is backed by an unsatis- and io-year-old idiots, when the really

factory school record-e.g. twice having to dangerous-in regard to propagation-are

stay on in the same class instead of being not being touched. The pressing cases are

promoted at the end of the year, or atten- the physically healthy men and women from

dance at a special school (" Hilfsschule ")- sixteen to forty, young schizophrenics and

the diagnosis of mental defect may be made manic-depressives in remissions, young sub-

almost regardless of the results of the jects of hereditary blindness and deafness,

" intelligence test."

etc. It is important to make sure of the

One of the special problems of mental capacity for procreation. It must not happen

deficiency is its ascertainment. Psychiatric in future that, after months of proceedings

cases are got hold of largely through the costing a lot of money, it appears that the

psychiatric clinics. A few mental defectives case should never have been brought.

will be discovered in the same way, if they Further, everyone is entitled to be heard in

come into the clinics in a state of excitement, his own defence. If not capable of taking

or complaining of the depressive or hypochon- steps himself, he must be represented. The

driacal symptoms not infrequent in defec- doctor must see to this.

tives; but these must be few. The majority The following are some of the more inter-

are discovered in other ways. In the country esting cases:

the local " Bezirksarzt " is supposed to, i. A man under guardianship for mental

and generally does, know every single defect was held by the court to be a

family that lives in his district. He is psychopath* and not sterilizable. The

accordingly able to put his hands on the local defectives, persistent low-grade mis-

* Both in German psychiatry and in the sterilization law there is a sharp distinction between the psycho-

fits and failures at any time. In the towns pathic and the psychotic. Only the following conditions

the matter is more difficult, and the defectives are got hold of largely accidentally,

render their subjects liable to sterilization: inbom hereditary defect, schizophrenia, circular (manicdepressive) insanity, hereditary epilepsy, hereditary

GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

289

difference between guardianship and steri- union, the limitation was not held to

lization laws is made clear. Guardianship amount to mental defect. Sterilization

depends entirely on social irresponsibility. rejected.

Liability to sterilization is governed by 7. Three imbecile males, I4, I5, 19

other, biological, considerations.

years. The court allowed the appeal,

2. A woman at the menopause, last because they can work on the land and

period some months ago, still theoretically show themselves useful members of society.

capable of bearing children, but not likely The reduction in numbers of such people

to. Sterilization not enforced. Compelling is not socially desirable. Bostroem re-

grounds must be shown for necessity of marks that it is all very well to be tender

sterilization, not merely a theoretical of " primitive personalities," but if they

possibility.

are imbecile they ought to be sterilized.

3. A man, aged 50, wife at menopause.

8. Female, aged 25, Normal school

Appellant has adult children. The theoreti- career, could never do any useful work,

cal possibility of producing children by wanted to write stories and poems. In a

extramarital intercourse held not sufficient girls' home was incapable even of finding

to justify sterilization. There are a number her place at table, if it was changed. The

of similar decisions.

court held mental defect proven on the

4. A man, aged 57, is in an institution, following grounds: (a) Development uni-

and usually allowed out only in company. form and continuous from childhood up.

He has an interest in the other sex, but If she is mentally defective now, she was

only as an exhibitionist. He looks so so congenitally. (b) Father is a psycho-

repulsive that it is inconceivable that any path. (c) Mother was for ten years in an

woman should wish to have to do with asylum. Appeal dismissed.

him. Sterilization was rejected on the 9. Man. No proven mental defect, but

grounds that he was under adequate he is an habitual criminal and recidivist of

supervision. His personal appearance was a bad type, guilty of crimes with violence.

held to be beside the point, and no grounds The court held that his abnormal behaviour

for not enforcing the law.

justified the assumption of mental defect.

5. A man, stupid, but a useful agricul-\

tural labourer. His brother, like himself, In commenting on the above cases one

attended a special school. Previous his- notes, as indeed was to be expected, a certain

tory shows early death of the mother and lack of uniformity between court and court.

a neglectful stepmother. He was held to One sees three imbeciles, who are capable

lie on the boundary between normal of simple work on the land, encouraged to

stupidity (" landlaufige Unbegabtheit ") propagate their kind, and a criminal psycho-

and deficiency. Sterilization not enforced. path sterilized for mental defect. One notes

The court wished to postpone decision for the admission of irrelevant evidence. It is

a year. This is not permitted. On the no good evidence of hereditary mental

other hand it is allowed to reintroduce defect to show that the parents were

proceedings at a later date if new facts, respectively psychopathic and insane. In

e.g. altered behaviour, justify it.

fact one is inclined to doubt the diagnosis of

6. Woman of limited intelligence, hus- mental defect here altogether. The child was

band the same. Although it was to be apparently normal in schooldays, and later

expected that only children of limited developed a progressive change simulating a

intelligence would be the result of this dementia. It seems not unlikely that this

was a schizophrenia of the simplex type. Of

(Huntington's) chorea, hereditary blindness, hereditary course this also justifies sterilization, but it

deafness, severe hereditary physical abnormality, is poor law to do the right thing on the wrong

severe alcoholism. Under the term " imbecile " is understood in Germany a considerably wider range of mental defect than in England.

grounds. One may note also a difference of principle

290 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

between English criminal law and German Certain alterations are possible in the law.

sterilization law. One completed trial does Criminals are not covered by it. It is very

not protect against a second charge for the possible that a special law will be brought

same " offence." In the case of the three into force to cover them, or certain classes

imbeciles, there may be grounds for assuming of them, which will be called by a different

the influence on social psychiatry of the name, be administered by different officers,

national-socialist Weltanschauung. Those have a different procedure. Criminals were

"zuverlissige und treue Arbeitskrafte " purposely omitted from the present steriliza-

and useful members of the " Volksgemein- tion law, as far as possible to obviate the

schaft" are perhaps members of the party, idea that sterilization is a sort of punish-

and have demonstrated in that way their ment. There is no foundation for the idea,

social desirability and suitability for pro- sometimes found outside Germany, that the

creation. This is pure supposition, but would law is administered in a partial way as a

at least be congruous. One notes that the punishment for political offenders.

law in its operation is tender of the merely There are other possible enlargements-

stupid. Mental defect appears to have to e.g. to include the children of two recessive

be of considerable degree before becoming parents, and the monozygotic twin of a

operative as a ground for sterilization. One person already ordered to be sterilized. This

remembers political speeches in which intelli- could be taken as an improvement in the

gence is rudely decried, and the ideal for justice of the law. The phenotypically

the people is held out to be physical health healthy twin is at least as dangerous eugeni-

and a capacity for unquestioning, uncritical cally as the sick twin. Further it is possible

obedience. For such a make-up, too high a that there may be a new clause allowing

degree of intelligence would be, if anything, voluntary sterilization to those individuals

a disadvantage. With this official attitude, who, according to current conceptions, would

the whole attitude towards mental defect is be regarded as certainly heterozygotic, e.g.

bound to undergo a change. Of the first the children of a schizophrenic. This is

importance to the German Government is hardly probable. The possibility that the

that every citizen should be a good national- law, at this date, may be converted into a

socialist. While no hereditary constitutional law for voluntary sterilization altogether

tendency to national-socialism has yet been may be disregarded. It does not lie in the

demonstrated, one may hardly blame the national-socialist philosophy to consider the

judges for attempting to estimate the value possibility of getting anything done by

of the individual as a whole. One case is voluntary effort.

known to me where hospital authorities Apart from possible changes in the law,

arranged that an officer in the S.A. should there is a possibility of a new orientation in

not be sterilized merely for a slight attack of its application. The appeal cases show that

dementia pracox.

the law is not absolutely hard and fast, but

As far as my information goes, the opera- that its administrators tend to be governed

tion of the sterilization law is likely to prove by other considerations than merely the

costly. On an average it costs per woman diagnosis and fertility of the person con-

i,ooo marks (£8o) and I00-200 marks cerned. This is illustrated by the case of a

(£8-ji6) each for men, inclusive of operation musician in Frankfurt-am-Main, a man of

charges. In cases where there is an appeal, unusual musical ability, who had an attack

or where the patient is held in a psychiatric of mania or depression and was ordered to be

clinic for some weeks' observation, the cost sterilized. He appealed against the order,

would be considerably higher. The whole of and the appeal was allowed on the grounds

these charges are borne by the State, which that unusual hereditary (here musical) talent

must mean, at the present rate of steriliza- compensated, as it were, for the manic-

tion, a sum of about £2,000,000 a year. The depressive taint. This seems to me to

patient, even if wealthy, pays nothing himself. indicate an alteration of the official attitude,

GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

29I

i.e. the estimation of the individual as a institute were of the nature of pure research

whole, and not merely as the bearer of one or and so the data obtained thereby would not

other particular hereditary taint.

be used to provide sterilization notifications,

yet other activities were not so purely

STERILIZATION AND RESEARCH

research ones, and there this dispensation would not hold. For example, were subjects

There is no doubt that the sterilization law admitted to the institute for anthropological

and the whole social policy bound up with and medical examination, and were they at

it will have a profound effect on research the same time to receive anything in the

in Germany. Certain not entirely desirable nature of treatment (e.g. the continuation of

effects have shown themselves already. The a diabetic diet) then a duty to notify could

fear of being notified as a suitable case for not be evaded. The institute in question was

sterilization does operate as a cause of dis- also intended to develop into the biological-

trust and reluctance to give information statistical centre of its city, and into the local

among the subjects of a psychiatric research. marriage-advice bureau, and these activities

In my own research in Munich, which was were regarded as being similarly not covered

into the relatives of manic-depressives, I by the term research. In other words there

found an extraordinary willingness among was a definite determination among the

these people to come to the institute, often workers at this place to use their institute as

at considerable personal inconvenience, for much as possible for the extraneous purpose

examination, and an equally great readiness of providing candidates for sterilization.

to give full and sincere information about When one learned that the material for these

their relatives. I am sure this could not be anthropological and other investigations con-

paralleled in England. It is no doubt largely sisted practically solely of voluntary sub-

due to much greater interest in and know- jects who had been secured by the fair words

ledge of this subject in Germany, and the of sisters at clinics, social workers, etc., one

popular German conviction of its social was left with a very disagreeable impression.

importance. Quite a number of the relatives There are other important aspects of

I saw brought family trees and documents German eugenics beside the sterilization law.

extending back over several generations. Eugenic qualifications are insisted on by the

Nevertheless there was quite a proportion of government for applicants for appointment

my informants who required very persistent to the State services-e.g. for the post office,

and express reassurance that it was out of State bank, railways, etc., as well as for the

the question that the information obtained civil services proper, and for members of

from them should be used in a way they the S.S. and S.A. These are briefly that

would not like. Of the motives that in- the applicant shall not be non-Aryan nor

fluenced those persons who would not reply hereditarily tainted (" erblich belastet ").

to any attempts to get in touch with them it The definition of what constitutes here-

is impossible to speak.

ditary taint has not yet been clearly laid

The attitude of different research workers down. Luxenburger has claimed that it

in regard to this matter of research versus should be interpreted in its more strict

sterilization varied greatly in different re- scientific sense, and only those persons

search institutions. In one place I found a regarded as " belastet " who according to

steadfast conviction among the more respon- present ideas must be the carriers of a patho-

sible workers that it was indeed undesirable genic gene. These would then be only: those

that the material obtained by research showing the hereditary abnormality; or the

should be used directly for extraneous ends, monozygotic twin of such a one; the

or that the public should be allowed to get children of parents one or both of whom have

the impression it could be so used. In another shown a recessive abnormality; the parents

place I found a very curious quibbling atti- of a child with such a recessive abnormality;

tude, that while certain activities of the in the case of sex-linked abnormalities all

292 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

children of an affected mother, the daughters in carrying out the new eugenic measures.

of an affected father.

At every one of the offices a special office will

Luxenburger has difficulty with the sib- be set up for giving the certificates required

lings of schizophrenics, and suggests that by the above law, and for the administration

only those who themselves are schizoid of the marriage loan. At these clinics every

psychopaths should be regarded as tainted, applicant for certificate or marriage loan will

not for instance those who are psychopaths receive a careful examination. For this an

of a non-schizoid kind. The clinical distinc- official form is provided, in which besides an

tion would be one of some difficulty. He ordinary medical examination the doctor has

remarks that " In principle even the here- to note anthropological measurements, type

ditarily tainted [erbkrank] families are to be of constitution according to Kretschmer,

encouraged, apart from those members who racial type, twinship, all details of previous

are to be regarded as' belastet.' " The whole illnesses with dates and notes of where

family with all its members may not be treated, so that more exact particulars can

regarded as " belastet "; the individual be obtained if required. Further the whole

members must be considered separately, to family history is gone into, and details are

see if they come under his rules. Luxen- obtained if possible of the great-grandparents,

burger's view, however, does not seem to be in every case of the grandparents and all their

the official one, at least in regard to the descendants, even, if possible, first cousins.

administration of the marriage loan.

Finally a summary card is drawn up, in which

MARRIAGE LAWS

the above facts are summarized, and cross references to data in the possession of other

On October igth, I935, entered into force social services are given, e.g. for venereal

the " Gesetz zum Schutze der Erbgesundheit diseases, cripples, tuberculosis, obstetrics and

des deutschen Volkes." This expressly for- infant welfare, insanity and psychopathy,

bids marriages where one of the parties suffers alcoholism, school medical service. Here also

from an infectious disease, is under a form of the " diagnosis " is entered, e.g. non-Aryan,

guardianship, suffers from a mental disorder, insane, " belastet," criminal, peculiarly

or suffers from a hereditary disease in the gifted, etc. The special gifts, which have to

sense of the sterilization laws. Before mar- be far above average to receive mention, are

riage, certificates must be obtained from the mental-for mathematics, languages, organi-

appropriate authority to the effect that no zation, art, music, painting, drawing and

hindrance exists on any of the above grounds. plastic art; and practical-for manual and

Marriages which violate the law are null and technical occupations and sport. Similar

void, and the parties are liable to imprison- details are noted about all members of the

ment, as also for attempting to get around family.

the law, for example by marrying abroad. On the basis of these findings a decision is

Marriages between " Aryans " and full Jews reached as to whether the applicant is to be

are also forbidden. The full Jew may only granted the marriage-enabling certificate,

marry the full Jew. Half Jews, if they accept and/or the marriage loan, or as to whether he

the Jewish faith, are reckoned as full Jews. should be conditionally or unconditionally

Otherwise they may only marry half Jews. advised against marriage. The following

Quarter Jews may not marry their like, but must be disallowed the marriage loan:

only " Aryans."

I. Those who suffer or have suffered from

The certificate allowing marriage has to be the following hereditary abnormalities: here-

obtained from the local health office (" Ge- ditary mental defect, schizophrenia, manic-

sundheitsamt "). These are being set up all depressive psychosis, idiopathic epilepsy,

over Germany in every district which does Huntington's chorea, hereditary blindness,

not yet possess one. They correspond in hereditary deafness, severe hereditary physi-

many ways with public health offices in Eng- cal disability, severe psychopathy, severe

land, but their activities principally consist constitutional disorder. The deaf, blind and

GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

293

epileptic may only receive the loan when the reckoned together. Even lesser degree of

disorder is clearly to be traced to exogenous hereditary taint is sufficient for the rejection

causes, and where apart from this the of the application, if the proposed partner

applicant can support a family. Physical has a similar degree of tainting. Emphasis is

disability includes congenital dislocation of laid on the fact that it must be ascertained

the hip, congenital clubfoot, cleft palate, split that the abnormalities in question are in fact

hand, spina bifida, hereditary narrowed pelvis hereditable; mention is made of depressive

of such a degree that it is impossible for a states and psychoses of short duration,

child to be born naturally, Friedreich's especially at advanced ages, where endocrine

ataxy, myotonia, progressive muscular dys- disturbances should be thought of as an

trophy, hereditary spastic paralysis, dwarfs alternative diagnosis to that of an endogen-

less than I30 cm. in height. Constitutional ous psychosis, of symptomatic epilepsy, etc.

disorder includes severe asthenia coupled III. Those suffering from any infectious

with other abnormalities or stigmata of disorder likely to affect the health of the

degeneration, juvenile diabetes, dystrophia partner or the children. This is specially

adiposogenitalis, early and severe otosclerosis, directed against venereal diseases.

severe lymphatism, haemophilia, myxcedema, IV. Where one of the partners is sterile.

high-grade infantilism, severe goitre-in V. Severe alcoholism, where it is super-

regions with endemic goitre only those with imposed on a basis of "hereditary in-

cardiac disorder. Among the severe psycho- feriority," or has led to such destruction of

pathies are included severe cases of hysteria, the personality that no satisfactory family

homosexuality, alcoholism, drug-addiction, life can be expected.

asocial and antisocial psychopaths (presum- At the end of the examination one of the

ably includes all at least habitual criminals), following certificates is issued: that the

and other types of psychopathy, which with- applicant may marry; that he is perman-

out being asocial or antisocial " because of its ently or temporarily unfit for marriage;

special kind and severity represents a great that though the findings do not necessarily

hindrance in the way of work and pleasure prove him unsuitable for marriage, he has

in life," where the said psychopathy shows been advised against the proposed union;

itself as hereditary. This includes conditions that he is sterile and only to be recommended

with severe mood changes, depressions, to marry another sterile individual or the

anxiety states, suicidal tendencies, and subject of an hereditary abnormality; that

compulsive symptoms.

he is the subject of hereditary disorder and

II. Those who, without having suffered only to be recommended to marry a sterile

themselves from any of the above conditions, individual.

have families which show or have shown in A number of points of great interest arise

such a severe degree the presence of heredi- from these paragraphs. Luxenburger's defi-

tary illness that the children of the applicant nition of the scientific conception of " Belas-

may be regarded as materially more heavily tung" goes by the board. Those are to be

tainted than the average population. The considered " belastet " who have a con-

" Belastung" may be certain or highly siderably greater chance than the average

probable. Apart from special consideration of carrying a pathogenic gene, not only those

of the method of inheritance in a given case, who theoretically must do so. Hence the

it may be assumed that the applicant is government is content to prevent a number

" belastet " when one parent, or two sib- of healthy and normal people marrying and

lings, or more than a third of the remaining propagating, if by so doing a number of

relatives (grandparents, uncles and aunts), abnormal and undesirable people are also

or one sib and two grandparents, suffer from prevented. In this connection it is only

severe and certain hereditary physical or rational that unlike abnormalities should be

mental abnormality. By this estimation, reckoned together in determining " Belas-

abnormalities of different kinds are to be tung." The heaping up of such abnormalities

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

among the relatives obviously increases the the birth of children. Much more effective

chance of developing some sort of an in this way should be the German income-

abnormality, though for example the nephew tax system. This is exceedingly complicated,

of a schizophrenic is no more likely to but it may be roughly stated that there is

develop schizophrenia for having a half- a tax on single persons of about I5 per cent.

brother with a cleft palate. It is possible, Marriage reduces the amount of tax slightly,

however, that this not the basis of this the birth of the first and subsequent children

provision, but rather a belief in a general very considerably. For poor and middle-

hereditary degenerative diathesis. This view class people the possession of four children

receives support from the official use of such renders them almost tax-free. All reductions

terms as " hereditary inferiority " and such of income tax for children are, unlike in the

ideas as constitutional asthenia with signs English system, percentage reductions, so

of degeneration.

that better-off people get a correspondingly

The policy with regard to selective breed- larger actual reduction in tax. From an

ing seems to have been settled in favour of eugenic point of view this is a much better

attempting to keep abnormalities latent, system.

rather than breeding them out. This is shown by the provision that those with a slight

THE CITY AS GODPARENT

degree of " tainting" may marry normal An interesting experiment has been intro-

persons but not those with a similar degree of duced in the city of Berlin, the " Ehren-

tainting. They are treated in the same way, patenschaft." Families with two or three

in fact, as quarter Jews.

children may, if they decide to have a third

It will be seen that the function of these or fourth, go to a city office and declare their

"Eheberatungsstellen " is a very important intention. If within the term of two years

one. There is first the immediate and the child is born, the city will stand god-

practical one of forbidding undesirable and parent. This implies a present of 30 marks

encouraging desirable unions. A secondary (48s.) a month until the end of the first year

duty will no doubt be notifying cases for and 20 marks (32s.) a month subsequently

sterilization. Thirdly, and of increasing until the end of the fourteenth year. If the

importance with the passage of years, will child himself or an elder brother or sister

be the function of these clinics as record dies, the fund ceases, but may be continued

offices. The summary cards already referred again with the birth of an additional child.

to are kept in duplicate, one locally, the Only legitimate children may receive the

other forwarded to a central office in Berlin, gift. If twins or triplets are born, all are

and are definitely intended for statistical covered. The gift is independent of the

research. If the examinations and records financial position of the family. It is not a

are made even with only moderate care there form of social support, but a gift of honour.

will soon be provided a complete and fairly For no official purpose, e.g. for calculation

exhaustive family record of the whole of income tax, is it to be reckoned as part of

German people. Such records thrown open the income of the family. The family and the

to research will provide material of quite child bear the honourable titles of " Paten-

incalculable value.

familie " and " Patenkind der Stadt Berlin."

The marriage loan is of the value of 6oo They receive precedence in applications for

marks (L48). It is given to those certified flats and dwellings, for jobs and posts of

suitable by the marriage-advice bureaus, and whatever kind where the influence of the

no interest is demanded for the first year. city authorities can make itself felt. The

The birth of a child automatically pays back city even pledges itself to use its influence

ioo marks and gives another year of interest- on their behalf in other parts of Germany,

free enjoyment of the remainder. It should should the family move. The family has

be a considerable inducement to marriage to be " of high biological value," and the

and have a certain slight effect in promoting conditions for this seem to be a slightly

GERMAN EUGENICS IN PRACTICE

295

stricter form of the conditions for the marriage loan.
In considering all these eugenic measures, particularly the sterilization and marriage
laws, one must not forget that their compulsory character is nothing strange to the
German people. These are but two of a multitude of such laws. All the German's
actions are governed and regulated. His
scheme of education, what views he may express-even in the scientific world-what wireless programme he may listen to, where and what he may buy and eat and read, how he may sign his letters and say good
morning to his friends, are governed by law or by a form of persuasion resting on force. The future development of the German people has been decided, on theoretical and philosophical grounds, by its leaders. The German's duty is to be moulded in the right direction. Any leadership among the people, apart from the disciplined and subordinate leadership of the type of the non-commissioned officer, is rigidly suppressed- The Fuhrer directs with a series of ukases. With successive hammer-blows the German

citizen is driven into a swastika-shaped hole. The atmosphere of compulsion pervades the whole of his life. The fact that he and his fellow men are now to be selected and bred like a herd of cattle seems to him hardly more distasteful than a hundred other interferences in his daily life. There is little doubt that these measures will have at least a partial success. If commanded with authority the German docilely obeys. The command now is to breed.
REFERENCES.
Grunds4tze fur die Einrichtung und TXtigheit der Eheberatungsstellen fur Erb- und Rassenpflege," Reichsund Preussische Ministerium des Inneren.
" Einige fur den Psychiater besonders wichtige Bestimmungen des Gesetzes zur Verhutung erbkranken Nachwuchses," H. Luxenburger, Nervenarzt, p. 437,
1934.
" Der Begriff der ' Belastung ' in der Eheberatungstatigkeit des Arztes," H. Luxenburger, Erbarzt, I935.
" Wichtige Entscheidungen aus der Rechtsprechung der Erbgesundheitsgerichte und Erbgesundheitsobergerichte," A. Bostroem, Fortschritte der Neurologie und Psychiatrie, July 1935.
" 2 Jahre Erbgesundheitsgesetz-4I Jahre Erbge-
sundheitsgerichtsbarkeit," B. Steinwallner, Psychiatrisch-Neurologische Wochenschrift, July 1935.
" Wer ist erbgesund und wer ist erbkranh?" Klein, Verlag G. Fischer, Jena, I935.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XVII, No. 4.

