MYRDAL'S "NATION ANID FAMILY't
By SALLY CHILVER

A LVA MYRDAL'S Nation and Family*
was finished in Stockholm in I940.
In her introduction she says: " We fear the end of an historic epoch during which humanitarian ideals, despite slips and setbacks, have been steadily making this world a more decent place in which to live." The war is ended and the totalitarian regimes of Germany and Italy have been destroyed, but the fear voiced in I940, in a neutral Sweden miraculously exempt from invasion, is still alive. To externalize this fear, as some of us do, merely in terms of prejudice against this or that regime savours a little
of self-justification. Qui accuse, s'excuse.
The grounds for criticism may be valid enough but they are incomplete unless the trends and disharmonies of our own democratic society are rigorousIy analyzed.
The Swedish Population &Commission, appointed in May I935 by the Social Democratic Government of the day, did in fact undertake such an analysis; and Alva Myrdal's book is an account of this experiment, of the social trends which preceded it and the social legislation which resulted from it.
The salient facts of Swedish demography are already fairly familiar. They are illus-
* Kegan Paul, I945. Price 21S. net.

TABLE II

NORMAL FAMILIES IN SWEDEN AND MEDIAN.
FAMILY INCOME, BY NUMBERS OF CHILDREN AND REsIDENCE-1935-36

Nos. of children. under I6 years
Total
0
I
2 3
4 5 6 7 or more

Median Family Income (Crs)

In Urban

In Urban

Total Districts Total Districts

x1000 38-o 29-6
17.3 8-O
3.7
I *8 0°9
0.7

00K o },gg996 3,046
45.0 2,I48 3,I60 30-8 2,072 2,970 15.3 1,955 3,03I 5.6 1,75I 2,980 2-1 I,6I2 2,786
0o8 1,474 2,655 0-3 1,426 2,553 0 I 1,296 n.a.

trated in Tables I and II. The pattern of age distribution shows a bulge in the adult group, reflected in the high expectation of
life and due to the large number of births at the beginning of the century. The probability of advances in hygiene and'longevity is offset by the fact that the proportion of old people in the population will increase. The net reproduction rate declined from
about I *300 in I9II-I5 to o0958 in I925, and fluctuated between 0725 and O'750 during
the 'thirties. The average age at marriage
is high. In I931-5 it was 30-55 for men

TABLE I
SELECTED VITAL STATISTICS FOR SWE:DEN 190I-1937

I90I-I9IO
1911-1920
1921-1930
I93I
I932
1933
1934' 1935 1936 I1937

Married, per i,ooo, population

... ...

6-oo

... ...

6-26

.6.49

... ...

6-97

... ...

6.75

.. ... ... . . ... .. ... ...

7-00
7-73 8-22
8-5 z 8-67

Births, per x,ooo population
25-77
22'1I
17-51 14-80
14 54
13.7r 13-68
I3-76
14.z1
14'33

Deaths in first year per zoo children born
alive
8'45 &693 5'88 5'66
5s07
4'95
4'72
459
4 34
4.52

Child-bearing women per I,00o married women (15-44)
258-6
2II5
r55*4
124 1
1210
II3-8 r13'5 t I21I
1145
II4'0

Percentage of unmarried
women bearing children
to all women bearing children
12.84
I5-14
1550' 15-96
15-6I 14-48
14-32
13.46 13S03

I42

MYRDAL'S ""NATION AND FAMILY"

and 26-92 for women. Increased mobility lations and the prolonged existence of a

during Sweden's industrialization period double standard of sexual morality for men

gave rise to an unfavourable sex-ratio in and women penetrated the people as a whole.

different localities. It seems probable that "The discussion," says Alva Myrdal, " was

men are more stationary and women more far from harmonious and peaceful....

mobile as far as internal migration is con- The lancing of the boil of public dishonesty

cerned. In the most marriageable age- was painful, but it was lanced. In general,

group (25-29 years) there were only 52 un- the discussion penetrated to the roots of the

married women in rural districts of Sweden problems and was pursued in most social

to IOO unmarried men.

groups with courage and rationality, with

Swedish social patterns reflect the relative dignity and understanding of its social

weakness of feudal influences in Swedish implications."

history and the strength of the free farmers. The section of Alva Myrdal's book devoted

Industrialization, starting with the lumber to this part of Sweden's sociological experi-

industry in the 'fifties of last century, was ment is short. It is treated more fully in

rapid. By I935 35-2 per cent of the popu- her husband Gunnar Myrdal's book, Pop

lation was urban. But a considerable pro- lation : A Problem for Democracy.* But I

portion of Swedish industry is located in the, have insisted on it because of the enormous

countryside and acted as a centre for the importance of the Swedish lesson to our own

spread of urban ideas in the farming com- society, which, though strongly democratic

munity.

in traditioni is disposed to absorb, con-

The challenge of a falling population did sciously or unconsciously, certain totali-

not come upon a community quite untried tarian ideas of both "right" and "left'"

in social and sexual discussion. Most of us parentage because they attract by a promise

are aware of the very high standard of of efficiency. The methods adopted for the

Swedish journalism, of the quite detailed education of public opinion in Sweden were,

knowledge most Swedes possess of sociolo- by totalitarian standards, vastly inefficient.

gical problems, and of the wide variety of Time will show how much more effective

clubs and societies which cater for adults they were than the mixture of regimentation

anxious to increase their civic sense. But a and blackmail adopted by the Nazi popula-

more fundamental discussion had been pro- tion experts.

ceeding for years before the Population Our own Royal Commission on Popula-

Commission had been set up on the ethics of tion has started with certain disadvantages.

birth control and on the nature of sexual Public discussion of the issues has been

conventions. It was this discussion which extremely superficial on the whole. The

had created a basis of public opinion for the boil of public dishonesty has not been lanced.

family reforms of the 'thirties.

Newspapers, films and politicians have

The Swedish people seem to have been the avoided controversial issues, have done little

first to attempt a really frank public assess- or nothing to explode the myths that pass

ment of sexual mores in their relation to for rational judgments on any question con-

public policy, and to uncover the personal nected with marriage, childbearing and

choices which lay behind the statistical sexual relations. Many newspapers,t for

evidence for falling population trends. Much instance, maintain on their staffs psycholo-

of the argument has now become part of the gists or " problem-solvers " to whom readers

idees refues of civilized Europe. But a may write for advice on all sorts of personal

great deal of it was really original-that is difficulties, and who are given a certain

to say original as public, opinion-forming dis- amount of " feature " space once a week.

cussion, rather than as private discussion in Many of them are very sensible people and

go-ahead circles. Discussion on topics like the frequency of abortion, methods of family limitation, the pattern of extra-marital re-

* Harvard University Press, I940.
t E.g., the Daily Mail with Ann Temple's column,
and the News Chronicle with John Aubrey's column.

THE EUGENICS REVIIW

their advice, given the limitations of their duties occupying women, the greater Was the

"practice," is usually pretty sound. But prestige attached to thetu.

these writers are generally subject to certain With the advances of industrial civiliza-

rather vague policy directives which effec- tion, the notions of the rich were copied by

tively prevent them from broaching any topic the poor, and it is now accepted by millions

likely to disturb a minority of their readers. of people that it is " natural " for men to

While marital infidelities and male promiscu- work and for women to do domestic work

ity can be discussed, providing certain lingu- only, or no work at all.

istic conventions are observed, homosexuality In peasant societies in the past (and even

and the emotional problemns of women which to some extent to-day) there was a rather

arise out of an unfavourable sex ratio are different division of labour, the men doing

carefully shelved.

the work farther away and the women the

Much of the evidence put before the work nearer the homestead. Then-and

Population Comrnission is likely to be un- this was true of town households too-the

sound, not so much because of prejudice, women were engaged in manufacture, in

but because the problems treated will not trading, in teaching, in curing illnesses and

have been properly thrashed out. There is so on. With industrialization, the matu-

4 real danger that a minority demand for facturing and trading activities of women

half-baked measures-such as the outlawing passed to entirely new social groups. In

of birth control, for instance-may be time, too, the professions became organized,

allowed to distract the public fromn the central took over still more of women's responsibili-

issues.

ties and for a long time successfully prevented

It is one of the many great merits of Alva the re-entry of women into what had been

Myrdal's book that she never loses sight of a customary field of activity in the past.

the central issues. The specialist-housing Domestic duties now tnerely involved main-

expert, maternity welfare worker, public tenance and the preparation of finished or

health officer, educationist-is amply catered semi-finished products instead of their mnanu-

for in chapters which describe Swedish facture.

measures and the principles behind them Other social influences, all tending to

with great clarity. But he or she is brought break up older kinds of co-operative organi-

up against the central issues in the final zation in the family and village group, made

chapter.

child-rearing more time-wasting than it had

Can there be such a thing as a truly been and isolated the child-rearing woman

democratic population policy ? Alva Myrdal from the community which now began to

thinks there can be and that the acid test regroup itself in new ways.

is the attitude taken towards women's What had happened was that the new basic

problems and women's strivings for emanci- economic unit was the indi'vidual, not the

pation.

family, and that many of the family's

Whether we like it or not our attitude to previous functions had been taken over by

women's status is coloured by traditional industries, professions and the State. Mar-

patterns of thought. We assume that these ried women now have two economiic r6les

traditional patterns have some fundamnental open to them. The first is a variety, de-

relation to " nature," forgetting that many pendent on the husband's status, of semi-

of them are quite recent and that other parasitic existences writh which child-rearing

patterns exist even to-day in differently can be accommodated; the second a pro-

organized societies.

ductive existence which can only be com-

In urban Europe in modern times, the bined with child-rearing under exceptional

rich developed a system whereby men circumstances.

engrossed all outside activities, while women The semii-parasitic existence, though it has

attended to domestic duties. Later, the its attractions for the. well-to-do, does not,

more ornamental and useless the domestic although it is supposed to, fit in with modern

MYRDAL'S " NATION AND FAMILY "

I45

social rhythms. The housewife has little odds and ends of leisure at times she cannot share
them with workers. If she has a child, she is almost invariably tied at the times at which workers have leisure. The productive
married woman is financially and socially better off than she is. Consequently, the seni-parasitic woman is jiust as nuch at sixes and sevens as her gainfully employed
Sister. She is vaguely, irritably aware that
her stat-us is anomalous, that " they " (mase. plur.) do not consider her. She realizes that recreation is not organized for her but for
workers, that in most socially organized
A&tivities she has been simply overlooked.
The working woman, on the other hand, is
strongly aware that society is well disposed
towards her ad a producer, but indifferent
or hostile when she wishes also to become a
mother.
In Sweden the central " woman problem" was allowed to come right out into the open.
The laws, which were passed in I939, protecting the working woman's right to marry or have children as she pleased, were expected

by some to have a boomerang effect by in-
ducing somne employers not to employ women
at all. Some such effects were apparent for
a few months and a few employers withdrew
small ex gratia payments to girls leaving to
get married. The reaction among working
women was to join trade unions to improve their bargaining power, as one would have
expected. (In fact, it would not be out of the question for the women's side of the T.U.C. to become, in this country, the chief proponent of a rational family policy.)
The Swedish Parliament has gone a long way towards abolishing some of women's economic dilemmas. Other dilemmas remain, but the Swedes, at least, are aware of them, thanks largely to the work of a group of sociologists which includes Alva
Myrdal. Her book is something more than an im-
portant sociological epitome. It is also a
work of art in the sense that its author has the sort of insight into human motives which is usually reserved to first-class poets and
dramatists.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVIII, No. 3

