SOME ANTHROPOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF HYBRID POPULATIONS*

By J. C. TREVOR
(Leonard Darwin Research Fellow)

approaching the general problem of senting distinct human types, the conditions

crossing, it is important at the under which it has taken place are always

tset to make some distinctions between very different from any ideally controlled

thropological and the genetical points ones such as those arranged by the geneticist

w as they are applied to studies of in his experimental work on non-human

beings. The anthropologist is pri- material. For example, the original numbers

concerned with what happens to large of the racially distinct individuals that con-

of people rather than to individuals. tributed to the ancestry of a particular hybrid

aids the situation in its descriptive population may have been markedly dis-

and, to start with at least, he may similar, and usually they are quite unknown.

,no theories as to the mechanism of It is only in exceptional cases that their

ertance of physical characters. The proportions can be safely inferred, as in that

on of the geneticist is usually somewhat of the Bounty mutineers and the Polynesian

t. His chief interest being in the mode women with whom they mated. In general,

vidual inheritance, the material he all that can be stated with certainty about

ers first will be composed of separate a hybrid population is that it has been

y lines, so that the groups with which derived from at least two racial stocks,

are often small in comparison with though their respective contributions to it

" populations " of the anthropologist. may be a matter of vague conjecture. At

spite of the distinction just made be- any particular time, too, it may include

the anthropological and the genetical individuals representing almost every grade

es, it should be realized that they of intermixture between the parental stocks,

> some degree complementary, and that and there are seldom reasons for supposing

impossible to reconcile their findings, that it has remained isolated without back-

must be due to erroneous deductions crossing to one or both of these or even being

the material of one or the other. The affected by exposure to fresh infiltration.

logist has in mind the situation as it Such hybrid communities are obviously very

y exists, and his data are seldom of a involved in their biological constituents, but

nature or such that the information he they are the ones that do in fact occur, and

about them is relatively complete. it is necessary to study them in order to

there has been extensive inter- reach conclusions of practical value.

between two populations repre- A great deal of confusion has been caused

by failure to appreciate the distinction be-

uld be explained that " hybrid " is used here tween the group and the individual situations.

stricted zoological sense, viz. as relating to One of the main objects of the anthropolo-

c rather than to interspecific crosses. The "mixed," though convenient, can be missince there is no acceptable definition of what

gist is to trace the descent of human groups, and the problem of miscegenation is of great

ts a " pure" human race. For the purposes presnt discussion, " hybrid" will be taken to ;ocrosses between races comprised within

importance to him, as a knowledge of its consequences must be obtained before he

major divisions of mankind such as the can hope to reconstruct his racial gene-

"of Blumenbach and the main " groups" on, Hooton and other anthropological

alogies. As a rule, most anthropologists have taken more or less for granted certain

21

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

generalizations bearing on the effects of race crossing. To cite an instance, it is often supposed that when two populations have crossed to form a third, the average values of the physical characters of this last will be intermediate in relation to those of its progenitors. The fact that in such a case the anthropologist is thinking of an amalgamation of group characteristics is generally overlooked and has given rise to much unprofitable discussion of " blending inheritance." * Again, the opinion is frequently held that the crossing of markedly distinct racial stocks will result in a population that displays a peculiarly large variability and that the frequency distribution curves of its metrical characters will in turn be of an unusual kind, possessing more than a single mode or peak.
Such questions are of prime anthropological importance, and it is strange that no comprehensive examination of the most suitable material for testing their validity, namely that furnished by the intermixture of groups representing widely different human types, has yet been made. They have, it is true, been considered empirically in the case of particular studies of hybrid communities, but with results which have not always been in accord. Extreme types can be chosen deliberately, because it seems safe to infer that they will provide the best evidence required to answer the general problem. It is not suggested, of course, that the nature of the mechanism of inheritance will differ, though the types of genes may, in crosses between European and Negro groups, for example, from that which obtains when European groups are crossed inter se.
Several hybrid communities have been investigated anthropologically within the past forty years, but the information presented by many of the observers is quite inadequate for the demands of a modern survey. In the present instance, it has been
* An adequate knowledge of the group characteristics of hybrid populations may not throw any clear light on the mode of individual inheritance, though the position will be different in the case of the blood groups, say, for which this is relatively simple, and in that of metrical characters, which appear to be determined by a number of genes.

possible to select nine studies-three of| crosses between Europeans and Negro and related races, three of crosses between Europeans and American Indians and three,
of crosses between Europeans and other non-2 European peoples-which afford a more or!
less satisfactory basis for some preliminary conclusions.
For the kind of treatment that is now attempted, data relating not only to the hybrid population but also to both parental
populations are required, and these data
consist of measurements of living subjects. It must be acknowledged that, for practical
purposes, there are no measurements what-
ever available for the actual parental groups from which the hybrids were derived. In all such cases the process of intermixture
has been of varying duration and has taken place within a period extending, as far as is
known, from the beginning of the sixteenth
until almost the end of the nineteenth century.* Of the nine hybrid series considered, the earliest to be examined was noti measured until I898. All the original
parents of either purely European or purely
non-European origin had probably died before this date, and there are no anthro-1 pometric records for them. What can be, obtained, and what have actually been used,
are measurements of groups believed to be descended from those populations which actually contributed the parents. It is im-
portant to appreciate the point just made,:
because analysis of the situation becomes much more difficult if the parental populations were themselves changing pheno-N
typically within the period mentioned. In fact, so far as physical characters are concerned, there is no good evidence to show whether they were changing or not, except some relating to the past few decades, and the best comparisons possible are obviously
far from ideal. There is a danger, for example,
* A striking exception is provided by Hawaii, where primary miscegenation still occurs on a fairly wide scale. A study of race crossing in the Hawaiian archipelago is now being undertaken by Dr. Harry L.
Shapiro of the American Museum of Natural History,l
and the results of such a careful and unprejudiced
workers will doubtless clarify the problems arising inl
this important area, for which the available material is deplorably sparse.

CHARACTERISTICS OF HYBRID POPULATIONS

23

that the purely European or purely non- geographical isolation, the inhabitants of

European groups from which the hybrids Pitcairn and Norfolk have formed practically

derive may not have been truly random a closed community, and the prolonged in-

smples of the populations to which they breeding which has occurred on these two

themselves belonged, and a great deal of islands takes on the aspect of an unpre-

uncertainty must consequently arise regard- meditated biological experiment. There is

ing the material used in particular com- little doubt that several back-crosses to the

parisons.

parental populations are represented in the

eight other hybrid groups, none of which has

Imperfections of the Evidence

been isolated to the same extent as the

The nine hybrid series to which reference Pitcairn and Norfolk Islanders. Some inves-

ias been made will be described later in this tigation of pedigrees was undertaken in

-per, but certain of their features may be five studies and attempts were made to

0mmmented upon now. It is extremely prob- construct sub-series containing different pro-

'ble that in the initial crosses most of the portions of intermixture between the

,Mthers were Europeans and the mothers parental groups. Owing to the small size

lan-Europeans, but a small proportion of of most of these sub-series, it is not profit-

W_iutrhopmeeamnbewrosmeofn

may have the hybrid

intermarried population in

able to consider them separately for the purpose of analysis, except in a single case,

bter generations. On the whole, it will be that of American Negroes of Mixed Blood.

venient to assume that the immediate All the remaining series, then, comprise

cestors of the first generation were agglomerations of individuals with unequal

usively European males and non- " impure " pedigrees and possessing various

pean females. It is unfortunate that proportions of the two main ancestral stocks.

e are no data relating to the sort of As far as can be ascertained, and with an

filial generation considered by geneticists exception which will be mentioned later,

the case of any of the series dealt with each hybrid population treated appears to

, and it can only be supposed that each have been derived from purely European

them has been made up of individuals sources, on one side, and a single non-Euro-

"impure " pedigrees are quite likely pean stock, on the other. In his extensive

represent, contemporaneously, varying work on the American Negro, Herskovits

es of intermixture. In general, there is (1930) has described a number of hybrid

information regarding the degree of gene- series into the composition of which Euro-

"cal heterogeneity shown by a particular pean, Negro and American Indian elements

es, but two instances exist in which either have entered. These are not large, however,

conditions of the formation of the cross and on this account and because an adequate

different from those of the rest or in treatment of them would be an extremely

ch some details of the kind indicated are complicated undertaking, they have been

Sable. omitted from the present discussion.

has already been pointed out, the While little difficulty exists in selecting the

dants of the Bounty mutineers are in hybrid series for consideration, the task of

respects unique. It is known that obtainingsampleswhichcanfairlybesupposed

are mainly derived from a few primary to represent the parental groups is far from

between Englishmen and Tahitian easy. All that it seems possible to accomplish

en. Their pedigrees are thus approxi- in such a direction is to find modem series

ely of the same length and each subject which may be presumed suitable for the

be regarded as the product of equal purpose in view if the characters used are not

ts of European and non-European subject to secular change. As an illustration,

provided that such factors as the type of the half-dozen Englishmen who

ye mating or differential dea4¶h-rates founded families on Pitcairn Island at the

be overlooked. By reason of their close of the eighteenth century is, for eleven

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the fourteen characters compared, taken
to be the same as that of a series of Oxfordshire villagers measured in I922 and I923. In this case it is possible that the two groups supposed to be equivalent constituted
samples, not absolutely random in nature, of
populations which were somewhat different
in type. The ten or twelve Tahitian women
with whom the Bounty mutineers contracted unions are in turn represented by a series
drawn from the contemporary population of the whole of the Society Islands. The best comparisons which can be made under such circumstances are evidently very imperfect. In dealing with the other hybrid series, the conditions are no better. The method em-
ployed has been to select samples which appear to give more or less satisfactory representations of the parental groups in-
volved in the formation of the hybrid popula-
tion and to make comparisons within these
triads. At first sight, it seemed quite probable that the material would be too defective to yield suggestions of any value. Actually, the conclusions arrived at are so consistent
that it can be concluded that its manifest de-
fects are of less consequence than was feared. Any adequate statistical characterization
of a population demands a sample of sufficient size to furnish reliable constants. It is known from anthropological experience that small samples, composed of fewer than thirty individuals, normally provide either misleading or inconclusive results. There is also some danger that small samples are less likely to have been selected at random from the assemblies they are supposed to characterize than large ones. Again, the numbers of observations recorded for different charac-
ters in one sample are seldom constant. In the hybrid series now considered, they range from 88o to 23 in the case of adult males and from 72 to 39 in that of adult females, the majority for adults of both sexes being over 50. Most of these numbers are by no means
large for statistical purposes, but the series
are the longest available. The samples chosen to represent the parental groups vary in the numbers of observations for different characters from 5,426 to 24 and from I,549 to 25 in the case of males and females,

respectively. On the whole they are larger
than those for the mixed series. It is obvious that the ideal statistical requirements are
satisfied very imperfectly by the data used. Owing to the influence of the factor of
personal equation in metrical descriptions of living subjects, it would have been a decided advantage if each triad-the hybrid and the
two parental series-had been measured by the same observer. This has been done in only two studies. In three others the hybrid and one parental series have been measure either by a single observer or by a small group of observers working in conjunction, and in the rest each one of the three associ-
ated series has been described by a different observer. It is well known that comparisons
between measurements recorded by sever4a
observers working independently will often
differ on the average to such an extent that true racial distinctions are entirely obscured,
merely on account of the way in which the measurements were taken. This is a regret-
table state of affairs, but one which cannot
be avoided until anthropometric technique become more rigorously standardized than they are at present. It may be supposedi that exact comparisons can be made between
data collected for various series by the same observer or by a number of observers working together. In other cases the position is
different for different characters. There may,
be little danger in comparing statures and
cephalic indices recorded by independent observers, but nearly all the measurements of the face and limbs are less reliable. So far as the present material is concerned, an attempt has been made to compare as man characters as could be secured with any reasonable expectation of accuracy, although such a procedure involves retaining some comparisons which are quite likely to be fallacious owing to " errors" of measure-
ment. As the general aim has been to restrict the treatment to adult series, this has necessitated revision of some of the original records in which several immature individuals
are included. As a rule, subjects under thel age of twenty have been rejected, thoughi
their r"tention in some series cannot alto-'
gether be avoided.

CHARACTERISTICS OF HYBRID POPULATIONS

25

Material and Method of Analysis
The nine hybrid series concerned in this paper may be briefly described as follows:
(i) Norfolk Islanders, II3 adult male and female subjects, the descendants of six nutineers of H.M.S. Bounty and from ten to
ftwelve Polynesian women from Tahiti and pssibly two of its neighbouring islands, masured and described by Shapiro (I929). ;They are compared with I53 male and female
loiety Islanders, whose measurements were tAken by Handy and reduced by Shapiro, w=d with 6,975 " English " and 38I Oxford-
fiiire villagers, whose measurements were taken by Galton and by Buxton and Black,ood, respectively, and reduced by the Nmiter. The genealogical records of the Nor-
Islanders have been carefully kept since Iut790, and any influx of fresh blood invarably been noted. '(2) Half-Blood Sioux, 77 adult male sub-
i,ncluding some described as a quarter others as three-quarters Indian, whose urements were taken by Boas and eight tants and reduced by Sullivan (I920). European ancestry is said to be French,
tch, English and Irish. They are com-
with 540 full-blood Sioux, measured the same observers, and with 727 " Old
can" Whites, measured and described Hrdlicka (I925). Herskovits (I930) has nded several constants of variation for last series, and the writer a few others. ) Ojibwa-Whites, 8o adult male subjects, ipally from Minnesota, representing us degrees of intermixture between
women and French and Scotch which has been " continuous and tive" since i66o. They are described Jenks (I9I6) and have been compared
*2e4d)fulaln-dblowoidtOhjiIb0w0a M(ianllnetshoattacoFurlednbceh
50 Minnesota Scotch, also measured by The constants of variation of these four * have been computed by the writer. ) Yucatecans, 88o adult male subjects, product of intermixture between Spanish
ts into Mexico and Maya Indians
a period of some 350 years, measured
described by Williams (1931). They are

compared with 77 presumably unmixed
Mayas, measured and described by Steggerda
(I932b), and with 4I6 Andalusians measured and described by Hulse (I933), for stature,
and 79 subjects from all parts of Spain, whose
measurements were taken by Barras and
reduced by Williams, for cephalic and facial
characters. (5) Jamaican " Browns," I65 male and
female subjects of mixed White and Negro
ancestry from Jamaica, measured by Steg-
gerda and described by Davenport and him-
self (I929). They are compared with one series of I00 Whites of British and German
descent and with another of I05 full-blood
Negroes, also measured by Steggerda, both
coming from the island of Jamaica and its
dependencies. The Whites cannot be said to
represent ideal comparative material, and as a large proportion of immature subjects is in-
cluded in all three series, means based on their absolute measurements would appear to be unreliable. Consequently only indices, which are less likely to be affected by possible growth changes, have been used in the present comparison. It is unfortunate that
the means and constants of variation provided by Davenport and Steggerda were determined by very crude statistical methods and that mistakes also occur in their compu-
tation. (6) American Negroes of Mixed Blood, 254
adult male subjects of European and Negro ancestry, principally from various parts of the United States, measured and described
by Herskovits (1930). Genealogies were obtained from each subject, who was then classified with regard to the proportions of White
and Negro ancestry he possessed, three main divisions being recognized: (i) more Negro than White, (ii) approximately equal amounts of Negro and White, and (iii) more White than Negro. The number of individuals in each of these divisions makes them, in general, adequate for separate statistical treatment. They are compared with an unmixed American Negro series of I09 individuals, also measured by Herskovits, and with Hrdlicka's " Old Americans."
(7) Boer-Hottentot Crosses (the so-called "Bastaards" of Rehoboth), 74 adult male

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

subjects of six or seven generations of ese, also measured by Rodenwaldt, and

mixed Boer and Hottentot descent from Steggerda's Dutch are used.

South-West Africa, measured and described (9) Anglo-Indians, " new style," I45 adult

by Fischer (I9I3). Fischer, like Herskovits, male subjects of mixed European and Indian

divides his material into genealogical classes ancestry from Calcutta, whose measure-,

representing different proportions of Boer ments were taken by Annandale, first reduced

and Hottentot ancestry. None of these, by Mahalanobis (I922-3I) and later, with the

however, is really large enough for statistical exclusion of some immature individuals, by

purposes, and the measurements have been the writer. There is almost a complete

pooled to form a general Bastaard series, absence of reliable information concerning

which is compared with 74 Hottentots, their origin and it has been found impossible

measured by Schultze Jena (I928), and, in to select suitable material from Indian senes

default of local Boers, with 70 Dutch, whose for a comparison of means, though in view

forbears come from the northern provinces of their very complex racial antecedents

of the Netherlands, measured and described they can be retained for the study of

by Steggerda (4932a). The general Bastaard variability.

constants of variation and those of the In any investigation of race crossing it is

Hottentots have been computed by the of interest to examine the physical relation

writer.

of hybrid populations to the parental stocks.

(8) Kisar Mestizos, 132 adult male and This has been attempted in the most direct

female subjects of mixed Dutch and Indo- way possible, namely by selecting the means

nesian ancestry from Kisar, a small island of as many characters as are available for

in the Sunda archipelago, some thirty-five both the hybrid sample and those represent-

miles east of Timor. They were measured ing the groups from which it is presumed to

and described by Rodenwaldt (I927), who have been derived, and comparing them pair

ascribes their origin to the seventeenth by pair in terms of the standard errors of

century. The mestizos are divided by him their differences. The method adopted is

into genealogical classes, but these are too illustrated in Table i. Comparisons of the

small for satisfactory statistical analysis, kind indicated are admittedly very crude

and the material has again to be treated as a and may be misleading. If for a particular

whole. For comparative purposes, 64 Kisar- character there is, in fact, no distinction

Character

Head Length (L) ... ... ...

Head Breadth (B) ... ... ...

Minimum Frontal Diameter (B) ...

Bizygomatic Breadth (J) ... ...

Bigonial Breadth (W) ... ...

Nasal Breadth (NB)

... ...

BILIoo ... ... ...

Ioo B'/B ... ... ...

iooJ/B ... ... ...

Ioo B'/J ... ... ...

100 W/J ... ... ...

Means and Standa rd Errors

|

Differences in Terms of Standard Errors

Society (S) Norfolk (N) English (E) S&N N&E S&E

I88o0 ± *7I I95-6 ± *73 195-5 ± *66 7-5 - 7.7

I59-6 ± *54 155-5 ± *54 15I*4 ± *55 5 4 5.3 IO6

I02 9 ± *54 104*0 ± *55 I09'3 ± *58

6 6 8 iI

1457 ± *56 I4O*9 ± *66 I37.7 ± 55 5-5 3 7 I0i2

I07 8 ± *66 I07 6 ± *58 I08-3 ± *63

-

43*4 *30 37-6 ± *35 33.7 ± *30 z2-6 8-5 22-9

88-o - 42 79-5 ± -36 77-5 ± *36 I5-4 3 -9 19-0

64.6 *33 66-9 ± *36 72-2 ± *37 4-7 I0-3 15.3

91-4 ±29 90O7 ± *35 90O7 ± *35 - _

70-7 ± *36 73-9 ± *40 79-6 ± *44 5.9 9-6 I5.7

740 ± 45 76 4 ± .47 78-9 ± *46 3 7 3.8 7 6

TABLE x.-Comparison of S mean cephalic and facial measurements of 85 Society Islanders, 64 Norfolk Islanders and 7I English. Any difference less than twice its standard error may be considered insignificant and is omitted from the table. (Compiled from Shapiro, 1929, and Buxton, Trevor and Blackwood, 1938.)

CHARACTERISTICS OF HYBRID POPULATIONS

27

between the true means of the parental series,
then the question whether the mean of a ample drawn from the first population is
geater or less than the mean of a sample *awn from the second population will be
ktermined merely by chance. In such a se, the further question whether the mean f the sample drawn from the hybrid populao falls between the two parental means
1 also be expected to be determined by ce, and hence no significance can be
ed to the order in which the series are ed by their several means. Where,

however, the means of the parental series are widely different, the position of the corresponding mean of the hybrid series in relation to them is of real significance, and, as might be expected on a polymeric hypothesis, its value will tend to approach that of the parental group which has made the greater contribution to it. A rather striking example of this is provided by the changes in position of the mean value of the nasal breadth in Herskovits's male American Negroes, illustrated in Figure i, where there is a progressive decrease in the direction of the narrower

30 I_ ____

_ FI IN W

h _ i t ma vl o t n b w i

a o Eurpea

Rl1.0 agsi h envau ftenslbedhwt icesn mut fErpa

,3,0~~~-~U~if-3-1lM 1the i i ixe i- t IiOtsr inttorneesrnssnsotepmsrtconNNfgtoesmoao .Tiee itlrodrttho

etclwieln ftes-mosi

ntebd h xrm

fec ih

Fsga3Hn0rd,Idl9i2E5k.a,)~~~3 30 andH - a 34050)

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

European nose with increasing amounts of White ancestry.
The results obtained from a total of I02 comparisons of male and female series are shown in Table 2, in which the position of the mean of the hybrid sample is considered with reference to the differences between the presumed parental groups and its own differences from them. It will be seen from Table 2 that as the significant differences between the mean values of the several series in a triad become more numerous, the relative frequency with which the hybrid means are intermediate increases correspondingly, a fact which would seem to validate a principle of the classification of racial groups which has generally been assumed in anthropological taxonomy.
Variability and Forms of Distributions
The problem of human variability has recently attracted the attention of a number of workers in both anthropology and genetics, and it still bristles with difficulties. Since the present discussion concerns populations which have resulted from the crossing of distinct racial stocks, it may be asked whether they are more or less variable than other populations not so formed, or comparison may be made between the observed situation with regard to this matter and that which would be expected in the light of theoretical considerations. For the moment,

only the first of these two methods of procedure, that is to say the description of a situation which actually exists, will be touched upon. It must be remembered thai the topic is treated with reference to the measurements of living people, characters of a particular kind which are unlikely to yield any results which might be susceptibl of a simple interpretation even under th most favourable conditions. Problems o inheritance are involved, it is true, but speci fically those of mass inheritance in the cas of subjects whose origins are multifariou and unknown, except within the wides categories, and in the case of physi features of an extraordinarily complex nature. Most anthropological problems are of th same kind.
The series described, though the best available, are far from ideal when considered as samples representative of a few of the hybrid communities which now exist. In this connexion it would be as well to recall some remarks made a little earlier. It is important to realize, in the first place, that the samples in question are assemblages of individuals representing all grades of intermixture between two or more parent groups. Probably the only exception i furnished by the Norfolk Islanders, who ma be supposed to be, roughly at least, the descendants of a few members of two distinct racial stocks who intermarried in the first

Class of Comparison

H between P and P'

H not between P and P'

Totals

No significant differences between P and P'
Significant differences between P and P', but none between either P and H, P' and H or both (P and H) and (P' and H)
All differences between P, P' and H significant
All comparisons

6 or 30 o per 14 or 70 o per cent. cent.

34-5 or 76-7 105 or 23-3

per cent.

per cent.

36 or 97*3 per i or 2*7 per

cent. cent.

76*5or75*oper 25*5or25*Oper

cent. cent.

20
45 37 I02

TABLE 2.-Comparison of the positions of d and V means of anthropometric characters betwee hybrid (H) and the European (P) and non-European (P') parental populations from which the hybri are supposed to have been derived. In the few cases in which the means of H and P or H and P' identical for a particular character, .5 has been assigned to each of the second and third columns of t table.

CHARACTERISTICS OF HYBRID POPULATIONS

29

eration and subsequently inbred, so that which calculations are falsified on account

chindividual to-day can, with reservations of this imperfection. A further difficulty is

at have already been mentioned, claim to introduced in cases in which the modem

ssess an equally divided racial heritage. hybrid population has been derived from

In these circumstances it would not be very small numbers of European men on the

rising if different crossed populations one side and of non-European women on the

owed variabilities of different orders, so other (as in that of the Norfolk Islanders),

at generalizations regarding all of them for these small groups may not have dis-

uld not be of much value. As has already played the same order of variability as the

en stressed, in the majority of cases the large populations to which they belonged.

ormation regarding the parental groups Small samples are often peculiar and they

nwhich the hybrids have been derived is are not likely to represent random selections

adequate. There are almost no physical from total assemblies. Finally, it must be

ords relating to them directly, and for pointed out that the metrical data them-

s reason it has been necessary to suppose selves involve certain defects. Different

at data for series which' are presumed numbers of characters are available for differ-

be their descendants can be used for ent comparisons of a hybrid with the two

e comparative purpose in view. The corresponding parental series, and this must

umption that the parental populations not be forgotten when comparisons are made

ye not altered appreciably in type or between conclusions drawn from one such

ability during the past three hundred triad .with those drawn from another. In a

ars is not an unreasonable one, but slight few instances it is necessary to admit that

anges of which no knowledge exists may the same feature may have been measured

vertheless have taken place.

by two different observers in ways which are

Another source of uncertainty may be sufficiently dissimilar to affect the com-

more consequence. In making compari- parisons of variabilities. It would be pleasant,

ns of the mean values of measurements, it of course, to neglect any such imperfections

s been assumed as a pis aller that only one of the evidence when attempting to make

opean stock was concerned in the for- general deductions regarding the variability

tion of the hybrid population, which is of hybrid populations, but unfortunately

ainly no more than a first approximation they are too obvious to be overlooked.

the truth. If, however, the same series The method employed here in considering

used in several comparisons of variability the question of variability was devised by

re will be some danger of underestimating Morant (I933). It takes into account the

variabilities of the European groups ratios of the variances (NS2's) of a number of

ch actually participated in the cross. It characters and provides a conventional

quite impossible to assess the extent to estimate of the mean variability of one series

Order of Variability
more vaxiable than either P or P'
more variable than P but as variable as P' less variable than P, but more variable than P' less variable than either P or P'.

Hybrid Population Jamaican "Browns" d and V (17), American
Negroes of Mixed Blood d (I2), AngloIndians d (7). Half-Blood Sioux d (9). Yucatecans d (io), Mestizos of Kisar c3 (4).
Norfolk Islanders S and e (I4), Bastaards of
Rehoboth d (4).

poAatoBesnLsedEdtht3teho.e-nhCuaEovmumebrpoebaprereeioanfsndocenh(raPior)vfaecaddt.neadrnTsdnhcoeeonmfm-ipEegauuarrrneeodipv.nearabirnaanc(ckPe'es)ts(ptaa2f'rste)enrtotafhleapnnotaphumrloeaptooifmoeantssreirfcirecoshmianrwathchitecerrhisgtbhhetet-hwhaeynebdrnichdoyslburamirnde

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW;

as compared with another. The results obtained from the material that has been used in the present paper are given in Table 4, in connexion with which two points need

violation of Mendelian or other acqepted gee principles being involved. One of the possibe mechanisms by which such an effect could he produced would involve the partial suppresion, in the mixed race, of the intraracial varability

clarifying. Herskovits's American Negroes of of either original race. This suppression mht

Mixed Blood are his NNW, NW and NWW
series combimed, and the standard deviations ('s) of the non-European series with which the Anglo-Indians are compared were calcu-

conceivably be so great"as to fully compensate or more than compensate, for that part of the variability of the mixed race which was caused by the segregation from one another of those genes that had caused the two original races to

lated by Mahalanobis (I927) from the differ. Thus the intraracial variability of t

measurements of a number of North Indian series included in Risley's classical work The Tribes and Castes of Bengal. The impossibility of selecting a single series which might be supposed to represent the indigenous ancestors of the Anglo-Indians has
already been commented upon. A more detailed analysis of the data shows con-

new mixed race would be largely constituted ol the interracial differences, and the origin intraracial differences would now be in pa suppressed in their expression."
It should be pointed out that for most of the commonly used anthropometric characters interracial variability, i.e. the variati of the averages for different groups, is ve

vincingly that the variabilities of the hybrids small compared with intraracial variabilityl are of the same order as those of the popula- i.e. the variation exhibited by individu tions from which they have presumably belonging to the same group, a fact whi descended. From this conclusion, which Muller does not sufficiently stress. certainly fails to coincide with the genetical The view that the distributions of metric assumptions customarily made in considera- characters in hybrid populations are often tions of race crossing, it is quite clear that bimodal or multimodal in form will be dis.

most hybrid populations do not tend to be cussed very shortly. Most of the available

either appreciably more or appreciably less material is hardly adequate for testing this

variable than the majority of existing supposition, but where normal curves have

''unmixed" populations.

been fitted to distributions of stature, head

The question of the unincreased variability length, head breadth, bizygomatic breadth,

of hybrid populations has formed subject of cephalic index and nasal index for hybrid

three important papers by Herskovits (I927), series composed of 75 or more individuals,

Wagner (I932) and Muller (1936). Fischer none of the results suggests any appreciable

(I9I3), was inclined to attribute the low departure from normality, and the proba.

variability of the Bastaards of Rehoboth bilities of the true population distributions

whom he studied to the unsuitability of the being normal in these cases are all quite

measure of dispersion used, the standard high.* The question here, of course, is not

deviation, but Professor Muller, an eminent whether a particular sample gives a distribu.

geneticist, has pointed out that the term tion which appears to be bimodal or not, but

" variation" has hardly any exact scientific meaning unless it is defined as the standard

whether any samples can be supposed to
indicate that the total assembly from whicl

deviation, the variance or the coefficient of they were taken exhibits such a peculi variation. Some ingenious Mendelian inter- arity. The series examined do not indicate

pretations of unincreased hybrid variability that there is a clear departure from the usuW

have been advanced by Muller himself, and symmetrical form of distribution with asingle

the one he favours may be quoted:

peak in the case of any character and for any

population considered.

"There are several circumstances which could

give rise to a comparatively low variability on the part of a population of mixed race, as com-
pared with the onrginal populations which went

* The evidential basis of this and other statementsii
the present discussion will appear in an extended monograph on race crossing i course of preparatioi

to form the mixture, without the slightest by the writer.

CHARACTERISTICS OF HYBRID POPULATIONS

31

$ummary and Conclusions
To summarize, the anthropologist, as such, Jo not concerned specifically with the mechan-
of heredity but with certain of its results they apply to groups of individuals. The servational data he has collected demonate in a conclusive fashion that some *ple relationships exist between the group
cteristics of hybrids and those of the ocks from which they have presumably
derived. The first of these is that the
values of quantitative characters are
ermediate in the hybrid population where e is a clear distinction between the ental groups, the second is that the bilities of the hybrid population do not, the whole, tend to be peculiarly high or
arly low, and the third is that the ,tributions of qualitative characters in the brid population are approximately normal form and, so far as can be judged by the 6 at present available, apparently always
modal.
spite of the imperfections of the evice, these general conclusions may be *dered as firmly established. They are of
a nature that it would be possible to ncile them with any neo-Mendelian nes concerned with the mechanism of
lidual inheritance. At the present time
is no adequate descriptive material ble which could be used to demonstrate the group situation is brought about by action of genetical laws. The anthrocal data only enable one to observe an result which might have been reached in
of different ways. An obvious exists for additional descriptive records ting to hybrid populations which would the linking up of anthropological and
.i conclusions and also form a research of great theoretical and practical
t.

REFERENCES
BUXTON, L. H. DUDLEY, TREVOR, J. C., and BLACKWOOD, BEATRICE, 1938, Measurements of Oxfordshire Villagers, MS., Department of Human Anatomy, University Museum, Oxford. (Forthcoming.)
DAVENPORT, C. B., and STEGGERDA, MORRIS, 1929, Race Crossing in Jamaica, Pubi. Carneg. Instn., No. 395.
FISCHER, EUGEN, 1913, Die Rehobother Bastards und das Bastardierungsproblem beim Menschen.
HERSKOVITS, MELVILLE J., 1927, Variability and Racial Mixture, Amer. Nat., LXI. -, 1930, The Anthropometry of the American Negro, Columbia Univ. Contr. Anthrop., XI.
HRDLI6KA, ALE§, 1925, The Old Americans.
HULSE, FREDERICK SEYMOUR, I933, The Comparative Anthropometry of Cubans and Andalusians, MS., Peabody Museum, Harvard University.
JENKS, ALBERT ERNEST, I9I6, Indian-White Amalgamation: An Anthropometric Study, Univ. Minn. Stud. Soc. Sci., No. 6.
MAHALANO0IS, P. C., 1922-3I, Anthropological Observations on the Anglo-Indians of Calcutta: Part I, Analysis of Male Stature, Part II, Analysis of Anglo-Indian Head Length, Rec. Indian Mus., XXIII. , I927, Analysis of Race Mixture in Bengal, J. Asiat. Soc. Beng., XXIII.
MORANT, G. M., 1935, An Attempt to Estimate the Variabilities of Various Populations, Z. Rassenk., II.
MULLER, H. J., I936, On the Variability of Mixed Races, Amer. Nat., LXX.
RODENWALDT, ERNST, 1927, Die Mestizen auf Kisar, 2 vols.
SCHULTZE JENA, LEONHARD, 1928, Zur Kenntnis
des Korpers der Hottentotten und Buschmnnner, Denkschr. Med.-Naturw. Ges. Jena, XVII.
SHAPIRO, HARRY L., 1929, Descendants of the Mutineers of the Bounty, Mem. Bishop Mus., XI.
STEGGERDA, MORRIS, 1932a, Physical Measurements of Dutch Men and Women, Amer. J Phys. Anthrop., XVI. , 1932b, Anthropometry of Adult Maya Indians: A Study of their Physical and Physiological Characteristics, Publ. Carneg. Instn., No.
434-
SULLIVAN, LOUIS R., 1920, Anthropometry of the Siouan Tribes, Anthrop. Pap. Amer. Mus., XXIII.
WAGNER, K., 1932, The Variability of Hybrid Populations, Amer. J. Phys. Anthrop., XVI.
WILLIAMS, GEORGE DEE, 1931, Maya-Spanish Crosses in Yucatan, Pap. Peabody Mus., XIII

Eugeics Review, Vol. NX,No. 1.

