8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The third question was in effect answered by Mrs. Grant Duff in the article* that provoked Mr. Kerr's criticism. Even if the allowances fail, as we believe they will, to raise the birth rate, they will serve for the better sustenance of the boys and girls for
* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1940, 82, 95.

whose world we are fighting to-day. This is
not a very great eugenic achievement, but it is an instalment to go on with. Even if it does not help us far forward, it will do something to keep us from slipping back. And in war-time that is perhaps as much as could be hoped for.

POPULATION TRENDS AND POLICIES
By FRANCOIS LAFITTE

FOR students of population trends and policies Mr. Glass's book* is an invaluable encyclopaedia. In years to come,
says Mr. Glass in his preface,
We may be faced with a population considerably reduced by war casualties. We shall almost certainly be faced with one which is at least on the verge of decline. Some writers have already made up their minds that a declining population is undesirable; others believe that, at least for some years, a decline may bring, or may be used to bring, considerable advantages. But many writers agree that to adjust ourselves to population changes of the kind most likely to occur, or to adjust the population to our aims, will need much forethought and planning. In this book I do not deal with the question of planning. Instead I have tried, by summarizing the work I have done in recent years as Research Secretary of the Population Investigation Committee, to give a general background which may be helpful when we come to consider which way we ought to go, and what we should do to go there.
Whenever and however Britain's population problem is ultimately tackled, Mr. Glass's work, with its 373 pages of closely argued analysis and its ample footnotes and appendixes summarizing or referring to nearly all the important research in this field, will become an indispensable reference book. It sums up the demographic experiences of an epoch-an epoch in which all the
* Population Policies atnd Movements in Europe.
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1940. See also EUGENICS RzVIEW, 1940, 82, 49.

immanent contradictions-social, political, moral, spiritual-of European civilization culminated in the paroxysms of social and military strife which have convulsed Europe for at least thirty years.
In his review of past and possible future population trends and of policies designed to influence those trends, Mr. Glass sticks closely to his special field, covering this with meticulous accuracy but passing few judgments. His facts speak largely for themselves and form an unforgettable picture of an epoch that can never return. It is a picture of outspoken, purposive and efficient militarism and nihilism in Germany attempting to master population trends, as it attempts to master all other social and economic problems, with a terrifyingly thorough use of modern techniques combined with a brutal, degrading and reactionary " ideology "; of Fascist Italy, Germany's precursor in population policy, but without
the forward-looking dynamism of the Nazis, inefficiently and unsuccessfully striving in the same direction; of France, Italy's precursor, its official mind even more rooted in the past, more and more coming to imitate Italian and German techniques; of Britain, shirking the issue and hoping to muddle through; of the progressive Scandinavian democracies, making what may later be seen to have been the first faltering steps towards a human, democratic, civilized

POPULATION TRENDS AND POLICIES

9

solution of the population problem which is to be hoped that he wil later devote

confronts most European nations. Mr. Glass himself to the topic.

himself does not make these generalizations; Chapter VIII and an appendix contain an

I cannot see any other generalizations which authoritative discussion of the methods of

fit the facts he records.

projecting present population trends into

Chapter I surveys British population the future and a review of the most import-

trends since i8oi and analyses present-day ant " estimates " which have so far been

regional and social differences in fertility. It made for this country. Mr. Glass draws

also discusses the causes of the falling birth- attention to a relatively new method of

rate. Mr. Glass rightly concludes that extrapolating mortality and fertility trends,

changes in the amount of marriage or age at by " plotting each specific death-rate against

marriage are not responsible, and that the period of birth of the persons to whom

involuntary factors (such as a growth of the rate applies, instead of the period in which

physiological sterility, greater use of soap, the rate was observed." This generation

etc.) are probably not important. The really method, developed by Derrick, Kermack,

important factor is that people are less McKendrick, McKinlay, Barclay, Cramer,

willing to have children and voluntarily Wold and others, may prove to be very

control their reproductivity. Mr. Glass fruitful, especially in the interpretation of

remarks that " the desire to control reproduc- mortality trends. It suggests, for instance,

tion has probably always been present in that " each generation, at least from the age

society, even when it did not imply a serious of lio onwards, tends to carry its own mor-

restriction of births, and at almost all times tality with it." Its application to fertility

and among most peoples some knowledge of trends is less evident, but the implications

methods of birth prevention has been for the forecasting of population trends are

available." But the vital point is that " the obvious. Mr. Glass presents a set of three

conditions specifically favouring small new projections made by himself. In general

families were lacking in Europe until the his curves follow those of Enid Charles,

nineteenth century, though individuals, es- although they suggest a considerably slower

pecially in wealthy and fashionable circles, decline in total numbers. It is a pity that

refused to be burdened with large families." expense has prevented publication of the full

Mr. Glass's account of how fertility has tables setting forth these " estimates."

been reduced in the past seventy-five years The bulk of the book is devoted to an

by contraception, abortion and other methods examination of " pro-natalist " policies in

is a fascinating piece of original research in France, Belgium, Italy, Germany and Scan-

English social history. His explanation of dinavia, discussing measures, motives and

why precisely since mid-Victorian times results in the light of population movements.

people generally have come to want to limit It is so learned, so exhaustive, so masterly,

their families is less satisfactory. He rightly and for all the difficulties of the subject such

ascribes this changed attitude towards interesting reading, that it well repays the

parenthood to the growth of a " new cultural initiative of the Eugenics Society in making

pattern" and sketches briefly some of the Mr. Glass's work possible. The biggest

main economic and social factors which generalization which he permits himself is

gave rise to this pattern. I do not feel, how- the following:

ever, that this analysis goes deep enough: it merely mentions some of the obvious
features. Yet a careful and detailed socio-

Evidence given in the chapters on France, Germany, and Italy shows that in those countries there is far less concern with the economic than

logical analysis of the " new cultural pat-, tern" is required, for without such a diagnosis we cannot prescribe any certain
remedy. Mr. Glass rules out such speculation from his strictly factual survey, but it

with the political implications of a declining population. France has been affected largely by her anxiety over the possibility of invasion and relative military strength of her neighbours, while Italy and Germany have been concerned
largely with the desire to justify their statements

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

on the question of " living space." . . . It would be no exaggeration to say that Italian population policy, when stripped of its fascist mysticism about the individual, the family, and the State, is to a large extent concerned with proving the validity of its claims for more territory. Other political factors may have more justification, and, in the present state of the world, it is certain that differential rates of growth of the populations of the Great Powers give a genuine basis for anxiety. But here, again, it would probably be much cheaper, as well as more
satisfactory, to solve the problem by thorough international control of migration and settlement than if each nation were to rush headlong into a
demographic armaments race.
On family allowances in France, Belgium and Italy Mr. Glass has written what is probably as authoritative a study as will be needed for many years to come. He shows conclusively that the French-Belgian-Italian systems, whatever their undoubted merits as welfare measures, almost certainly had no influence at all on the birth rate. The same would seem to apply to all the other petty monetary inducements offered to parents in France and Belgium-rebates on various taxes and charges, loans, subsidies, welfare facilities, medals, a shallow social prestige. After all, if the retreat from parenthood is bound up with a " new cultural pattern," a host of minor modifications and palliatives which left that pattern fundamentally unaltered were not likely to bring about a new attitude to child-bearing. There still remain the basic frustrations of French social life the aspiration of the masses for a fuller freer life which they felt to be possible, the force of " social capillarity " in an economically competitive society, the feelings of insecurity engendered by unemployment and the growing threat of war. Nor, as Mr. Glass shows, was the other aspect of French " pronatalist" policy-in the ill-inspired and ineffective repression of both contraception and abortion-likely to succeed in raising the birth rate; not, at least, as long as personal liberty was cherished in France. The main inspiration of much " pro-natalist " propaganda was the fear of German invasion. It was largely a defensive outlook, rooted in the past, harking back to I870 and I9I4, inspired not, as the Nazi policy is, by the

need for greater numbers to build up a
Herrenvolk holding all the best jobs in a unified and enslaved Europe, but simply by the desire for large armies to defend the status quo, both within France and in Europe generally. As war drew nearer French " pro-natalist " measures were in-
tensified on essentially similar lines: more petty inducements, more repression. It ended logically enough in Marshal Petain's
despairing outburst in June I940: " Too few children, too few arms, too few allies." " Too few technicians, too many vested
interests, too many traitors" would have been nearer the mark. It was tanks, aircraft and honest men, not troops, that were lacking.
Italian policy largely resembles that of France, with the addition of land reclamation, free portraits of Mussolini and a larger dose of repression. Measures which on examination amount to very little are put over with a windy bombast of which only the Duce is capable. Family allowances began largely as an ingredient in a scientific wage-cutting policy; "pro-natalist " measures were almost entirely inspired by aggressive imperialist ambitions and not by the social welfare motives that might lead a democratic country to wish to control its demographic development. Of the period before I937 Mr. Glass writes:
First, a large part of the policy was directed towards restricting emigration, in so far as economic conditions made this possible. Secondly, another considerable section concentrated on " negative " or repressive measures -imposing economic penalties on bachelors and childless married couples, and making it more difficult for women to prevent conception or procure abortion. Of the positive measures, many were not directly pro-natalist . . . Thus the general system of land reclamation and improvement coming under the head of bonifica integrale is not a direct population policy, though it may enable a larger population to be supported at the current or at a higher standard of life. Similar schemes of reclamation have been undertaken in many countries for reasons quite unconnected with a desire to increase the birth rate. The same applies to the legislation for the protection of maternity and childhood. This is not to deny that such measures are of very great value. . . But it is somewhat inappropriate to

POPULATION TRENDS AND POLICIES

II

invest them with the title of demographic measures, when there is scarcely any modem State which has not been passing similar legislation in the last fifty years. If we subtract these measures from the general group of positive measures introduced in Italy, we are left with very little specifically in the category of encouragements to the raising of families.
After I937 the family-allowance system was developed on a much larger scale and marriage loans were introduced. Mr. Glass finds no evidence that any of these measures
has so far influenced fertility. The slight rise of the birth rate in I937-38 probably resulted mainly from the return of troops from Abyssinia. The new marriage loans may have proved a stimulus but, as in Germany, this may only mean a concentration of births in the early years of married life rather than an increase in the total number of births per marriage.
Nazi Germany is a different proposition. Here repression, positive inducements and " pro-natalist " propaganda have been systematized and perfected to a pitch which makes the efforts of Belgium, France and Italy look childish in comparison. Mr. Glass's
examination of the Nazis' apparent success in promoting births is of great interest. He establishes that
while a considerable part of the rise since I933 is due to the increased number of marriages, a much greater proportion is due to the increase of fertility within marrage. Both the recent marriages and those contracted before I933 have shown this increase. Two-thirds of the increase in legitimate births, says Burgdorfer, must be attributed to a genuine rise in fertility.
But he rightly points out (as Burgdorfer has admitted) that
the economic depression of I930-32 may have caused married couples to postpone having any or having additional children. An improvement in economic circumstances, under whatever government, might therefore not only have increased the annual number of marriages but also the number of children per marriage. ... If this criticism is valid, then the increase in births attributable to the special measures of National-Socialist Germany is considerably less than the total increase. But there has been, nevertheless, some real increase.
The Nazi theorists attribute this genuine increase to the "psychic rebirth of Germany." Mr. Glass is sceptical:

If " psychic rebirth " is an important factor in affecting population trends, it should be noted that quite a large section of the population appears as yet untouched by it. Of the 6I5,630 marriages contracted in I933 and still in existence on December 3ISt I936, 2I9,334, or 36 per cent., had borne only one child each, and 240,793, or 39 per cent., had borne none. Of the
722,764 marriages contracted in I934 and still in
existence at the end of I936, 287,888, or 40 per cent., had borne only one child each, and a further 328,295, or 45 per cent, had not borne any children. The present writer believes, however, that the material measures have been more important than the " psychic " changes, and that, in particular, the suppression of illegal abortion has been a major factor.
He gives statistical evidence in support of this assertion, and concludes: " If the suppression of illegal abortion has been as successful as it is said to be, that by itself would account for the increase in births in recent years." It is curious that Mr. Glass does not refer to the changed attitude to illegitimacy in Germany, which may have some bearing on the decline of illegal abortion. There is no mention- either of the stud-farm uses which the Nazis made of the Labour Camps
and the Landjahr for young women.
In contrast to all these countries, Sweden especially, Denmark and Norway to some; extent, present a different position. As Mr. Glass points out:
The Scandinavian approach to the population problem is distinguished by two special characteristics. First, that the passing of legislation should be preceded by detailed investigations of the various aspects of the population problem. Of no other countries is this true. Even in France . . . no really serious inquiry has been made at any time, either by the Commissions set up early in the twentieth century, or by the Conseil Sup6rieur de la Natalite . . . Secondly . . . in Scandinavia the initial assumption is that parenthood shall be voluntary. The mandate of the Swedish Commission categorically states that homes which are economically badly off should not be burdened by too many children, while the Mandate of the Danish Commission specifies that no repressive measures shall be considered.
In Sweden population discussions were launched by Alva and Gunnar Myrdal's
book, Crisis in the Population Problem (I934),* which had an enormous influence on
* See EUGENICS REVIEW, I937, 10, 58.

x2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the thinking public of all Scandinavian countries. It pointed out to Neo-Malthusian optimists the social and economic dis-
adivantages which might result from a

On the contrary, says Mr. Glass, the Population Commission is very anxious to safeguard and guarantee the employment of married women, and to establish their right to have
children and take the required absence during

declining and ageing population. To Con- pregnancy and childbirth without being subject

servative pessimists it replied that, whether to the fear of losing their jobs.

or not a rise in the standard of living would In Sweden up to the outbreak of war, increase fertility, there were in any case

strong grounds for removing the major social and economic disadvantages of childrearing. It proposed that measures to pro-

the economic assistance actually given to families is still relatively small, and whether the proposals suggested and measures actually
introduced will have any significant effect upon

mote parenthood should go hand in hand the trend of fertility is, of course, impossible to

with measures to enhance personal freedom
by promoting voluntary parenthood-the willing production of wanted children.
The seventeen reports of the Swedish

predict. But of the general proposals and
measures two things may be said. First, they are in keeping with the thesis of democratic government, for they all emphasize the need for voluntary parenthood. Secondly, whatever their

Royal Commission on Population and the effect upon fertility, they are in any case all

legislation to which they led were all socially desirable.

inspired by this general outlook. Abortion was allowed on therapeutic, eugenic and
ethical grounds both in Sweden and Denmark,* and measures to diffuse contraceptive knowledge were adopted in both countries. The magnificent work of voluntary bodies, such as the Swedish Riksforbuttd for Sexuell
Upplysning (National Association for Sex Education), received a great stimulus in the years immediately preceding the outbreak of war. A beginning was made with a programme to get parenthood on to a planned,
rational and eugenic footing. At the same
time in Sweden a series of measures was adopted-with emphasis on community services-to make parenthood easier. Better housing, nutrition, maternity services and direct provision of benefits in kind were preferred to children's allowances. Home-

The Swedish measures were only the earliest beginnings of what was frankly an
experiment which might or might not have
succeeded. The outbreak of war has probably frustrated this democratic attempt to solve
the population problem, as- it will almost certainly nullify the different type of experiment in Germany. In a sense Fascism and Nazism are short cuts to a solution of the major social and economic problems of European civilization. Much the same may also be said of the population policies of France and Belgium: they are short cuts, their spirit is wrong, their intentions those of despair and reaction. In the long run they are doomed to failure, because they are
short cuts to a road along which humanity
refuses any more to travel.

furnishing loans to assist young married But it must not be ignored that in war couples were introduced, but interest was time Nazi population policy is still develop-

charged and there were no cancellations of ing. The Herrenvolk is actually taking over

repayment at the birth of children. Nor was Europe and new attempts to increase its

there any attempt, as in Germany and fertility are being made. War-time separa-

France, to use these loans to drive women tion of man and wife is an impediment to

out of employment.

fertility which the Nazis are seeking to over-

come by indiscriminate exhortations to

* In Norway abortion law reform was demanded by breed. The German soldier is urged to leave

the Medical Congress in I930 and by a petition organized by the Free Churches in 1934 and signed by 200,000 persons over I8. A Government Committee recom-

his wife pregnant when he returns to his unit. If not his wife, any echtdeutsche woman

mended reform in 1935, but nothing was done. The full will deem it an honour to bear his progeny.

text of the Danish law is published in the EUGENICS REVIEw of April 1938 (P. 43), and of the Swedish law
in the issue of July I939 (P. IO9).

On the other hand separation is being used to reduce the fertility of the conquered

POPULATION TRENDS AND POLICIES

13

nations. Polish, Czech, Dutch, Belgian, French man-power is drafted into Germany for semi-forced labour. Jewish men in Poland are apparently herded into reservations away from their stranded womenfolk. Many thousands of French soldiers are retained as prisoners. Hitler's dream of a Europe repopulated by IOO million " racially superior" Germans is more than ever the

inspiration of Nazi policy. I feel nevertheless that all this will lead nowhere. One day,
when the nightmare is over and Europe faces
once more the problems of reconstruction,
the Swedish attempt to influence demographic trends by enhancing personal welfare and freedom will be found to have contained important hints for a British approach to the
problem.

FAMILY ALLOWANCES IN WAR TIME
By EVA M. HUBBACK
Vice-Chairman, Family Endowment Society

T HE fact that as many as I50 Members instance, Sir John Orr's estimate that at

of the HIouse of Commons drawn from least 25 per cent of our children come from

all parties have put their names to a homes in which the income is too low to

resolution asking the Govemment to fonnu- allow for adequate nourishment. But they

late a scheme for " a national State-paid may not be so familiar with the recent

scheme of allowances for dependent children, figures as to child-dependency drawn by

payable to their mothers or acting guardians, Mr. Seebohm Rowntree from a recent social

as a means of safe-guarding the health and survey of I5,577 men in York. In this group:

well-being of the rising generation," is a sure 57 *8 per cent. had no children; 2I per cent.

sign that the support for Family Allowances had one child; I2.3 per cent. had two

is growing every day. Women's organiza- children; 5 per cent. had three children;

tions, religious bodies, professional societies 2.3 per cent. had four children; and i 6 per

and economists of note are also increasingly cent. had five or more children. It is sig-

giving their support, not only to the principle nificant that the 3 9 per cent. with more

of Family Allowances, but also to a universal than three children accounted for over 23

state scheme.

per cent. of the total number.

It often happens in war that the national Since the beginning of the war it has been

social conscience is strengthened, and that estimated that the cost of living for working-

reforms which have been asked for is peace class families has risen by at least 30 per

time for many years are adopted and dreams cent. In some industries wages have risen as

become facts. It would not be surprising much, if not more, and overtime and the

should this happen in the case of Family employment of more members of the family

Allowances, for the need is so greatly have resulted in higher incomes. But in

strengthened as a result of war conditions. other cases it has not been so, and incomes

The main ground on which it is being put have risen much less than prices or even not

forward is the need for maintaining an at all. Often, moreover, when the man has

adequate standard of living for the children been called up his wife has to manage on a

of the nation.

greatly reduced weekly sum. The result is

Readers of the EUGENICS REVIEW will be that many families who were previously

familiar with the peace-time figures-for above the poverty line are now below, and

