A. H. HALSEY
Department of Social and Administrative Studies, Oxford
Genetic and Environmental Factors in Human Ability* A Review

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY has been organizing a series of symposia on problems which
relate the biological to the social sciences. A hundred years ago this would have given rise to no excitement. Spencerian unity would have been taken for granted. But, as is well
known, these two partners of nineteenth century progress parted company in the early
years of the twentieth century. Separation was ideological and political rather than intellectual. Most sociologists to-day have been taught to assume, mainly through second-hand
references to the excesses of social Darwinism, that application of biological ideas to human society is the instrument of scoundrels designed to justify predatory ethics and to defend
racial, ethnic, caste and class inequalities.
The divorce has been costly. It has prevented the emergence of a highly appropriate modern form of liberal education which, if it existed, would reveal the over-simplifications of the so-called "two cultures" problem. No less regrettably it has delayed scientific advance in the social sciences in a fog of ideological dispute. Happily, however, and especially in the past five or six years since the celebration of Darwin's centenary, there are strong signs of reconciliation. This volume, jointly edited by an economist and a physiologist, is one such sign-and an especially significant one because it is concerned with the central traditional controversy of nature and nurture, but in the fresh context of current preoccupations with the search for ability, its causes, measurement and consequences.
Presumably following the organization of the symposium, the book is divided into four groups of essays; the first on the nature and meaning of intelligence tests, the second on selection for higher education, the third on aspects of subnormality and the fourth on differential fertility and intelligence. Each group of essays ends with a few remarks from the chairman of the session and there is summary reporting of the discussion of some of the papers. The result, though graphic and embodying the main papers, which are certainly impressive, is incomplete for lack of an editorial essay or "overview". Themes recur in the four sections without reference between them. There is, for example, a meticulous answer by R. M. C. Huntley in the fourth section to a question (the proportion of intelligence test variance which is attributable to heredity) which Professor Vernon has disposed of in the very first essay as one with "no simple answer in terms of so much attributable to genetic, so much to environmental components".
The structure of the missing editorial essay might well have been taken from Hebb's distinction between Intelligence A (the genetic potentiality) and Intelligence B (intelligence as defined by the Oxford dictionary which is the product of interaction between IA and environment) to which Vernon added Intelligence C (measured intelligence-a sample of IB).

* Meade, J. E., and Parkes, A. S. (Eds.), Genetic and Environmental Factors in Hunan Ability. Eugenics
Society Symposia, Volume 2. Edinburgh 1966: Oliver and Boyd. Pp. xi+ 242. Price 57s. 6d.

ER-D

49

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Two related and fundamental questions would then have remeged which are in fact discussed in the essays:
1. What is the relation between IA, 'B and Ic?
2. What causes variation in IC, IB and 'A?
The essential relation between IA, 'B and Ic is contained in their definitions. Beyond
this, however, vast ignorance remains. Little is known about IA. It is unobserved and unmeasured but is reasonably assumed to be normally distributed. It is pretty certain that it is polygenic and additive. There is no evidence of dominance or "hybrid vigour". IB too is not directly measurable. Thus statements about the distribution and variation of IA
and IB are partly dependent on the measurement of Ic and the analysis of its components.
Professor Vernon's review of this problem is politically cool and conceptually sophisticated. He insists that intelligence tests cannot provide us "with even a moderately reliable estimate of the IA of an individual or of a group" and he dismisses the claims of Burt and others to be able to measure the genetic component of intelligence test scores as unrealistic. (Professor Burt believes that the genetic component on careful testing may be up to 90 per cent). This is not at all to deny that the major part of variance in intelligence is hereditary at least in culturally and educationally homogeneous groups, but the essential underlying point is that progress in the nature/nurture controversy has consisted largely in increased recognition of the importance of the interaction of heredity and environment. There is, as Professor Vernon says, no simple answer and Mr. Huntley's suggestion "that for general operational intelligence genetic differences will be responsible for something nearer threequarters, perhaps 70 per cent, of the total variability" must be taken with his own carefully circumscribed version of the question, viz. "an estimate of the heritability of intelligence as measured from scores obtained on a particular test by a particular group of people living at a particular time in a particular area". In other words the crucially important sociological question of the range of environmental variables is excluded and with it the possibility of determining whether, for example, class or ethnic groups are genetically as well as socially distinct in their intellectual quality.
The genetic determinants of variation in IA and IB are similarly uncharted. Medical knowledge has accumulated concerning the tiny proportion (0 37 per cent) of severely subnormal individuals (IQ less than 50). Observable pathology of the brain is almost always present but in only a small proportion of cases is a definite cause attributable. Perhaps the most significant known fact is sociological. Severe subnormality is more or less randomly distributed socially, whereas mild subnormality (IQ 50 to 70) is almost entirely confined to the lowest social classes. Almost no middle class child has an IQ of less than 80 unless he is the victim of a recessive genetic condition such as phenylketonuria or some other pathological process.
In general social and psychological knowledge of the environmental determinants of
'B and Ic is further advanced than is biological knowledge though even here Professor
Wiseman emphasizes how little is known. What is perhaps most impressive in the essays by Professor Himmelweit, Dr. Bernstein and Professor Wiseman is their demonstration of the elaborately sophisticated methods now used to disentangle the web of environmental forces which determine 'B' IC and educational attainment.
Once granted that environment contributes to the outcome to a significant extent, it follows that many of the unsolved problems lie completely within the social and moral arts and sciences-in the study of language as a social institution and in schools, families and neighbourhoods as forms of social organisation. Mr. Pidgeon argues forcibly that intelligence tests might be more celebrated or deplored for their function in justifying and perpetuating selective systems of education, rather than as instruments for allocating educa-
50

GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS IN HUMAN ABILITY
tional resources in accordance with a natural order of merit. He incidentally puts considerable stress on the structured expectations of teachers as determinants of performancean aspect of the school environment of which firm knowledge is all too meagre. Mrs. Floud goes further to disparage a misconceived meritocratic problem in the context of university admission and insists on defining this problem as intrinsically political and administrative in character. From the point of view of political egalitarians the university admissions problem may be dismissed as academic in the pejorative sense, in that the major forces of inequality which handicap females and working-class children have already done their work. The admissions tutor can do little towards promoting justice: he can only ask for more places.
"Predictor uncertainty" among the highly selected population of university students constitutes a problem to the solution of which the social scientist can expect no help from genetic study. Meanwhile the inaccuracy of academic assessment of those destined to form the academic succession is far greater than is generally recognized by dons. For example, in Mr. Hudson's Cambridge sample 23 per cent of the Fellows of the Royal Society and 43 per cent of the D.Sc.s had gained seconds or thirds. But belief in the predictive value of the "first" as well as in other instruments of academic grading is likely to survive while, quite apart from the interested self-conceptions of the university teaching professions, educational selection becomes a bigger and bigger industry.
However, another aspect of the causes of variation in IA, 'B and Ic brings us firmly
back into shared territory; this is the old question of the trend of national intelligence. The pre-war theory, in essence, was that since there is an inverse relation between Ic and fertility (largely through their association with high and low social status respectively) the average
IA of industrial countries must be declining. Sir Peter Medawar offered a subtle discussion
of this problem in the 1959 Reith Lectures but came, however guardedly, to the conclusion that limited decline was the best guess. Dr. C. 0. Carter, though with no less caution, comes in his essay to look in the opposite direction towards a possible rise in average IA through reversal of the correlation between intelligence and fertility. This is mildly exciting, though Medawar's theory of the limitation on decline would presumably also hold for the contrary trend towards amelioration.
In summary, I would say that this book of essays is much to be welcomed. It deserves to be widely read among biologists and social scientists: better still by their joint students.
51

