THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION
By FRANCOIS LAFITTE

Itstroduction

I5-64) will grow older. Between I89I and

AWELL-CONCEIVED population I937 its average age rose by 24 years, from

policy cannot be elaborated unless
the most careful and objective assessment of the consequences of present population trends is first attempted. If we wish to modify the British demographic situation we have to know why it needs modifying, and in what direction it should be guided. The consequences of differential fertility and mortality are the main concern of
eugenists, and less attention has been
devoted to the possible effects of changes in age composition and total numbers. The present article is limited to a discussion of the latter in relation to Britain's economic future, and is written in lieu of a review of W. B. Reddaway's The Economics of a Declining Population (I939)*, the first systematic study of the subject in England.

34-3 to 36-9 years. In the coming forty years Glass's projections suggest a further ageing of between 3j and 6 years. Wil this. affect the productivity of the worker ad-
versely ? We do not know, but, since the' whole trend of industrial technique is away from types of work involving great physical
strength, I doubt whether any possible deterioration of productivity due to ageing of the working population could not be made up for by improvements in health and working conditions. In any case, productivity per operative employed in Britain rose by 7 per cent in I924-30 and by at least 20 per cent in I930-35, whilst in the U.S.A. physical output per man-hour in industry rose by 27 per cent in I929-35. The advances in technique which made possible such stupendous progress in productivity are far more

Human Needs and Resources
If we ignore the existing economic arid social system, population trends down to I980 give no cause at all for alarm. Smaller numbers mean more material resources per head, the ratio of active workers to dependants does not deteriorate, and there is no danger of increasing average age affecting the productivity of labour. The new projections into the future of population trends
in England and Wales made by Glass (1940)
suggest that the ratio of men aged 20-54 to the total population to be maintained is hardly likely to vary at all in the four decades that lie ahead of us. If the war kills off a proportion of this labour force, it is equally likely to bring about a corresponding reduction of dependants, young and old alike.
But the working population (age groups

important than any adverse effects which might result from the ageing of the working population.
The objective needs-resources situation is, therefore, reassuring. Why worry about population trends at all ? Because between human needs and their satisfaction by use of the available human and material resources there stands a complex system of economic and social relations which must be taken into
account. Thus, in I93I there were 23-l men aged 2I-54 per I00 of the population, but I2 per cent of the men in these age groups were available for work but could find no one to employ them. While the effect, of population trends upon the primary relationships between our society and our material resources may be insignificant in one or two generations, their effects upon the superimposed economic and social relationships within our society may be of great

* Allen & Unwin, 8s. 6d.

importance.

121

122 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It is, therefore, necessary, as Reddaway Reddaway, requires the intervention of a

argues, (a) to make an analysis of the third factor, " something which will create

economic system, and (b) to assess the im- extra incomes and so extra demand, without

portance of population trends as one of providing a simultaneous increase in the

many factors which influence the working volume of goods to be bought." Expansion

of the economic system, on the assumption of the production of producers' goods fulfils

that the system will continue more or less this function.

as at present. This assumption is necessary, But capital outlay is not undertaken by

although we may be certain that the system business men unless they expect an adequate

will change, because we cannot predict such level of profits. Economic recovery, in our

changes, and because only thus can we see the present economic system, thus depends upon

general shape of coming problems and the the foresight, imagination and " confidence "

sort of changes we ought to welcome and of a numerically small but economically all-

work for.

important group of people known as entre-

The Economic System

preneurs. Their " confidence " is a fragile thing, (a) because no one can forecast

(I) Capital Outlay and Economic Progress business conditions more than a year or

Following Reddaway and Keynes, I take two ahead, (b) because they depend for their

the view that capital outlay (the " propensity capital on banks, and on the " investing

to invest ") plays a key role in the economic public" who may be even more influenced

system. Economic depression may be re- by short-term considerations than the busi-

garded typically as a state of affairs in which ness men. Unfortunately for the mass of

the level of consumers' demand anticipated ordinary folk, the " confidence " of entre-

by entrepreneurs appears too low to inspire preneurs is exposed to a constant tendency

in them confidence in the profitability of new for the " marginal efficiency" of capital-

net capital outlay, which, if undertaken, i.e. the profitability of investment-to

would, by the mechanism of the " multi- decline. The accumulation of capital itself

plier," expand production approximately tends ultimately to diminish the " marginal

to conditions of full employment. Instead, efficiency" of capital. The more plentiful

capital and labour remain unemployed capital becomes, the lower tends to be the

because entrepreneurs do not anticipate any net yield which the next capital goods pro-

profit from expanding production. Although duced will give to the entrepreneur, unless

there are many methods of effecting the counteracting forces simultaneously create a

economic expansion necessary for recovery, new and proportionate demand for net addi-

the surest, indeed, the classical method (as tional capital outlay. " Capital has to be kept

Reddaway points out) has been a direct scarce enough in the long period," says

expansion of the production of capital goods, Keynes (I936), " to have a marginal effi-

producing an additional flow of wages and ciency" sufficient to induce entrepreneurs

a rise in demand for consumers' goods to to continue producing new capital goods.

which the consumption goods' industries then He points out that

respond. Expansion of the consumers' goods industries depends on the level of consumers'
demand, which can, of course, be raised by an expansion of the consumers' goods industries themselves. But recovery on these lines would be slow and uncertain, since some of the additional purchasing power would be saved and the expansion in expenditure would be less than the expansion in production of consumption goods which generated

" of two equal communities, having the same technique but different stocks of capital, the community with the smaller stock of capital may be able for the time to enjoy a higher standard of living than the community with the larger stock; though when the poorer community has
caught up the richer . . . then both alike will suffer the fate of Midas."

it. A really convincing advance, argues Thus, although from the objective needs-

THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION I23

resources point of view, a greater quantity of " In circumstances of such rapid techni-

socially useful capital is invariably prefer- cal progress accompanied by a demand

able to a smaller quantity, man-made which is no greater than can be met by an

obstacles to consumption may convert this unchanged value of plant, it is probable,

accumulation of material wealth into a cause both here and in America, that the deprecia-

of poverty.

tion allowances currently set aside by

Hitherto there have been counteracting manufacturers are sufficient to pay for all,

forces which succeeded in keeping capital or nearly all, of the cost of new plant without

scarce enough in the long run-by expanding requiring to be supplemented out of current

the demand for it-to maintain its " mar- net savings. This factor is a further aggra-

ginal efficiency." These forces were (a) vation of the contemporary problem of

technical advance (i.e. new knowledge em- finding a volume of profitable new net

bodied in inventions, improved organization investment sufficient to maintain equili-

of production and in a labour force trained brium with the readiness to save.... It

to apply new methods) ; (b) steady and rapid is certain that in the last quarter of a

growth of the home population (i.e. ex- century such a state of affairs has never

pansion of the internal consumers' market); existed, apart from very brief periods in

(c) expansion of foreign trade (i.e. expansion abnormal conditions, in any industrial

of the number of overseas consumers em- country in the world, except perhaps in

braced in the British economic system as the United States in i928."

customers or as borrowers) ; and (d) the rise in the standard of living (i.e. rise in the level
of consuming power per head. This factor was largely a function of the first three). Prolonged stagnation of any one of these forces of expansion would, if the other factors continue to expand demand for net additions to capital no faster than before, have a depressing effect on capital outlay.
What has happened to them ?

Similarly Cohn Clark (I937) has shown that " of the remarkable gains in productivity which have been made since I9I3, nearly the whole has been lost" [in the form of increased unemployment].
Even if new big capital-absorbing industries do develop, in itself the net additional capital outlay involved would not suffice to get us out of Joan Robinson's vicious circle:

(2) The Forces of Expansion
There is little doubt that technical advance will continue, but there is much dispute among the experts about whether it will require large volumes of new net capital outlay comparable to those needed in the nineteenth century for heavy industrial equipment. Pigou (I936) and Hicks (I936) are optimistic, but Harrod (I939) and Keynes* are less hopeful. At any rate, there are no important signs at present of the

" The accumulation of capital is always tending to bring itself to an end, while at the same time generating the need for a greater rate of investment to keep up employment."
The number of consumers in the domestic
market increased by I-Ij per cent annually
from i8oi to I9II, by i per cent from I9II to I93I, and by j per cent from I93I to I937. Keynes (I937) makes the following rough estimates for I860-I9I3:

emergence of new major capital-absorbing (a) Real capital increased by I70 per cent.

industries. Recent technical trends have (b) The long-period average rate of interest

been mainly in the direction of reducing the

was constant.

amount of capital per unit of output. Dis- (c) The technical period of production

cussing the British and American produc-

lengthened by at most I0 per cent.

tivity trends referred to above, Keynes (d) Population increased by 50 per cent

(I938) wrote:
* For example in his Galton Lecture, EUGENICS
REIEvw, April I937.

and the population served by British industry and investment by much more.

124 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(e) The standard of living rose by 6o per no more than I per cent since the last

cent. war.

According to this estimate the demand for In the inter-war period overseas invest-

net additions to capital arose very little from ment gradually dried up as a source of

technical changes which required " increas- demand for new net capital outlay. Is it

ing capitalization per unit of consumption " therefore " played out " because " no fresh

(say g per cent), but mainly from increasing continents remain to be discovered " (Joan

population (say 4I per cent) and from Robinson, I937), or because " the channels

increasing consumption per head (say 50 per of overseas investment are closed and are

cent). Somewhat less than half of the addi- not likely soon to be reopened" (Harrod,

tional home investment arose from expansion I939) ? There are immense possibilities of

of population; substantially more than half new demands for capital, not only in countries

of additional overseas investment was made like China and India, not only to restore the

possible by expansion of the number of over- colossal destruction of real capital that will

seas consumers served by the British econo- result from the present war, but in South

mic system. Over two-fifths of the additional America, Australia and even in Central and

stock of capital would not have been required Eastern Europe. Enormous obstacles, even

if the same improvement in the standard of before the outbreak of war, prevented this

living and the same lengthening of the latent demand from becoming effective in

period of production had not been accom- backward countries and no change for the

panied by any increase in population.

better after the war is likely in the absence

The new capital outlay necessitated by the of planned international action to raise

nineteenth century expansion in the number consumption on a world scale. Harrod is

of consumers was not necessarily devoted to therefore probably right, if, but only if,

direct production of their basic needs. Much " nothing is done about it." It is impossible

of it was used to foster production of food- henceforth to count on overseas investment

stuffs and raw materials in " new " countries, to stimulate the demand for new capital in

(a) by direct exports of capital or (b) by the absence of deliberate measures to promote

producing industrial exports to exchange for it.

" new " country products. Man-power was If 50 per cent of the net additions to

also exported in the form of emigrants. Britain's stock of capital in I860-I9I3 arose

Exports of capital on this basis can continue from the rising level of consumption per head,

to expand, (a) as long as Britain's effective the standard of living is in any case a prime

consuming power for " new " country pro- factor in keeping the economic system

ducts continues to expand (which depends functioning healthily. But it has not hitherto

on continued growth of our population and/ been an independent factor of economic

or on a continued rise in consumption per expansion, but rather a function of the other

head of such products), and (b) as long as the factors we have discussed. Raising the

" new " countries continue to need to borrow standard of living depends in the long run on

additional capital from Britain to increase technical advances making possible a higher

total output and productivity per worker. output per man-hour. But in the short run the

Just as cessation of population growth will actual level of demand may be well below

remove one source of demand for net the upper limits imposed by the state of

additional home investment and depress the technique. Short-term changes in the level

total demand for new net investment (unless of consumers' demand depend upon the

counterbalancing changes in other sources state of employment of capital and labour,

of demand occur), so it may be a cause of which in turn depends upon the " marginal

decline in overseas investment of the tra- efficiency" of capital. Within a trade cycle

ditional pre-I9I4 type. For example, the the standard of living is not the agent of

annual increase in British food imports has change but the subject affected. Because in

fallen steadily from 8 per cent in I86o-73 to the short run the standard of living depends

THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION 125

upon the " marginal efficiency " of capital, investment to private entrepreneurs, may

a rise in the level of demand has traditionally not the cessation of population growth make

been not a cause of economic recovery, but it more difficult to avoid unemployment of

a result of it. If population increase dis- men and resources than in the past ? On this

appears as a source of demand for net issue there are optimistic and pessimistic

additional capital outlay, if the prospect of schools of thought. I follow Reddaway in

future demand for additional investment giving the benefit of the doubt (but not more)

arising from technical advance and overseas to the pessimists, providing nothing is done

borrowing is uncertain, then a further long- to alter the working of our present economic

term rise in the standard of living (generated system. In a progressive economy technical

by technical progress) may not materialize. advance continually reduces the number of

Instead- the prospect for the post-war years workers employed by a given quantity of

ahead of us may quite well be one of pro- capital. To maintain full employment and

longed economic depression with a steadily prosperity, sustained cumulative annual

rising volume of output per man-hour additions to our stock of capital are therefore

counterbalanced by a formidable increase in necessary; that is to say, economnic progress

the proportion of workers left unemployed. depends on continually increasing the stock

The problem of bridging the gap between the of capital employed by maintaining the

standard of living technically possible and demand for net additional capital outlay,

that actually achieved is no new one. It was which means, at present, maintaining its

not engendered by population trends, but profitability to entrepreneurs. Keynes (1937)

cessation of population growth is likely to has estimated that, since 8-I5 per cent of

accentuate it in the future.

the national income is saved in conditions of

With two expansive factors ruled out and full employment, " with our existing organi-

with uncertainty about a third, profitability zation, and in conditions of full employment,

and " confidence " may disappear and the we shall have to discover a demand for net

prospect may be one of prolonged economic additions to our stock of capital amounting to

depression, relieved only by fresh booms in somewhere between 2 per cent and 4 per cent

production when future wars break out. annually. And this will have to continue year

Economic recovery and progress in the future after year indefinitely."

would therefore appear to be bound up with Uncertain about the future effects of

advances in the standard of living, which technical change on the demand for net

will only be achieved if the trend of the additional capital outlay, gloomy about the

standard of living can be made to cease prospects of overseas investment, pessimistic

being dependent upon the effects on capital economists are inclined to argue that cessa-

outlay of population expansion, technical tion of population growth will remove one

advance and overseas investment.

major source of demand for new net invest-

The Employment of Capital and Labour

ment and will exert a chronic depressing effect on investment, employment and the

* Provided we avoid under-employment of standard of lving. A cautious expression of

caPital and labour at least as well as in the past, this view is given in the League of Nations

Reddaway argues that projections of popu- World Economic Survey, I938-9:

lation trends in the next four decades suggest

an economic situation that is potentially " In past decades, in Western and

highly favourable, since the ratio of workers Northern Europe and in Northern America,

to total population would remain satis- a great deal of capital construction has

factory and smaller numbers imply greater been necessitated simply by the growth of

amounts of natural resources per consumer, population.... Even the demand for

of industrial capital per worker and of social ordinary industrial capital equipment may

capital per citizen. But in an economy the be diminished when the number of new

mainspring of which is the profitability of consumers of the product of industry

I26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ceases to grow. . . . The incentive to This is a fair statement of the problem posed

borrow savings for capital development by our economic system. I do not however

may be depressed below the funds which agree that a solution can only be found by

people wish to save, so that unemployment somehow " convincing entrepreneurs that

and trade depression result from the there is a reasonable prospect of demand

reduction of activity in the construction remaining at a prosperity level." This could

industries."

be achieved by mass hypnosis of business

To this the optimist can make many replies, men, but the issue is not in fact a psycho-

chief among them being the argument that logical one. An economic system does not the pessimist is really assuming a close have to depend on the " confidence" of

relation between the number of consumers business men, although our present system

and the total consumers' demand. Yet the cannot work well without it.

level of demand per head (or standard of A second argument of the pessimist is that,

living) may be far more important than the because in a stationary or declining popula-

total number of heads. Thus New Zealand tion total demand will depend far more than

with two million inhabitants imported 87,000 hitherto on the standard of lving, expansion

road motor vehicles in I935-7, while India, of demand in future may be far less " auto-

with 360 million people, imported only matic," far more uncertain than in the past.

72,ooo. But I agree with Reddaway's This may generate a general mood of caution,

summing up of the debate between optimist if not of pessimism, among business men and

and pessimist:

undermine their " confidence " and eagerness

" The optimist's arguments fundament- to undertake new production.

ally amounted to saying that openings for Hicks (I936) in particular has used this
capital outlay arise out of the need for argument, but I feel that this is too specula-

more capital to provide a rising standard tive a question to argue about, and would of consumption for a constant or even a say with Jewkes (1939):

declining population, as well as out of the need for more capital to provide the same standard for larger numbers. Previously we have had both factors at work; now our stock of capital is larger, our standard

" I am not convinced that, in fact, the tendency mentioned above is particularly likely to become actual since possible
counteracting forces cannot be ruled out."

of consumption already higher, and our But again the pessimist may quite well be

population no longer expanding. There is right if " possible counteracting forces" are

no theoretical impossibility about the not consciously brought into play.

maintenance of the level of capital outlay, A third argument of the pessimist,

especially if we visualize a great wave of favoured by Harrod, is that, if we avoid

inventions; but the probabilities are aU economic depression as well as in the past

against it, unless conscious measures are (and once we recover from the effects of war),

taken to secure it."

real income per head is likely to continue to

Reddaway's conclusion is
" Unless we do succeed in avoiding catastrophic slumps, and in convincing entrepreneurs that there is a reasonable prospect of demand remaining at a pros-

grow. The number of dependants per income receiver will also diminish. The effect will be that an increasing proportion of expenditure will be available for consumption of non-essentials. As Reddaway says,

perity level, then it will seem very risky " Catering for a rise in the standard of

to undertake capital outlay which will consumption is almost bound to be a

only be justified if the average person's riskier business than extending existing

consumption rises-and not, for example, industries to provide for more consumers.

if real wages are high for those in work, but Demand is more fickle as between one

25 per cent are unemployed."

semi-luxury and another."

THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION I27

I accept this argument as, on the whole, Malthusian Devil of Population does give

probably valid, but it is possible to place too us a chance of increasing economic welfare

much emphasis upon it. It is however true all round, but only on condition that " the

that capital and labour will have to be more increase in resources or in consumption . . .

mobile and adaptable in a diversified economy which the stationariness of population makes

producing a large volume of " tertiary" possible, does actually take place." For the

consumption goods and services, because of Devil of Unemployment, " escaping through

increasing likelihood of shifts in demand due the breakdown of effective demand,"

to changes in tastes and fashions.

threatens us.

A fourth undoubtedly correct argument of " When Devil P. of Population is chained

the pessimist (which again is commonly up, we are free of one menace; but we are

over-emphasized) is that a stationary or more exposed to the other Devil U. of declining population will engender a greater Unemployed Resources than we were amount of structural unemployment. In- before. . . . With a stationary population

creasing fickleness of demand would increase we shall, I argue, be absolutely dependent the number of necessary readjustmetits in the for the maintenance of prosperity and civil

supply of capital and labour, and increase peace on policies of increasing consumption

the risk of loss of productivity through by a more equal distribution of incomes temporary unemployment of specific types and of forcing down the rate of interest.

of material and human resources. A shift in demand, when population is declining,

. . .If we do not, of set and determined purpose, pursue these policies, then with-

may involve actual contraction of the total out question we shall be cheated of the output of the industry concerned, which benefits which we stand to gain by the

would involve physical transfer of capital chaining up of one devil, and shall suffer

and labour to new employments, with un- from the perhaps more intolerable depre-

employment in the interim; whereas in a dations of the other."

period of population expansion a fall in

demand for capital and labour of a specific The National Income

type (e.g. horse transport) might more We must turn from considering whether

commonly be met simply by ceasing to a declining population will mean more or

expand production of that type. Structural less employment to examining whether more

readjustments of this character might also or less income will accrue from employment.

be more difficult than hitherto, since an older On this question I follow Reddaway's views

working population is inevitably less mobile closely. In the past the amount of capital'

and adaptable than a younger one. Once increased much faster than the population,

again I give the pessimist the benefit of the and most of the additional capital that was

doubt unless special measures are taken to not needed for satisfying the needs of the

counteract these tendencies.

additional population was available for

In general, what are we to conclude? raising the level of consumption per head.

Within the framework of our present The advent of a stationary or declining

economic system, I have no doubt that the population makes it possible to raise the

conclusions of Keynes in his Galton Lecture standard of living even faster than in the

I937) are broadly valid (although the war past, since there will be little use for savings

may disturb these basic trends for a number merely to duplicate existing industrial equip-

of years). He doubted whether even the ment to provide for new demand resulting

2 per cent minimum annual net addition to from growth of population, and more savings

our stock of capital, postulated by him as will be available to raise the level of output

necessary to maintain the " marginal efficien- and consumption per head. Moreover the

cy" of capital (and so prosperity) -in future, abundance and cheapness of capital would

would be possible " if things go on as they make it possible to stimulate a rapid rise in

are." He argued that the chaining up of the the amount of capital per worker employed

128 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and hence in productivity, (a) by further Consumers' demand need only be determined

mechanization of production, (b) by facilitat- by the number of consumers in the case of

ing the expansion of highly capitalized commodities such as bread, the demand

industries relatively to those in which the for which is inelastic. In any case, even

ratio of capital to labour is low. Reddaway admitting that a smaller population may

therefore concludes:

involve a shrinking demand for theproducts

"Unless people become less successful of a whole series of significant industries, it

in using them [capital equipment and land], is difficult to think of a single important

we shall expect the real income per person industry in which a falling off of demand employed also to rise more rapidly than would not raise productivity by eliminating

in the past."

the least efficient productive enterprises.

Real income per person occupied (i.e. including the unemployed) may not however rise as rapidly as real income per person employed, and the divergence between these two curves may be greater than at present. The difference between them is due to the
extent of unemployment. We have assumed that general unemployment will be no more prevalent than at present, but we have seen
that structural unemployment is likely to be
somewhat more prevalent. But structural unemployment need not be of great importance if there is no general unemployment. It is the latter which is the real problem. Reddaway sums up his discussion:

Thus the physical output of British mines and quarries fell by I4 per cent betweeri I924 and I935, but physical output per employee rose by no less than 3I per cent. Much of this rise in productivity was due to improvements in technique, but undoubtedly an important proportion resulted simply from the closing down of inefficient pits and quarries. Diminishing returns would of course inevitably set in if our population were to fall from 40 millions to IO millions. Such a nightmarish trend is not impossible, but it is futile and idle to speculate about what may happen in A.D. 2IO0. It is nevertheless theoretically true that population decline will have to be slowed down and

" If we consider the whole field of halted before the point of diminishing returns

economic activity, the changed age com- is reached.

position of the employed population may The whole of the foregoing discussion

on balance be favourable, even if some of depends on the overriding proviso that

the elderly are not really up to standard; general unemployment is avoided as well in

for there will be a smaller proportion of the future as in the past. If it is, the poten-

boys and learners to pull down the tialities of the demographic situation are

average."9

very favourable. Whether we seize the

The pessimists have several arguments chance given us by the chaining up of the

which must be considered. Harrod (I939) Devil P. of Population, to chain up once and

states that

for all the Devil U. of Unemployment is

" dwindling numbers would lead to a net loss of production per head. The economies of large scale production have not yet reached their limit in this country and a
contraction of the market would lead to diminished efficiency in many fields."

another matter. It will not be done without planning. If it is not done, "redundancy" of capital equipment and productive capacity are more likely than any advance in prosperity. Population trends are not the cause of this problem (nor of the mental laziness of those who call it a " redundancy " problem),

This pessimism is really rooted in a general but they are going to make the problem more

pessimism about the future of the standard acute.

of living, which, we have argued, is quite

unjustified except on the assumption that the International Trade

economic system is simply to be allowed to In this sector of the battlefield the pessi-

flounder on from crisis to crisis as in the past. mists are well entrenched. Their first

THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION 129

argument has been well stated by Dr. Snow materials until we are a much better clothed,

(I935):

housed and materially equipped nation than

" In the pre-war period we adjusted our
commercial and industrial machinery to provide [by means of exports] for an annual increase of about 2 per cent in our total food supplies, and this necessi-
tated an annual increase of about 5 per cent in our imports of foodstuffs. Between I9II and I926, however, our total consumption (by weight) of foodstuffs increased
by less than i per cent per annum, and the
highly complicated commercial and indus-

at present. The raw-material countries could be kept busy at full producing capacity if the international and internal barriers to food consumption could be overcome.
Another form of Dr. Snow's argument is the assertion that cessation of population growth is a cause of the world agricultural crisis. The League of Nations World Economic Survey, I938-9, for instance, states:
" With a cessation of population growth,

trial machinery which we set up on the basis the demand for agricultural products will

of requiring an increase of 5 per cent per cease to grow or at least will grow at a

annum in our imported food supply is only very much slower rate. If agricultural

required to produce an annual increase of inventions and improvements in agri-

less than i per cent. This simple fact seems cultural technique continue at their present

to me to be at the bottom of many of the rate, this may mean that agriculturists

world's economic troubles. Australia and will be threatened with serious over-

Argentina, for example. . . have organized production and a serious excess of pro-

themselves in the post-war period to ductive capacity, which can no longer be

expand their production more or less at remedied simply by waiting for a growth

the same rate as in the pre-war period. of population to bring forth a new and

. . . The cause for the slowing up of increased demand."

international trade since the war is, to a The answer to this is that the main barrier

large extent, due to the change of [demo- to feeding the malnourished half of the

graphic] circumstances in this country." human race is not cessation of population

Yes, declining numbers of home consumers does mean a falling demand for " inelastic " commodities such as cereals and sugar, but why for anything else ? Unless the standard of living ceases henceforth to rise, a declining

growth in one part of the world, but lack of
" effective demand " in all parts. Another
League of Nations publication, the Interim Report of the Mixed Committee on Nutrition, Vol. I (I936), makes this clear:

population simply does not of necessity " The dislocation of international trade

imply any fall in the demand for most raw which resulted from the crisis [after I930]

materials. League of Nations nutrition fell with exceptional severity upon agri-

surveys have repeatedly shown tremendous cultural exporting countries. One of the

world under-consumption of most foodstuffs outstanding features of the depression was

except perhaps basic energy-yielding foods the disproportionate fall in the prices of

(cereals, rice, sugar, etc.). Even in Britain agricultural products, leading to a restric-

Orr (I936) estimated that increases of 29 per tion of purchasing power in agricultural

cent in the consumption of meat, 8o per communities and, consequently, to a

cent for milk, 4I per cent for butter, 55 per limitation of the intake of industrial

cent for eggs, 124 per cent for fruit (money products. In three years the price of

value) and 87 per cent for vegetables other leading products in the world market fell

than potatoes (money value) were needed to from the 1929 level by more than 50 per

raise food consumption generally to the level cent, a development which might at first

of the best fed class. Nor need there be any blush appear an ideal one for securing an

falling off in the demand for cotton, wool, abundant food supply through inter-

leather, timber and almost all other raw national trade. But, in fact, many indus-

130 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

trial communities were unable to purchase their necessary supplies offoodstuffs owing

(£ millions)
Widows

to their inability to sell their products to the

Old Age' and War Total

impoverished agriculturists. Industrial

65-70 70 Orphans

workers fell into unemployment; agri- I936-37 20 46 24 40 I30

cultural produce went into stocks, not (actual)

into consumption."

I945-46 24 56 28 32 I40

It is perfectly true that less foodstuffs might have gone into stocks and more might have

I955-56
I965-66

25
28

67
76

3I 33

2I
I0

I44 I47

been sold if the populations of the advanced At first sight this appears to justify Harrod's

industrial countries had been growing more alarmism. But Reddaway goes on to point

rapidly. But it is equally clear that we shall out a factor which all the pessimists have

get nowhere by blaming on to population hitherto overlooked: the future yield of

trends the crazy and tragic effects of inter- death duties. The rapid fall of death rates

national economic anarchy.

in the past has-by postponing the demise

Another argument of the pessimists is that
cessation of population growth, by stopping expansion of demand for certain foodstuffs and raw materials, is undermining international investment. The declining tendency of the Western populations, writes Hender-
son (I937), "greatly diminishes, in my
judgment, the opportunity for sound international investment; and large-scale inter-
national investment was an integral part of the old system of international economic intercourse." We have already dealt with this argument in another form. Even
admitting that there is a large grain of truth

of many owners of property-deprived the Chancellor of the Exchequer of much income from death duties. Even a continued fall in age-specific death rates will not however in future avert a steady rise in the total number of deaths of elderly people whose estates will
come under the axe, simply because the proportion of elderly people with one foot in the grave is increasing every year. This will gradually raise the proportion of capital which is taxed for death duties each year. Reddaway estimates the future yield of death duties (assuming no change in the rate of taxation) as follows:

in it, such a trend would only imply the drying up of overseas investment of this type-i.e. to facilitate expansion of produc-
tion of various raw materials. Other types of overseas investment are easily conceivable.

Death Rate (per I,000)
I935-39 IX29
I940-44 I3.7
I945-49 I4.5

Yield
( milions)
8o
85
90

I950-54 15.3

95

Public Finance The favourite argument of the pessimists

I955-59 i6*i
I960-64 I6*9

Ioo
I05

in this field is that of Harrod (1939):

The rise in the yield of death duties would

" In the coming decades we shall have a rapidly ageing population and the main-
tenance of the older members will be an increasing burden on those actively employed."

continue for some time after I965. By I965 we might thus expect an increase in pensions expenditure of about £I7 millions to be balanced by an additional income from death duties of about £25 millions. This was the likelihood if war had not broken out. But

Taking the average of Charles's two most increased pensions expenditure due to war

important projections of population trends, losses and higher pension rates may be Reddaway makes the following estimate of counterbalanced by a higher yield from death

the order of magnitude of future expenditure duties resulting from war-time deaths and

on pensions:

heavier taxation. At any rate there is little

THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION

justification for gloomy talk about the course there may be plenty of other

increasing financial burden of old people.

reasons for wanting to do it. But what a

The changing age structure of our popula- commentary on the ingenuity of homo

tion will however transform the nature of sapiens! That he should be reduced to

the dependency problem. In I89I children laboriously increasing the number of

under I5 constituted no less than 35 per cent children born in order that we may keep

of the population of England and Wales, up the level of capital outlay, and so avert

while old people over 64 were less than 5 per a slump, by making it attractive to build

cent. To-day children have fallen to under houses for them to live in! In view of the

22 per cent and old people have increased to large gap between what so many of us

about 9 per cent. Glass's first estimate actually get with our incomes and what

suggests that by I985 old people will slightly we would like to have, surely we can devise

outnumber children, but his second estimate (and carry out) some better policy for

(continuance of present trends) reaches this ' maintaining employment' than that? "

situation about I965, and by I980 shows a

population in which children are only I2 per I have also tried to show-following Redda-

cent and old people amount to 20 per cent. way to a considerable extent-that if our

The dependency problem of the past has been economic structure persists without con-

mainly a children's problem; in future an siderable readjustments it is going to en-

old people's problem is going to be added. counter worse and worse difficulties as a

The children's problem has not yet been result of present demographic trends. I do,

solved, and its solution may require large- however, hold that, in the short run (i.e.

scale readjustments in our social and speaking in terms of decades) the influence of

economic life. If such readjustments are economic trends on the demographic situa-

embarked upon, they will, in future, become tion far outweighs the influence of demo-

increasingly complicated by the need for graphic trends on the economic situation,

another set of readjustments to tackle the although this may not be so true in the long

old people's problem.

run (i.e. speaking in terms of centuries).

Conclusions: Is a Population Policy Necessary ?

In this respect there is an analogy between population trends and war. The outbreak of a major European war for the second time in

I have endeavoured to show that many of one generation has brought to a head all

the economic arguments currently put forward those economic problems the solution of

as grounds for stimulating the birth rate are which was easier, but less urgent, as long as ill-conceived, and that others are really peace was preserved. In the same way the

arguments for dealing with our economic cessation of population growth is bringing

lack-of-system rather than with population to a head all those economic problems the

trends. I am strongly in sympathy with solution of which was easier, but less urgent

Reddaway's general conclusion:

and evident, in the period when population

"The problem is essentially a ' man- was still steadily expanding. But these

made ' one, which human ingenuity should economic problems arise in the main from

be capable of solving. Our difficulty is not the economic system itself. Their existence

to overcome the niggardliness of nature, is independent of whether we are in a state

but so to organize ourselves that we can of war or peace, or whether the population is

make use of the (relative) abundance which young and expanding or ageing and dwind-

should be available, but seems likely some- ling. It is futile to blame either war or

how to elude our grasp. . . . Suppose it population trends for this situation. They

were possible, by elaborate action, to raise cannot be isolated from other factors as

the birth rate by an appreciable amount; fundamentally to blame, although they make

-would this be a sensible thing to do? a solution at once more urgent and more

Failing all else, perhaps it would, and of difficult. As Reddaway says:

132 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

" If there is to be an 'economic should be done in the meantime. But in fact

verdict,' then, on the population changes the achievement of stationariness by about

which we are to expect in the next I980 involves action now, and not forty

twenty-five or thirty years, it must be years hence, as Harrod (I940) makes clear

couched in much the same terms as those in his rejoinder to Jewkes. With age-

used for the outlook as a whole. They put specific death rates as they were in I935-6,

us collectively on our mettle. If we can maintenance of a stationary population at

show sufficient social resourcefulness and the I935-6 level would require immediately

adaptability to solve various problems of a Net Reproduction Rate of less than unity,

adjustment, then they will give us a good though it would have to rise gradually to

reward; if we cannot, then they will unity. This is because the proportion of

prove a curse instead of a blessing."

women of child-bearing age in our population

is at present " inflated," and this factor has

Reddaway believes that future economic staved off population decline so far, in spite

policy will have to aim (a) at stimulating of a N.R.R. below unity for nearly two

consumption up to the limits technologically decades. A N.R.R. of unity at present, if

possible, (b) at stimulating the employment maintained, would mean population growth

of capital and labour (by reduction of for some time, because .xeplacement of the

interest rates, etc.), (c) at increasing the present generation of potential mothers by

mobility of capital and labour. (His book a generation of future mothers of equal size

should be consulted for a discussion of at present implies a somewhat larger total

possible ways of achieving these ends.) I population (about 46 millions, according to

would add that (a) and (b) can probably only Glass and Blacker, I938). Kuczynski (1938)

be achieved by releasing over an ever- gives stationary death rates for I935 and

widening sector the employment of material I936 as I6-02 and i6-o8, compared with

and human resources from their present crude death rates of II*75 and I2*I4.

dependence on the profitability of investment Following Harrod's method, these rates

to private persons; and that all such imply that to maintain a stationary popula-

measures are not likely to succeed unless they tion at the I935-6 level, a N.R.R. of

I6 72are fitted into the framework of a general
programme for peaceful world (European,

= 0*73 was needed in I935, compared

Empire) economic reconstruction.

with an actual N.R.R. of 0-76, and in 1936

There are nevertheless sound reasons for hoping that the demographic situation will

a N.R.R. ofI- 04 = 0-75 was needed, com-

be kept in the forefront of any post-war
plans for social and economic reconstruction. If population decline goes too fast and too
far, most of the pessimists' gloomy prognostications may come true . . . ultimately. The outbreak of war may bring this doomsday measurably nearer. In my opinion the desirable trend would be one of slow population decline (since some decline cannot be averted) reaching ultimate stationariness of numbers and stability of age structure by

pared with an actual N.R.R. of 0-77. Continued maintenance of the population at the given size would involve gradual raising of the N.R.R. to unity, which should be attained by the time when the age-composition of the population becomes "normal"
(i.e. that required by a stationary popula-
tion), perhaps in fifteen or twenty years
ahead. Thus the present N.R.R. of about
0-75, if it rises over the next two decades

the end of the century. The I980 level of to unity, should suffice to keep our

33-36 millions for England and Wales numbers up to the present level. If the

indicated by Glass's projections would be achievement of unity were to take twice as

adequate, provided we achieve replacement long we should attain a stationary population

of numbers by about the same period. about I980 only two or three millions smaller

Jewkes (I939) sees no reason why anything than its present size.

THE ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF A DECLINING POPULATION

Supposing now we take Jewkes's advice Thus action now involves gradually raising

and do nothing until I980. Let us assume the Net Reproduction Rate from its present

also that fertility and mortality persist un- level to unity over a period of forty or fifty

changed at the I935 level. According to years. This would ensure us a stationary

Glass the position in I980 would be: a total population a little smaller than to-day. The

population of 36 millions, 38 per cent of all achievement of this trend would have been

females would be in the child-bearing age no easy matter even if war had not broken

groups (compared with 46.7 per cent in out. But it is a hundred times easier than

1935), the crude death rate would have risen Jewkes's alternative of waiting (say) until

to i8-90 (because of the greater age of the I980. Action in I980 means at best an

population), and the stationary death rate immediate raising of the N.R.R. by 58 per

would, -of course, still be i6 o02 as in I935. cent, from 076 to about I 20, and then

To maintain the population stationary at the allowing a gradual fall to unity. It might

I980 level would require a N.R.R. of mean an immediate doubling of a N.R.R.

iii86 *09o22

II i8, compared with an actual

fallen as low as o *55, which is an evident impossibility. Clearly Jewkes's alternative

N.R.R. of o '76 (as in I935), so that a group
of potential mothers constituting a propor-

would run us into the very real risk-brought nearer by war-of a nightmarish future in

tion of the total female population smaller three or four generations, not so much

by one-fifth than the present generation of because of changes in the size of the popula-

potential mothers would each have to tion, but because of the changes in age com-

produce about three children for every two position that are indissolubly wedded to

now needed to maintain a stationary popu- changes in size.

lation. To avert further decline of numbers Indifference to the birth rate is not there-

this N.R.R. of I *i8 in I980 would have to be fore, in my opinion, justifiable. The right

achieved immediately, after which the N.R.R. time to gain a hearing for the adoption of a

could be allowed to fall gradually to unity by the time when the proportion of potential mothers in the population had been raised

population policy will come in the immediate post-war years when, assuming the destruction of the Nazi and Fascist systems, there

to the level required by a stationary popula- will undoubtedly arise in Britain a ferment

tion. The N.R.R. would actually have to be of new ideas about social policy and a general

a little higher than I * i8, since the age
distribution of women of child-bearing age themselves would be less favourable to
fertility than to-day. In I935 5I.4 per cent
of potential mothers were under 30; in
I980 (on the above assumptions) only 47'9

atmosphere favourable to proposals for social reconstruction. Economic measures will have to be included in any birth-rate policy which is intended to succeed. Optimists will do well to admit that reform of the economic system in itself will not solve everything and that measures to encourage

would be. If fertility and mortality continue parenthood are also desirable. Pessimists

to fall from the I935 level, the position in will do well to admit that many features of

I980 would be much more difficult. The our economic system are not sacrosanct and

population would be about 33 millions, the that no substantial and sustained rise in the

crude death rate i8 88, the proportion of birth rate is likely to be achieved in the

women in the child-bearing age groups would
be 35-3 per cent, of whom only 42'3 per
cent would be under 30. The actual N.R.R. would be about o-55; the N.R.R. required for a stationary population at that level

absence of far-reaching economic reforms. Both optimists and pessimists would do well, in the field of economic policy, to advocate measures intended to raise the birth rate which are at the same time acceptable as part of a programme of reform which is

would have to be at least double, falling desirable in itself. Reddaway's book con-

gradually to unity.

tains a host of ideas on this subject although

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

no reference is made to eugenics. It should
be read and pondered over by all eugenists who are in the habit of attempting to strengthen their case for a population policy by the use of non-eugenic arguments about the effects of population trends in the future.
References Cohn Clark (I937): National Income and Outlay. D. V. Glass (I940): Population Policies and
Movements. D. V. Glass and C. P. Blacker (I938): Population
and Fertility. R. F. Harrod: " Modern Population Trends,"
The Manchester School, April I939. "The Population Problem: A Rejoinder,"
ibid., April I940. H. D. Henderson: " Economic Consequences and
Problems," Sociological Review, July I937.
J. R. Hicks: " Mr. Keynes' Theory of Employment," Economic Journal, June 1936.

J. Jewkes: " The Population Scare," The Manchester School, October 1939.
J. M. Keynes (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.
(I937): " Some Consequences of a Declin-
ing Population," Galton Lecture, EUGENICS
REVIEW, April 1937.
(I938): Letter of Times, October 3rd.
R. R. Kuczynski: " The Analysis of Vital Statistics, II Birth and Death Statistics," Economica, August 1938.
League of Nations: The Problem of Nutrition, Vol. I. Interim Report of the Mixed Committee on the Problem of Nutrition (1936).
World Economic Survey, 1938-9 (1939). J. B. Orr (1936): Food, Health and Income. Prof. Pigou: Economica, May I936 (Review of Keynes). Joan Robinson (I937): Introduction to the Theory of Employment.
E. C. Snow (I935): " The Limits of Industrial Employment," II. Journal of Royal Statistical Society, II. 1935.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Articles appearing in forthcoming issues:

REACTIVITIES OF COLPODA DUODENARIA TO ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS. II. FACTORS INFLUENCING THE FORMATION OF RESTING CYSTS. By C. V. TAYLOR and A. G. R. S ,ucKLrm, Stanford University.
RETARDATION OF EARLY CLEAVAGE OF URECHIS BY ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT. By ATHmUR C. GmsE, Stanford University.
ON THE KILLING ACTION OF OPTICALLY ISOMERIC NICOTINES IN RELATION TO PROBLEMS OF EVOLUTION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN ANIMALS. By G. F. GAUSE and N. P. SMARAGDOVA, Institute of Zoology, University of Moscow.
THE PRODUCTION OF DUPLICITAS CRUCIATA AND MULTIPLE HEADS BY REGENERATION IN EUPLANARIA TIGRINA. By ROBERT H. SILBER and VIKTOR HAMBURGER, Washington University.

Edited by W. C. ALLu, Professor of Zodlogy, The University of Chicago. Published

Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press.

Subscription: 353. 2d. per year.

EnglishJghets: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX , No. 4.

