EUGENIC LEGISLATION IN NORWAY AND GERMANY

Text of Proposed Laws

The German Eugenic fLaw was published ¶4. The proposal is to be made either in

in Berlin on July 25th, I933. We are writing or dictated at the office of the

indebted to the Lancet for permission to Eugenic Court. The facts on which the pro-

reproduce the following translation,of its text. posal is based are to be attested by a medical

opinion or in some other way. The office

LAW FOR THE PREVENTION OF HERE- must inform the official doctor of the pro-

DITARY DISEASE

posal.

¶i. Anyone who is hereditarily ailing may ¶5. Competent to give judgment is the

be made barren (sterilized) by surgical Eugenic Court in whose district the person to

operation, if in the experience of medical be sterilized has his ordinary legal rights.

science it is with great probability to be ¶6. The Eugenic Court is to be attached to

expected that his progeny will suffer from a magistrate's court. It consists of a magis-

severe bodily or mental hereditary disorders. trate as chairman, an official doctor, and

Hereditarily ailing in the sense of this law is another doctor registered in Germany who is

anyone who suffers from one of the following specially versed in eugenics. For each mem-

diseases: (i) congenital feeblemindedness, ber a deputy must be appointed. From the

(2) schizophrenia, (3) periodic (maniac- chairmanship is excluded anyone who has

depressive) insanity, (4) inherited epilepsy, decided on a guardianship proposal under

(5) inherited St. Vitus's dance (Huntington's ¶2 (i). If an official doctor has made the

chorea), (6) inherited blindness, (7) inherited proposal he cannot take part in the decision.

deafness, (8) severe inherited physical mal- ¶7. The proceedings of the Eugenic Court

formation. Further, anyone suffering from are not public. The court has to make the

severe alcoholism may be sterilized.

necessary inquiries; it can examine wit-

¶2. Competent to make the proposal is the nesses and experts as well as order the

person who is to be sterilized. Should he be attendance and the medical examination of

irresponsible or incapable of managing his the person to be sterilized and can have him

affairs on account of weakmindedness, or not brought if he stays away without excuse. In

yet have completed his eighteenth year, then the examination and swearing-in of witnesses

the proposer is the legal representative who and experts as well as in the exclusion and

requires the consent of the court for the pro- rejection of members of the court the appro-

tection of wards. In the remaining cases of priate clauses of the civil law are applicable.

limited responsibility the proposal requires Doctors who are examined as witnesses or

the consent of the legal representative. If an experts are bound to give evidence regardless

adult is under the care of a guardian, the of professional secrecy. Courts and boards of

consent of the latter is required. The pro- management as well as institutions have to

posal must be accompanied by a certificate give the Eugenic Court information if

from a doctor registered in Germany to the required.

effect that the person to be sterilized has had 18. The court has to decide to its own

the nature and consequences of sterilization satisfaction after consideration of the total

explained to him. The proposal may be product of the proceedings and evidence.

withdrawn.

The judgment follows as a result of oral con-

¶3. Sterilization may also be proposed (i) sultation on a majority of votes. The decision

by the official doctor, (2) for the inmates of a must be put in writing and signed by the

hospital, institution or prison, by its director. members who were concerned in the judg-

I79

i8o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ment. It must give the grounds on which the situation, the Eugenic Court must take the

sterilization is determined or declined. The matter up again and forbid for the time

decision is to be communicated to the pro- being the carrying out of the sterilization.

poser, the official doctor as well as to the If judgment was given against the proposal,

person whose sterilization is proposed, or, in revision is only permissible when new facts

case he is not competent to propose, his legal have arisen which justify the sterilization.

representative.

¶I3. The costs of the legal proceedings are

¶9. Against the judgment an appeal can borne by the State Exchequer. The costs of

be lodged by any of the persons mentioned in the surgical operation in the case of an

¶8 (5) within a period of a month after its insured person are borne by the sickness

delivery, notice to be in writing or dictated at insurance office, in the case of other needy

the office of the Eugenic Court. The appeal persons by the public assistance. In all other

has the effect of delaying execution of the cases the costs up to the minimal scale of the

judgment. The appeal is decided by the professional fee and the median cost in the

Eugenic High Court. Until expiration of public hospitals is borne by the Exchequer,

the period for appeal the status quo may be beyond that by the person to be sterilized.

resumed in accordance with the provisions ¶I4. Sterilization, not carried out accord-

of the common law.

ing to the terms of this law, as well as re-

¶io. The Eugenic High Court is attached moval of the genital glands are only per-

to a High Court of Justice and covers the missible when performed by a doctor

same area. It consists of a judge of the High according to the rules of medical science to

Court, an official doctor, and another doctor avoid serious danger to the life or the health

registered in Germany who is specially versed of the person on whom the operation is

in eugenics. For each member a deputy undertaken, and with his consent.

must be appointed. T6 (2) applies here. For ¶I5. The persons concerned in the pro-

the procedure before the Eugenic High ceedings or in the carrying out of the surgical

Court ¶7 and 8 apply. The judgment of the operation are bound to secrecy. Anyone who

Eugenic High Court is final.

breaks this obligation without authorization

¶ii. The surgical operation necessary for is to be punished with imprisonment up to

the sterilization may be carried out only in a one year or with a fine. Prosecution is only

hospital by a doctor registered in Germany. undertaken if a charge is made; the charge

He may only operate when the decision may be made by the chairman.

ordering the sterilization has been made final. ¶i6. The execution of this law is for the

The supreme State authority determines the State governments. The supreme State

hospitals and doctors to whom the carrying authorities determine, subject to the provi-

out of the sterilization is to be committed. sions of ¶6 (i) and io (i), seat and area of the

The operation may not be done by a doctor deciding courts. They nominate the members

who has made the proposal or has been a and their deputies.

party to the procedure. The operating doctor ¶I7. The Home Secretary in collaboration

has to make a written report to the official with the Minister of Justice issues the neces-

doctor on the execution of the sterilization, sary regulations for the carrying out of this

stating the method employed.

law.

¶i2. If the court has given its final decision ¶i8. This law comes into force on January

on sterilization, it is to be carried out even ist, I934.

against the will of the person to be sterilized, unless he alone made the proposal. The

***

official doctor has to requisition the necessary THE following is the English text of draft

measures of the police authorities. If other proposals for a law respecting sterilization

measures do not suffice, the use of direct and other matters which has been prepared

force is permissible. Should circumstances by the Consultative Eugenics Commission

arise which demand another testing of the of Norway:

EUGENIC LEGISLATION ABROAD

i8i

I5

By sterilization in this Act is understood A person who has had sexual intercourse

an operation which deprives a person of the with children under I4 years of age can be

power of propagation.

castrated when the application is made by

By castration in this Act is understood an the Court of Justice or by the director of the

operation the purpose of which is to deprive prison or asylum in question.

a person of his sexual desire.

The performance of sexual operations on

6

medical grounds is not affected by the following provisions.

At his own request a person having reached 2I years of age may be castrated when he is

2 unable to control his sexual desire and it is

Permission to carry out a sexual operation under this Act is to be granted by the Chief Medical Officer of Health.

thought probable that he thereby might be
dangerous to his surroundings. His application should be accompanied by a certificate from a physician declaring that he under-

3 stands the nature of the step he intends to A person who must be assumed to bear take.

hereditary taint of insanity, imbecility, epilepsy, or similar serious psychic disease or defect may be sterilized:
i. When he is an imnate of a lunatic asylum or of a prison or penal workhouse or of a reformatory or training institution which is under official control, and when the application for sterilization is made by the principal of the institution or by its resident physician.
2. When he receives public relief and is not by his own efforts able to provide for himself and his offspring, and when the application is made by the Medical

7 When application under this Act for the performance of a sexual operation is made, the wife of the person concemed and/or his guardian must, when possible, be notified of the application. If the Chief Medical Officer of Health decides that the operation is to be permitted, the guardian can make appeal to a Special Board. This Board shall consist of three members, namely, a judge, a physician with psychiatric education, and ar. expert in eugenics. The members shall hold office for
5 years.
8

Officer of Health in question.

The Crown decides which Ministry shall

4

issue detailed provisions for the accomplishment of this Act. These provisions shall con-

Any person having reached i8 years of age tain particulars concerning the performance

may at his own request be sterilized when the of the operations.

operation is found justifiable on eugenic or

social-medical grounds. Such application should be accompanied by a certificate from a

***

physician declaring that the person concerned These proposals and other activities of the

understands the nature of the step he intends Consultative Eugenics Commission are dis-

to take.

cussed in " Notes of the Quarter " at p. I44.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 8.

