NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.

By NORMAN E. HIMES, Ph.D.

WORLD POPULATION TRENDS

of abortion as more important, probably,

ACCORDING to a survey published in the Statistical BuUetin of the Metro-
politan Life Assurance Company (November I935), the world birth-rate con-
tinued to decline in I934. This downward
trend is evident in twenty of the thirty-four countries whose I934 rates are now available. However, in the United States the I934 rate was higher than that for I933 (I71I per i,ooo as compared with i6 .6). There was a
drop of less than i per cent. in four countries (the Netherlands, Italy, New Zealand, and Venezuela); and in five the I934 rate was identical with that of the preceding year (the Irish Free State, Norway, Sweden, Poland, and the Union of South Africa). In
fifteen countries the decline is still evident, the decreases in I934, as compared with I933, ranging from i -2 per cent. in France and Switzerland to 5 4 in Spain, 5.6 in Austria, and 6*3 in Palestine.
The Statistical Bulletin also notices a con-
siderable rise (22-4 per cent.) in the German birth-rate,* attributing it to the " marriage aid loans " and " the subsidies for births of

than the marriage loans. Economic assist-
ance has been too small specifically to
influence the birth-rate. Marriage loans,
being inaugurated in August I933, " suc-
ceeded rather than preceded the rise in the marriage-rate which began in the second quarter."
In my own view this increase cannot be
other than temporary. In addition to the factors already mentioned, I am inclined to
believe that there is a " pent-up effect " operating here. The economic crisis doubt-
less, caused the postponement of many marriages. Even slight economic assistance in the form of loans looks big in such circumstances. This doubtless increased the marriage-rate and consequently the number
of births. But the movement will soon spend itself. Doubtless there has also been a spurious prosperity, owing to the expulsion of the Jews and to various nationalistic
economic measures aiming at national selfsufficiency. These measures are, however, false trails and will eventually be discovered
to be such.

German children born of these loan-aid marriages." There are undoubtedly other

BIRTH-CONTROL

reasons for the rise. Dr. P. K. Whelpton, in On December 2nd, I935, the American

an article in the American Journal of Socio- Birth Control League held a mass meeting in

logy for November I935, entitled " Why the Carnegie Hall, New York City, to discuss

Large Rise in the German Birth-Rate ? ", whether or not it was fair to withhold contra-

calls attention to a probable decline in ceptive information from families on relief.

abortion. Dr. Whelpton, who is an associate Protestant and Jewish points of view were

of Professor W. S. Thompson at the Scripps put forward by Bishop Francis J. McDonnell

Foundation for Research in Population of the Methodist Episcopal Church and

Problems, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio, R'abbi Sidney E. Goldstein of the Free

points out that the rise of birth-rate in the Synagogue. The Catholics refused to present

large cities preceded and was greater than their view, though invited to do so, the

that in the remainder of the country. He League having been informed by Mgr.

is inclined to discount a " psychical rebirth J. Francis A. McIntyre, Chancellor of the

of the German people" as a chief cause of Catholic Archbishopric of New York, that

the higher rate, and regards the suppression " the Catholic position in the matter of birth-

control is well known.... With Catholics, it

* See EUGENICS RE:VIEW, 1935, XXVii, 207.

is a moral, not a social issue. Consequently,

303

304 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I can see no purpose to be gained by presenta- he avowed, " in killing an unborn child and a

tion of the Catholic doctrine on this occa- living person." The Archbishop considered

sion." Other speakers at the meeting were his decree to be in accordance with the

Oswald W. Knauth, chairman of the Emer- doctrines laid down in the Papal Encyclical

gency Relief Bureau; Rose Schneiderman, of I93I. The immediate reason for the decree

President of the Women's Trade Union in the archdiocese, which includes Minnesota,

League, and Mrs. Thomas N. Hepburn of North and South Dakota and Montana, was

Hartford, Connecticut, the mother of Kathar- the recent inclusion of a Minnesota birth-

ine Hepburn, the motion-picture actress, and control organization in the Minnesota con-

prominent American birth-control advocate. ference of social workers.

The chairman was Dr. Eduard C. Lindeman, More recently in Los Angeles, California,

Professor of Social Philosophy at the New the Catholic Women's Club withdrew from

York School of Social Work. It may be the General Federation of Women's Clubs

added that a few days later, on Sunday, because the Federation endorsed enactment

December 8th, Cardinal Hayes made birth- of birth-control legislation. The Catholic

control the subject of a scathing sermon in group considers the endorsement un-Ameri-

St. Patrick's Cathedral, New York.

can and un-Catholic. The Catholic group

Dr. Eric M. Matsner, Medical Director of represents a membership of about 450.

the American Birth Control League, has That the leaders of such Catholic organiza-

recently returned from a survey of birth- tions have little conception of the American

control clinics abroad.* In an interview with attitude toward freedom of discussion and

the Press he pointed out that the United freedom of individual opinion is evident from

States now has more clinics than any other these and numerous other tactics that could

country in the world-somewhere between be cited. I know an eminent gynaecologist in

225 and 250. He declared, however, that a large city on the eastern seaboard, who a

public opinion in Great Britain and the few years ago signed a medical petition to

Scandinavian countries as well as in the the Legislature endorsing a move to liberalize

Soviet Union was in advance of American the restrictive statutes on contraception.

opinion, in that these countries regarded Priests of the Catholic church immediately

contraception as a public-health measure. began a systematic boycott of him, with the

Though materials are definitely inferior in result that his Catholic practice, which was

quality in Russia, the Soviet Commissariat considerable, was ruined. I also kmow an

of Health is making determined efforts to instance of a school physician who signed the

improve contraceptive methods.

same petition and lost his position for no

other reason. The American public has no

THE ROMAN CATHOLIC ATTITUDE

conception whatever of the extent of these

A despatch from St. Paul, Minnesota, last August - reported that Archbishop J. G. Murray of the Catholic Church issued an official pronouncement throughout the arch-
diocese ordering all Catholics to renounce membership and employment in organizations advocating contraception or steriliza-

activities; and even so-called enlightened liberal opinion in the United States has little ff any conception of the extent to which American institutions are being undermined by organized intolerance of the character mentioned above. One wonders how long
the American public will put up with it.

tion. The decree was read in all Catholic churches. It especially affected physicians,

"JOURNAL OF CONTRACEPTION "

nurses and social workers. The Archbishop The first issue of the Journal of Contra-

compared supporters of birth-control with ception, edited by Dr. Abraham Stone,

the " Dillinger mob." Both were " organized appeared in November.* It is beginning very

to commit murder." " I see little difference,"

* This Journal is the subject of editorial comment on

* Sfe EUGENICS REVIEW, I935, xxvii, 232.

page 270.

NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.

305

modestly. It is a twelve-page periodical in a been accepted by the Minnesota Conference

format of 5j in. X 71 in. It is described as on Social Work as an associate group. This
being " devoted to the biological and clinical acceptance has been thought in many

aspects of human fertility and its control," quarters to have prompted Archbishop

and is designed to keep the medical profes- Murray's decree noted above. The Maternal

sion informed of the latest developments in Health Association of Missouri reports more

the contraceptive field. Its subscription than 2,000 cases advised since its opening in

price is one dollar per year. The editorial August I932. The association now has five

address is I7 West i6th Street, New York clinics in that state. The Pennsylvania Birth

City. The American Birth Control League is Control Federation has new headquarters at

also now issuing a similar periodical, called 253 South I5th Street, Philadelphia. A

the Clinic Courier. It has similar purposes clinic was opened in Waverly in the summer

and is distributed free of charge.

of I935. At the present time only eight of

PROGRESS IN BIRTH-CONTROL MOVEMENT

sixty-seven counties in the state are without co-operating physicians to whom the Federation may refer patients for contraceptive

A few miscellaneous news items on birth- advice. A clinic has been opened in Newport,

control. The October Birth Control Review R.I. The State Federation of Women's Clubs

reports that five clinics are akeady estab- in Rhode Island also went on record for birth-

lished in Maine. Brunswick opened its first control in I935.

centre in August I935; and the Portland clinic has had over 300 patients, many of

"POPULATION LITERATURE "

them from rural districts. At the Brookline The Population Association of America

(Massachusetts) Mothers' Health Office, continues to publish Population Literature,

Roman Catholic patients comprise 50 per an extremely useful bibliography of litera-

cent. of those treated. A third clinic in ture on that subject. This should be carefully

Massachusetts was opened in Worcester on surveyed by all students of eugenics, popula-

September iith, I935. One of the main tion, contraception, etc. The annual sub-

purposes of the Michigan Maternal Health scription is $3.00, and the editorial office is

League is to extend contraceptive advice to 308 Victor Building, Washington, D.C. It

the population of the upper portion of the is to be hoped that the bibliography will

state, a large percentage of whom are on not have to be suspended owing to lack of

relief. Arrangements have been made for proper financial support. Population Liter-

lectures before County Medical Societies. ature is photolithographed in quarto size,

The Minnesota Birth Control League has not printed.

EugeRnicsIIew, Vol. XXVII, No. 4

