*THE WORK OF THE SPECIAL SCHOOL
(LONDON) FOR MENTALLY
DEFECTIVE CHILDREN.
By ALBERT H. HILL.
THIS short paper will be devoted to a description of the practical side of the work actually done in the London Special Schools, with a view to giving a complete idea of the system for training mentally dieficient children.
It is well to emphasise, at the outset, the importance from the eugenic point of view, of a knowledge and record of the high grade cases. Imbeciles are mostly ascertained and controlled, but the high grade deficients go out into the world and are apt to be forgotten and lost. At present the complete ascertainment of mentally deficient children puts some mark of identification upon them and the record that they have at one time been in a Special School gives some indication of their 'history.
It is proposed to say what we do, what we do not do and what we claim to be the results of our work.
The first step is the ascertainment of the M.D. In London this is practically complete through the preliminary information from attendance officers and Social Workers (for children not in school) and from teachers (for children in school) followed by the statutory examination of the suspects by the certifying medical officer.
In London there are about 7,000 (6,964) certified M.D's out of a school population of 666,000.
Of the 7,000, 4000 are boys and 3000 girls. This shows a percentage of 1.04 M.D's in the school population as against a percentage of e0.5 for the school population ofthe whole country (England and Wales), indicating a higher degree of deficiency in London or, as is most probable, a failure of ascertainment in the country generally. Two years ago when visiting a large school in an important midland town I asked the Head Master "What do you do for your M.D's ?" and the reply was "We have no M.D's in S ."
For the accommodation of these 7000 children, there are 78 Special Schools, 13 being for elder boys, 5 for elder girls, 2 for little boys, and 58 being mixed schools, mostly for junior children. Teachers are provided at the rate of one teacher for an average attendance of 25 pupils, and in vocational classes one teacher for 15-18 pupils.
The scheme of training aims, not at making scholars but at training the children in habits of obedience and cleanliness and at arousing a social conscience so that they will join in collective work or games and respect the rights and feelings of others. Interest is aroused chiefly through handwork.
On admission, the children are generally apathetic and seem to think that nothing is expected of thena, but when they find the tasks

24 EUGENICS REVIEW.
within their powers and see that others are only feebly successful they alter their attitude and the first step is made.
A child often appears to halt in progress for months and then to develop steadily for months. Many learn to read fluently, and few persons outside the work w( uld suspect that the readers do not understand a word of what they read. This however is not lost effort, for later when the words are fitted to the appropriate facts an understanding is applied to the words, e.g., when the boys take an interest in the football results (and even the betting) they will read and understand but only in that limited degree where and when their outside knowledge gives them the key.
In number work, while the rules of arithmetic and the setting down of sums on paper are beyond them, yet with interest in what has come practically and frequently within their experience, they will do fairly difficult calculations. This refers particularly to money and to coster boys.
In writing they are taught with much repetition to write their names and addresses, to read and write simple bills, to write receipts and to indite simple letters. A minority attain to simple composition. As a rule the actual handwriting is good and drawing is surprisingly good. Satisfactory results are also obtained in singing (by ear) and in mechanical memorising, the children often producing quite good entertainments. Handwork progresses through plastic material, raffia, paper, wool. light woodwork and toy-making to the higher forms to be mentioned later.
Practically every school is equipped with a bath-room and a woman attendanct supervises the bathing of such children as the Head Mistress selects.
In most schools a two-course hot mid-day meal is provided at a cost of fourpence. Cases of necessity, met by consequent remission of the fee, partial or total, are decided by a lay body constituting the care committee. Medical inspections are regular, the child's mental condition being reviewed annually or oftener if desired. Any parent
may demand a re-examination at intervals of six months. As a result
of these re-examinations 4% are returned to the ordinary elementary
school, as no longer certifiable. A record termed a "Progress Book" is kept for each child and this
is filled up by the teacher twice a year. At the end of each term, the
Head Mistress of the junior School makes a return to the Inspector, of all pupils over 11 years of age who would be likely to benefit by transfer to a school for elder scholars, and the majority of those over 11 are so transferred. The provision of schools for elder scholars, a feature almost confined to the London system, was made for two especial
reasons:1 That M.D. boys and girls of from 14 to 16 years of age should
not be together, and to give the boys an opportunity of com-
ing under the influence of men teachers. 2. That training in vocational handwork such as woodwork,
tailoring and metal work, for the boys, and in domestic subjects and dressmaking, for the girls, might be more throoughly and economically organised.

THE WORK OF THE SPECIAL SCHOOL.

25

Here it should be observed that the whole scheme would be much weakened if classes only of such senior pupils were attached to elementary schools, or to the junior M.D. schools.
The big boys require something more strenuous, something more utilitarian than handwork which is carried out in desks and under instruction by women. The travelling involved in attending thecentral schools for elder scholars is a serious matter requiring frequent adjustments to meet the views of parents, but on the whole Londoners are more amenable to administrative action than parents in the north country.
Conveyances are not provided for M.D. children but juniors may by guided by women attendants and tokens are provided for the elder pupils, with which they may travel by tram or bus.
The older boys receive instruction in elementary trade work from trade instructors. This is not designed to teach a trade but to train the boys to handle tools, to obey instructions and to do continuous work. The boys reach a surprising level in skill and often do well in the trades of which they have learnt the elements. As a rule the boys do not reach the stage of 'cutting out' either in boot-making or tailoring.
The girls receive instruction in dressmaking and blouse-making, fitting them for machining and factory work. They also receive a considerable amount of instruction in cookery, laundry work and housewifery. Much attention is given to the development of games and sports. An Annual Sports meeting is held and a Swimming Gala, -and in both events the social and sporting spirit developed is evident.. Physical exercise receives as much attention as in the ordinary Schools, with excellent results.
In 1923 several attacks were made, partly for reasons of economy, on the retention of M.D. pupils after the age of 14. Birmingham in
particular reported to the Board of Education that not more than 30%
of their M.D. children were employable at 16, and that it was not considered advisable to retain them after the age of 14.
On this we were asked by the Chief Inspector of the Board of Education (Medical Branch) for our views on the matter. Three of the larger schools for Elder Scholars were selected, and the case of every child who had left during the preceding three years was examined tosee what the child was doing. At the Inquiry there were present the the Chief Inspector, myself (the L.C.C. Inspector), the Head Teacherand the representative of the Care Committee. The result was officially submitted to the London County Council.
In the first school, a girls' school, out of 187 who had left, 71.5 per cent were in employment; 10.0 per cent. were unemployed, but employable.
In the second school, a boys' school, out of 130 who had left. 63.0 per cent. were in employment; 9.2 per cent. were unemployed, but employable.
In the third school, a boys' school, out of 86 who had left, 67.4 per cent. wQre in employment; 20.0 per cent. were unemployed, but employable.

'26 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Thus 80% of the children who had passed through these schools for elder scholars appeared employable.
Before this in 1922, a return was obtained from a large East End school for elder M.D. girls, of all who had left during the three preceding years. Of these, 92 in all, 77 were in work, 11 out of work and 4 in institutions.
The London Association for the Care of Mental Defectives, which is responsible for the After Care, are notified of all pupils leaving the Special Schools, and the Association reports annually to the London County Council,
Unfortunately the returns are vitiated by the fact that they are not complete and do not account for the best children, i .e. those who obtain work for themselves or through the help of their parents or teachers.
This is not the fault of the Association. For reasons of economy the Association were instructed to divide the cases into three categories: A. B. C.
(A) were the good cases mentioned above who need not be visited. However in spite of this the Report of the Association for 1923 states that out of 1.941 cases still on the books, and covering a period from 1905-1923, 964 were employed and 410 were not visited ("A")
so that presumably 50% were employed. The National Special Schools Union also compiled statistics fromn
17 London Schools, covering a period of 5 years (1918-1,23) and the
result showed that 90.7% of the whole were judged capable of employment and that 78.7% did obtain employment.
Mention should be made of the apparent decrease of mental deficiency in London. Official figures show a distinct fall in the number -of children certified as mentally deficient.
In 1913 there were practically 8000 (7991) certified and in 1924 there were 7000 (6964).
Allowing for the fall in school population there still remains a
fall of 5% in certified mentally deficients. Since 1918, 14 schools for M.D's have been closed in London, and curiously the reduction has been most marked in poor neighbourhoods such as Hackney Wick and
Notting Dale. In Hackney Wick a school that in 1913 had 92 pupils and in 1917
106 pupils, in 1924 had only 30 and is now closed. In Notting Dale a school that in 1912 had a roll of 130 pupils, in
1922 had only 55. There is a tendency to much over estimate the delinquency of
mental defectives. Sir Basil Thomson (formerly of Scotland Yard) in the Times of
March 8th, 1922 said: "The age of recruits for crime has been steadily rising. The proportion of convictions under 21 years of age has fallen from 11.6 in 1902 to 6.1 in 1913, with a proportionate rise in the ages after 30." (It should be observed that 30 years ago was the birthtime of the Special School).
Sir Basil also stated that it was the unemployable who passed to vagrancy and then to crime.
Dr. Shrubsall in a statistical review of delinquency among M.D's shows that the crimes they commit are those due to foolishness or lack

THE WORK OF THE SPECIAL SCHOOL.

27

of appreciation of social conventions, the most frequent delinquencies being wandering, begging and pilfering. He further adds: "The greatest delinquency (for men) is with unemployables or those only occasionally employed" and that "Social failures are mostly due to emotional instability."
On this it should be noted as already stated that our aims are to improve emotional stability and to make the children employable.
In conclusion we claim that the children are largely trained to take their places in low grade work, that they are improved in their
emotional stability and that the majority become law abiding citizens capabl of conducting themselves far better than they would do in the
absence of special training.
We do not claim to cure mental deficiency, nor to make scholars, nor to make high grade workers, neither do we think that out final products are of eugenic value to the race.

