PROBLEM FAMILIES AND THEIR HOUSEHOLD BUDGETS

By E. T. ASHTON, M.A., B.Sc.
WITH NOTES BY D. CARADOG JONES, M.A. AND DAVID JONES

T HE word " household " rather than appeal of the Sunday newspapers. Yet it is

" home " has been chosen deliberately the " unreasonable " economic choices of

in the title of this article. It is a noun problem families which make their way of

that refers to the home in its economic life dismal indeed!

aspects. " The household is the unit of Because a mode of life appears " lawless"

decision as far as concerns the economics of when compared with an ideal type of normal

consumption" say S. J. Prais and H. S. household budgeting, that is no excuse for

Houthakker.* When we hear the phrase ignoring its peculiar economy. Modern

" the home background of the problem research on problem families is engaged on

family" we expect discussion of far more finding what distinct types this blanket-term

than the economic difficulties; " home " includes. The research will not yield a full

denotes psychological considerations, which picture of these families unless their economic

are secondary when " household" comes thinking is included. It is more convenient,

to mind.

of course, to describe on the one hand

The title of an article can be very mis- psychological features such as instability,

leading. It was a temptation to call this dullness, neglect, and, on the other, the

article " Lawless Families." This would' physical condition of family members and

immediately prepare the reader for a their home. Both of these are, however,

discussion of family influences in crime and aspects of the problem closely related to the

juvenile delinquency. If I had given way to way income is utilised in the household.

the temptation and used that title I would,

however, have meant something quite different! Problem families are, it seems to me, lawless in the economic sense, whatever

Distribution Household

of

Income

within

the

their significance for criminologists. They are lawless in their irrational disregard of ordinary commonsense management of income.
The subject of consumer-choice is one of the higher mysteries of modern economic theory. Consumer-choice among problem families would be an esoteric study which might, or might not, reveal regularities based on constant irrationality rather than on the rationality which is postulated in economic
theory. Economics is often called the dismal science, reasonable behaviour being so much less fascinating to observe than unreasonable behaviour, as witness the

One of the most difficult things in the study of household budgets is to ascertain what the household income really is. This difficulty itself can be subdivided into two
parts. Firstly, in a budget survey it is aknost impossible to obtain full and accurate figures of earnings, including overtime, of a large enough group of workers. This is
particularly the case where problem families are concerned. The authors of the I952 Eugenics Society study (Ed. C. P. Blackerwhile giving figures, admitted " information
about income was sometimes difficult to
obtain, and when obtained, was felt to be untrustworthy." Secondly, it is difficult to

* The Analysis of Family Budgets. I955. p. 1I.
Cambridge University Press.

assess what proportion of the earnings are given to the wife, with which to meet

-95
T EUGENICS REVIEW, July, 1956. 48, 2.

96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

household expenses. Michael Young* gives AssistancE0 Board allowed us instead to

a vivid account of the biased " distribution examine just one source of problem family

of income within the family " resulting from income.

the insufficient housekeeping allowance gran-

ted. He summarises the observations of National Assistance

many social workers that wives often do without for the sake of husband and children, especially in times of depression. He comments, with examples taken from social surveys, on the disproportionate part of the household earnings retained as pocket money by the husband.
Dr. Zweig in his " Pelican" study, The British Worker (pp. 72-5) comments on the situation, adding that " the higher the wage level, the smaller the percentage given to the housewife," her housekeeping allowance remaining constant when wages rise.
Both these difficulties are encountered when problem family budgets are studied. Variations in the domestic economy are so numerous that it is difficult to strike a realistic average for income over a period. It is equally difficult to assess what part of that income finds its way from husband to wife. With rational planning at its minimum, it is clear that whatever she gets will not be handled with the foresight required to make a little go a long way.
Several problem family surveys have shirked the task of computing household incomes, and have concentrated on the rich variety of alternative headaches presented by these families. In Southamptont we soon learned that to follow the detailed financial fortunes of the hundred families involved

We found that seventy-four out of I04 families had received National Assistance in the two-year period. Twenty-four of these seventy-four families had had long-term allowances of over twelve weeks at a time; these long-term allowances alone amounted to £2,592. Particularly interesting was the number of families (sixty) who had received emergency cash grants, over and above any other grants they were receiving. No less than 369 such emergency cash grants were made in the period. The reasons tabulated for their award throw considerable light on the tangled finances of the families, and should be closely scrutinized by all interested in this subject.
This was interesting enough, but would have been even more valuable if we had been
able to relate the National Assistance Board figures to total household income. This we were not able to do with any exactitude. As Dr. Williams states, " one-third of the I04 families gave betting, drink and gambling as the main reason for their financial difficulties."§ This is ultimately however just one aspect of their general financial fecklessness and ineptitude. Looking at it any way, it is clear that quite a large proportion of their sacrifices on the altar of chance come out of
public money.

over a two-year period would have left us little time and energy for other matters that

Primary and Secondary Poverty

we wished to examine. Dr. Maurice Williams It is obvious that much more investigation

says of them, for instance, " their debts pile is needed into the special nature of problem

up, they resort to football pools and family income and expenditure. I will

gambling in the forlorn hope that by some merely suggest a few approaches that could

stroke of luck all, their worries will dis- be tried. The first relates to the secondary

appear."+ So do other people, but within a poverty that is more characteristic of problem

reasonable budgetary framework which in families today than the primary poverty that

the case of problem families does not exist. existed before the war. It will be recalled

We were relieved in a way when good that Rowntree, who coined the term,

fortune and the kindness of the National denoted by secondary poverty those cases

* British Journal of Sociology, I952. 3, 305. t Ford, P., Thomas, C. and Ashton, E. T. Problem

where " total earnings will be sufficient for the maintenance of merely physical efficiency

Families. 1955. Blackwell.

* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1956. 47, 219.

§ Ibid.

PROBLEM FAMILIES AND THEIR HOUSEHOLD BUDGETS

97

were it not that some portion of it is absorbed by other expenditure, either useful or wasteful." Rowntree insisted that there were many such families with adequate income, where nevertheless acute poverty existed. This is probably still, to a lesser extent, the case to-day, as we shall see.
Dr. Young* pleads for a closer study of secondary poverty within the family. So far, primary poverty has been much more accurately observed. " It had," says Young, " one brilliant advantage; it was statistically measurable." It is not so easy to gauge the degree of secondary poverty in a family. Descriptive or comparative accounts seldom give the whole picture.
Yet some light on the situation of the problem family in the community is thrown by a study such as Poverty and the Welfare State.t Chapter 8 of this little book is called "Life below the minimum." In it occurs (p. 59) a paragraph that should make us query the extent of poverty that exists to-day. " Since our poverty line is a stringent one," say the authors," and itself represents, as we fully recognise, a standard of living that is a good deal below what is desirable, and since Classes -' A' and ' B ' [i.e. 4 64 per cent of the population of York] fall below our poverty line, it follows that the 846 families in York in those classes are going short of the necessities of life, even if they did not spend anything on non-essentials." In fact we should add to these families in York another I,395 families (Class " C ", i.e. I9-4 per cent) technically above the poverty line, but only if they concentrate all their spending power on absolute necessities.
The frontier linking primary and secondary poverty does not indeed end, in this York study, until we reach class " D," only the more prosperous of whom are free from actual or likely poverty. Even if this study, as some critics allege, over-estimates the amount of primary poverty, it certainly points to a wide range of secondary poverty. It is certain that problem families would represent, in York or elsewhere, one of the
* Op. cit., 1952. t Rowntree, Seebohm and Lavers, G. R. I95I. Longmans.

permanent sources of primary and secondary poverty. This, moreover, was in I95I. It is not likely that problem family incomes since that date have risen in proportion to the rise in prices. It is even more unlikely that the ability of these families to manage their income has increased proportionately to the rise in the cost of living. It is accordingly very probable that the amount of secondary poverty among problem families is increasing rather than decreasing.
Health of the Wife
Another point for further research is the relations between the health of the wife and the distribution of income within the family. The poor health, often mental as well as physical, of the wife in these families is a fact often noted. Regrettable in itself,-it is also a matter of major sociological importance, being a primary cause of the family's deterioration. Any light thrown on her position in the family illuminates equally the whole family situation.
The Eugenics Society study, Problemi Families: Five Inquiries (I952) gives in its Table I7 (p. 63) a clear picture of the frequency of this factor. Of the 347 known cases in the districts studied, only a third of the problem family housewives could be classified as in normal health. Over 55 per cent of them, while not actually ill, were assessed'as below par; another ii per cent were actually ill at the time of the investigation. Small wonder that their efficiency as home managers, never very marked, decreases steadily with every year of life and every additional pregnancy. The trouble is that these families, as Dr. Williams comments, are not usually receptive to health education. Very persistent efforts, indeed the maximum effort from health visitors and others, appears to bring only minimum returns where these families are concerned.
Dietary Levels
One last point might interest those concerned with problem family budgets. Engels, writing a hundred years ago; said that food represented the largest item in family

98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

budgets, but that the proportion of expenditure devoted to food decreases as the standard of living of the household increases. The dietary levels of problem families are certainly among the more alarming of their characteristics. It would be valuable to know therefore the effect of rehabilitation on their expenditure on food. It would be interesting to learn whether the proportion spent on food does in fact decrease as family standards are raised.
This may however be one of the respects in which these families defy normal economic laws. Experience makes it seem probable that improved standards will not greatly alter the total proportion of family income spent on food. Efficient rehabilitation would however alter the proportion of different kinds of food bought. Present problem family diets are normally, as David Jones said," tea, bread, margarine, cheap cake and chips taken at odd times."* Obviously, to quote again, " they have little idea of food values, and what food they have is lacking in nourishment."
Problem families probably spend on food (if the term is taken in a very loose sense to include sweets, etc.) more than most workingclass families. Improved standards might mean that they would spend no more on food, but would distribute their purchases more wisely on a balanced diet, including some items such as extra meat. This would absorb any savings effected by eating less
fish and chips !
Rehabilitation
Rehabilitation would substitute planned and reasonable choice in diet for irrational and capricious choices. This would mean a major variation in spending habits, not necessarily connected with the income level of the household. Household budget studies, however, often use the so-called " Engel's curve," which relates to the variation of expenditure on particular commodities according to the income level of the household. This is a good illustration of how difficult it is to apply ordinary economic laws to the behaviour of problem families, for the
* EUGENICS REVIEW, 1950. 41, 172.

Engel's curve is based on a model of rational economic choice. Prais and Houthakker, for instance, say " a working-class household will be acting in a perfectly rational manner if it discounts very heavily its future incomestream and establishes habits of expenditure which are appropriate to a lower income level than it may in fact be enjoying." Would this apply to problem families?
Rehabilitation might of course mean that more comes into the home; it should at least mean that existing income is more wisely expended. Much of the success of the Family Service Units with these families is due to friendly help with household budgeting. More information would be welcome from Family Service Units, Local Authorities and National Assistance Boards on this matter. What, that is to say, is the extent of change in diet with higher standards, and what effect does it have on the general finances of the family?
Conclusions
It is not claimed that budgeting, or the lack of it, is the whole or even the main source of the difficulties that perpetually plague these families, and all who have to deal with them. Their financial situation is one aspect of a many-sided problem. It is a situation that can only yield to a totalitarian approach. This does not mean Hitlerian measures, but an all-out attempt to deal with all their interrelated problems concurrently. Nevertheless, in this frontal attack, the weapon of budgetary control should not be spurned. To bring order into the lives of such families is a formidable task. A good start in clearing the muddle can be made by analysing the family budget.
MR. D. CARADOG JONES writes:
MR. ASHTON cogently argues that budgetary control-I should prefer to say guidanceshould not be spumed in any radical attempt to cope with problem families. Admitting that the outlay of their income is not the main source of their difficulties, he has nevertheless underlined certain aspects of their household economy which deserve further exploration, for he believes that

PROBLEM FAMILIES AND THEIR HOUSEHOLD BUDGETS

99

" research will not yield a full picture of intelligence and one symptom is a recurrent

these families unless their economic thinking economic crisis. The root cause of the

is included."

trouble in another individual may be a

In my experience the majority of such chronic lack of self-control, the resulting

families seem, in fact, to be incapable of symptom being some form of moral delin-

economic thought, or at least of forethought. quency. The case might be described in fact

I will illustrate this by an example which as one of moral rather than mental sub-

has recently come to my notice. In a village normality; and when the individual con-

with which I am well acquainted there lived cerned is the breadwinner or his wife, the

a retired glass-worker, over eighty years of family readily becomes a problem family.

age, with an unmarried woman of about Here too, sooner or later, as a secondary

sixty as housekeeper. While he was alive he symptom, the family economy may be

used to settle -the monthly accounts and dole observed to suffer. It is a signal of impending

out small sums for her to buy food and other disaster if the national assistance officer does

essentials. When he died the woman was not intervene.

left with a pension judged to be adequate for In this respect there is some likeness

maintenance, supplemented as it was with between " problem families " and " broken

national assistance. But, never having had families." What is the cement which holds

the full direction of expenditure before, she any household group together? It may be

has no idea of setting aside the weekly sums ties of blood, as with parents and children;

needed to pay the rent and meet the cost of or affection, as with husband and wife; or

fuel and other regular charges. Moreover, community of interest and feeling, as with

being somewhat simple, she cannot easily be friends who choose to share a home; or a

taught to look ahead by those who would combination of these factors. Given one or

help her.

two such intimate ties, the household will not

The consequence is that she has got in necessarily disintegrate even if both ends

arrears several weeks with her rent, and there cannot be made to meet and from time to

would be in addition a heavy bill for coal had time they have to fall back on outside

not a friend paid what was owing in the very assistance. But, if these ties loosen, it is

cold weather to prevent her weekly hundred- unlikely that the economic bond, one member

weight being cut off. When she draws her of the group supporting the rest or making a

money at the post office she goes straight to significant contribution to a common pool,

the village stores, pays the back week's will suffice to keep the family together. And,

account, and proceeds to buy her groceries just because it is at these times of economic

and a quantity of most unsuitable food, crisis that the household is likely to attract

sausages, iced cakes, sweet biscuits, anything public attention, it is easy to mistake the

that is tasty but of little nutritive value. effect for the cause of the trouble, when in

With fires also she is lavish at the beginning point of fact, here as in the case of problem

of the week, so that at the end of it she suffers families, economic ineptitude is nearly always

from cold and hunger. Now she has been a symptom only of some deeper underlying

taken to hospital with bronchitis and the maladv.

ward sister says that she has been " badly My own opinion, for what it is worth, is

neglected." When she comes out she will that the only approach which gives hope of

continue to be a problem for the village and, anything more than purely temporary relief

were it not for the kindness of neighbours, in dealing with problem families is that

her plight would be a sad one.

adopted by Family Service Units. The appeal

Here we see progression towards the must be by example rather than by precept,

typical problem family condition, reduced to and it must be inspired by a patience that

its simplest terms, for.only one individual is persists in spite of repeated failure and by a

involved. The fundamental cause of the faith which continues to believe in the

trouble in this instance is subnormality of possibility of achievement though dealing

ioo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

with what seems to most of us to be utterly exploited by commercial interests through

hopeless human material.

hire purchase, etc. Many notorigus aspects

of the budgets of problem families are

MR. DAVID JONES writes:

common to a much wider group of families

THE budgets of problem families, although often apparently almost wilfully irrational,
can usually be explained in the light of the total family situation. Secondary poverty arising from mis-spending is certainly a typical feature of these families and is partly responsible for their poor material standards, and for the condemnation they receive from the community. Primary poverty, even as measured by fairly stringent survey standards still occurs, however. The amount of such poverty is possibly underestimated, partly because some families, almost always those with more than one wage earner, have quite large incomes, and partly because irregular employment, change of employment, shorttime and other factors which often reduce the average income of a family considerably may be ignored.
Most problem families are living on fairly marginal incomes and even slight financial mismanagement can have disastrous results

although complicated in the problem family by adverse circumstances and personal
deficiencies.
Personality factors are, in fact, usually of great importance in determining the spending of problem families. Low intelligence and ignorance may in some instances be so extreme as to make wise spending an impossibility. More usually, however, mis-
management can be traced to emotional immaturity and instability of temperament and of character. Nor is it due only to the personal inadequacies of the individual parents; the relationship between them is frequently of crucial importance. For example, Mr. Ashton rightly emphasizes the disproportionate amount of his earnings often retained by the father for his own use and, although this biased distribution is by no means confined to the problem family, in such families it reflects and is accentuated by the disharmony between the parents.

for them. Many people with more ability The budgets of problem families are thus

and foresight may be managing a good deal closely related to many other aspects and better on similar incomes, but many others they are usually symptomatic of personality will be just as irrational in their expenditure and relationship difficulties. Study of spend-

but will evade the consequences because they ing habits might well be valuable in that

have more income to mismanage.

they might typify the family's way of

Families living on small incomes are dealing with their problems generally and

inevitably more vulnerable to misfortune, reveal underlying attitudes and behaviour

such as ill-health or the death of the wage patterns. But unless the study is related to

earner, and their financial situation is usually the total situation it could be misleading, such that any long-term planning of particularly when methods of helping the

expenditure is difficult. In many ways it is family are being considered.

also more expensive to live in poverty; the In some instances straightforward advice

quality of articles will be inferior and and education in budgeting may be all that

expensive credit will have to be obtained for is required. Usually, however, the ability of

any majdr purchases. Sometimes the only problem families to respond to such a direct

way of getting by is through mismanagement. and rational approach is very limited.

In addition the budgets of families are Hostility and suspicion might easily be

much affected by the attitudes towards aroused and the family become resistant to

spending current in their area or social any kind of influence. In addition, since

group. Irrational spending may be the result financial mismanagement is -usually only

of giving priority to matters which to the part of the problem of the family, any

family and its neighbours are of greater attempt to deal with it in isolation is doomed

importance, e.g. funeral expenditure. Such to failure. Often, in fact, a budget might be

attitudes and priorities may in turn be changed not directly but as a by-product of

PROBLEM FAMILIES AND THEIR HOUSEHOLD BUDGETS

assisting the family with other and possibly more basic aspects of their problem such as the relationship between the parents.
In each case the assistance provided must therefore be based on as full as possible an understanding of the family and of their situation. A prerequisite both for gaining understanding of the family as well as for making constructive help available to them

is the establishment of a relationship with them. This relationship is quite fundamental; it is not merely the medium through which various forms of help can be provided but is in itself the help. As Mr. Ashton indicates in his conclusion, with problem families budgeting guidance can usually only be effective as
part of an intensive casework process adapted to meet the needs of the particular family.

