72 EUGENICS REVIEW.

such a vast question as that of the cyclical rise and fall of civilisations.

Nevertheless, such books as that under review are full of suggestion

to those who take an interest in the wider problems that the contem-

plation of the historical record raises.

A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS.

Chatterton-Hill, GEORGES, Ph.D. (Privatdocent of Sociology at the Univer-

sity of Geneva). The Philosophy of Nietzsche: An Exposition

and an Appreciation. London. John Ouseley, Ltd.; 1912; price

7s. 6d. net; pp. 292.

IN this able volume Dr. Chatterton-Hill has given us a sympathetic

yet discriminating appreciation of that potent, but erratic, genius,

Friedrich Nietzsche. He regards Nietzsche as one of the great forces of

modern Europe, and as a force working, on the whole, for good. He

believes that Nietzsche's message-be strong, believe in life, cultivate an

ideal of strength and beauty, despise the soft virtues, recognise that only

through suffering can anything great be created, reject the mediocre con-

ceptions of democracy and Socialism, beware of the materialism of

science and ideals of mere comfort and equality, look for the coming of

the Over-man, the leader, creator, autocrat-is a message which the

modern world needs. i-1e recognises the violence of Nietzsche's language,

his exaggeration, his furious onslaught on most of the ideals-scientific,

philosophic, sociological and religious-which our civilisation most highly

cherishes. He discounts his perverted view of the origin and spirit of

Christianity. But he does full justice to Nietzsche's originality and power,

the grandeur of his philosophic thought, his intrepidity, his insight, his

poetic charm, and his prophetic enthusiasm. It is not possible in the

course of a brief review to do justice to Nietzsche's scheme of thought,

which has affinities with the general doctrine of eugenics, although it

may be that Eugenists may find him a dangerous ally. Nietzsche is the

sworn foe of democracy, of equality, of the religion of love, pity, and

sympathy, of asceticism, of pessimism. His ideal is one of exuberant life,

of beauty, power, and strength. His hero is the strong man who can

command and coerce, who is not afraid either to suffer or to inflict

suffering. The weak, the timid, the incompetent are to be crushed out

of existence or coerced for their own good. Sympathy is a mistake-it

weakens him who gives and does not help him who receives. Morality

is only to be approved if it can be shown to be more useful to life than

immorality. The justification of humanity is the production of the

superior race-the Over-man. This is the new wherefore ? The cate-

gories of life are aesthetic, artistic-not moral. Science is materialistic,

religion is a worship of the slave virtues, and so on and so on.

All this gives one furiously to think, as the French say. Much might

be said on the other side. Nietzsche is not good meat for immature

minds, but there are some to whom he may be a useful tonic or at least

good red pepper.

J. A. LINDSAY.

Key,

ELLEN. Love and Ethics.
price is. net; pp. 6i.

London.

G. P. Putnam's Sons; 1912;

THE authoress here replies to. some of the criticisms that have been

showered on her former book, " Love and Marriage," protesting that,

in pointing the way to the probable development of marriage in the

future, she was only pleading for a recognition of the development of

the social organism, and, therefore, forecasting what would be one

of the necessary developments of one of the most important of social

customs. Ellen Key is both an Idealist and a Eugenist, and from these

standpoints she considers the existing marriage laws and customs of

society, weighs them in the balance, and finds them wanting. The ideal

of love and marriage she sets before us is perhaps far beyond the

capacity of the average even to appreciate, much less to attain, but

the future development of sex relations will be along the lines she

