REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

Westermarek, E., Ph. and LL.D. Marriage Ceremonies in Morocco.

London. Macmillan and Co., Ltd.; 19I4; price I2s.; PP. 422.

THE possibility that a sort of eugenic instinct exists in the human race is

suggested by the fact that marriage is surrounded by more ritual than

any other human function and by the special character of some ceremonies.

In number and variety the symbolic and magical performances collected

by Prof. Westermarck are remarkable. His general explanation, which

will serve as a working hypothesis for the study of all ceremonial, is that

marriage ritual is an application of magical ideas for the purpose of

ensuring the safety and welfare of the bride and bridegroom. "A verv

large number of marriage ceremonies spring from the feeling or idea

that bride and bridegroom are in a state of danger, and therefore stand

in need of purification and of special protection against magical influences

and evil spirits." To this chief class belong such customs as shutting up

the bride in a box, dressing her as a man and the groom as a woman,

and the curious quivering noises made by the attendant women on all

possible occasions. Ceremonies with a positive intention include many

whose object is to, make the bride a mother and a mother of male off-

spring.

Thus the bridegroom's mother sings a song praying for male twins

" or even one son "; or she carries a sieve or a bundle of her son's old

clothes on her back, like a baby. A married woman who is blessed with

children is selected to tie the magical knot, hayek, that the bride also

may be fruitful. An interesting detail is that the more beautiful of the

two young wedded people performs the usual ablution before the other on

the wedding night; it is believed that the children will resemble that

parent. Again, precautions are taken to prevent the offspring being

diseased. Superstition in the service of eugenics has evidently been a

force in human history.

Other sources for this or that ceremonial are justly admitted by the

author. The origin of many is mixed. For instance, there are several

which express or symbolise sexual bashfulness, a fact in itself indirectly

eugenic.

Prof. Westermarck has resided among the tribes whose customs he

has detailed so carefully, for various periods amounting in all to six

years. This condition enhances the value of one of the most important

contributions to the history of marriage.

A. E. CRAWLEY.

Reisshelmer, HERMANN. Evolution by Co-operation. A Study in Bioecononmics. London. Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner and Co.; 1913; price 3S. 6d. net.; pp. 200.
IN this book the author attempts to show-what he regards as a new principle of evolution-that a necessary condition for advance of type is that the organism should contribute at least as much to the total supply of nature as it takes from it. The relations of organisms should be like those of manufacturers, each produces something which the other lacksif an organism lives at the expense of another without contributing anything in return, it ifso facto degenerates. When a species lives " legitimately " it adds diiectly or indirectly to the total food supply, and thus the Malthusian doctrine of over-production of individuals is said to fail. It is, of course, obvious that if an organism lives in such a way as to
increase its own food supply, as in the case of an insect which feeds on
and at the same time fertilises a flower, it has a better chance than one which merely destroys its food, and further that species which have a wide choice of food and habit are more likely to give origin to new forms than those which are specialised for one set of conditions. Apart from giving

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

I65

instances, mostly well known, of this kind of relation, the book seems to shed little fresh light on the problem of evolution.
L. DONCASTER.

Haldane, J. S., sonality:

M.D., LL.D., An Examination

F.R.S. of the

Mechanism, Life, and Per-
Mechanistic Theory of Life and

Mind. London. John Murray; 1913; price 2S. 6d.; pp. 139.

IN this book of four lectures delivered last May at Guy's Hospital, Dr.

Haldane has his views on

developed, a subject

in of

a remarkably attractive and assimilable unfailing interest. Commencing with

form,
a fair

and lucid exposition of the mechanistic hypothesis of living organisms

and the physiological observations upon which this hypothesis is founded,

he discusses more superficially the objections raised in favour of vitalism,

only to reject this alternative hypothesis as "unproved, unintelligible,

and practically useless as a scientific working hypothesis."

find

On such that the

a clear and mechanistic

tangible foundation it hypothesis is rejected

is a on

little disappointing to
no better ground than

that of the extreme complexity of the intracellular mechanisms required

for the ordinary functions of cell life, and for heredity; in view of our

ignorance of the possibilities of molecular structure, such a conclusion

would seem to be somewhat presumptuous. Moreover, when we look

further for an alternative hypothesis, we are merely frustrated by a

philosophical discussion on the reality of the a not very relevant presentation of idealism.

phenomenal

universe,

and

That there is nothing in the mechanistic hypothesis which is incon-

sistent with the purest idealism must be familiar to all students of

Huxley; and we imagine that Hume would have particularly resented the

assertion (p. 74) that he had proved the world of matter to be non-

existent. Nor does it help matters to place organic beings in a special

category; if the physicist is right in attempting to express the relations

between physical quantities in terms of mathematical symbols, although

the symbols are avowedly not physical quantities, the physiologist is

equally right in explaining physiological mechanisms, even the most

obscure and intricate, in terms of physics and chemistry.

It is, indeed, to be regretted that Dr. Haldane, in developing specu-

lations of great philosophical interest, should have founded them, in appearance, upon the supposed inadequacy of the mechanistic theory; for

not only does he fail to establish this inadequacy, but there remains

between the physiological and the philosophical portions of his reasoning

an unbridged gap in an argument, which in other respects he has taken

pains to make complete.

Unquestionably the best lecture of the four, both from the literary

and from the scientific point of view, is the last, entitled "Personality."

Here, in a purely philosophical region, the author develops the conse-

quences of the thesis that the phenomenal world is a product of per-

sonality; and in particular of the personality of an organism, itself

adapted to its environment. The conception bristles with paradoxes,

and it is only by appealing to an ultimate unity in the universe of per-

sonality that solempsism ";

it is possible to nevertheless, it is

escape from by powerful

the sophistry reasoning as

of " racial well as by

brilliant creative thought that world and all that lies within it

we is

are led to the conclusion, that " This a spiritual world." R. A. FISHER.

Dealey, JAMES QUAYLE. The Family in Its Sociological Aspects. London.

G. G. Harrap and Co.; 1913; price is. 6d. net; pp. 137.

ccThuHalIpmStienlraistttilcneogmbpoirnoikstehdeoaemsossdoimenergwnuhlaafrtalmyiplolyoitrtolfeanjAdumsetuirncicecoatnonviintdsceimtnoigtclre.ahicsytT.ohreicaflirsotutsleivneen,

" It family,

is in

possible, therefore, its later aspects at

to get a much clearer idea of the least, from a study of the American

modern family

