DISCUSSION
METHODS OF RESEARCH
BEING AN ATTEMPT TO RECONCILE THE VIEWS OF DR. G. ARCHDALL REID WITH THOSE OF OTHER
BIOLOGISTS
THE science of Biology is founded upon certain facts, and neither the source from which the facts were derived nor the manner of their discovery has any bearing upon their utility so long as the facts themselves are reliable. This statement, which can scarcely be described as controversial, appears to represent the main thesis of an article entitled Methods of Research by Dr. G. Archdall Reid, published in the October number. Dr. Archdall Reid describes his paper as very controversial, but it appears to the present writer that a great deal of misunderstanding might be avoided if a clear statement were made of the views of some of those observers with whom Dr. Archdall Reid assumes himself to be in conflict.
I understand Dr. Archdall Reid to attribute to Mendelians and Mutationists the opinion that a certain class of facts, namely the facts of experiment, are in themselves of a superior order to certain other facts, namely, the facts of observation. In my own study of the writings in question I can find nothing to justify this assertion, which could scarcely have been made by anyone familiar with the numerous observations on heredity in the human species recently published by writers who must undoubtedly be described as Mendelian. The facts used by these writers are exclusively facts of observation, since in the case of the human species experiment on Mendelian lines is an impossibility. Of all the facts brought to light by students of Mendelian hereditv these are the facts of greatest interest to Eugenists, and it is curious that they should have been overlooked by a contributor to the EUGENICS REVIEW. It is true, however, that many of those who have taken a prominent part in the recent march of biological progress have made great and sometimes exclusive use of facts derived from experimental observations. Of the true reason for this apparent preference no hint seems to have reached the ears of Dr. Archdall Reid. And yet the reason

DISCUSSION

34T

is not far to seek, and may be summed up in one little word-the experimental facts are new.
It would be a curious study to estimate the number of
writers who, in the thirty years immediately following the publication of Animals and Plants under Doinestication, have discussed Darwin's facts without making the smallest appreciable
advance upon Darwin's own conclusions. Doubtless one possible
deduction from this eventuality was that no further progress was possible-that the path of Biology had terminated in a cul de sac. Those to whom this inference was inacceptable were, however, quite clear as to their own requirements. What was wanted
was new facts-and if possible facts of a new kind. Such facts are now rapidly becoming available. And it is worthy of notice in this connection that the only collection of observational facts
made during the period in question, in any way comparable with
Darwin's collection, was compiled by the most prominent of modern Mendelians.
For the want of fresh facts the study of Heredity stood still
for thirty years ; we are now almost overwhelmed by the flood of new facts which have come to light as the result of the experimental method. It is scarcely surprising that the new facts
should absorb a good deal of attention, or that some time is required before they can take their proper place in relation to the old. The present is at least a singularly unsuitable time for renewing the discussion of the old facts without taking due cognizance of the new.
There is another difference between the old and the new
facts which can perhaps best be illustrated bv means of a definite example. The example chosen is described by Darwin as the most remarkable instance known to him of the direct and prompt action of climate upon a plant. In spite of the publication of the Mutationzstheorie in 190I, in which they were interpreted in a totally different fashion in accordance with evidence derived from experiment, these facts have been resuscitated by at least three separate authors, who preferred observational to experimental facts, and again quoted on Darwin's authority as a remarkable example of the direct action of the environment. On turning up the entry Metzger in the index of The Laws of Heredity, I find the same usage exactly repeated by Dr. Archdall Reid. The facts are as follows. Seed of a particular type of maize was cultivated by Metzger in Germany, having been introduced by him from America. " During the first year the plants were twelve feet high and a few seeds were perfected; the lower seeds in the ear kept true to their proper form, but the upper seeds became slightly changed. In the second generation the plants were from nine to ten feet high and ripened their seeds better; the depression on the outer side of the seed had almost disappeared, and the original beautiful white colour had become duskier. Some of the seeds had even become yellow, and in

342 DISCUSSION
their now rounded form they approached common European maize. In the third generation nearly all resemblance to the original and very distinct American parent form was lost. In the sixth generation this maize perfectly resembled a European variety."
Such is an example of a fact drawn from observation. Let us see how the facts of experiment bear upon the matter. It has been observed by de Vries, Correns, and the present writer, among others, tha a large number of different types of maize introduced from America into Holland, Germany and Ceylon, preserve their original type unchanged for at least six generations, so long as they are protected from intercrossing. This is true of types differing in all or any of the following characteristics: colour of the seed, which may be white, yellow, blue or red; shape of the seed, which may be flat and indented (like Metzger's maize), smooth and round, wrinkled (sugar corn) or minute and sharply pointed (pop corn); height of the plant, and several other characteristics. If, however, a few plants bearing any of these characters are grown in close proximity to a native strain, the phenomena observed are practically identical with those described by Metzger. The student of experimental results therefore, naturally concludes that the same explanation may apply to Metzger's own phenomena, and that it is not an indisputable fact that climate alone has any such direct and prompt action on maize. In this case, at least, it may be argued that the facts of experiment have an advantage over those of observation in reliability as well as in novelty. The great merit of an experimental fact is that the experiment can be duplicated and the fact verified by anyone who takes the trouble to repeat the conditions of the experiment. The great defect of so many observed facts is that they are based upon the report of a single observer who is often a person quite untrained in the proper weighing of evidence, and are then blindly copied by one essayist after another. Such an assertion may be quite incapable of proof or of confutation, since the combination of circumstances described may be impossible to repeat experimentally. Experimental facts can be demonstrated at any time, and we may add that we have never met with any seriously adverse criticism of Mendel's work from anyone who has carefully repeated his experiments-a verification which is easily within the power of every possessor of a garden.
So much for the facts themselves. Dr. Archdall Reid goes on to make some excellent remarks on the proper use of facts in scientific operations. Writing of the recognised method of procedure which he recommends, he states: " This method has four stages. In the first, a stage of observation, facts are collected. In the second, a stage of generalisation or induction, every relevant inference that can be conceived as possible is drawn from the facts collected in the first stage. In the third,

DI SCUSSION

^343

a stage of deduction, crucial instances are thought out by means
of which all the rival hypotheses made in the second are put to the test. In the fourth, a second stage of observation, those
facts are collected to which the mind was directed in the
third stage."
Dr. Archdall Reid accuses Mendel and his modern followers of ignoring this method of research. At the risk, therefore, of becoming tedious it seems necessary to point out how exactly Mendel himself pursued this very method. We shall, however, simplify the account as much as possible. Mendel found that when a pea plant bearing green seeds was crossed with one which produced yellow seeds, the immediate result of the cross con-
.sisted of yellow seeds--the colour being exhibited by the cotyledons or seed leaves of the next or hybrid generation. The yellow hybrid seeds grew into plants which produced 8,023 seeds, of which 6,022 were yellow and 2,00I green, or a proportion of
almost exactly three to one. When these seeds in their turn were sown, the green seeds produced plants bearing only green -seeds like themselves; one yellow seed out of every three produced only yellow seeds; whilst two out of three yellows produced a mixture of yellow and green progeny in the same proportion as before. This was the first stage of Mendel's research-his original observation. The second stage was to frame hypotheses which would fit the facts. The only hypothesis which Mendel or anyone else has suggested as an adequate explanation is the hypothesis that the reproductive cells of the hybrid plants are of two kinds, which occur in equal numbers; and that one of these kinds contains something which represents yellow, whilst the other kind contains something which represents green. The third stage was to devise a crucial test by which to verify this hypothesis. Mendel saw that if his hypothesis was correct a cross between the hybrid plant and one of the pure parental yellow strain should yield vellow seeds only, whilst a cross between a hybrid and the pure green strain should yield equal numbers of greens and yellows. On no other theory of hereditary mechanism which has ever been suggested would such a result be expected. As the fourth and concluding stage of his research Mendel therefore carried out the necessary crosses and found that his prediction was realised. The same phenomenon was observed and the same verification practised in the case of six other distinct characters. Mendel also showed that his theory afforded an explanation of a great number of observations made by earlier hybridisers, such as Koelreuter and Gaertner-facts of which the meaning had previously been quite obscure.
It is because Mendel's work so exactly fulfils the requirements postulated by Dr. Archdall Reid as the essentials of sound research, that his paper remains a model of what the statement of a scientific discovery should be. A theory is not necessarily unscientific because the original observation leads to only one

344 DISCUSSION
hypothesis in the mind of a clear thinker, and that hypothesis is found to be capable of a single simple verification. The hypotheses of presence and absence, patency and latency, and the like are only minor modifications of Mendel's original theory, and have not in any way checked the stream of research to which that theory has given rise. For just as the theory of gravitation has been found to fit in with innumerable observations made since Newton's time, so Mendel's theory has been, and is being used to unravel the mysteries of heredity, reversion, sex and a host of others, all of which were regarded by Darwin and his followers as quite distinct problems. How Mendel's discovery would have delighted Darwin himself will be realised by all who have read the provisional theory of Pangenesis.
The theory of Natural Selection which Dr. Archdall Reid defends so fiercely from attacks which we believe to be largely imaginary, is axiomatic in the minds of Biometrician, Mutationist and Mendelian alike. No modern biologist of repute doubts that Natural Selection determines what shall survive and what shall be exterminated. But even Dr. Archdall Reid does not suggest that Natural Selection accounts for the first appearance of heritable variations, or as we now call them mutations. On the contrary he states that the only relevant hypothesis which is compatible with the law of evolution througn Natural Selection is that variations are normally spontaneous. We wonder whether any other biologist exists at the present day who is satisfied with such a phrase-to us this so-called hypothesis seems a mere verbal confession of ignorance. Is it possible that Dr. Archdall Reid does not realise that the main object with which experimental research has been so vigorously prosecuted during the last twelve years has been to ascertain the true nature of these spontaneous variations ? This is a problem, which so far as we can see can only be attacked by the experimental method-at least the method of observation has not carried us a step nearer to its solution in the last forty years.
In the last pages of this article Dr. Archdall Reid seems to us to inculcate a still more dangerous heresy, for the view that moral and intellectual faculties are bred and not created lies at the very foundation of Eugenics, and the collection of evidence to prove this proposition was one of the most important contributions to science bequeathed by our distinguished founder. It is difficult to understand how anyone can doubt the inheritance of such faculties who has read Sir Francis Galton's account of his observations upon the characters of identical twins. On the other hand Dr. Archdall Reid's criticism of the work of Professor Karl Pearson, though betraying a remarkable unfamiliarity with the most elementary methods of biometry, seems to be not entirely groundless. Pearson has shown that the correlation between relatives in respect of mental and moral characters is of the same order as the correlation in physical characters. Unfor-

DISCUSSION

345

tunately both kinds of characters are influenced by environment, and the environments to which relatives have been subjected in their youth are generally more alike than the environments of persons not related. Consequently, although Galton's work leads to the belief that nature is much more important than
nurture, yet some portion of the correlation observed must be
due to nurture or environment. The work of Biometricians will always stand open to this
criticism until they can find some method of distinguishing between heritable differences, or mutations, on the one hand and fluctuations, or differences due to the environment, on the other. The misunderstanding which exists between Dr. Archdall Reid and students of mutation is due to his using the terms of the latter in a sense which they do not accept. The terminology employed by mutationists at the present moment has undergone practically no change from that used by de Vries in the first pages of the Mttationtstheorie (published in I9OI). In this terminology fluctuating variations are simply those differences which are occasioned by the environment. A mutation is the first origin of one of those differences which are inherent in the germ plasm and which are therefore capable of inheritance. 'Normal' variation may include both fluctuating variation on the one hand and differences due to mutation on the other. A considerable body of evidence has lately accumulated to show that mutations, are definite and discontinuous, and that the differences which so arise are analogous with chemical differences. The misunderstanding above referred to, which is constantly being repeated, could never have arisen in the mind of anyone who had read Prof. de Vries' great work with real attention.
We have strayed, in our pursuit of Dr. Archdall Reid, rather far from our original subject of fact. But the necessity for an accurate definition of terms is a closely related and
equally important subject. The main object of the present note, however, is to protest against Dr. Archdall Reid's action in disparaging the work of experimental observers and misinterpreting their methods. In pursuing the search for novel facts, which is the first duty of every man of science, no discrimination need be drawn between experiment and observation so long as, the investigation is carried out in a critical spirit and without bias.
R. H. Loci-, M.A., D.Sc.
Peradeniya, Ceylon.

Discussiont followinig Lecture on "Methods of Rcscarch October i9th, I9II
The President began the discussion by expressing the satis-faction he felt in finding in Dr. Archdall Reid such a keen advocate of the views associated with his father's name. As ta

346 DISCUSSION
the main purport of the paper-that is the setting forth in broad outline the methods of research which ought to be followed by all scientific workers-he found himself in close accord with the lecturer. It was in matter of detail where they differed, and, as the object of these meetings was to elicit criticism, he would confine his observations to one or two points where they were not in accord.
The point where they were most at variance was as regards the relative importance of heredity and environment, and more especially as regards his criticism on Professor Pearson's arguments on this subject. One of these arguments, if he understood it, ran as follows: If they ascertained the intensity of inheritance in man of eye colour, and also that of some mental characteristic, such as modesty, they would find them to be nearly identical. Now eye colour is obviously wholly independent of environment. Therefore the similarity of modesty to eye colour in this matter of inheritance indicates that it also is almost entirely independent of environment and almost wholly dependent on innate qualities. But, in order to apply any crucial test to this argument, it is obvious that they must first clearly understand what is meant by the intensity of inheritance. Assume a
population of men with an average height of 5ft. Then take a
number of fathers of 6ft. in height, and ascertain the average height of their sons. Let it be 5ft. 6in., or half way back to the average of the whole population. Then the intensity of inherit-
ance would be said to be i or >5. It is important to note that
in this case a considerable number of sons would also be of the same height-6ft.-as their fathers. But if they had taken for the fathers only the giants in the land of 7ft. high, they might have found that the average height of their sons was 6ft., or also half way towards the average of 5ft.; and they might thus again have proved that the intensity of inheritance was j or -5. But in this case the chance of the son of a man 7ft. high himself measuring 7ft. would be extraordinarily small. The intensity of inheritance may be identical though the character may recur frequently in one case and very seldom in the other. In fact the probability of any character, such as height, being reproduced in any individual in the next generation to an equal degree is not the test adopted by Prof. Pearson of the intensity of inheritance. But it is true that if they ascertained by statistical enquiry, in the first place, the probability of any character appearing in any individual up to a given standard without reference to his parentage, and in the second place the probability of the offspring of such an individual being himself equally well endowed, they would thus have obtained all the data necessary to enable the mathematician to calculate the intensity of inheritance on certain assumptions. Take for instance the case of birth-marks, which Dr. Archdall Reid seems to consider to be a crucial case to be quoted in refutation of Prof. Pearson. Some

DISCUSSION

347

birth-marks were, he knew, sometimes inherited, and probably all would be found to reappear occasionally. Now if they ascertained the probability of a certain birth-mark appearing in any individual independently of his parentage, and if they also ascertained the probability of a child having the same birth-mark as the father, however extraordinarily minute this second probability might be -provided that it was greater than the first-mentioned probability-it might be found as the result of the necessary calculations that the intensity of inheritance in the case of this birth mark wvas, like the intensity of inheritance in the case of giants. also somewhere about I or *5. Had Dr. Archdall Reid produced a fraction of evidence to show that this would not be the case ? None whatever. WVhatever might be the value of Prof. Pear-
son's argument, a point he was not then discussing, it seemed to him to remain wholly untouched by this criticism. In these
circumstances he could not but feel that it was a pity that the lecturer had used such expressions as " void of content " and " nonsensical " with regard to it. In conclusion the President thanked the lecturer sincerely for having read a paper which had given rise to such an interesting discussion.

After expressing great interest in Dr. Reid's paper, and an appreciation of its scope and ability, Prof. Sedgwick made the following remarks:
On p. 248 Dr. Reid implies that ow.Aing to imperfect training biologists do not appreciate the importance of the method which Newton used in establishing his results. No doubt Newton's method is often neglected by biologists and by other men of science, but this is not due to ignorance or incapacity, for this method of verification is known to all men and is constantly used in daily life in matters of practical importance. Why is it left behind when they enter the Laboratory ? The reason is this. All scientific men must use hypotheses; science advances by hypotheses. No stimulating teaching can be given without hypotheses. They are the stimulating ingredient of the dry scientific meal. The danger is, and this often happens, that they become the spoilt child of their author. He must defend them at all hazards and the correction must come from others.
On p. 254 Dr. Reid says: " Evolution is due to natural selection and nothing else." This was not the view of Darwin, who says on p. 72 of the Origin: " There can be little doubt that the tendency to vary in the same manner has often been so strong that all the individuals of the same species have been similarly modified without selection."
One of the main doctrines of Dr. Reid's address is the contrast between inborn characters and acquirements. I agree that these differ and should be contrasted, but not as being fundamentally different.
What are inborn characters and wherein do they differ

348 DISCUSSION
from acquirements ? Inborn characters are acquirements-i.e., characters which have been acquired in the prenatal environment which cannot be got at. What Dr. Reid calls acquirements (Lamarckian acquired characters) are properties evolved in an environment which can be got at. Or, to put the matter in another way: inborn characters are those which arise in response to the internal environment afforded by the organism itself and created by the organism; whereas acquirements of authors (Lamarckian acquirements) arise in response to the environment which is external to the organism. This external environment, though modifiable by the organism, is on the whole independent of it.
In his eighth conclusion on p. 263 he says that variations in inborn characters are normally spontaneous. By this he means that we are ignorant of their causes. When he says that the alternative hypothesis that " variations are commonly caused by the direct action on the germ-plasm of its environment is demonstrably false," he is, I think, himself on doubtful ground, for all characters and properties are due partly to the action of the environment, and the form which they assume depends on -the kind of environment. But I freely admit that I do not know what he means by gerym-plasnt. Is the substance of the unsegmented zygote germ-plasm ? Is it germ-plasm after cleavage? When does it cease to be germ-plasm ? Or is germ-plasm only to be found in the gonad and gametes ? If the latter, then I think his suggestion that it cannot be altered by the environment of the utmost interest and significance. There can be no doubt that this is a burning question at the present moment, that it touches the heart of the matter. Can the gametes be so affected by the environment as to give rise to variations which would not otherwise have occurred in the later zygote. Darwin discussed this question and was inclined to think that they could be so affected. I maintain that the only thing we know is that the environment acts with effect on the moving, the evolving zygote. We do not know if it acts at all on the gametes so as to affect the zygote which proceeds from them or on the resting zygote. The gametes and the resting zygotes are in a static state; the developing zygote in a dynamic state. Can we do anything to the zygote or pre-zygote when it is resting which will affect the motion which is subsequently imparted to it ?
DR. GosSAGE said that everyone would agree with the reader that facts, however collected, were equal before science, but he thought that there was some confusion in the paper between facts and recorded observations. The latter were by no means necessarily facts. It was quite possible that experimental observations were more likely to be facts than those obtained in other ways: arranged experiments were simpler than the phenomena supplied by nature and so were easier to observe and

DISCUSSION

349

laboratory work tended to teach accuracy to the observer. There
was one special cause of error which was commoner in direct observations than in the simpler experiments and that was a
general tendency to mix up facts and the inferences drawn from facts and to advance the latter as though they were facts. For instance, Dr. Archdall Reid had stated that Negroes and Hindus were more resistent to malaria than Europeans; but this was a hypothesis founded on the observations that adult Europeans going to the Tropics suffered more severely than adult natives. The facts could be explained on another hypothesis, viz., that all the specially susceptible individuals in each generation were eliminated in malarious countries during childhood and the available evidence rather favoured this alternative view. Much the
same might be said with regard to Measles, where the apparent greater resistence of European races over South Sea Islanders or South American Indians might be explained by the supposition that each individual acquired some immunity from his mother during intrauterine life, the mother having had measles in childhood and being therefore highly immune. Such a passage of immunity from mother to foetus was known in vaccination; if a woman was vaccinated during pregnancy the child was usually immune to vaccination for several months after birth. Dr. Archdall Reid's conclusion that every race is resistant to every disease precisely in proportion to its past experience of that disease, might be quite true; but before it could be used as an argument in favour of Natural Selection, or anything else, it was necessary, according to his own admirable rules, that some
decision between the opposing hypotheses should be arrived at and at present there were not sufficient facts to warrant any decision. What was chiefly wanted in the study of Heredity were verified facts, however acquired and old observations, accepted for years as facts, required to be constantly retested in the light of fresh knowledge and newer methods. No observation should be blindly accepted, however famous the name of the
observer.

"HEREDITY AND THE JEW " THE paper of Dr. R. N. Salaman on "Heredity and the Jew" is likely to strike the uninitiated reader as a fine piece of scientific reasoning founded on a sound basis of fact; not so, however, those who have first-hand knowledge of the Jews, and know them intimately from personal acquaintance. No wonder that Jews are greatly surprised at the results obtained by Dr. Salaman, for these are contrary to all that experience would teach us. Having myself taken up the matter in order to find out how far Dr. Salaman's statements are correct, I have come to the conclusion that not only are his general arguments in-

350 DISCU SSION
applicable to such a nondescript feature as the "Jewish face,"' but that the evidence of his statistics itself is flatly contrary to that of the first few cases collected by myself. Indeed, when trying to tabulate my material according to "Jewish" and " non-Jewish" appearance, I soon found myself entangled in insuperable difficulties. It is comparatively easy for everyday purposes to distinguish by the mere look a Jew from a non-Jew, but on closer examination it is impossible to draw in doubtful cases any definite line of distinction which will stand scientific scrutiny. There are Jews who decidedly look non-Jewish, though one is iiearly always able, when told that they are Jews, to detect some outward sign of their descent. On the other hand, among the small number of cases seen by myself, I have twice been "taken in " by the completeness with which certain Gentile women who had married Jews " mimicked " the Jewisn type. Dr. Salaman does not indicate whether in the cases enumerated by him he has taken into account this feature of the parents. Furthermore, all observations are vitiated to a large extent by the fact that very often the Jewish trait is absent in youth and only develops in later years. Has Dr. Salaman taken sufficient precaution to exclude this second source of error ?
Now, I have collected only a small number of cases, and I ceased because it seemed to me futile to accumulate material which is in itself unreliable and unscientific. Still, taking the rough-and-ready method of common observation, as Dr. Salaman has obviously done, I find that the facts do not bear out his statistics. He contends that all the children of marriages between Jew and Gentile are Gentile-looking, and he attributes the relatively small number of cases going against his theory to errors of observation and the admixture of Jewish blood in the Gentile strain. This is a facile method of interpreting away undesirable facts. I have myself observed twelve cases of mixed marriages, and find of the twenty-five children of these cases twelve Jewish-looking, nine Gentile-looking, and four indeterminate. Of the twelve Jewish-looking children five belong to three Gentile mothers with a decided Jewish cast of feature, while among the nine Gentile-looking children there were seven where the Jewish parents were more or less Gentilelooking. How far in these cases was the non-Jewish appearance of the children due to this factor ? There was no evidence that in all these cases the features of the parent were due to previous race-mixture. I know two cases where there is no doubt of the original purity of the parental strain, yet out of five children, three are distinctly Jewish-looking, while the remaining two are still too young to allow a decisive judgment.
In order to refute Dr. Salaman there is no need of statistics on a large scale. In any small number of random cases such as collected by myself, there ought not to be any chance of finding
so many instances contrary to his theory. A single case upsets

DISCUSSION

35 "

his thesis, taking for granted that error of observation as to racepurity and Jewish looks be excluded
And I would maintain that anyone who takes the trouble to collect a few cases of Jewish-Gentile marriages will find that the Jewish type comes out in a considerable number of the children of the first filial generation. Apart from this, as I have said, the Jewish face is too indefinite and complex a feature to
serve as a biological unit in the study of Mendelian inheritance. S. HERBERT, M.D., M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P.

THE CORRELATION BETWEEN DEAF-MUTISM
AND SEA-SICKNESS
To many of your readers the connection between Deaf-mutes and Sea-sickness may appear fanciful, yet they are intimately associated in a curious and interesting way. It is a fact that a large proportion of deaf-mutes are immune from sea-sickness and from any approach to it; a small compensation, perhaps, for so great a loss, but that is another matter. It may seem strange, but there is a solid anatomical and physiological basis for this phenomenon.
The " Internal Ear " or " Labyrinth " lies in the Temporal bone, hollowed out of its dense bony structure. It consists essentially of two parts, the Cochlea, and the Semicircular Canals; the former a spiral canal something like the cavity of an ordinary snail-shell; the latter three hollow loops sufficiently indicated by their name. These two parts are continuous in structure, inasmuch as they communicate with a common cavity (the Vestibule) lying between them; they are lined by a common membrane, and have, suspended in fluid within their interior, a common membrane on which their special nerves are distributed. The Cochlea and the Semicircular Canals are therefore closely associated both in structure and position, as they also are developmentally.
But their functions are essentially different. The Cochlea is the organ of hearing, while the Canals are for the purpose of the maintenance of position and equilibrium. By them alone under ordinary circumstances we know the position of the head and the rest of the body, and are able to preserve our balance during both rest and movement. Interference with the Semicircular Canals immediately causes vertigo of the most aggravated kind; and this vertigo and consequent sickness is also produced by disturbance of the fluid, with which the canals are filled, such as is brought about by the movements of a ship at sea-or of course, by any other movements of the body of an oscillatory or rotatory kind. Disturbance of the fluid acts, of course, on the suspended membrane, whose nerves communicate
5

352 DISCUSSION
directly with the vertigo centre in the brain. This is what takes place in the normal subject.
But in deaf-mutes the Internal Ear is imperfectly developed, the Semicircular Canals suffering equally with the Cochlea, and hence vertigo and sea-sickness cannot be produced in them either by ship movements, or even by such violent rotatory motion as may be given by twisting the person many times round in a child's swing and then releasing it.
As sea-sickness is a subject of such universal interest I may add that the uncomfortable dizziness produced in many persons by visual sensations, such as reading in the train, or the kaleidoscopic involution of colours in a magic lantern, or the use of unsuitable spectacles, is accounted for by the fact that the optic nerve centres in the brain and the Semicircular Canals are directly connected together by fine nerve fibres. Hence visual impressions may also produce vertigo.
This mechanism of vertigo and its accompanying sickness is present and active in animals, except in lower forms in which the Semicircular Canals are absent, and in them vertigo cannot be produced by rotatory movements.
The questions I should like to ask are these: I. Do deaf-mute infants display a slowness and difficulty in learning to balance themselves in sitting or walking ? 2. Have adult deaf-mutes more difficulty in maintaining equilibrium than normal persons; and further, have they more difficulty in doing so in the dark or with their eyes closed? Bearing on this point is the fact that birds in whom the Semicircular Canals have been destroyed gradually learn to maintain their equilibrium by means of sight and feeling. Do deaf-mutes in like manner depend largely on sight for preserving their balance ? And leading out from these considerations, are there any signs or qualities by which we may predict whether a normal person will prove a good sailor or not? May I suggest that possibly a clue may be found in that "good sailors" may be people in whom the nerve sensations of the Semicircular Canals are less acutely developed. Such persons one would expect on
this hypothesis to rely on sight to an appreciable extent for preserving equilibrium, and would, therefore, walk somewhat unsteadily in the dark or with their eyes closed. They would be abnormally dizzy on looking over a precipice, but would be good sailors so long as they kept their eyes rigidly fixed on a distant object clear of moving ones, as on a star, or kept their eyes closed.
There are other interesting side-lights on this subject, but I fear I have already overstepped the limit of space in this note.
JOHN MASON, M.D.

DISCUSSION

353

BIRTH RATE IN AUSTRALIA
To the Editor of the EUGENICS REVIEW
SIR, In the October number of the EUGENICS REViEW I am
taken to task by Mr. L. F. Giblin of Tasmania, for stating that the Australian Birth Rate is almost the lowest in the civilised world, and am referred to the Official Commonwealth Year Book, No. 4, I9II, which I may state was published after my paper appeared in the January issue, the data contained therein being not available for reference at the time.
The Year Book gives the statistics from I90I to I9IO. On page i68 the following centence in regard to the birth-rate occurs, which certainly bears out my contention: " A comparison with other countries shows that the Australian States occupy a very low position." On referring to the actual crude birth-rate figures, the rate of the Commonwealth in I909 is given as 26-4, while South Australia and Victoria (where the rate was only 24-6), occupy along with Ireland, Canada (Ontario) and France the five lowest positions of the thirty-five countries referred to in the tables.
At the same time, Mr. Giblin is right in stating that the falling birth-rate in the Commonwealth of Australia has certainly been checked during the last few years. The rates for the six years 1904 to I909 have been respectively 26-3; 26-I; 26-4; 26&5; 26&3, and 26-4.
The following are the birth-rates of some of the principal countries: Russia 48&I; Hungary 36&3; Austria 33-8; Italy 33.4; Spain 33-2; Japan 33-o; Germany 32-3; Holland 29-7;
Denmark 28-3; Scotland (Io08) 272; England (igo8) 26-5;
Norway 26&2; Belgium 25-3; Ireland (I908) 23'3; and France
(I908) 20'2. My Melbourne medical friend referred to in Mr. L. F. Giblin's
letter spoke in the strongest terms in reference to the widespread artificial limitation of families in the great cities of Australia.
In the British Australasian of October igth it is stated that
during August of the present year the birth-rate in Sydney, the Capital of New South Wales, was 30-24, the highest since I889, and showing an increase of IO per cent. over the average of the preceding five years.
Yours, etc., R. MURRAY LESLIE.

ANTI-EUGENIC CUSTOMS DEAR SIR,
I have read with great interest, the preliminary announcements of the International Eugenics Congress, to be

354 DISCUSSION
held in London next year. May I ask you to publish in your REVIEW, the following incident, which should serve to show how little we, as a Nation, can claim to understand of eugenic
principles.
Not very long ago, I wrote to an official in the Colonial Office, on behalf of a friend of mine, whose husband had died from illness contracted on the Gold Coast. He left one baby daughter, and his widow, on applying for a pension, was told that no pensions were granted to widows.
My horrified appeal and protest, was met with the information that such was indeed the case, but that under special circumstances, a bonus was sometimes granted, of half the deceased officer's annual pay.
I was able to secure £200 for my friend, but the burden of the refrain was always, that men serving in West Africa, should not marry. Such an attitude is criminally short-sighted; is it not also a direct encouragement to immorality and vice ?
I have myself been on the Gold Coast, and I learnt there, that such a country requires the best men that England can produce, because they will have to face the worst odds.
If the existing circumstances continue, either, those men who are so eminently fitted to carry on our race, will not give England splendid sons, or else the women will rebel at last, and Colonies, such as West Africa, will again become the dumping ground for the men we have no use for in England.
Yours etc., NORAH WATHERSTON.

