HZEMOPHILIA IN THE ROYAL CASTE

By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.HIST.S., F.S.G.

I N Dr. Carroll Birch's work on haemophilia had no children. It is understood that sons

* reviewed elsewhere in the present issue of Princess Henry of Prussia, another

(p. 277), the formula for the inheritance member of the Hesse family, have been

kof this disease is stated: males only affected, affected, but the only one who has married

Mransmission only through females or affected has escaped. Finally, in the Hesse family,

cales, but never in any eventuality from the transmission through the late Czarina

ither to son. In the case of a female trans- to the Czarevitch was well known and

putter, it is an even chance that a son will definitely influenced the course of history.

be affected, and an even chance that a Some at least of his sisters must have been

F1aughter will transmit. In the case of an potential transmitters but all have perished.

.ffected son, no son of his will inherit, but Of Princess Beatrice's family, one son,

t is again an even chance as to whether a Leopold, was affected but died unmarried,

ughter of his will transmit. This trans- the other two sons escaped. The daughter,

*ssion through affected sons has been the Queen of Spain, transmitted. Two of

enied, but the weight of opinion is now on her four sons have been affected : the eldest,

e affirmative side.

who has no children, and the youngest,

The only known instance of an occurrence Prince Gonzalo, who, like Lord Trematon,

f hamophilia in the Royal Caste has taken lost his life in a motor accident and similarly

lace among the descendants of Queen from excessive loss of blood. Transmission

ictoria, who was quite evidently a trans- may well occur in this family through female

tter. Of her four sons, however, one only, lines, but it is perhaps the only direction in

e Duke of Albany, was affected. The other which danger now remains for the descen-

ee-King Edward VII, the Duke of dants of Queen Victoria.

burgh and the Duke of Connaught-all There seems curiously enough to be no

ped and their descendants are therefore evidence of the existence of this disease

une. The Duke of Albany could not among her collateral relatives. As her father,

ve transmitted to his son, the present the Duke of Kent, was not affected, trans-

ke of Coburg, but through his daughter, mission must have occurred through her

cess Alice, transmission took place to mother, the Duchess. By a former mamage,

r son, Lord Trematon, who lost his life in this lady had two children, the Prince of

motor accident. He died unmarried. As Leiningen and the Princess of Hohenlohe.

was affected, it is unlikely, under the The Prince was not affected and there has

ula, that his sister, Lady May Abel been no record of haemophilia among the

mth, will transmit.

Princess's descendants.

Of Queen Victoria's daughters, Princess This Duchess of Kent herself was one of a

uise had no children and the Empress large family, ten in all, five sons and five

ederick and Princess Christian did not daughters, and again there is no-record of the

smit, as none of their descendants have disease among the descendants of those of

enaffected, except in one line from another her brothers and sisters who left issue. It

ection. Alice, Grand Duchess of Hesse, is to be noted, however, that of the above ten,

pd Princess Beatrice have, however, trans- one left no children, two died young and one

utted. In the family of the former, the only was still-born, and it is possible that all these

m,the late Grand Duke of Hesse, escaped, would have been affected or potential trans-

ad the Dowager Lady Milford Haven has mitters.

ttransmitted. The Grand Duchess Serge Going back one more generation, we will

245

246 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

take the family of Augusta of Reuss, Duchess
of Coburg, the Duchess of Kent's mother, through whom the transmission must have
come, as the Duke of Coburg was not affected. In the Reuss family, seven in all,
only two others besides Princess Augusta left children, and there is no evidence of hamophilia among their descendants. There were, however, three others who died young, besides one who had-no family, and all these may have been affected or potential transmitters.
It will be noted that in these generations we arrive at the period in which many children died young, and there can be little doubt that the mortality would be greatest among haemophilic subjects. In fact, m those days, the disease would tend to extirpate itself quickly, whereas under modern conditions, extirpation, though probable in the end, tends to be much slower.

It will be remembered by some
that Mr. Laurence Housman, in one of Queen Victoria plays, discusses the ques of Prince Albert's parentage, and pic English statesmen congratulating th
selves on the " information " that Vic and Albert were not really first cousins that there would, therefore, be no possi
of a double chance of this hereditary d Actually, it is most unlikely that
statesmen had any knowledge whatsoe
this disease in the family; it was po hardly suspected by the family itself. In event, Prince Albert could not have affected* from the Coburg side, as even if father, the Duke of Coburg, had himself a victim, there is no transmission father to son. In almost every respet
totally false impression is given by this cular play, which, it is interesting to n has nghtly been excluded from the stage.

Edted by R.FS E
(ounded byK. PEAARSON

VIolume VIII, Part II, will contain articles by

J.B. HiUTCHiINSON and B. M4. PUGHjI

M. aA. MIACCONAL

L. CSIK. and K. MLATHIER

Hi. JEFFREYS

D. MIcGREO

V.FRIEDENREICHI

A. D. L-ATHiAM4 and T A. MN R

J.A. FRAkSER ROBERTS, R. M4. NO)RM4AN and RUTH'F GRIFITH

Subscription, in advance, 50/ per volume. Four quarterly parts obtai'nable se-1parately at 155 - each from Galton Laboratory, Uni-versity
College, Gsower Street, London, WV.C. 1.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX o4

