THE DEVELOPMENT OF EUGENIC POLICIES

A Memorandum by the American Eugenics Society

R ECENT studies in psychology and in the public mind with a discriminating

population make it clear that many increase in births, than if it emphasizes

of the changes which would be desir- further restriction.

able for eugenic reasons are equally desirable for the purpose of improving our social 2. The Distribution of Hereditary Capacity

environment and retaining the best of our An infant a few days old possesses an

inherited cultures. Eugenics should receive hereditary capacity for speech. That capac-

new impetus from its relationship to other ity will never become a developed quality

social needs.

unless the child lives in an environment

The following considerations appear to be where it can hear the speech of others. It is

fundamental to the working out of sound possible to measure developed qualities, but

eugenic policies.

very difficult to measure hereditary capaci-

ties.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

When a developed quality is measured in

i. The Decline in Births

any large group of people, the trait which is being measured is found to be distributed

For some years past the women of child- among them in a fairly regular way; there

bearing age in the United States have not are fewest people at the extremes and the

been having enough children to replace their great majority cluster near the average.

own number.* If present trends in birth- When plotted on a chart, the distribution

rates continue, the population of the United approximates the " Normal Curve of Dis-

States will begin to diminish in numbers in tribution." The accompanying diagram* of

the next twenty to thirty years.t After that the distribution of intelligence quotients in

time, our population may diminish at quite the United States presents a typical example

a rapid rate, especially if the downward of such normal distribution.

trend of births continues. Eugenists as such

may have no opinion as to whether a rapid

decline would be harmful, but the public

generally is likely to be distressed by any

decline and to demand counteracting

measures.
In several European countries the public is already much concerned over the decline in births, and many measures have been adopted, of which some are undoubtedly illconsidered. It seems therefore a particularly opportune time for the careful study and development of population policies which will be eugenic in their effect. Eugenics will be more strongly supported if it is associated
* Lotka, A. J. Modern Trends in the Birth Rate. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. November 1926.
t National Resources Committee. The Problems of a
Changing Population. Government Printing Office, '937.

- ~~16%

16%.

0 80 90 100 110 120 130 140
If the curve for the developed qualities of any social, racial, or regional group is superimposed on the curve for the nation as a whole, the overlapping is very great. With few exceptions, a substantial fraction of any group, whether high or low in the social scale, is superior to the national average, and in every group there are a substantial number of people who are below the national

* Hollingworth, I930. Mental Growth and Decline. New York: Appleton.

II7

II8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

average in the socially valuable qualities discussed in a later section.
If hereditary capacities of any large group of individuals could be measured before they have been influenced by the environment, it is probable that their distribution would take the form of a normal curve like that above, although any given individual might be in a very different position on the two curves. If curves for hereditary capacities of different groups were superimposed, we have every reason to believe that there would be a large amount of overlapping even between the most diverse groups. In any study of the distribution of hereditary capacity, the great majority of people would be found clustered on either side of the median line.
Any effective programme of eugenics should therefore provide for selection within each of the regional, racial, and occupational groups and within each of the broad socioeconomic groups. And to be widely effective, eugenic policies should attempt to sort out the families whose qualities lie fairly close on one side or other of the average; quite as much as the smaller number of families who are distinctly above the average. It is evident that the preponderating majority of births in the numerous families nearer the average will ultimately tend to determine the hereditary qualities of our people, far more than will the births among the more limited number at the extremes.
3. The Relationship Between Developed Quali-
ties and Hereditary Capacities
Individual differences in hereditary capacity present a wide range. People at one extreme inherit factors that limit development to such an extent as to produce mental and physical inadequacy. Those at the other extreme inherit factors that in the proper environment can produce genius. Since the time of Galton, an increasing number of studies have been made to determine the effect of genetic differences in influencing the development of personal qualities. The technique of these studies has been gradually improved. Work on identical twins and on foster children reared in varying

types of homes has helped to demonstrate the effect of environment when heredity is held approximately constant, and of heredity when environment is held approximately constant. There is now no reasonable doubt that hereditary factors are extremely important as the basis for development.
When people live in different environments it is hard to tell how much their personal differences are due to differences in their hereditary capacities. But when their environment is generally similar, as in the case of people with similar social status and in the same occupation, there is a fairly close relationship between hereditary capacity and personal qualities.* Because of this relationship, it is possible, as well as highly desirable, that methods for increasing the proportion of births among those with superior hereditary capacities in each of our various occupational groups should also have the effect of preserving the best in our various cultures, by increasing the proportion of children born in the best available home environments. The confirmed environmentalist will then be as much interested in obtaining a better distribution of births as is the confirmed hereditarian.
4. The Proportion of Large Families
The replacement of any group of people in the next generation depends very largely on the proportion of large families. If one tries to lay out a hypothetical distribution of births for a normal American group, it becomes apparent that the group will not be self-replacing unless about 20 per cent. of the couples have five or more children. If the group is actually to increase, the percentage must be even higher.
At present in the United States there is no large non-rural group among whom 20 per cent. of the married couples at the high school level can raise five children without seriously impairing their standard of living. The implications of such a statement are farreaching, and to a large extent determine the type of eugenic measures which are required.
* Schwesinger, G. C. Heredity and Environment:
Studies in the Genesis of Psychological Characteristics. Macmillan, 1933.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF EUGENIC POLICIES

5. The Importance of Social and Economic practice would we know whether more

Factors in Determining the Proportion of authoritative measures are necessary or

Large Families

desirable. A brief consideration of the

It is apparent from the studies of Raymond possibilities of true freedom of parenthood

Pearl and others that social and economic will make this clear.

factors are altogether more important in To-day, very few people are really free to determining the birth-rate than are physio- have exactly the number of children they

logical factors. It is therefore in the social would choose. Those unfamiliar with birth-

and economic field that we must seek the control are not free to limit the size of their

factors which will be most widely effective families. Those who practise birth-control,

as measures of eugenic improvement, and especially in the cities, are generally deterred

which are most important as fields of from having many children not only by a

eugenic research.

laudable desire to maintain high standards

for such children as they do have, but by

6. Agreement on " Desirable" Qualities

other social and economic causes apparently

Eugenics does not seek to breed genius or beyond their control. Among such people,

specialized types. It seeks only such a dis- freedom from the economic and social handi-

tribution of births as will tend to raise each caps which attach to large families should

group of our population closer to the level of cause an increase in births. The possibility

its best types. Any general improvement in of such a change is indicated by the greater

human stocks will tend of itself to increase proportion of large families among certain

the proportion of specially gifted people. small groups in this country who to-day have

A few basic qualities are almost universally the freest choice as to number of children.

regarded as highly desirable. These include The better-educated farmers in some of the

intelligence, good health, relative immunity most prosperous agricultural regions still

to physical and mental disease, and certain have a fair proportion of large families. In a

qualities of character. Many different kinds number of urban studies, families in some of

of character may be valuable under varying the highest rental groups appear to have

circumstances. There is general agreement, more children than those in the rental groups

however, as to the value of courage and self- immediately below them.* The graduates

control, kindness and tolerance, initiative, of some of the older privately endowed

self-reliance, honesty, and a co-operative colleges apparently have children in direct

spirit. On the other hand, it is difficult to relation to their socially valuable qualities

imagine any form of society which would as rated by their fellow classmen.t

desire to increase the proportion of definitely Among the families least fitted to assume

anti-social traits, such as an unbalanced the responsibilities of additional children,

personality, inability to co-operate with complete access to contraception might be

others, lack of self-control, shiftlessness, and expected to reduce the proportion of births.

cruelty.

The argument that there are many people

who would not limit the size of their families

7. Freedom of Parenthood

even if birth-control was more effective and

Granted that there is broad agreement on more cheaply accessible than it is at present,

generally desirable qualities, a perplexing appears to be refuted by the experience of

question still confronts those who are con- Stockholm and other European cities.

cerned with the development of eugenic Studies are needed to determine what

policies: " Who is going to decide who the personal qualities would be most effective in

best families are ? " The practical policies causing people to have larger families if

now being proposed by eugenists would put

the answer to this question very largely in * Lorimer and Osborn. Dynamics of Population.

the hands of the parents themselves. Only after such policies have been tried out in

Macmillan, 1934.
t Huntington and Whitney. The Builders ofAmerica, Chap XVII, I927, and Philips, J. C.

120 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

neither their economic nor social status were To these we would reply that neither is the

thereby altered, but certain general tenden- science of genetics sufficiently advanced for

cies seem evident. It is reasonable to suppose such an attempt, nor does public opinion

that these qualities would include a strong desire it.

physique, good health, love of children, Others will feel that they cannot sanction

unselfishness, ability to get along with other proposals of so general a nature until science

people, compatibility of husband and wife, has advanced to the point where it can more

willingness to assume responsibility, and accurately predict genetic results. To them

willingness to make sacrifices for the sake of we would reply that in a practical world

the family. These are all socially valuable people do not wait until knowledge is com-

qualities. There is some evidence that these plete, but base their actions on the best

good qualities tend to go together and to be knowledge at hand. Great improvements in

associated with intelligence more than with domestic animals and domesticated plants

stupidity.* Thus, it appears that under useful to man were made long prior to the

conditions of perfectly free choice, couples development of genetics as a science. It

would tend to have children somewhat in would be highly unreasonable for an intelli-

proportion to the degree to which they gent people to fail in developing policies

possess the highly desirable qualities men- which might have an equally important

tioned above as conducive to large families. result in the improvement of mankind, even

The importance of this is evident when we though those policies may at the start be

reverse our statement and say that the tentative. Bearing this in mind, eugenists

smallest families would be more likely to be will recognize that the final test of eugenic

found among the people who are poorest in measures can only be found in the study of

physique and health, least fond of children, results obtained in actual practice. Such

most selfish, most difficult to get along with, studies must go hand in hand with the

least happily married, and least willing to development of eugenic policies.

make sacrifices for the sake of others. Under present conditions the very quali- 9. Historical Examples

ties which would be expected to lead to There are many historical examples of

larger families if people had full freedom of selection by which superior stocks have been

choice, lead to great restriction. Unselfish- established and maintained over a long

ness, affection, intelligence, and other good period of time.

qualities may cause parents to restrict their For many centuries the Parsis have

families if they are convinced that the dominated the business of the Bombay

advantages of their children will be curtailed Presidency. They are above any other

by large numbers. The present stage of Indian group in education, respect for

modem civilization appears to be highly women, economic activity and many aspects

dysgenic in its effect on vast numbers of the of culture. They rise above their neighbours,

very people who are most desirable as in an environment which for others is

parents.

enervating both climatically and socially.

8. The Tentative Nature of Eugenic Proposals

The Parsis are the produce of a most drastic process of selection. For more than a cen-

To many professional biologists and geneti- tury, long ago, they were persecuted for

cists the implications of the present state- their religious beliefs, pillaged and driven

ment may be unsatisfactory. Some will hold from one refuge to another. Finally, of those

that it does not go far enough in attempting who remained, a small remnant was allowed

to determine and direct the biological aspects to settle in India on condition that they form

of selection through the science of genetics. a distinct caste which would not inter-

marry with outsiders. They were a highly

* Chassell, Dr. C. Correlation of Intelligence and
Character. Teachers College, I936.

selected group, and under the caste system have remained so to an outstanding extent.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF EUGENIC POLICIES

I21

Iceland furnishes another example of life in the United States should be so modi-

effective selection. The original Icelanders fied that an increasing number of intelligent

were drawn largely from the upper classes of parents will have greater freedom to raise

the old Norsemen, and from the best of their large families. This means freedom from

retainers. They were those who chose to false values and standards inculcated by

migrate peacefully rather than recoup their education and by our urbanized environ-

fortunes by forays to the south. In Iceland ment, freedom from the economic handicaps

they underwent a further process of physical now attaching to large families; freedom

selection under the influence of an extreme from social conditions which make the

climate. There has been no appreciable proper rearing of children an unwelcome or

migration since the first settlement I,OOO an impossible burden. With any advance

years ago. To-day, although Iceland is the which can be made towards these objectives,

poorest in natural resources of any country we shall approach nearer to a process of

in which Europeans have long been settled, eugenic selection at once voluntary and

its civilization is at a high level. In propor- natural.

tion to its population, the land which Policies for putting such a programme into

produced the great Norse Sagas and which effect should be developed through public

developed the first effective form of demo- discussion and in co-operation with the

cratic government has contributed more many social agencies actively concerned

names to the Encyclopa3dia Britannica than with the betterment of man's condition. It

any other non-English speaking country. is hoped that the series of Conferences now

Its people are among the most literate and being carried on with leaders in various

scientific in the world, and cultural institu- fields under the auspices of the American

tions abound in great numbers.

Eugenics Society may help to develop a

Many other examples of selection come to number of practical measures.

mind, such as that which took place among The present statement has been prepared

the early Puritans who settled in New as a background for such a consideration of

England, and among the ancient Jews. We eugenic policies. It is not intended to

cannot tell how far the distinctive qualities include any actual proposals. However, an

of these groups are the product of bio- outline of the general frame in which various

logical inheritance and how far they are eugenic measures would fall may help to

the product of cultural inheritance. But the clarify the discussion which has preceded.

evidence seems clear that selected parents It appears that the major emphasis of

tend to produce selected children of similar eugenics should be on policies which would

characteristics, and that this process has encourage a greater proportion of large

frequently been continued over long periods families among people who are above the

of time.

average of their group in socially valuable

qualities. Such policies should be designed

NATURE OF EUGENIC POLICIES

not only to reduce the economic handicaps now attaching to large families, but to create

In the light of the various general con- a new set of values. In actual practice the

siderations enumerated above, the path application of measures in both these fields

towards a practical programme of eugenics should be made simultaneously, for economic

becomes a little clearer.

needs and human values constantly interact,

We are justified in encouraging the system each affecting the other.

of voluntary parenthood which will some

day be almost universal because of the (a) Measures to Reduce the Economic Handi-

spread of birth-control.

caps Imposed by Large Families

But voluntary parenthood must include In our urbanized society, to have four or

freedom to have children as well as freedom more children usually means a lowered level

to restrict their number. Thus conditions of of living which few couples are willing to

C

122 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

accept. Several European countries are making serious efforts to solve this problem, notably France, Germany, Belgium, and Italy.* The most widely practised method is that of the family allowances, in the form of bonuses in proportion to the number of children. In France, where this system has become compulsory in all industry, the allowances are paid by the employer, and within each industry there are equalization pools to prevent an undue burden on any one firm. The allowances in France cover approximately 25 per cent. of the cost of maintaining each child. A somewhat similar system exists in Italy, and has been compulsory in Belgium since I930.
In Germany various special measures have been set up, the most important of which is the provision for marriage loans, of which one-quarter is remitted with the birth of each child.
All these measures have been developed for the purpose of increasing the birth-rate, in most cases without regard to the type of people among whom births would increase. They were not primarily intended to be eugenic measures. The study of their operation, and their effect on the birth-rate of different types of people, will be of great importance in teaching this country what ought and what ought not to be done in the best interest of eugenic development.
Indirect measures for stimulating births may perhaps have a more selective effect on the birth-rate than do the large scale experiments now going on in Europe. In addition to direct payments to the parents, there are many other ways of diminishing the cost of rearing children. Economic changes affecting the birth-rate may be developed through modifications in many fields of social activity, such as:
Co-operative nurseries. Education, through scholarships or other
means.
Housing, and suburban development. Maternal and medical care.
* Carr-Saunders. World Population. Oxford University Press. 1936.

Opportunities for some earnings as a part of the educational process.
Recreation. Social services, nursing, child welfare, etc.
In these and many other fields, it is possible to make changes which would not only reduce the cost of having a large family, but would tend to reorient the sense of human values among the very people most desirable as parents.
(b) Changing Human Values
European attempts to influence the birthrate by money rewards would probably be more successful and also more eugenic if they were accompanied by an intelligent attempt to reorient human values. In the long run, appeals to patriotism are of doubtful effect on the birth-rate. Far more effective would be an early and continuous conditioning in the values attaching to home and children. The environment of young people during their period of growth should lead them to feel that some of the most important human satisfactions are those connected with rearing a family.
The present environment of most of our children is far from fulfilling this ideal. The briefest consideration of American education, conditions of housing, attitude towards marriage, the difference between commercialized recreation and home or outdoor recreation of the simpler and least expensive types, will indicate many changes which would influence the development of human values.
Enough has been said to indicate that eugenic policies may require rather important changes in economic relationships, in human values and in social customs. It may be difficult to achieve these changes within the framework of existing society. But until the serious attempt has been made through every channel of social activity to reorient human values with respect to family life, and to remove as many as possible of the economic handicaps now attaching to large families among responsible people, we shall not know what further steps are needed.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF EUGENIC POLICIES

I23

(c) Policies of Negative Eugenics
Until recently, there seemed no danger of actual decrease in the better stocks of the nation, and eugenists were chiefly concerned with diminishing the birth-rate of those with poor genetic qualities. There is ground for hope that the aims of negative eugenics may be attained. The culture pattern of family limitation, and improved methods of contraception, are spreading to all groups in the cities and, more gradually, into the rural districts under the leadership of sociallyminded women. A start at least is being made in preventing reproduction by presumptive carriers of hereditary defect, as is evidenced by permissive laws for eugenic sterilization in twenty-eight states and increasing provisions for obligatory segregation of defectives. Our immigration laws, with the support of public opinion, should become increasingly eugenic. There are also many factors operating in American life which would tend more and more to limit the proportion of large families among economically marginal people. Among these factors may be included the opening up and improvement of isolated and slum areas, rural and urban, through programmes of housing, rehabilitation and the extension of social services, and the increasing influence of urbanization with more uniform aspiration for higher standards of living. The heavy cost of the programme of relief to which the nation has suddenly, and perhaps permanently, been committed is helping to arouse public interest in the question of the part played by the birth-rate in problems of inadequacy. It is reasonable to hope that the United States, with its rapidly developing agencies for public service, may follow along the lines of development which have been taking place in Stockholm, where the excess of large families among the marginal economic groups has largely disappeared,

and in our own State of California, where
carefully guarded measures of eugenic sterilization have been successfully in effect for
several decades. These are the known goals of negative eugenics, which under proper
leadership and with an aroused public
opinion are quite likely to be attained in the United States, if we may judge by what has happened in other countries. That they
should be attained as rapidly as possible is
vitally important. If these changes take
place, births among isolated and less
educated families would no longer make up
for the shortage of births which already
exists among those families with more adequate resources and at a better level of
education. Then will come the final test of the
eugenic ideal. Will it be possible for society to make such changes in its forms, and in the values which it sets for men to follow, that the interests of society in obtaining more children in certain families will coincide with
the individual interest of the parents of such families? Can we develop such a system of freedom in parenthood that those parents
who are at or above the average of the nation in cultural and in genetic qualities will have
enough children to replace their own number and increase their proportionate number as well? There are a few hopeful signs. Among some of the specially situated people who most nearly approach true freedom of parenthood, large families are rather more frequent than among those of their group who have greater economic handicaps. These and other trends hold possibilities for further development. But if the decline of births among responsible parents becomes too great, all effort at social advance will be immeasurably handicapped.
The problems of positive eugenic selection have become national problems which require the attention of all thoughtful citizens.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI No. 2.

