BIOLOGY AND EUGENICS

Being a Request to Certain Professional Biologists

By MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, D.Sc.

M ANY will no doubt have read with thus be led to imagine that nothing useful

much interest Professor A. V. Hill's in regard to human breeding can be learnt

Sidgwick Lecture, published with from the study of animal life?

the issue of Nature of January 3rd, in which Professor Hill tells us that if we could

he expresses thoughts of great value prevent parenthood amongst all mental de-

to us all. Here I should like to use it, if fectives we should on certain assumptions

I may, as a convenient if not an altogether reduce their numbers by i i per cent. in the

appropriate peg on which to hang a plea for next generation; and we thank him for

the more open support of eugenics on the definitely saying that this should, if

part of certain biologists.

possible, be done. But he unfortunately

The general reader does not absorb many goes on to sav of this procedure that if

actual facts from an address, whilst often " repeated in the next generation it would

retaining permanently some strong general have comparatively little additional effect."

impressions, and I will begin by asking what Now I am informed on good authority that

is the general impression concerning euge- by the same method of calculation it can be

nics likely to be produced by the following shown that there would be a reduction in

sentences taken from this lecture:

these hypothetical circumstances of about

27 per cent. in three generations. Would

" There are many common fallacies Professor Hill consider the diminution of,

about inheritance, derived from imperfect say, nearly ioo,ooo mental defectives in a

experimental knowledge or by false deduc- century to be but a slight achievement? If

tion from experience. Much of so-called he had mentioned this latter deduction,

eugenics is based on such fallacies."

which he could have done with no greater

inaccuracy as regards actual facts, he would

In the absence of any quotations bearing have left a far more hopeful impression on

on this point, the general reader will be in the minds of his readers.

no better position than I am in attempting A little later on in this address certain

to decide what should be classed as eugenics figures are given which have every appear-

and what as so-called eugenics, and it seems ance of being quoted from a paper published

likely that the public will be led to accept bv Professor Punnett, with, as I believe, a

that alternative which best justifies them in different object in view. As here given,

throwing away all eugenic literature unread. they indicate that it would take between

If we eugenists blunder, we want to be set two and three thousand years by eugenic

right by experts, whilst vague criticism means to reduce the incidence of mental

impossible to answer does nothing but harm. defect to i in IO,OOO. This statement is so

WVe are told that a " type of eugenics, based surprising that it may well drive all that has

on the analogy of the domestic animals, does been said before out of the head of the

not lie within the bounds of practicability." casual reader, and it is hardly possible to

But what responsible eugenist has ever advo- conceive figures which, standing alone,

cated such a system as that alluded to in the would be better calculated to leave an erro-

quotation given from Professor Jennings's neous impression on the mind. All the main

book? And may not the general reader underlving assumptions are inaccurate if

21

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

judged by existing conditions, though this is not my main point; for the necessary corrections might tell in both directions.
What should be noted is that the unchallenged calculations of Dr. R. A. Fisher
show that, on the same assumptions, mental defect would be reduced by I7 per cent. in a single generation, this being comparable to the above-mentioned i i per cent. Pro-
fessor Punnett's figures can only be fairly quoted as showing that if mental defect
were to be reduced to what may be called manageable proportions, then no doubt
further progress by any means now known would be very slow indeed. This moral not
being clearly stated, the main effect of these startling figures will be to discourage anyone who is thinking of aiding in the eugenic campaign.
The figure of I 7 per cent. above men-
tioned has no doubt been vigorously attacked by certain high authorities, and on this question I wish to make two observations. If it can be proved that eugenists were too optimistic in the earlier stages of their campaign, is not this a common and a
venial fault ? Are all democratic institutions now to be condemned because the radical of times gone by painted democracy in too glowing colours ? All we ask is that biologists and others would quote our actual words, which they seldom do; for then we
should be able either to defend ourselves vigorously or openly to sit in sackcloth and ashes.
My second point is that for the following
reasons there are good grounds for believing that the birth rate of mental defectives, taken as a class, is low, this being quite consistent with the fact that those indivi-
duals who are allowed to procreate are very fertile. Nature prevents many imbeciles
and all idiots from breeding. Nature also
seems to have implanted in the minds of normal women an instinctive dislike of cohabiting with mentally-defective men. Considerable numbers of mental defectives are prevented from procreating bv being placed in institutions or under guardianship. And, possibly most important of all, successful endeavours are constantly being made pri-

vately in many classes of society to prevent

feeble-minded relatives from breeding. In

short, nature and society combined are now

really doing a great deal to reduce the inci-

dence of mental defect, a fact of which little

or no notice has been taken in these

discussions.

Now the reduction of I7 per cent. above

mentioned was avowedly calculated on an

erroneous assumption underlying Profes-

sor Punnett's figures, namely, that all

mental defectives are normally fertile; and

if allowance be made for what is now being

done in the way of rendering them infertile,

this figure may be in accordance with what

Dr. Tredgold, I believe, suggests as now

being practically possible, namely, a reduc-

tion of 5 per cent. in a generation. But let

me clearly state that, in the existing shame-

ful absence of reliable statistics, I make no

comment one way or the other on the

correctness of this last mentioned estimate.

Later on in this same address appear the

following words. " By eugenics, so far as

it is practicable-and with further know-

ledge it may become not only practicable but

easy-we shall ensure that the survival of

the fittest. . .

AAs to eugenic reform

becoming easy, a reference is doubtless here

made to the possibility of discovering a

method of recognizing the apparently nor-

mal carriers of hereditary defects. This

would indeed be a splendid achievement,

greatly facilitating the elimination of in-

sanity, mental defect, and other less com-

mon evils. It would, in fact, render possible

a reduction in what is known as the social

problem group, this being probably an

essential step if racial decay is to be avoided.

But it must be remembered that this riddle

may remain unsolved for long or for ever,

and that when solved, the task of preventing

parenthood by compulsion or persuasion

amongst the many hundreds of thousands

of ' carriers ' of recessive factors would

remain one of great difficulty.

Those who are induced to wait until the

task of the eugenic reformer becomes easy

will wait for ever before putting their

hands to the plough. Moreover, wTe should

indeed be guided to some extent by our

BIOLOGY AND EUGENICS

23

knowledge of the process of evolution in nature, and we should remember that in that drama the elimination of harmful reces-
sives, though an essential feature, has hardly played the leading part; for fewer recessive defects are in all probability carried by monkeys, for example, than by civilized men. Other means must be adopted when trying to prevent the dying out of so many of our best stocks, now going on at an alarming rate. In fact, innumerable opportunities for benefiting future generations are being lost every day.
Then as to eugenic reform being pursued as far as is practicable, it is possible that
some readers will be led by these words to what is, I hope, a false conclusion, namely, that Professor Hill thinks that little can

now be accomplished in this direction. All
that I have been saying has indeed been with the object of leading up to an expres-
sion of the most earnest hope that biologists without exception will in the future endorse all those eugenic reforms which meet with their approval in the most open, unequivocal, and decisive manner possible. Let them criticize what they hold to be erroneous as strongly as they like, making it quite clear whom they hold to be the sinners; for the opinion of biologists is of primary importance in these regions of thought. But let it also be recognized by them that the
half-hearted and indecisive attitude adopted by some of their leaders constitutes a definite impediment both to racial progress and
to the prevention of racial decay.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE

FOR THE

Journal of Morphology and Physiology

American Anatomical Memoirs

The Journal of Comparative Neurology

American Journal of Physical Anthropology

The American Journal of Anatomy - The Anatomical Record

Folia Anatomica Japonica (Tokyo, Japan) Physiological Zo6logy (Chicago, Illinois)

The Journal of Experimental Zoology

Stain Technology (Geneva, New York)

Ecological Monographs (Durham, North Carolina)

EARL Y SERIES

- Bibliographic reference cards, without abstracts, for articles which have appeared in the

MoJrouprnaohlfology, from Vol. I (I887) to June ist, I917 ..............

........................................... 380 titles

The Journal of Comparative Neurology from Vol. I (I89I) to June ist, I9I7 .450

ThAmeerican Journal of Anatomy, Vof. i (I9OI) to June ist, 1917 ............ 344...........................

AnatomTihcealRecord, V0ol. I (i906) to June ist, I9I7 ............................................................... 464

The Journal of Experimental Zoology, Vol. I (I904) to June ist, II7 .......... 423.......................

AmerTihe caAnnatomical Memoirs .......................................................................................... 9

These cards, containing full bibliographic references, enable a subscriber to have complete author and

subject indices of all articles which have appeare(d in the above journals from their beginning to date

mentioned. The price for these Bibliographic Reference Cards is two cents for the first card of each title. Additional

cards for each title may be had at one-half cent per card when ordered at the same time.

ADVANTCE ABSTRACT SHEETS bearing ten or more abstracts without bibliographic references, are sent to members of the American Association of Anatomists and to memnbers of the American Society of Zo6logists, without cost, and sold to others at $3.00 per annum for all abstract sheets issued. This is a convenient means of selecting such1

articles as may be desired in reprint form. Prices of reprints are given on each Advance Abstract Sheet.

BIBIIO(GRAPHIC CARDS bearing authors' abstracts with complete bibliographic reference for all articles appearing in The Wistar

Institute journals and those co-operating, $s.oo per year.

- Abstract cards may be obtained from the beginning of the series, June ist, I917.

Each abstract card is issued to subscribers before the complete paper appears in a journal.

ABSTRACTS IN BOOK FORM Abstracts with authors' and analytical subject indices are brouight together periodically in book form.
Volumes I to 5, covering the abstracts issued from June ist, 19I7, to December 3ISt, 1929, $5.oo each. Liberal discotunt to subscribers to the Bibliographic Service Cards.

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.

