TEMPERAMENT AND SOCIAL CLASS

By F. C. BARTLETT, M.A.

'Intelligence ' tests and the apparent differences they reveal between social class
and social class have for some time occupied an important part in eugenic studies. Mr. F. C. Bartlett, the writer of the following article, does not attach much value to them,
chiefly on the ground that they demand " reactions which are now regarded as a
part of the necessary equipment of all civilized people irrespective of their social
status." He has recently been engaged with other psychologists in devising a technique for accurately assessing that deeper and probably more important human quality, ' tam-
perament.' The following article, extracted from an address he gave to the Society on
January I9, indicates the eugenic field opened by this work, further articles on which we hope to print from time to time.-Ed.

N contemporary psychology ' temperament ' has no agreed connotation. By

but important temperamental racial differences, but at present very little, if any

it I mean that group of predisposing genuinely sound evidence for maintaining

tendencies and feelings which may be used constant temperamental differences between

to characterize one person in contrast to another, and which seems to come to expres-

social classes within the social groups. Nevertheless, I believe that if only we had

sion independently of special training due a good way of determining temperamental

to the repetition of specific situations.

qualities such evidence could be found. In

Thus I would regard timidity, careful- any complex society a person is, as we

ness, capacity for foresight, executive ability, recklessness as possible examples of

accurately say, " born into " a particular social class. Now it is perhaps unlikely,

temperamental tendencies or qualities. No though not impossible, that this fact itself

complete list of such qualities and tenden- tends to give him a certain characteristic

cies is possible at present or perhaps ever temperamental endowment. But the

will be. But those I have named determine mobility of modern society makes possible

a man's attitude and responses towards any a considerable amount of shifting about from

one of an indefinite number of situations class to class in every generation. I wish rather than to any single specific situation. we knew more about how this ' shifting ' Some people lack them, some have them. is effected. It ought to be a primary They begin to find expression extraordin- problem of the social psychologist to find arily early in -individual mental life, and out more about this. I believe that far

they appear to be capable of singular per- the most important psychological factors are

sistence from generation to generation; they a man's endowment of temperament and

may thus be regarded as innate in the wide ' interests.' I will come to the second. in

sense of the term.

a moment or two.

Certain common expressions: 'The Here is a man assertive, energetic,

Governing Class,' 'Our Betters,' ' The ardent, critical and questioning, optimistic

Inarticulate Class,' might be held to indi- so far as his own powers are concerned, dis-

cate that they differentiate one social class satisfied, moderately pessimistic about the

from another. But these expressions may stability of his immediate social relations

refer rather to persistent social institutions with other people. He will, unless external

and traditions than to any endowment of conditions are very overwhelmingly against

relatively constant temperamental qualities him, inevitably gravitate towards high

and tendencies peculiar to a given social social rank. He will move towards the

class. There is some definite basis for governing class. But in which particular

maintaining the existence of certain broad direction he will go, in industry, in science,

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in art, in religion, in the practical handling It is true that every psychologist now

of men, in any one of a large variety of knows that interests may appear to fluctu-

other special directions will depend psycho- ate considerably up to fairly late periods of

logically in the main upon his interests. individual growth. This is, I think, mainly

Not entirely, however, for his temperament because fleeting interests can be very easily

must still play its part. For example, manufactured by accident of environment.

whether he is a staff or an executive officer, A boy will want to be now a carpenter, now

and if the latter what type of men he will an engine driver, now a motor mechanic,

handle best, are themselves primarily a now a wireless operator. But there are

matter of his temperament.

always limits within which he revolves

I am prepared to maintain that if we had a sufficiently accurate method of investigation we should find a significant statistical consistency of temperament among the members of a given social class, that this would be the more marked the more impor-

around from one interest to another, and if occasionally he breaks out of these limits he displays the most evanescent of all his interests. Nobody has seriously studied what determines the range of these fluctuations, but it is obvious that temperament

tant the functions of the class in the general community, and that this temperamental consistency most certainly has an innate

and interest are closely related, and very likely it is the more persistent and stable temperament that sets the range of variation

basis. How temperamental endowment is from one to another of the more volatile

determined is a question to which I will interests.

presently return.

A very deep-seated broad difference of

If this holds good of temperament it prob- interest indeed is that between an interest in

ably holds good equally or even more markedly with ' interests.' Here again is a term for which psychology has developed

life, plant, animal, or human, and an interest in inanimate things. I do not know how, psychologically, to derive these from

no universally accepted connotation. I anything else. They are, however, pro-

must provide my own definition. An interest is, I think, a bias towards noticing

foundly important in shaping a man's career and his social status. Take our man of the

certain things, thinking about certain ardent, critical, inquiring, analysing, some-

things, acquiring certain skills. In it cog- what assertive temperament. Let him be

nitive factors are always prominent. Tem- endowed with an interest in life but lack any

perament mainly determines how we face the keen bent towards the acquirement of

varied situations of life; interest what we wealth. He will move towards biological

select from these situations to deal with, or science of the academic type. Add to him

with what class of situation among the many an interest in money: he will be deflected

that life presents to us we shall be specially towards biological application in industry,

pre-occupied. Although psychologists dis- or to one of the humane professions. Let

pute whether interests are innate even in the him have also the temperament that can

wide sense, I am myself strongly of the understand or control men. IHe will push

opinion that they are. We can see a bias towards public administration and affairs,

towards the numerical, the aesthetic, or the business executive, some technical branch of

mechanical aspects of things coming out his country's Army or Navy services, poli-

very early indeed in the individual mental tics. An unfriendly society may thrust

life. We seem to be able to trace them as upon him a life pre-occupied with things,

appearing and re-appearing again and again with lifeless figures, paper schemes, inani-

in the history of particular families. They mate material. He will remain unhappy,

often seem to have a highly specialized restless, and relatively inefficient because he

form, as in interest in musical sound, in cannot have his proper pleasure even in

words, in architectural design, in executive what he does well.

management, in public affairs, in money.

The combination of temperamental en-

TEMPERAMENT AND SOCIAL CLASS

27

dowment and innate interests may be an ex- of which the life of the group from one time

ceedingly complex matter in any man. But to another can be seen to be internally con-

I am persuaded that more than any other sistent and to possess a definite continuity.

psychological factors of individual constitu- Turn to the psychological side of this. It

tion, this combination determines a man's means that the individuals who belong to a

social status and class. And I think it cer- given class in society are in some way pre-

tain that owing to this if we compare the disposed to understand and accept the social

members of a given social class one with possessions of that class. It means that

another, we may discover a uniformity of they are predisposed also to assimilate

temperament and interest that are not to be readily the direction towards which those

found if we compare them with those be- possessions are trending and to carry them

longing to any other class. If this is true further in the same line without abrupt

we can certainly maintain that there are break.

innate differences between social classes.

Of what nature are these predispositions?

Perhaps we can get our best working No doubt every normal man has a fairly

notion of social class by considering that strong endowment of social instincts. These

every fairly large community develops sub- help to make him ready to accept the insti-

groups which are arranged in a more or less tutions and traditions of his immediate

orderly hierarchy of rank or of authority group in society. But it is hard indeed to

in the whole community. The basis of any believe that they are all. In the first place

group belonging to this hierarchy is always the prized possessions of different social

a social institution, and the latter is itself, classes differ so radically and so widely that

of course, founded upon some deep-seated it seems extraordinarily unlikely that a mere

individual human tendency, such as mar- common instinctive endowment should pre-

riage customs, or property, or traditions of dispose men to assimilate them all with

governing, of professional or trade arrange- equal readiness. It seems impossible that

ments. Such sub-groups form the social it should be a common stock of social

classes. That they may be infinitely varied interests which causes men to rise to appre-

goes without saying. That they overlap in ciation and partisanship of the social usages

function and membership is equally obvious, of a working miner's class, of a small shop-

and at the same time a matter for us of owning class, of a plutocratic financial class,

great importance. That they are not merely and of a leisurely asthetic class. And

the possessors of certain institutions but the secondly there is the fact that the man

active guardians of relatively special func- ' born into ' a social class and with a long

tions must also not be overlooked for a tradition behind him of related members of

moment.

that class tends to espouse and comprehend

There are two very striking things about its possessions and functions with a loyalty all such social classes. The first is the and serenity unknown to the newcomer.

remarkable permanence of the institutions This may be due to longer individual

which they possess, the customs which they experience: I cannot believe that it is.

practise, the traditions which they uphold. Everywhere in psychology we see that mere

It is a permanence which goes far beyond length or repetition of experience has very

any limits of individual length of life, little to do with stability or genuine adap-

and even withstands for a long time changes tiveness of reaction. Here is another matter

of individual opinion. The second is that that needs research. A man, by force of

nevertheless this permanence is not the individual temperament, pushes into a social

fixed pose of profound torpor. It is dyna- class and remains there, unhappy perhaps,

mic. If we take any social class at any a bit defiant, at best a little homesick for the

stage of its history we can see that its social usages of the class from which he has

institutions, traditions, and customs.display emerged. His immediate descendants re-

a certain trend or direction by consequence main where he has set them, living upon his

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

prestige, or more often in the world we not merely group factors objectively dis-

know, upon his money. But the third or coverable by a study of the institutions and

fourth generation returns home again, and traditions of a group, but that in some way

in them the interloper is back in his original they may actually work into individual

class. We need to learn more about these mental life, and produce innate predisposi-

social reversions. In Lancashire they say tions favouring the maintenance and

" Three generations from clogs to clogs." development of specific class possessions.

I think it highly likely that if we knew In one class, for long periods social govern-

more about it we should find that the shift- ing tendencies are predominant, even in

ing from one social class to another-par- individual endowment; in another, submis-

ticularly the shifting upwards-is in the sive, accepting tendencies; in a third,

long run less marked than may appear if we manipulative tendencies specialized for par-

study only a single generation or two ticular crafts; in a fourth, bartering,

generations.

trading, specialized acquisitive tendencies.

Now if we have to push beyond the notion More than this; because, in any social

of a mere common stock of instinctive en- group institutions and traditions grow very

dowment, what are the hypotheses that we strong and very permanent, and pervade a

must use? In the first place it is highly great proportion of the social activities of

probable that in different social groups the its members, they, also, in some manner,

majority of the individuals concerned pass into the mental constitution of the

possess a different common arrangement of members and develop in them specialized

instinctive endowment. In one group one interests which are innate in the sense in

set of instinctive tendencies is relatively pre- which I am using this term. So the persons

dominant; in another group a different set. born into that class are predisposed towards

This appears to be certainly the case in some certain occupations, certain skills, a certain

instances. For example, if we study the outlook upon life. I cannot at present prove

various versions of popular stories current this to be so, but I firmly believe that it is,

in different related groups of North Ameri- and that it has much to do with that perma-

can Indians we find some persistent and nence of the social functions of different

significant variations. The versions cur- classes which is an undoubted fact of the

rent in the northernmost part of the coast life of groups as we find it in all ages.

area tend to be dominantly concerned with We have then a double-sided process. In

greed or voraciousness, those of Vancouver every generation and at every age indi-

Island and the delta of the Fraser river viduals with an innate temperamental en-

with sex, and those of the south-western dowment and a fundamental bias towards

interior of British Columbia with vain- certain interests gravitate towards certain

gloriousness or boasting.

special social classes. And then the very

I believe that this principle of predomi- existence of these classes for long periods

nant tendency is capable of great extension. stamps into the individual mental life an

These factors, actively discriminating one innate arrangement of instinctive responses,

group from another I wish to call " group an innate temperamental outlook, an innate

difference tendencies." I have attempted group of interests. The first fact largely

to work out a part of their psychological accounts for the diversity of social grouping

implications in my book on Psychology and as we find it, the second for the striking

Primitive Culture.* I believe that they are persistence of social classes.

* Cambridge: at the University Press. I923. 8s. 6d.
net.

