INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE IN AN ADULT SAMPLE

By EILEEN M. SCOTT, M.A., and JOHN D. NISBET, M.A., B.Ed., Ph.D.

IT has been suggested that a part of the tests. A description of this sample has been

relationship between intelligence and given in their paper (p. I39).

family size, which is commonly observed Two measures of intelligence were obtained

in samples of children, is attributable to the from this sample: the non-verbal Progressive

effect of family environment on the verbal Matrices (I938) test (20-minute version);

development of children. In a large family, and a combination of four of the verbal

children are less stimulated to develop the sub-tests of the Wechsler-Bellevue Intelli-

use of words, and this impairs their per- gence Tests (General Comprehension, Digit

formance in intelligence tests, particularly Span, Similarities and Vocabulary). Both-

verbal tests. In an earlier paperl one of the these tests were administered individually,

methods by which this hypothesis was the latter without time-limit. The mean

tested was the comparison of results obtained score of the sample in Progressive Matrices

from verbal and non-verbal tests of intelli- was 34.3 (standard deviation 9go); the mean

gence: the correlation between test score score in the Wechsler sub-tests, converted to.

and family size was significantly smaller a quotient by the tables of norms, was 94-8

when a non-verbal test of intelligence was -.(standard deviation II-7). Both these means

used than when a verbal test was used.

are below the population average. The

As a recent editorial note* observed, it is correlation between scores in Matrices and

not yet possible to say whether such an effect Wechsler was +0o580.

persistJ into adult life. It may be that as

persons grow out of the narrow limits of the Family Size family their adult experiences tend to Family size was measured as the number reduce earlier inequalities. Vernon's findings2 of the subject's siblings plus any non-sib, seem to indicate that the effect at least does brought up in the family for not less than

not increase after childhood. Thus, while Nisbet found a tendency for the negative
correlation between test score and family size to increase between the ages of seven and eleven, Vernon reported that this negative correlation among 9,183 National Service recruits mostly aged eighteen was not sub-
stantially different from the correlation found among eleven-year-old children.
The data collected by Baird and Scott3
provide some evidence on this matter.t The following results are derived from

two years of the subject's life-that is, the "family of upbringing." The mean family size was 4 6 (standard deviation 2.3). The full number of known pregnancies of the subject's mother (mean 4.6; standard deviation 2.4) differed in only a-small number of cases from the size of the family of upbring-
ing, showing a correlation of +0o903 with it. Table I gives the correlations between
family size and scores in the two intelligence
tests, the verbal and the non-verbal.

the test scores of the 288 women in their

TABLE I

one-in-six sample who were given intelligence CORRELATION BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE TEST SCORE

AND FAMILY SIZE.

*EUGENICS REVIEW, 46, 6-8.
t Acknowledgment is made to the Social Medicine
Research Unit of the Medical Research Council for the use of the data in this investigation, though neither Unit nor Council is in any way responsible for conclusions reached.

Test Correlation with size of family of upbringing
Progressive Matrices, non-verbal -0o222 Wechsler, 4 verbal sub-tests -0-250

233

234 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The correlation involving the verbal test
in this sample is smaller than most of the
corresponding. correlation coefficients re-
ported in other investigations from samples of school children (e.g. the Scottish Mental Survey). This suggests that the effect of family environment on test score does not increase after childhood, though it must be
remembered that the present sample is not directly comparable with age-groups of children. The difference between the correlation involving the verbal test and the correlation involving the non-verbal test is not significant, though the non-verbal test does produce the smaller coefficient. If the number of pregnancies of the subject's mother is taken as a measure of family size, there is no difference at all between the correlations, which are: Matrices, -o0'24I Wechsler, -0 240.

age, of uncertain size but probably larger with a non-verbal than with a verbal test.
The ages. of the 288 women in the sample ranged from seventeen to forty, with a mean of twenty-four. In the Matrices test, the first of the influences mentioned above seems to have been nearly cancelled by the second, for the correlation between Matrices score and age in this sample is +-0 I4. In the Wechsler verbal sub-tests, the decline with age is eliminated by the use of quotients with age allowances, so that the correlation between Wechsler score and age is +o 274.
If the influence of age is made equivalent in the two tests by holding age constant in a partial correlation, the difference between
the correlations of family size and test score with a verbal test and with a nonverbal test is now larger, as is seen from the results in Table 2.

Inwfluence of Age
These results, however, are complicated by the influence of age. Age affects the correlations in two ways. It will be remembered that this sample was composed of women having first babies. Though the sample was suited for the purpose for which it was selected, difficulties arise when the data are applied to the problem of the relation
between intelligence and family size. There is a tendency for those with higher intelligence to have a first baby at a later age: from this one would expect a small positive correlation between test score and age in this sample. But age also directly affects ability to score on an intelligence test. To quote Wechsler,4
Every human capacity after attaining a maximum begins an immediate decline.... The age at which this maximum is attained varies from ability to ability but seldom occurs beyond 30 and in most cases somewhere in the early 20's . . . (p. 55).
Certain abilities decline more slowly with age than others. Thus the abilities called for by the General Information and General Comprehension Tests hold up much better than do the abilities called for by the Substitution and the Memory Span for Digits Tests (p. 63).
This influence would therefore show itself as a negative correlation between score and

TABLE 2
PARTIAL CORRELATION BETWEEN INTELLIGENCE
TEST SCORE AND FAMILY SIZE, WITH AGE HELD
CONSTANT.
Test Correlation with size of family of upbringing
Progressive Matrices, non-verbal -0-222 Wechsler, 4 verbal sub-tests -0 265
The difference between these coefficients, however, is still not significant (on Cochran's test of the significance of a difference between two correlation coefficients based on the same sample, t=I.04). The partial correlations between the test scores and the number of pregnancies of the subject's mother show a similar, though smaller, difference: Matrices, -0'24I ; Wechsler, -0o259.
The tendency for women with higher intelligence test scores to marry and have first babies at a later age is closely allied to social class patterns. Analysis of our data within social classes (Registrar-General's scale) is precluded by small numbers; but within the largest class (Social Class III, numbering I22) the differences between the correlations of family size and verbal and non-verbal intelligence test scores are similar to the differences in the total group. In the other social classes correlations are smaller -due, in part at least, to the smaller

INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE IN AN ADULT SAMPLE

standard deviations of scores and consequent attenuation of correlation coefficients-but all are still negative.
Conclusion Among eleven-year-old children, the cor-
relation between non-verbal Matrices score and family size was shown to be smaller than
the ,correlation between a verbal test of
intelligence and family size. This difference was attributed to the effect of family environment. The results from an adult sample of 288 women suggest that this
effect -may persist but is probably less
marked at a later age. In this adult sample, the negative correlation between family size

and intelligence test score was smaller (though not significantly smaller) when the test used was a non-verbal test than when it was a verbal test. Such a result gives support to the conclusion that environmental factors associated with family size exercise an influence on test performance even among adults.
REFERENCES
i. Nisbet, J. D. (I953). Family environment and intelligence. Eugen. Rev., 45, 3I-40.
2. Vernon, P. E. (I95I). Recent investigations of
intelligence and its measurement. Eugen. Rev., 43, I25-137. 3. Baird, D., and Scott, E. M. (1953). Intelligence and childbearing. Eugen. Rev., 45, 139-I54.
4. WVechsler, D. (I944). The Measurement of Adult Intelligence (3rd edition). Baltimore. Williams
and Wilkins.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 4

