THE GALTON LECTURE, 1948

HE 1948 Galton Lecture, under the crow. The bantam did not crow, but he told

T title " Some Reflections on Genius," the suspects to hold up their hands, which

was delivered by Dr. Russell Brain at were found to be covered with soot, except Manson House, Portland Place, on February the hand of the guilty person.

i6th, to a large and appreciative audience. His ability was passed on to the famous

In the absence of Lord Horder, the Chair Napier brothers, one the Peninsular War

was taken by Mr. B. S. Bramwell.

historian, the other the Napier of India who

The text of the Galton Lecture is published sent the famous " Peccavi" message after

in full elsewhere in this issue. At its con- he had captured the Kingdom of Scinde, and

clusion Mr. Bramwell said that he-found it to their cousin the admiral who took his

rather difficult to add anything of value. sailors ashore and made himself a general

He remembered in one of the " Ego " books and as such was quite invincible, ending the

the author saying that many people went Portuguese civil war. The great Clark

through life without ever having had a Maxwell came of this stock.

thought of their own; such people could not Genius needed a high level of verbal

be looked upon as approaching genius ! ability to allow for the interchange of

Robert Louis Stevenson gave in one of his thought, but in ordinary people thought far

books a description of how he roughly outstripped words. For instance, we saw a

worked out what he was going to write and car approaching and apprehended its type,

let it simmer for a few days, then lifted off size, colour, speed, direction and whether it

the lid and there it was. In complete con- was safe for us to cross the road, in far less

trast, it was the work of a journalist to time that it would have taken to formulate

write down what he had to say straight the words describing it. In small children

away.

thoughts preceded words, and in old age we

Bidder, Q.C., son of the " Calculating lost the memory for words, and particularly

Boy" and a great friend of Galton, had for names. How often we found that we

played a large part in the litigation entailed could not recall a person's name, though we

in the making of the railways; this ability could visualise them perfectly. He remem-

had gone down to the third generation. This bered during the I9I4-I8 war, when in a

was not abnormal. It was quite a common paratyphoid and enteric hospital at Bombay,

thing, when a man of ability sprang from that all the patients found they had lost the

unlikely surroundings, for the ability to be faculty for remembering names; he even

passed on to his posterity, as if it were a found that he could not remember his wife's

mutation.

maiden name. But this faculty gradually

As regards madness, people of special returned after recovery.

ability not only got the reputation of being Another aspect of verbal ability was

mad, but also of being wizards or witches. exemplified by Siegfried Sassoon, who said

One case was that of John Napier, the that he studied the technique of poetry and

inventor of logarithms; he was much considered that he had mastered it and then

annoyed by his neighbour's pigeons and found he had nothing that he wanted to

declared he would bewitch them. He put express.

out bread soaked in alcohol and the subse- Mathematicians got away from the tyranny

quent antics of the pigeons earned him the of words. Whittaker had said that mathe-

reputation of being a wizard. On another matics was a form of logic which had been

occasion he lost a ring. He paraded his much more highly developed. It was to some

servants and told them to stroke the back of extent above the need for words. Artists, too,

his favourite black bantam, and when the did not need words to express their message.

guilty person stroked it, the bantam would But in the professions verbal ability was a

31

32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

great stimulation not only to learning but to reading Dr. Russell B In's paper and moved

one's own thoughts by interchange of ideas a vote of thanks, which was received with

with one's fellows.

acclamation, for one of the most interesting

Mr. Bramwell concluded by saying that he Galton Lectures the Eugenics Society had

was looking forward with great pleasure to ever heard.

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

Annual General Meeting

youth organisations and of the informal

THE Annual General Meeting will be held education of adults. In the final session,

at The Rooms of the Royal Society, Bur- under Sir Wilson Jameson, attention was

lington House, Piccadilly, London, W.i, on paid to the great influences of the Press,

Tuesday, May 25th, at 4.30 p.m.

radio, cinema and the Church. The many suggestions made during the conference will

Members' Meetings

now be studied by the Family Relations

ON Tuesday, April 20th, I948, at 5.30 p.m. To be announced later.

Group, which hopes to produce a report on this important aspect of education.

On Tuesday, May 25th, I948, at 5.30 p.m.

A paper on migration. Speaker: Professor Miss Holland

Brinley Thomas, M.A., Ph.D.

WE regret to record the death of Miss Hester

The meetings will take place at The Rooms Holland on December i8th, I947.

of the Royal Society, Burlington House, Miss Holland was Headquarters Organizer

Piccadilly, London, W.i.

of the Family Planning Association (formerly

the National Birth Control Association) since

Family Relations Group

I933, and gave herself wholeheartedly to her

SOME I5O delegates, representing local health work, acting as General Secretary during the

and education authorities, voluntary organi- war. The Family Planning Association owes

sations, colleges and departments of educa- much to her untiring energy and enthusiasm

tion, etc., took part in the conference on Edu- for the birth control movement.

cation for Family Life, held under the

auspices of the Family Relations Group, at Scientific Information Conference

King's College, London, on January 5th and THE Council of the Royal Society has

6th. The first session, under the chairman- arranged a Conference on Scientific Informa-

ship of Lord Horder, examined the different tion Services to take place from June 2ISt to

ways in which parents, public health nurses July 2nd, I948, in London; it will be

and children's officers could contribute to attended by representatives of countries

the education of young children. The second providing information services in English,

session, with Sir Martin Roseveare in the namely the countries of the British Common-

chair, studied each stage of the formal wealth and the United States of America.

education system, working out ways in The Conference, which will consider infor-

which throughout the individual's develop- mation services from the point of view of the

ment education could contribute towards a scientific user, will meet in four sections:

healthy and rich family life. Professor i. Publication and Distribution of Papers

Hamley took the chair at the third session, reporting on Original Work. Editor-in-

which considered the role of juvenile and chief-Professor J. D. Bernal, F.R.S.;

