J. M. THODAY
Professor of Genetics, University of Cambridge
Causes and Functions of Genetic Variety *

hitroduction
D ISCUSSION OF ANY eugenic programme or policy must involve judgement of the relative merit of differing individuals as
potential ancestors of future generations. Such value judgements take us into deep philosophical waters into which I have no intention of plunging as I do not believe the biologist is as biologist any better qualified to make such value judgements than anyone else.
The biologist is however qualified to set out the factual and theoretical biological framework that must be taken into account when any such value judgements are made and hence must at least paddle a little at the edge of the philosophical sea when he wishes to expound knowledge he believes to be relevant. Further, the biologist has I think a duty to express the views that arise from his specialized knowledge concerning the biological origin and function of the various characteristics that may or should be considered in relation to any relevant policy. Likewise the sociologist and psychologist should have relevant considerations to put forward, so that final judgement must be based on complex integration: we should expect this, and beware of any specialist who puts forward his own speciality as the only one permitting authority in relation to any particular problem.
My purpose, therefore, is to consider certain biological attributes, especially as they are illuminated by the results of recent researches, from the biological point of view, so as to bring out something of their biological function.
* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on May 23rd, 1962.

Now in most discussions of this kind, whether
at the individual or the population level, the attributes under consideration are the attributes
of individuals. We may for instance consider
height, or the attribute or attributes that are measured by IQ tests, about which there are two
questions the geneticist may be asked. The first is: if for example individuals with higher IQs
breed more than those with lower (or vice versa), will the IQ ofthe population change, and at what rate? The second question is, if we were effectively to encourage such differential reproduction in favour of IQ, what would be the consequent changes in characteristics other than IQ? The first of these questions is of course difficult enough to answer, witness the problem of inter-
preting the4jcts concerning correlations of IQ
and family size. The second is at present impossible to answer for even if we were to suspect negative correlations between other attributes we deem desirable and IQ, establishment of the facts concerning the degree to which the correlation had genetic causes would be a difficult task
indeed. Difficult though they are, however, it is not
this kind of question that I am involved in. I am not concerned with individual attributes but with an attribute which by its very nature the individual cannot possess. What I am concerned with is the variety of individuals in the population, particularly in as much as it arises from genetic variety.
I think this a matter of proper concern in the Eugenics Society, because it is generally to be expected that natural or artificial selection of the ordinary kind will tend to reduce the genetic variety of a population, as also will inbreeding.

i9S
THE EUGENICS REVEEW, January 1963, 54, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

We therefore should be prepared to consider the that the arguments upon which this expectation

value we put on variety as an attribute of a of relative genetic uniformity was based were

population as well as the value we put on the erroneous. On the contrary, when we investigate

average or on individual attributes.

adequately two homologous chromosomes taken

Now when we come to the question of the from two individuals of a population of flies we

value we place on variety-particularly genetic find that they are different, or if we make suitable

variety-we really do come to the shore of tests on humans by skingrafting we find that it is

stormy philosophical seas. But it is I think just only identical twins that are alike. Each indi-

because of this that the specialist's knowledge of vidual appears to be genetically unique, and the

the facts ofgenetic variety and his views concern- more we discover about the genetic architecture

ing the causes and functions of such variety may of natural populations of outbreeding species the

be of importance, for they may help to limit the more clear it becomes that polymorphisms are

field of philosophical discussion.

not peculiar except as extreme examples of a

general phenomenon that does not usually force

Genetic Variety

itself upon our notice but is always there. We

It is a fact that has become more and more begin to feel it is not too much to say that, apart

clearly and strikingly established in recent years from identical twins, no two individual flies or

that in natural populations genetic variety is humans have ever been genetically exactly alike.

ubiquitous. Much of the most striking evidence Now, though mutation must have provided

comes from studies of flies, but there is quite the variety of genes upon which this diversity

sufficient evidence from other organisms, includ- depends, it is very clear that recurrent mutation

ing man, for us to generalize. Any natural pressure is responsible for the maintenance of

population of an outbreeding species contains an only a small part of it and much of that is

enormous variety of genetically different indi- deleterious. The bulk of this normal genetic

viduals.

diversity must be maintained in the population

Much of this variety is fairly readily detected, through other causes, and hence it is clear that

but much more is variety not readily discernible diversity itself, albeit no doubt diversity of the

as affecting the variety of observed characteristics proper kind, fulfils an important function in the

of contemporary individuals: it is what we call economy of most natural populations, including

cryptic, or concealed, genetic variety and its populations of humans. Investigation into and

demonstration depends on relatively sophisti- discussion of the causes and functions of this

cated experiments, or techniques.

natural diversity of course go hand in hand;

There was a time when it was generally understanding of the causes throws light on the

expected that a population would be relatively functions.

uniform genetically, such variation as there was We know four explanations of this genetic

being due to the usually accidental spread at low diversity, which I should stress are not alter-

frequencies of recently mutated genes. Certain native explanations, except in certain specific

phenomena, however, classed under the heading cases, but involve four kinds of cause each of

"polymorphism" (we should speak in this which probably contributes or has contributed

context of "genetic" or "segregational" poly- to diversity in any particular population.

morphisms) stood out as exceptions to the rules The four causes are, slow change of the

upon which this expectation was based. Work environment over long periods of time, hetero-

aimed at elucidating the causes of genetic poly- geneity of the environment in space and over

morphism notably in the hands of Ford's school short periods of time, assortative mating, and

at Oxford and of Dobzhansky in the United superior fitness of individuals heterozygous at a

States, together with demonstration of more particular locus when compared with either of

subtle classes of polymorphism by Dubinin, the the corresponding homozygotes. I shall not

work on quantitative inheritance initiated by spend time on the last two of these, believing

Mather, and work on blood groups in man and them to be mainly a consequence of the first two.

other mammals, have all converged as meaning The first of these explanations stems from the

I96

CAUSES AND FUNCTIONS OF GENETIC VARIETY

penetrating discussions by Darlington (1932 and different parts of a population in slightly different

1939) of the properties of genetic systems. It directions.

invokes the fact that all contemporary species

have evolved in a slowly changing environment, and that the changes the environment was to undergo in the then future were in essence unpredictable. In these circumstances natural selection would always be tending to promote adaptation to contemporary conditions, and in so far as environmental change was slow, to promote the maintenance of that adaptation. Over long periods of time, however, environmental change would be considerable and to meet it populations must retain adaptability. Now the maintenance of adaptation depends upon stability in heredity, but adaptability depends upon the possibility of hereditary variation. The two requirements, adaptation and adaptability are therefore opposite, and the only populations that will have survived long periods of evolution are those which retained adaptability despite the selection for adaptation, those

Selection and Genetic Variety In these circumstances it would seem reason-
able to expect that different genes or constellations of genes might be favoured in the different parts of the population and hence that the diversity of environment would actually give rise to positive selection for diversity of genotype.
What remained was to find out by experiment whether this can in fact be an effective factor promoting genetic diversity in populations and, if so, how effective. To this end (Thoday 1959, etc.), I and my colleagues have taken a simple quantitative character-hair number in Drosophila-and exposed populations to selection for and against diversity in this character. It proves that such selection is surprisingly effective.
Our earliest results are illustrated in Figure 1 which shows the variety of hair numbers in a

which developed genetic systems permitting

compromise between the two needs. As Mather (e.g. 1943) and I (e.g. 1953) among others have

40-

ORIGINAL

discussed, the development of cryptic genetic

diversity such as we find so widespread in natural 20-

populations provides a means of doing this

efficiently. On this view much of visible diversity

is the price we pay for an adaptable genetic IL ~

S 39

system. When the genetic diversity is cryptic that

price is reduced. But some price is inevitable for 40

genetic diversity is the prerequisite of genetic

adaptability and hence of survival in the novel 20_

and unpredictable conditions of the future,

though many of the genetic variants will be ill adapted in the present and some will never be of

0

use. 40 D 48

The second explanation has come to the fore more recently as a result of some ideas put forward by Mather (1955), and relevant researches I and my colleagues have carried out over the last seven years. This explanation invokes the fact that the environment to which a population is exposed at any one time is not uniform. On the contrary it would be truer to say that no two individuals meet quite the same environments. This being so, different groups of individuals will be exposed to different selective forces, and natural selection will continually be selecting

20'_
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 HAI RS
FIGURE 1.
The number of flies with each hair-number in samples of 160 ffies of the three experimental populations.
Original: the wild stock from which the other populations were derived. S: the stock bred by choosing average flies only as parents for 39 generations. D: the stock bred by choosing both extreme types of fly as parents for 48 generations.

'97

ER--C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

wild stock of flies, together with the variety in two populations selected from that stock in different ways. In one we selected always only the average flies and the consequence is clearly a reduction in the variety of hair numbers. In the other we selected always both extreme kinds of fly, eliminating those near the average and the consequence was increase in the variety of hair
number. Having demonstrated that these results occur-
red, we were led to ask whether in selecting for and against diversity of hair number in our populations we had in fact brought about change in the adaptability of the populations. Figure 2 shows that we had, for it shows the line selected for the diversity to be more, and that selected for uniformity to be less adaptable than the original wild stock.

*2
nO

/

D High
0 High
. S High

SLow

-2
D Low 0 1 23
Generations
FIGURE 2. The adaptability of the three populations.
From each population two selection lines were taken, and one was selected for high the other for low hair number. Their rate of divergence measures the adaptability of the population under test. It is clear that the D population is more and the S population is less adaptable than the original (0) wild stock.
We therefore see that such selection does affect the ability of a population to adapt to new conditions. Hence we may extrapolate and reasonably conclude that the heterogeneity of natural environments may preserve and promote the genetic diversity of natural populations, and hence that such diversity will function both as

adapting the population to the diversity of the present environment and as preserving the adaptability of the population against future unpredictable environmental change.
Now it is of some interest in relation to eugenics to consider what we have discovered of the genetic means whereby one of our populations responded to selection for diversity. We (Gibson and Thoday 1962) have made extensive analysis of the genetic constitution of this population, and have shown that part of the diversity is maintained by the maintenance of three alternative classes of chromosome. The first has two low hair number genes aL bL upon it, and is responsible when heterozygous with either of the other two, for the flies with few
hairs. This chromosome has another property, it is recessive lethal. The other two classes each
have one high and one low hair number gene and are a' bL and aL bH. These two classes are indistinguishable except in as much that flies
heterozygous for the two, that is aL bl/a bL
produce by recombination 10 per cent aL bL chromosomes among their progeny. These observations put us in a position to test the wild population with which we started and show that it also had both aL bH and aH bL chromosomes. The first point of interest is that we have here a situation in which a population has adapted to particular conditions by producing and exploiting a lethal chromosome, at the price of course of producing some lethal offspring. Measures taken to reduce the frequency of that "deleterious" chromosome in the population would have been undesirable unless accompanied by measures taken to change the environment in such a way
that the "deleterious" chromosome was no longer called for. A similar situation occurs with the sickle cell gene in man which is deleterious, yet in malarial areas advantageous unless the malaria is controlled.
The second point of interest is our demonstration of the cryptic diversity in the wild population. It is notable that the wild population with which we started shows a degree of variety that could be both increased and decreased by selection. This strongly suggests, as we might expect, that there is optimum diversity in any population in any contemporary situation or set of situations. Natural selection tends, as was

I98

CAUSES AND FUNCTIONS OF GENETIC VARIETY

demonstrated long ago by Bumpus and by experiment we took a wild population which in

Wheldon, to eliminate extreme variants of all the earlier parts of the experiment behaved as a

kinds thus stabilizing a population and keeping single population. Yet after only a few genera-

its properties constant. At the same time, how- tions of selection for diversity it was behaving as

ever, it does not eliminate all variants; a proper two separate populations between which hybrids

balance is preserved. But underlying the natural did not or did not often occur. Now this is the

diversity we see in the existence of the two sort of process that must be involved in the

chromosomes ae bL and aL b# a very clear formation of species, and we are forced to ask:

example of the kind of reserve of variability that if, in at least this one case, it can be so easy to split

Mather in 1943 argued should be there. These a population into two, and given the diversity of

two chromosomes differ little in their effects. natural environments, why is it that it does not

But their existence together in the population happen more often? Why is it for instance that

endows it with the capacity ofproducing extreme it seems easy to mate Drosophila melanogaster

recombinants that may be useful as adaptations populations from all over the world ? This

in the unpredictable future: they endow it with suggests that there are compensating disadvan-

genetic versatility. A price again is paid, for the tages, forces actually preventing species splitting

population must regularly produce some of these up in this way. I suggested something of the sort

recombinants which are undesirable in the before (Thoday 1953, 1958) and criticised Sir

present. But the price is reduced by the two Arthur Keith for assuming speciation to be an

genes' association in the same chromosome. essential end of progressive evolution, basing

I have now said nearly enough about these my argument on the view that splitting a popula-

causes of variety. But there is one further im- tion into two produces two populations each

portant point. In our latest experiment (Thoday genetically less diverse than the original popula-

and Gibson 1962) we selected a wild population tion, and, because less diverse, less genetically

for variety under slightly but very significantly versatile. Racial segregationists might take note

different conditions. In this experiment we gave of this.

the flies we had selected the opportunity to Genetic diversity then is produced by the

choose their mates. Thus the more hairy females diversity of selective forces operating through

could choose between equal numbers of more and variation of the environment in space and in

less hairy males and the less hairy females could time. It is itself an adaptation, not of the indi-

choose likewise.

vidual but of the species, an adaptation to the

The result of this was as Mather (1955) had unpredictability of the environment; it is respon-

predicted. The population rapidly split into two, sible for the versatility of populations, their

but it did it with such rapidity that only capacity to survive new conditions and even

twelve generations of selection were needed, catastrophes such as the myxomatosis epidemic

after which nearly all the effective mating was which rabbits have survived. It is one of the

assortative.

most important aspects in the adaptation of

The astonishing rapidity with which this populations and species to the conditions of life experiment worked raises two questions. The in our ever changing and variable world.

first is: was some assortative mating there

in the wild population with which we started? Conclusion

This would suggest that assortative mating might Now we can be sure that all this applies to man

be assisting the wild population to maintain its though the situation with respect to man is

diversity. We do not know the answer to this for complicated in a number of ways.

certain yet but preliminary evidence suggests The first complication arises because human

there may be a rather strong tendency for the populations not only have genetic versatility, but

more hairy ffies to choose more hairy and the are made up of individuals themselves versatile

less hairy to choose less hairy as mates in this in many ways. This individual versatility is of

wild population.

course itself a product of the human genotype.

The second question is more subtle. In the Individual versatility is also shown in various

'99,

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

degrees by other organisms, but such individual designed to reduce the frequency of certain

versatility, the adaptability of the individual to a genotypes regarded as undesirable at present,

wide range of environmental conditions, is a might itself be undesirable as it would tend to

property more highly developed in man than any reduce genetic variety. This however would be

other organism. This comes about of course to go too far, for the point the experiment

through the great flexibility of the human brain. showed was that selection could either increase

It has itself given rise to the remaining compli- or decrease variety in the wild population with

cations, for it has made possible the social which we started. The successful population

development of man through communicated maintains variety, but the variety is limited, there

experience, and hence of social inheritance, social is a balance between too much and too little

evolution and very rapid change of the human variety. Uniform populations will be unsuccess-

environment induced by human activity.

ful but so are the most extreme variant indi-

It is sometimes claimed that these factors viduals. Nothing I have said need prevent us

render unimportant genetic evolution in man, from considering eugenic programmes, but we

and if this were so, they would render genetic should beware extreme suggestions such as those

versatility unimportant. However, though I involving excessive multiplication, by asexual

would be the last to under-rate the importance of reproduction or artificial insemination, of geno-

social inheritance, this individual versatility does types now considered advantageous. We cannot

not mean that genetic evolution is rendered assess just how much genetic diversity is needed

unimportant. After all, individual versatility in our complex, variable and ever changing

itself is a consequence of genetic endowment, and social systems, but we can be sure that it is a

every change social systems produce in human good deal. There are always pressures toward

environments necessarily produce consequent uniformity in human populations; to a large

genetic changes. Furthermore, no one would extent they should be resisted.

pretend that we are in a position, for all our

culture, to predict the consequences of our

REFERENCES

activities for the future. The environment changes more rapidly than ever it did, largely thanks to

Darlington, C. D. 1932. Recent Advances in Cytology. Churchill.
Darlington, C. D. 1939. The Evolution ofGenetic Systems.

our own activities, and, though the future is perhaps more predictable to us than it was to

Cambridge University Press. Gibson, J. B. and Thoday, J. M. 1962. Effects of disrup-
tive selection. VI A second chromosome polymor-

our ancestors, this greater rate of change means phism. Heredity. 17, 1-26.

that the unpredictable aspects of the future will require more rapid adaptation than they did in the past. To say the least, we cannot be sure that
our individual versatility is sufficient. Consequently we need to be sure that we attach

Mather, K. 1943. Polygenic inheritance and natural selection. Biol. Rev. 18, 32-64.
Mather, K. 1955. Polymorphism as an outcome of disruptive selection. Evolution. 9, 52-61.
Millicent, E. and Thoday, J. M. 1961. Effects of disruptive selection. IV Gene flow and divergence. Heredity.
15, 119-217.

sufficient importance not only to individual but Thoday, J. M. 1957. Components of fitness. Symp. Soc.

also to genetic diversity as well as to devising and

exp. Biol 7, 96-113. Thoday, J. M. 1958. Natural selection and biological

maintaining flexible social and political systems. progress. A Century of Darwin. Heinemann.

Now in conclusion I should remind you of an important point I made in connection with my

Thoday, J. M. 1959. Effects of disruptive selection. I Genetic flexibility. Heredity. 13, 187-204.
TIhoday, J. M. and Boam, T. B. 1959. Effects of disruptive

experimental results, for the premium I have put selection. II Polymorphism and divergence without

in this discussion on the value of genetic variety may seem to suggest that any eugenic policy

isolation. Heredity. 13, 205-218. Thoday, J. M. and Gibson, J. B. 1962. Isolation by disrup-
tive selection. Nature, 193, 1164-1166.

200

