DELINQUENT BEHAVIOUR: SOME. UNANSWERED QUESTIONS*

By JOHN SPENCER, M.A., Ph.D., J.P.

C* RIMINALS, like the proverbial cob- relates to the question of apprehension: the

~ bler, not infrequently stick to their more efficient the police, the stricter the

'~-'lasts. Many follow one pattern of administration, the less intelligent the delin-

delinquency throughout their criminal career. quent, the greater the chance of being caught,

The criminologist, however, cannot follow and the greater the need for caution in the

theirgood example. He is, to use Sellin'swords, interpretation of results. It is unfortunate,

a king without a country, and the advance- therefore, that so many of the researches

ment of his discipline is dependent on the referred to in this paper are of delinquents

various sciences from which his knowledge is who have either appeared before the Court or

derived. My immediate difficulty, therefore, have been committed to an institution of

in reading a paper to this Society is that I some kind.

may appear a jack of all trades and master I remember at the Toynbee Hall J.C. a

-of none, but this handicap is inherent in my lively boy called Charlie. He was aged I4

subject.

years 8 months, and was charged with break-

The aim is to review the state of present ing into a warehouse. Twenty other offences

knowledge on juvenile delinquency with a were taken into consideration. He said

view to assessing where the most significant "Since I2 years old I have been committing

gaps are to be found. Two questions are crime but have never been caught. I want

selected for special attention in which the to get things off my mind and don't want to

Eugenics Society may have a particular thieve any more as I have got to know a girl

interest. The choice of juvenile delinquency who said she didn't like going with thieves."

rather than adult crime as the main focus of He was technically a first offender. The

our attention is quite deliberate. The police cleared up 200 offences as a result,

evidence points to the commencement of and the total value of his activities amounted

ccriminal careers in childhood and it is the to £1,400.

young delinquent on whom the weight of In the so-called delinquency area, the gap

research must be directed.

between published figures and the amount

Juvenile delinquency is, and has long been, of delinquency is particularly high; it is the

the subject of considerable popular attention minority who get caught, and the deviant

and frequently of anxiety, and for this there who fails to conform to the expected rules of

are perfectly sound psychological reasons. behaviour. Juvenile delinquency, Mays

(Reiwald I949.) Yet on few subjects is states (I952), iS " an accepted part of the

public opinion more unreliable. Scott's pattern of juvenile conduct handed down by

analysis of 500 press cuttings records a tradition and maintained by the familiar

variety of panaceas from the feeding of more system of gang allegiance."

Oranges to the urging of economic reforms Side by side with the delinquents waiting

(I950), while an analysis of crime news in the in the Court are the children subject to the

Colorado press showed an inverse relation- Court's non-criminal jurisdiction, the "care

ship between criminal statistics and news- or protection " and " beyond control" boys

paper space devoted to the subject.

and girls, but especially girls. It is through

There are certain obstacles involved in a this means that the young prostitute is first

scientific study of the problem. The first apprehended. The aetiology of the two

* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Soesety on January 20th, I954.

groups is surprisingly similar though the behaviour may well be different.

29

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Underneath the umbrella of delinquency -are to be found a wide variety of offenders and offences, from the street-footballer and the casual group caught " scrumping " to the aggressive and dangerous young psychopath. Yet all among this heterogeneous collection of law breakers are given the, same label, and all are the Court's responsibility. Frey, the Swiss children's magistrate and psychologist has distinguished between "' pseudo-criminels " and " criminels precoces (I950)." For the first group, about 85 per cent of the total, delinquency is a passing phase of development. They but rarely produce the recidivist. The second group contains the true delinquents, among whom the recidivist, or persistent offender and habitual criminal, will appear in the course of time. It is, therefore, no accident that a large part of recent research has been devoted to ways and means of detecting this group at an early age, and of helping their rehabilitation.
In the scientific study of delinquency a multi-disciplinary approach is essential and it is becoming increasingly clear that future progress must depend on effective team-work between the various disciplines. I have selected three approaches for discussion before turning to the main subject of my paper: the psychological/psychiatric, the sociological, and the bio-physical.
Psychological/psychiatric Approach
It is in this field that the foundations of scientific knowledge have been laid. Progress has followed two lines of advance, the statistical and the case-method, the former tending to be the approach of psychology, and the latter of psychiatry. Both have been concerned with causes, though the psychiatrist has also had a special concern for treatment. The statistical method has not unnaturally been more successful when control groups have been employed. In psychiatry a leading part has been played by the psycho-analysts not merely through the fundamental thinking- of their theory, but for the practical value of their con-
clusions. Aichhorn's Wayward Youth (I925)
has proved an invaluable guide to the re-

education of the delinquent, and is a work of great intuitive skill as well as theoretical
knowledge.
There has been no firm borderline between
the two and collaboration has become a
commonplace. I disagree both, with Burt
(I949) when he says that " with rare excep-
tions juvenile delinquency proves to be
plainly a problem for the social and educa-
tional psychologist rather than the doctor or psychiatrist" and equally with Winnicott's view that " the time is in sight when statistical inquiry will have done all it can do in the elucidation of problems of delinquency."
Until recently the emphasis has been on the search for causes. Before the pioneer works of Burt (I925) in England and Healy (I9I5) in America, investigators had already pointed to what is now recognized as the key to the problem. Leeson in I9I7 had
described the effects of the break-up of family life in World War I and its consequences for the child. Though Burt and Healy differed in their emphasis on environmental and psychological conditions they pointed the way for later work. Carr-
Saunders, Mannheim, and Rhodes (1942) again showed the association between delinquency and families of abnormal structure, and an attempt was made to divide the "broken home" into individual groups. The presence of delinquency in the home was closely associated with the subsequent delinquency of other children, a fact also observed by Ferguson (I952) in a more recent work.
The control group of non-delinquents was a livelier lot as regards leisure interests, with
better records of school attendance and conduct. All this has been substantiated by subsequent research.
Their final remark is of considerable significance, and is indicative of the change in emphasis that has recently taken place:
No one characteristic or set of influences typifies all the delinquents. The basic problem is one of susceptibility or predisposition and the authors suggested a parallel between predisposition to delinquency and physiological immunity to disease. The concept of the "broken home" has rightly been criticized as being of too vague or general a

DEL1NQUENT BEHAVIOUR: SOME UNANSWERED QUESTIONS 3I

nature, and the psycho-analysts have clari- Sociological Approach

fied the emotional relationship between "The time is rapidly coming to an end

parent and child which they understand to when it can be regarded as justifiable to

be of primary importance.

consider the characteristics, behaviour, and

This concept of predisposition has long been recognized but is of special interest in recent work. " Each child reacts according to his own inherent tendencies" wrote Aichhorn, who used the phrase "latent
delinquency" for predisposition to delinquent behaviour. Stott (I950) in his study of I02 Approved School boys emphasized the importance of detecting and treating the problem while it was still at '"'situationlevel."

treatment of the delinquent as an isolated person, set apart from the community of which he is a member. . . . Crime itself is the result of disfunction within the society in which it takes place." Professor Simey (1949) points to what is the essence of the sociological approach. The concept of the individual delinquent is an abstraction which fails to do justice to the infinite variety of delinquent reactions, the accidental and the chronic, the sub-normal and the clever.
More particularly the sociologist is con-

These conclusions point the way to what cerned to show not merely the diversity of

has been the most fruitful source of collabor- norms which exist within any given society,

ation-the use of prediction techniques. Our but the divergence which may exist between

debt to the Gluecks is immense though the work of Mannheim and Wilkins in a follow-up
study of Borstal boys (not yet published) will provide a material contribution to existing knowledge. One need hardly add that the
practical value of such methods to the court
and to the penal administrator, when the
validation of sufficiently large samples have been completed, will be consideratle. Past studies have not in fact been carried before the courts, and the lawyers are not unnaturally suspicious. The Gluecks focused their attention on possible success and failure of offenders sentenced to an institution. The disadvantages are important. There is a general resistance to the use of prediction itables from those who are afraid of the stigma inflicted by attaching the label " predelinquent" to a child (Glueck I952).
Glover (I954) comments that though they
may tell with reasonable accuracy whether a given child may become delinquent, they

those norms and the official code of behaviour
which the law prescribes. In a (unpublished) paper read to the Scientific group of the I.S.T.D. in I953 Mrs. Wootton contrasts the visiting foreigner's statement " your bobbies are so wonderful " with the accepted view of
delinquent society " all coppers are bastards and the only good copper is a dead copper."
In the field of juvenile delinquency the most fruitful source of study has been the
gang. Thrasher (1936) and others have shown how the gang provides for the under-
privileged boy an outlet for emotional expression and social experience which has been denied him through the normal means of family life. Above all, they show how misguided certain assumptions of deviance may often be. Obedience to the code prescribed by the gang has the first claim on a member's loyalty. In stealing, for example, there will be a hierarchy of values in which theft from the pocket of a fellow-member is at one extreme, and theft from Marks and

provide only a hint as to whether he will Spencer or British Railways is at the other.

remain delinquent, nor do they indicate the The fact remains, however, that while gang type of delinquency which will be selected. membership has been extensively studied, The results of the Cambridge-Somerville the effect of court experiences, and of

study, moreover, showed that although the experiences both within and without institu-

delinquents had been successfully forecast, tions has not. " For ten detailed analyses of

many who had been predicted as delinquents a boy's relations to his parents, one is lucky

.did not in fact become so.

to find a single comparable story of the

32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

impact upon him of a fortnight's stay in the remand home or of a year's probation." (Wootton I953.) This impact is certainly one of our unanswered questions and must surely rank high on any list of priorities. I myself have long hoped that someone might do a careful investigation of the waitingroom of a juvenile court. It might well prove more rewarding than observation of the events in the Court itself.
Biophysical Approach
The disappearance of the Lombrosian concept of the born criminal has led to a distrust of the so-called anthropological approach in most countries of the world with the exception of Italy. Under this head I include a rather miscellaneous collection. Intelligence (more correctly included under the heading of psychology): Twin studies: somatotyping and electro-encephalography.
Intelligence
On the place of intelligence in the aetiology of delinquency, opinion is divided. The difference in opinion must depend in no small measure on methods of ascertainment and disposal. Goddard's claim (I926) that lowgrade intelligence was the greatest single cause of crime has been rejected by later workers. Burt found five times as many mental defectives in his group as in the school population, while 82 per cent of his sample were technically dull. Healy and Bronner showed only slight difference of intelligence between their groups. Bagot, using headmasters' assessments concluded that backwardness is strongly associated with delinquency though in itself it does not
make a child delinquent. Stott (1950) on the
other hand is sceptical of the often quoted relationship between low intelligence and delinquency since emotional influences are too easily neglected in the assessment of test results.
High-grade rather than low-grade deficiency is the more relevant factor. More significant, however, is the effect of frustration and insecurity which follows as a consequence. In his study of younger soldiers

at a Special Training Unit (I952) during the war Trenaman states that, as between the one-third manifestly delinquent and the remaining two-thirds, differences in intelligence were slight. He emphasizes, however, their educational backwardness and the high percentage (57 per cent) of truants in the group. In my own study of the Army, deserter persistent truancy was also noticeable, while the poor school record of the young soldiers was also observed by Trenaman. Mannheim, in his Cambridge survey (1948), also comments on the mental inferiority of the delinquent group, though he does not generalize on such limited evidence. Studies of recidivists are most likely to point to low intelligence though samples of court cases show few grounds for optimism.*
Twin Studies
Twin studies have also been the subject of strong claims and of later scepticism. Lange's view (I929) that " heredity does play a role of paramount importance in making the criminal " though supported by his statistics and by the work of Rosanoff, Kranz, and Stumfl, is weakened not merely by the inadequacy of his criteria, but by the tenuous nature of his case-material particularly in the early period. Their evidence is still of value in showing the significance of inborn characteristics which create a susceptibility to delinquent behaviour.
Whelan's investigation (I95I) of a pair of uniovular twins in which one was an aggressive psychopath presents some fresh evidence. She used in her examination a variety of techniques, including E.E.G. psychological tests, and electromyography. The twins, though reared in the same environment, showed personality differences at an early age. *Before the age of ten their paths began to diverge, and after very different Army careers and dissimilar marital histories, their lives become totally unlike. The patient showed a more aggressive,
* An analysis of ioo consecutive cases from the Bristol Juvenile Court in 1949 shows dullness (I.Q.
80-go) in 25 per cent, borderline subnormality (70-79)
in i i per cent, subnormality (under 70) in 7 per cent and mental deficiency in 2 per cent.

DELINQUENT BEHAVIOUR: SOME UNANSWERED QUESTIONS 33

immature personality, and an inability to cope with social situations, a high level of aspiration but marked lack of persistence.
Somatotyping
The knowledge of the relationship between physique and character built up by Kretschmer has not generally been used by researches in delinquency. The more recent work of Sheldon (I949) and his associates for somatotyping has been simplified in this country by Parnell. The conceptual framework has rightly been severely criticized by Emmanuel Miller and by Sutherland, yet the results are of some interest. Epps and Pamell (1952) have discussed their conclusions from a comparative study of I77 Borstal girls and I23 young women at an Oxford College. Corresponding differences in physique and temperament were found. The delinquents were shorter and heavier in build, more muscular and fat. In temperament they showed a predominance of somatotonia and viscerotonia over cerebrotonia, broadly confirming Sheldon's work. Using his psychiatric index the predominance of affective-conative exaggeration was also confirmed. Seltzer's findings in the Gluecks (I950) large-scale study of 500 young delinquents chosen from reformatory institutions and 500 non-delinquent controls, agree with their evidence. The predominance of endomorphic-mesomorphs was also observed. Ferguson's (I952) picture, on the other hand, of his Glasgow delinquents, undersized and of poor physique, though not measured in so systematic a manner, provides a striking contrast to these conclusions. The problem raised by this contrast in body build requires further study.
Electro-encephalography
Finally there is the study of electroencephalography. Only in recent years has the development of technical skills been correlated with information on the delinquent gained through psychological and social means. A recent investigation by Sessions Hodge, Walter, and Grey Walter (I953) of ioo successive admissions to the

Kingswood Classifying School is evidence not only of great ability on the part of the authors but of an understandable caution in the interpretation of the results. In the absence of experiments showing the extent to which E.E.G. features are susceptible to environmental changes, the authors refuse to accept a dichotomy between nature and nurture to which this research can give support. A bias in favour of nature may be justified by further experiment, but the evidence is inadequate, they suggest, to support an uncompromising assertion.
In this research as many as 84 per cent had abnormal E.E.G. records, though "there was nothing to suggest that the peculiar appearances seen in the primary records were suggestive of any particular clinical condition." The popular connection between the dysrhythmia of behaviour disorders and epilepsy was rejected. Again, although the slower rhythms were associated with a factor called ductility (a word covering a variety of epithets, easily led, submissive, docile, malleable) it proved too facile to explain these findings in terms of simple immaturity. The authors forsee the possibility of what they call a physiological sociology, progress in which must be dependent on research over a much wider child population than delinquents alone and followed up over a long period.
Against this background I have selected two problems which seem to demand further study as well as the expert knowledge which this Society is able to provide. The first concerns the psychopath, and the second the social problem group.
The Psychopath
The effect of the new knowledge on separation in early childhood which has been made possible by psychiatric and in particular by psycho-analytic research, has been a swing of the pendulum from heredity in favour of environment. In the case of the " pseudo-criminel," the environmental delinquent, the results have been of slight importance. In the case of the chronic

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

delinquent, but especially of the psychopath, the Forty-four Juvenile Thieves (1946) and

the matter is more important.

again in his later work (I95i) questions the

The concept of psychopathy has a long history, beginning with the idea of moral insanity and at various times including most of the mental disorders except psychoses. It has been criticized on various groundsthat it is no more than a waste-paper basket for cases which cannot be adequately diagnosed, and that it involves its user in circular reasoning. Yet the presence of the non-sane non-insane character-to use East's terminology-both adult and juvenile, within and without the penal or reformatory institution, constitutes the most serious challenge to existing knowledge, and also to

contribution of heredity. The evidence of genetic factors is in the realm of inference. " The relatively high incidence of mental illness in the percentage of both groups of cases, delinquents and unstable or neurotic
controls, is suggestive of the possible importance of heredity as predisposing to the development of delinquent and unstable character." In the case of the affectionless character, however, whose characteristics seem to approximate most closely to those of the psychopath, he emphasizes the high degree of association with a history of mother-child separation.

the whole system of penal administration. In America other workers, Goldfarb, Spitz,

Not only do existing methods of disposal and Bender, to mention but three names, had

remain unsatisfactory, but within the prison arrived at similar conclusions. Bender also

walls he creates a perpetual disturbance to argues that there is a specific connection

the normal routine and to the staff.

between prolonged early separation and the

The size of the psychopathic group is itself a matter of some dispute. Frey equates psychopathy with habitual criminality, an argument that would not be accepted in this

development of the affectionless psychopathic character given to persistent delinquent conduct at an early age and extremely difficult to treat.

country. Morris (I95I) states that, of the The evidence of electro-encephalography is

two groups of habitual criminals in prison suggestive also of immaturity in the psycho-

investigated by him, for at least 20 per cent path. The majority of abnormalities in

the East-Hubert institution is required. Stafford-Clark's group were of excess Theta

Stafford-Clark and his colleagues (95I), activity mainly in the central areas, a normal

however, point out that the number is little occurrence in young children. Bowlby argues

more than 5 per cent. Criminality per se, they (I95I) that although there is a common

state, seems to add little to our knowledge assumption that these abnormal rhythms are

of this particular form of character disorder, due to a physical factor, such as genetic

one of whose most striking features is an defect or birth injury, there is in fact nothing

inability to accept any form of authority. to support this conclusion, and they may

They see a failure to mature as the funda- well prove to be psychogenic in origin,

mental abnormality in the prison subjects resulting from a fixation at an earlier level

selected for their examination. This charac- of functioning.

teristic belongs to psychopaths in general, though in the aggressive and explosive type the damage to society or the prison is most serious. In their electro-physiological study 83 per cent of the subjects displaying aggressiveness had an abnormal E.E.G. record as compared with less than 50 per
cent of those without overt aggressiveness.

To the criminologist the presence of a hard core of persistent criminality, in which psychopathy, though not necessarily a large, is nevertheless a most dangerous element, constitutes a challenge to the research techniques at our disposal. A review of the evidence suggests that there is urgent need for further investigation, using in any team

There is a body of opinion which regards designed for the purpose such help as the

the origin of psychopathy as constitutional. geneticist can provide. If I have only done

Bowlby, on the other hand, in his study of justice to one side of the argument, it is in

DELINQUENT BEHAVIOUR: SOME UNANSWERED QUESTIONS 35

part at any rate due to the inadequacy of The Problem Family

information in case-records on the heredity The concept of a " social problem group"

of delinquents.

gave way to that of the " problem family," a

change of phrase which, Blacker (I952)

observes, " reflected a transition from an

The Social Problem Group

impersonal and sociological to a personal and

The second of the two unanswered questions which I shall discuss lies on the borderline of eugenics and sociology. It concerns the Social Problem Group to a study of which this Society has devoted much of its thought. I raise this problem because of a preliminary study which I have begun while planning the Bristol Social Project in the last three months.
The classic description of the Wood Report is well known to you. The idea of the " dangerous and perishing classes " appeared

human approach." More important, however, it characterizes the emphasis which is now rightly laid on the place of the family not merely aetiology of delinquency but in many other troubles of a similar character. Persistent truancy and sexual promiscuity among girls are but two examples. The nature of causation is taken further in this later work. To mental subnormality is added temperamental instability and a' vicious circle is quickly set in motion.
Information on the relationships between

to the social reformers of Mid-Victorian crime and the problem family is no more

England as characterized by " moral " rather than a pointer to further investigation.

that " physical " destitution. Matthew Among the parents in the 379 families,

Davenport Hill in the Minutes of Evidence imprisonment or conviction was noted in

to the Select Committee of I852 em- forty-nine men and nineteen women. Of

phasized in particular " the children of 333 families forty-four children were in

criminals: they are hereditary criminals; Remand Homes or Approved Schools. Of

then illegitimate children . . . orphans, for themselves, problem families do not appear

obvious reasons, form another class. Found- to be productive of a large proportion of

lings and step-children form a large class; juvenile delinquency in the community. It

and no doubt the children of the very poor would, however, be of interest to study the

form a class."

records of those forty-four children removed

Since then there have been many changes, not only in our knowledge, but in the philosophy of our social administration. Blacker (I937) pointed out that recidivism appears to fall into a group of conditions more or less
intermediate between the medico-psycho-
logical and the sociological. Of the three sub-groups, subnormality of intelligence appeared to be the common denominator.

to a reformatory institution and to observe how far they contributed to the hard core of
delinquency, characterized not merely by
separation but also by rejection, frustration, and anxiety of which the psychopath appears to be the product. Wofinden has, in fact, commented on the unity and happiness which workers observed in some of the families (1950).

Hubert concluded as a result of a study of the In the course of the initial planning of the

literature that the proportion of defective Bristol Social Project I have been studying

recidivists in the recidivist population was the ecology of certain symptoms of family

surprisingly low. The hereditary factor and social disorder, such as truancy, child

involved, he concluded, is generally regarded neglect, delinquency, and so on, with the

as some sort of constitutional inferiority intention of comparing their distribution

which may show itself in other forms of social with that of the problem families of whom

behaviour as readily as. in criminality. Wofinden has already provided a map.

Subnormality of intelligence has also been (I950).

observed in a report on neglectful mothers The Bristol Social Project is a five-year

by the Governor of Holloway Prison (I950). scheme of " operational " or action-research,

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

supported by the Carnegie Trustees, and intended to help the inhabitants of a local
community in that city to deal more efficiently with its social problems. Although initially formed as an operational research
project in the treatment and prevention of
delinquency, it was argued that such a
scheme could not be limited in this way. It is intended that by the summer a team of
trained workers will be appointed, who will start work in various fields, in whichever
community may have been selected. Here I shall confine myself to certain
aspects concerned with the ecology of symptoms of social disorganization. It has been assumed, though not without certain criticisms, since the work of Shaw and McKay (I942) in Chicago, that the distribution of delinquency, correlated with such other problems as recidivism, mental defi-
ciency and T.B., reaches the highest rates in the centre and declines -towards the periphery of the city. This pattern was applied not merely to Chicago but to certain other American cities. Faris and Dunham
(I939) also showed that the total insanity
rates followed the same ecological principles, although the same was not true of all types of insanity, schizophrenia following the pattern closely; while manic-depressive psychosis and epilepsy did not conform.
In his study of Cambridge, Mannheim (1948) argued that while these principles of ecology held good in the case of the distribution of delinquency in London as shown by Burt or in Liverpool as observed by Bagot, or in Birmingham according to an Education Committee report, the same was not true for Cambridge, where some of the highest rates are to be found in the new housing estates on the periphery of the town.
The theories of the so-called ecologists do not hold for Bristol, where the distribution of delinquency and certain other indices appear to conform to no such principles. The incidence seems to be similar to the distribution of problem families shown in the map prepared by Wofinden ('950). We observe an accumulation of social problems in outer areas on the circumference, in certain new housing estates. The " black spots," in short,

have moved from the centre to the outskirts of the city leaving, however, a residue
behind.
Housing Estates
There is one obvious explanation for this change. The indices in question are all characteristics of the social problem group, which was moved under the slum clearance schemes brought about by the Housing Acts of I930, I936, and I938, from old central slum areas to new estates. Such movement was later accelerated by the bombing of the central areas during the war.
But the housing estates themselves have created a fresh set of social problems. From a study of the ecological approach to mental disease Hare concludes (I952) that it is possible -to distinguish in every environmental situation a constant underlying factor for mental health. This factor, which he calls " social communication," reflects the fact that a man's normal mental development depends on his being able to borrow a sense of security from a community by whom he is accepted as a member. In short, social communication has become a limiting factor in mental health. It may well be that a study of housing estates would provide a basis for the hypothesis which Hare proposes. The absence of communication has frequently been contrasted with the neighbourliness of the old slum areas.
Here then is a problem in which many of the questions have not finally been answered. To what extent are we dealing in the new areas with a population characterized largely by mental subnormality and temperamental instability, to mention two of the characteristics to which Blacker gives causal status in the creation of the problem family? What has been the effect of the new social services of the Welfare State on the social problem group ? Lastly, how far is the social pathology of these new housing areas due to a process of social selection, and how far to the effect of what-for want of a better wordmay be called a delinquent culture?
At one time it was argued that delinquency was the product of slum living. After removal

DELINQUENT BEHAVIOUR: SOME UNANSWERED QUESTIONS 37

of the slum population to the new areas had standards of neighbourhood behaviour may

failed to diminish the rate of delinquency it easily be underestimated.

was pointed out that the absence of social The Dutch programme for the rehabilita-

provision on new estates had led to boredom tion of the problem family at least has the

and frustration among the young and a merit of recognizing the existence of a social

weakened sense of community with impaired problem (the effect of which may well extend

means of social communication among the outside the immediate group which consti-

adult. tutes it) and of adopting a constructive

In the movement from old slum areas to policy to deal with it.

new housing estates there are, too, those In the process of re-education there is a

difficulties arising from the disruption of the need for greater emphasis on the develop-

kinship group.* The presence of old people, ment of group techniques. Lewin's view that

more particularly of the mother, near the " it is usually easier to -change individuals

family in times of stress, at periods of sick- formed into a group than to change any one

ness or childbirth, and in the giving of daily of them separately" constitutes a funda-

assistance and advice, is only seen in its mental principle on which future progress

right perspective when the effects of separa- is likely to be made. Whether the objective

tion are later experienced. " Going back to of social change be family-planning or the

mum " is a not uncommon reason given for prevention of delinquency, the use of con-

the anxiety to return to the old central areas. ventional methods through formal instruc-

Kuper has suggested (1953), in a recent tion seems handicapped by difficulties of

study of Coventry, a dichotomy in which social distance between worker and the

roughness and sociability, respectability and neighbourhood.

withdrawal from neighbourly contacts appear The extent of residential mobility in these

to form two fairly distinct groups. The areas suggests that the idea of a delinquent

application of this hypothesis to certain new culture with its own norms of behaviour and

housing areas of Bristol- appears to be of sanctions may be less accurate than that of

some interest. A slow process of social a disorganized group of families rejected by

selection or more accurately perhaps social neighbours and constrained to live together.

rejection by neighbours takes place. The With frequent movement from one house to

"respectable " move away from the "rough." another no accepted code is given time in

They apply to the housing authority for a which to grow. The study of the individual

transfer to a different estate or to a section problem family must be supplemented by a

of their present one, where they may live study of the locality in which it lives. The

undisturbed by the " rough " members of biological effects of intermarriage, the

the locality. Movement also takes place in place of the kinship system, the techniques of

the case of the rough group, one factor being child-rearing, the emotional development of

ability to pay the rent demanded, and the the children, the handicaps to family living,

process of drift into the cheapest and most both economic, social and psychological, and

inadequate accommodation gradually takes the appropriate social policy to be adopted

place.

-all these are matters on which only the

The significance of low morale should not beginning of social research has been made.

be underestimated. Its prejudicial effects

may be observed in the case of application

for employment. An address in a particular

area may well debar an applicant from an

REFERENCES

appointment. In areas of this kind the number of ascertained problem families may

Aichhorn, A. (95I), Wayward Youth. Imago. Bagot, J. H. (94I), Juvenile Delinquency. Cape.
Blacker, C. P. (Ed.) I937), A Social Problem Group?

well be small, though their effect on the Milford.

-(952), Problem Families. Eugenics Society.

* Personal communication from Michael Young, of Bovet, L. (I95I), Psychiatric Aspects of Juvenile

the Institute of Community Studies.

Delinquency. W.H.O.

38 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Bowlby, J. (I946), Forty-four Juvenile Thieves. Bailliere
- (I95I), Maternal Care and Mental Health.
W.H.O.
Burt, Cyril (1949), " Recent Discussions on Juvenile 'Delinquency." Brit. J. Educ. Psychol. 19, 32.
Caradog Jones, D. (I945), The Social Problem Group.
Squire Law Library. Carr-Saunders, A. M., Mannheim, H., and Rhodes,
E.C.- (1942), Young Offenders. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. Epps, Phyllis and Parnell, R. W. (I952), " Physique
and Temperament of Women Delinquents compared with Women Undergraduates." Brit. J.
Med. Psychol. 25, 249.
Ferguson, T. (I952), The Young Delinquent in his
Social Setting. Oxford University Press.
Fans, E. and Dunham, H. W. (I939), Mental Disorders
in Urban Areas. Chicago University Press.
Frey, E. (I950), " 1tude des facteurs cniminogenes chez
les mineurs." Proceedings of the Second Inter-
national Congress of Criminology.
Glover, E. (I954), " Team-Research in Delinquency.
A Psycho-Analytical Commentary." Brit. J.
Delinq. 4, I73. Glueck, E. (1952), " Predicting Juvenile Delinquency."
Brit. J. Delinq. 2, 275. Glueck, Sheldon and Eleanor (I950), Unraveling
Juvenile Delinquency. Commonwealth Fund, N.Y. Goddard, H. H. (I926), Feeble-Mindedness: Its Causes
and Consequences. Macmillan, N.Y. Hare, E. H. (1952), " The Ecology of Mental Disease."
J. Mental Science. 98, 592. Healy, W. and Bronner, A. (I936), New Light on Delin-
quency and its Treatment. Yale University Press. Kuper, L. (Ed.) (I953), Living in Towns. Cresset Press.
Lange, J. (1929), Crime as Destiny. Allen & Unwin. Leeson, C. (1917), The Child and the War. King. Lewin, K. (1947), in Newcomb et al. Readings in Social
Psychology. Holt.
Mannheim, H. (I948), Juvenile Delinquency in an English Middletown. Kegan Paul.
Mays, J. B. (I952), " A Study of a Delinquent Community." Brit. J. Delinq. 3, 5.

Mental Deficiency Committee, Report of. (Wood Report) (I929). H.M.S.O.
Morris, N. R. (I95i), The Habitual Criminal. Longmans
Green. Pearce, J. D. W. (I952), Juvenile Delinquency. Cassell. Prison Commissioners- for I949, Report of (I950).
H.M.S.O., Cmd. 8o88.
Reiwald, P. (I949), Trs. T. E. James. Society and its
Criminals. Heinemann.
Scott, P. D. (I950), " Public Opinion and Juvenile
Delinquency." Brit. J. Delinq. 1, 56. Sessions Hodge, R., Walter, V. J. and Grey, Walter W.
(1953), " Juvenile Delinquency. An Electro-
physiological, Psychological and Social Study." Brit. J. Delinq. 3, I55. Shaw, C. R. and McKay, H. D. (I942), Juvenile Delinquency and Urban Areas. Chicago University
Press.
Sheldon, W. H. (I949), Varieties of Delinquent Youth
Harper.
Simey, T. S. (I949), Contributor to Why Delinquency ?
Spencer, J. C. (not yet published), Crime and the Services.
Kegan Paul.
Stafford-Clark, D., Pond, Desmond and Lovett Doust,
J. W. (I95I), " The Psychopath in Prison." Brit.
J. Delinq. 2, 117.
Stott, D. H. (I950), Delinquency and Human Nature. Carnegie U.K. Trust.
Sutherland, E. H. (I947), Principles of Criminology.
Thrasher, F. M. (I936), The Gang. Chicago University
Press. Trenaman, J. (1952), Out of Step. Methuen. Whelan, Lorna (195I), " Aggressive Psychopathy in
One Pair of Uniovular Twins." Brit. J. Delinq.
2, 130. Why Delinquency ? The Case for Operational Research.
(I949). Contributions by J. Bowlby, H. Mann-
heim, T. S. Simey. N.A.M.H. Winnicott, D. W. (I943),. " Delinquency Research."
New Era. 24, 65. Wofinden, R. C. (1950), Problem Families in Bristol.
Cassell.

Eugenics Review, VoL XLVI, No. 1

