P. K. WHELPTON
B.S. (Cornell), Director, Scripps Foundation for Research in Population Problems
CLYDE V. KISER
Ph.D., Milbank Memorial Fund
Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertility

SUMMARY OF CHIEF FINDINGS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE STUDIES *

Purpose, Scope and Methods of the Study

The specific aims and scope of the study

T HE PURPOSE, SCOPE, and methods of developed with the discussion and field experi-

the Indianapolis Study have been des- mentation which went on over a period of two

cribed in published articles. Briefly stated, years during 1938-40. They were finally set by

two types of situations, existing during the the decision to try to test twenty-three hypo-

late thirties, prompted the study. One was the theses concerning the relation of fertility plan-

generally low level of birth rates of the period, ning and size of planned family to given social

especially in cities. It was believed that further and psychological factors. Altogether, six

knowledge ofthe social and psychological factors separate schedules and questionnaires were

affecting fertility would be needed if this country developed, which provided for upward of

were ever to attempt any form of legislation 1,000 specific items of information, most of

designed to encourage larger families. The other them being pertinent to one or more of the

situation was the existing status of research in twenty-three hypotheses.

differential fertility. Previous studies of data of The study was conducted in Indianapolis in

the census type had indicated the relation of 1941. Data for testing the hypotheses were

fertility to such factors as region, rural-urban obtained from an adjusted sample of 1,444

residence, colour, nativity, occupation, educa- "relatively fecund" couples with the following

tion, and other measures of socio-economic characteristics: husband and wife native white,

status. These had been followed by a series of both Protestant, both finished at least the eighth

studies which indicated that the observed group grade, married during 1927-1929, neither pre-

differences in fertility had arisen almost viously married, husband under forty and wife

altogether from group differences in age under thirty at marriage, and residents in a

at marriage and in prevalence and effective- large city most of the time since marriage.

ness of contraceptive practice rather than Couples with these characteristics were located

from group differences in fecundity-the physiological capacity to reproduce. It was

by means of a preliminary Household Survey of virtually all white households in Indianapolis.

realized, however, that contraception is only the means of family limitation, and that the next step might well be that of trying to investigate the social and psychological factors affecting resort to contraception and the size of the
planned family.

Chief Findings of the Study
The facts of chief significance that were learned from the Indianapolis Study are discussed briefly under three headings: (A) Household Survey data on religion and fertility; (B) contraception, fecundity, and fertility, and (C)

*This shortened version of the summary of the findings hypotheses on the relation of social and psycho-

of the Indianapolis Survey is reprinted from the Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly (July 1958, 36, 3) by permission of the authors and of the editors of the Quarterly.

logical factors to fertility planning status and size of planned family. It will be noted that one

3S
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1959, 51, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cannot find data on any of these three topics in (B) Contraception, fecundity andfertility

reports of the United States census of popula- Virtually all of the 1,444 "relatively fecund"

tion. Except in a recent sample survey the Census couples reported some experience with contracep-

Bureau has collected information regarding tion. The proportions were 98 per cent for the

religion only in the census of religious organiza- 1,444 "relatively fecund" couples, and 64 per

tions. It has never asked questions regarding cent for the 533 "relatively sterile" couples.

contraception, attitudes, or psychological charac- About 70 per cent of the "relatively fecund"

teristics.

couples began contraception before the first

pregnancy and an additional 21 per cent began

(A) Household survey data on religion andfertility

before the second pregnancy. Over one-fourth (28 per cent) of the "relatively fecund" couples

Of the 41,498 native-white unbroken first were classified as "number and spacing of preg-

marriages with wives fifteen to forty-four years nancies planned" in that (a) they had planned

of age in the Indianapolis Household Survey, all of their pregnancies by stopping contracep-

80 per cent were Protestant unions, 10i8 per tion in order to conceive or (b) they had practised

cent were Catholic unions, 5-8 per cent were contraception regularly since marriage, and, pre-

Protestant-Catholic mixed marriages, 1 per sumably in consequence, had no pregnancy. An

cent were Jewish unions, and 2'3 per cent were additional 14 per cent of the couples were classi-

of other or unknown combinations. The fertility fied as "number planned" in that they planned

rates were highest for the Catholic couples and the last pregnancy in the manner described

lowest for the Jewish. The fertility rate standar- above but had one or more previous pregnancies

dized for age was about 18 per cent higher for under other circumstances. Thus some 42 per

Catholics than for Protestants. It was about 25 cent of the "relatively fecund" couples were

per cent lower for Jews than for Protestants. "planned families" as defined in the Study

The fertility rate was relatively low for ("number and spacing planned" and "number

Protestant-Catholic mixed marriages. These planned" combined). The proportion of"planned

marriages were about 10 per cent less fertile families" in the group was enhanced intention-

than Protestant unions and 23 per cent less ally by the restriction of the sample to native-

fertile than Catholic unions. However, they were white Protestant couples of at least complete

about 21 per cent more fertile than Jewish grade-school education, and residents of Indiana-

unions.

polis or another large city most of the time since

Nearly three-fifths of the Protestant-Catholic marriage.

mixed marriages involve Catholic wives and As indicated above, a high proportion of the

two-fifths involved Protestant wives. However, couples were "relatively sterile" according to the

the fertlity rates for these two sub-divisions criteria that were used. Over one-fourth (27 per

were virtually the same.

cent or 533) of the 1,977 couples were classified

The higher fertility rate for the Catholic than as relatively sterile. This proportion was not

for the Protestant unions persisted at each level found to vary systematically by socio-economic

of education and rental value of the dwelling status.

unit, except possibly at the lowest rental-value An attempt was made to estimate the relative

levels. The range of the variations in fertility influence of impaired fecundity and deliberate

was wider, and the inter-class differences in family limitation in reducing the fertility of the

fertility by rental value of the home were 1,977 couples below the "biological potential."

sharper, for the Protestant unions than for the ". . . High, medium, and low estimates of normal

Catholic unions. Nevertheless, the general fecundity are obtained by utilizing, respectively,

pattern of variation was much the same for the experience of the most fecund 60 per cent, 75

the two religions. Among both groups fertility per cent, and 85 per cent of the couples." ". . .

was inversely related to rental value of the The medium estimate of the normal reproduc-

home except in the top rental-value levels where tive ability of the couples in this study during the

the relationship became direct.

twelve to fifteen years since marriage is a birth

36

SOCIAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY

rate of 6,325 per 1,000. Impairments would have partly because during the 1930s a substantial

lowered this rate to 4,594 (a reduction of 27-4 proportion of the users of this method were mis-

per cent) if no control measures had been used. informed as to what was the safe part of the

If all couples had been normal (or above) in cycle.

fecundity, contraception and abortion would have caused the birth rate to be 2,074, or 67-2
per cent below the estimated normal capacity. Actually, because of impairments and deliberate control, the birth rate was 1,699, or 73 1 per cent below capacity. In other words, partly because of defects in the reproducive system, but primarily because of contraception and illegal abortion, the number of births to couples studied was only 26-9 per cent of the number that could have occurred if all of the couples had been normal (or above) in fecundity."
The use and effectiveness ofspecific methods of
contraception was described by Westoff, Herrera, and Whelpton as follows:

(C) Findings from hypothesis testing A rather arbitrary classification of the twenty-
three hypotheses under five categories is shown in Table 1. Under each category the hypotheses are listed in the order in which they will be considered in the report. An effort has been made to indicate in applicable cases (a) the direction (i.e. direct or inverse) of the relationship found between the variable dealt with in the hypothesis and both fertility-planning status and size of the "number and spacing planned" family, and (b) whether or not the findings support the hypothesis. It should be emphasized that "support" of the hypothesis does not necessarily mean scientific confirmation, but merely that the

Condom and some kind of douche used separately or together account for approximately 72 per cent of all exposure with contraception for the
total group studied. Diaphragm and jelly, which

direction of the relationship found is or tends to be the same as that hypothesized. The table provides inadequate indication of either the quality

accounts for about 7 per cent of all contraceptive of the data or of the strength or consistency of

exposure, tends to be used later in the marriage the relationships found. However, a few cases of

period than condom and douche. There is a definite increase in the use of more effective methods over the marriage period, although over

especially inadequate data are noted, and the term "partially" supported is used for cases in

35 per cent of the couples were using compara- which the relationship is weak, not complete, or

tively ineffective methods after twelve to fifteen is known to arise almost entirely from the in-

years of marriage. The belief that a method offered "reliability" is
the chief reason for using a method and for changing from one method to another.

fluence of another variable.
Cases of "no support" of the hypothesis might arise from finding no relationship at all (indicated

For "relatively fecund" couples using contracep- by "O" in columns 4 and 5), or a relationship of

tion "always", contraception in general is 92 per the direction opposite that hypothesized. The

cent effective from the point of view of the reduction in uncontrolled fertility.
Individual method of contraception vary widely

report of "zero" relationship does not necessarily mean that none really exists, but simply that

in their effectiveness. They range from the highly none was found in this study.

effective methods of diaphragm and jelly, condom, and condom combined with douche to the least

Status and Security

effective method of the safe period, suppository, Socio-Economic Status. The first hypothesis

and douches. These differences support, in general, listed is "The higher the socio-economic status,

the results of previous studies on this subject. the higher the proportion of couples practising

It should be noted, however, that suppository contraception effectively and the smaller the

and douche (by themselves) reduced greatly the planned families." As expected from previous

risk of conception. The most effective method- studies, the first part of this hypothesis is defin-

diaphragm andjelly-had an "effectiveness ratio" itely borne out, for the proportion of couples

of 99 5 per cent before the first pregnancy and practising contraception effectively tends to in-

95*7 per cent after the first pregnancy. For all crease rather sharply and consistently with rising

douches used singly the corresponding ratios socio-economic status. The second part of the

were 86-6 per cent and 817 per cent. The effec- hypothesis-positing an inverse relation of

tiveness of rhythm (or safe period) was lower fertility to socio-economic status among planned

37

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE 1
INDIANAPOLIS STUDY HYPOTHESES CLASSIFICATION AND RESULTS OF ANALYSES1

HYPO- PUB-
THESIS LISHED
CLASS AND SUBJECT OF HYPOTHESIS NUMBER ARTICLE NUMBER

(1) (2) (3)

I. Status and Security Socio-Economic Status Economic Insecurity Economic Tension

3 IX 2 XI 1 XXIII

II. Community and Family Background Family and Childhood Situations Residence and Migration History Doubling-Up of Families Health of Wife and Husband Health of Children

12 XXVIII 11 XVI 4 None' 21 XIII 22 XIII

III. Interest in Home and Children Liking for Children Parental Preference Regarding Sex of Children Children Wanting Brothers and Sisters

5 10 6

XXIX XIV
XXXI

Reasons for Second Child: Belief "Only Child" Handicapped Desire To Insure Against Childlessness

8 XXXI 9 XXXI

IV. Personality Characteristics Personal Inadequacy Feeling Children Interfere With Personal Freedom Ego-Centred Interest in Children Fear of Pregnancy

16 XVII 7 XXVII 18 XVIII 23 XIX

Rationality ofBehavior: Tendency to Plan Interest in Religion Adherence to Traditions Conformity to Group Patterns

17 XII 15 X 14 XV 13 XXVIII

V. Marital Adjustment and Husband-Wife
Dominance Marital Adjustment Husband-Wife Dominance

20 19

VII VII

DIRECTION OF RELATION FOUND
Size of Fertility- ComPlanning pletely Status PI. Fam.
(4) (5)

++
--+

ii ±+ ++-

0 DNA DNA

+ + +

DNA + DNA +

__ -+ ++_

+-+ -+ i±

++ 00

HAS THE HYPOTHES
BEEN SUPPORTED

Fertility- Size of Planning Completely Status PI. Fam.
(6) (7)

Yes No No Yes
No' No'

Partially Partially
No' No'

Partially Partially
No' Nos

No Partially DNA Partially DNA Partially

DNA Partially DNA Partially

No No
Partially Partially

Partially
No
Partially Partially

Partially Partially Partially Partially Partially Partially Partially Partially

Yes Partially
No" No'

"Symbols: + = Direct relation with hypothesis variable (Col. 4-5). - = Inverse relation with hypothesis variable (Col. 4-5). 0 = No relation with hypothesis variable (Col. 4-5). DNA= Does not apply (Col. 4 and 6).

'Results believed to be spurious because of selective factors.
'Data on health very inadequate. 'Some results found on reformulated hypothesis.

38

SOCIAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY

families-is not supported. As expected, the ated with economic security, or, as the hypothesis

familiar inverse relation of fertility to socio- states, inversely associated with feeling of

economic status is rather sharply manifested for economic insecurity. This relationship is main-

the total sample of 1,444 "relatively fecund" tained, but to a smaller degree, when socio-

couples. It is also found to some extent within economic status is held constant.

the "number planned" group considered separ- Economic Tension. The hypothesis [1] labelled

ately. Within the "'number and spacing planned" "economic tension" was phrased "The greater

group, however, the opposite type of relation is the difference between the actual level of living

found. The fertility rates for this group are and the standard of living desired, the higher the

relatively low, but they tend to be directly instead proportion of couples practising contraception

of inversely related to socio-economic status. effectively and the smaller the planned families."

This direct relation is most sharply manifested Actually the results tend to yield the opposite

when husband's income is used as the measure of types of relationship, but there is also good

socio-economic status, but it is also found rather evidence of the existence of selective factors in

consistently in classifications by rental value of the measures used.

the home, net worth, occupation, education, and An effort was made to get at the difference

score on Chapin's Social Satus Scale.

between actual and desired level ofliving through

The "number and spacing planned" couples two types of approach-the quantitative and the

are highly homogeneous with respect to success qualitative. The quantitative approach was that

in preventing unwanted pregnancies. The group of comparing what the couples had with what

is composed (a) of couples who practised contra- they wanted with respect to three items: income,

ception regularly after marriage and had no home and automobile. Thus, certain sections of

pregnancies, and (b) of couples whose every the schedules provided data on family income,

pregnancy was deliberately planned by stopping value or rental value of home, and purchase

contraception in order to conceive. Hence, the price of the car if a car was owned. Other sections

factor of differential prevalence and effectiveness furnished the replies of wives and husbands to

of contraceptive practice (the factor underlying such questions as how much income the family

the general inverse relation of fertility to socio- would need in order to live in a satisfactory man-

economic status) is removed for this group. ner, how much they would have to pay to buy or

Economic Security. The next hypothesis is: rent a house in which they would like to live,

"The greater the feeling of economic insecurity, and how much they would have to pay for the

the higher the proportion of couples practising automobile that they would like to own. In each

contraception effectively and the smaller the case the amount of the desired item was coded

planned families." The classifications by feeling as a percentage of the actual.

of economic security are based mainly upon the The qualitative data were the multiple-choice

multiple-choice replies of wives and husbands to replies, ranging from "very much" to "very

a series of questions about confidence in meeting little", to questions regarding amount of addi-

future expenses, frequency of facing the possibi- tional income needed, interest in having a better

lity of husband's pay cut or unemployment, and home, and interest in having a car or better car.

the like.

With both types of data the degree of econo-

The first part of the hypothesis is not borne mic tension (i.e. the extent of the difference

out by the data. Among the couples studied, the between actual level of living and standard of

effective practice of contraception is directly as- living desired) is inversely related to socio-

sociated with economic security rather than with economic status. This is true despite the fact that

economic insecurity, but this relation virtually the quantitative data manifest no tendency for

disappears when socio-economic status is held the poorer people to be unrealistic in their state-

constant. The second part of the hypothesis is ments regarding what they wanted. Nevertheless,

supported by the data. The size of "planned the owner of a second-hand car bought for a few

families" and particularly the size of "number hundred dollars could quite reasonably-and

and spacing planned" families is directly associ- frequently did-express a desire for an automo-

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

bile costing two or three times this amount. This almost always placed them in a higher "tension" category than, say, persons who owned a Cadillac that was purchased new. Thus the groups with high economic "tension" are weighted with couples of low socio-economic status. This probably helps to account for the failure of the data to support the first part of the hypothesis-the higher the degree of economic tension the larger the proportion of couples practising contraception effectively.
It was noted above that within the "number and spacing planned" group, fertility is directly associated with the socio-economic status. Selection of this type should operate towards support of the second part of the hypothesis the greater the difference between the actual and desired levels of living the smaller the planned family. However, it seems reasonably sure that another type ofselection affects the classifications by economic tension, for couples with large families would tend to be the ones stating that they need more income. Since they need room for children they would also tend especially to think in terms of a larger house and hence a more expensive house. Selection of this type probably accounts partly for the observed direct (rather than inverse) relation of "economic tension", as measured, to size of planned family. Whatever the reason, it is certain that the measures of the difference between actual and desired levels of living which were used in the study were far from adequate. The hypothesis appears important on logical grounds; it is to be hoped that satisfactory measures can be developed for testing it in future studies.
Community and Family Background
Family and Childhood Situations. Hypothesis 12 states "Family and childhood situations and attitudes affect the proportion of couples practising contraception effectively and the size of the planned families." The "faniily and childhood situations" relate to the parental homes of the wives and husbands interviewed and include such items as "by whom reared", "parents' marital history", "parents' fertility", "happiness of parents", and extent to which parents encouraged the wives and husbands interviewed to have more children.

Kantner and Potter first concentrated on one of these components, and analyzed the relation of
"parents' fertility" to the fertility of the couples in the Indianapolis Study. Previous studies, in-
cluding a recent one by Berent, had indicated sharp relations between fertility of parents and fertility of offspring. However, Kantner and Potter found that:
Among the Indianapolis couples the relationship between the fertility of the older and younger generation is negligible except perhaps in the case of couples originating from families of identical size. Even in the latter instance, however, less than 10 per cent of the variation in the fertility of the younger generation is attributable to the size of the family of origin. Except among the efficient planners, what relationship there is appears to be partially dependent upon differences in socioeconomic status. Thus we have in the case of the present relationship, a hypothesis of low predictive value so far as the Indianapolis data are concerned.
The authors further stated:
It would certainly be unwarranted to conclude that the relationship in question is negligible under all conditions. Where a greater range in the fertility of both the older and younger generations is found, the influence of the parental generation on the succeeding one might be more evident. Related to this is the likelihood that if couples even less efficient at contraception than those in our inefficient planner subsample were included, a greater continuity of family size pattern would be apparent. Finally, the couples taken into the Indianapolis Study were chosen in such a way as to maximize differences between the two generations: for example, many were of rural background but no strictly rural couples were sampled; many had parents with less than eight years of education, yet no couples with so little education were admitted to the sample, and so on.
With respect to the more general factor of childhood situations, Potter and Kantner stated:
To test the hypothesis that childhood experiences influence fertility, several types of information were collected about the family of origin in addition to its size. These may be classified as those dealing with (a) the affectional tone of the home (e.g. happiness of children, happiness of parents) and the difficulties encountered by the parents in raising their children (b) the extent to which parents actively encouraged their children to have families of their own, and (c) the structural characteristics of the family of origin (e.g. marital history of parents, ordinal position and number of siblings, occupation, and education of parents). Although there is much that is interesting in these data, no association between them and either

40

SOCIAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY

fertility or fertility planning has been found. This lation of economic security to the size of com-

negative result is especially true for the items relating to the assessment of childhood and parental encouragements to family formation (a and b above). Regarding the structural charac-

pletely planned families was conspicuous and quite independent of socio-economic status. Nevertheless, the central problem of a future

teristics, couples reared in broken homes or reared investigation might well be that of trying to

by persons other than their biological parents secure a better understanding of the factors

exhibit above-average fertility. Examined within socio-economic categories, however, these differences tend to disappear.

underlying differential fertility according to socio-economic status and especially the role of

Reasons for so many negative findings are not psychological factors.

difficult to find. During the time that elapses As indicated in previous critiques, the scope of

between childhood and marriage, early experiences become entangled with a multitude of other influences, the disentangling of which poses formidable problems in a nonlongitudinal study.

the Indianapolis Study was too wide for adequate treatment. There were twenty-three hypotheses, each of which was concerned with the relation of

Even if full information were available on all sig- a given social or psychological factor to effective-

nificant intervening influences, the small size of ness of contraceptive practice and size of planned

the Indianapolis sample and the frequently skewed response distributions would tend to frustrate analysis. Other problems probably arise because

family. Thus when we say that the scope of the Indianapolis Study was too broad we mean that

childhood is recalled so selectively. This does not too many social and psychological factors were

mean, however, that future research should ignore included for investigation.

the childhood milieu. With the aid of more appropriate study designs certain early influences may yet appear as important determinants of fertility.

2. The dependent variables: Effectiveness of contraceptive practice and size of planned families

Methodological Lessons of the Indianapolis Study In our opinion, the measures of fertility-plan-

Four broad types of "lessons" are discussed: ning status and size of planned family did not

those concerning (1) the independent variables; pose problems comparable with those associated

(2) the dependent variables; (3) the size and with the independent variables.

character of the sample; and (4) the general 3. Size and character of the sample

design of the Study.

The Indianapolis Study sample has frequently

1. The independent variables

proved to be too small to afford good tests of the

In a study entitled "Social and Psychological hypotheses considered. A reduction in scope of

Factors Affecting Fertility" the social and psy- the study should make it possible to have not

chological factors were, in the nature of the case, only better data but also larger samples.

assumed to be the independent variables and 4. General design of study

fertility behaviour was considered to be the de- The attempt to study social and psychological

pendent variable. It was realized from the begin- factors affecting fertility by the actual collection

ning, of course, that in social science there is an of data at only one point in the married life

interaction of variables and this matter will be (twelve to fifteen years after marriage), raises a

discussed later. For the present, the chief lesson variety of problems. First of all is the question

to be emphasized concerns the generally closer of memory. To what extent can the person

relationship of fertility to broad social factors remember the details regarding, say, contracep-

(including the economic) than to the psychologi- tive practice since marriage, attitudes towards

cal factors. More specifically, the relation of successive pregnancies, and attitudes of the past

fertility and fertility-planning status to socio- twelve to fifteen years about a variety of other

economic status was consistently sharp. The things? In the second place, the dependence on

observed relation offertility behaviour to most of retrospective or ex post facto data frequently

the psychological characteristics considered was makes it difficult to differentiate between cause

generally much less pronounced or less regular, and effect. This deficiency was illustrated par-

especially when socio-economic status was held ticularly by the data regarding preference as to

constant.

the sex of children, by the relation of economic

There was one outstanding exception. The re- security to fertility among "excess fertility"

4'

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

couples, and by the data on "economic tension". Princeton University. It is sponsored by the

An indicated lesson of the previous condition Milbank Memorial Fund, with grants from the

is the need for a study that will utilize changes Carnegie Corporation of New York, The Popu-

in time as the fundamental units of classification. lation Council, and the Milbank Memorial Fund.

A longitudinal study of some type is rather clearly indicated. If a study can "catch" couples before they are married or before they have a child of a given order, it has a good chance to overcome some of the problems associated with the use of retrospective data.

The basic purpose ofthis study is to learn some
of the social and psychological factors affecting
the occurrence of and the time required for third births among couples who recently had their second births. Instead of being restricted to highly homogeneous couples in a single city, the

Application of "Lessons" in New Studies

new study purports to be representative of all

Several studies of fertility have profited to native-white two-parity couples in seven of the

some extent bythe experience of the Indianapolis eight metropolitan areas of the United States

Study. Many of the questions and procedures with a population of two million or more in

developed for the Indianapolis Study were used 1950. The study attempts to avoid the biases

in subsequent investigations in Puerto Rico, inherent in ex post facto data by collecting some

India, and the United States.

of the basic data before the event of the preg-

One study in particular has been based upon nancy for the third child. It is partially longitu-

the experience of the Indianapolis Study and in dinal in design in that second visits will be made

fact is frequently referred to as the successor to some two and a half years after the first visit. It

the Indianapolis Study. This is the Study of is possible that additional visits will be made

Social and Psychological Factors Affecting The still later. It is hoped that by constant improve-

Future Fertility of Two-Child Families. This ments in study design we may eventually have a

study is being carried out under the technical "breakthrough" of new knowledge in the com-

direction of the Office of Population Research of plex field of motivations regarding size of family.

42

