JAN A. BOOK,
M.D., Ph.D., Institute for Medical Genetics, University of Uppsala, Sweden.
Some Mechanisms of Chromosome Variations and their Relation to
Human Malformations

Introduction

matics will remain and many other methods and

IN MEDICAL GENETICS we are concerned special techniques will be more or less subsidiary.

with genetical material that can be transmitted This might be useful to remember each time a

from parents to children and cause individual new approach or a new wonderful technical

deviations of development, differentiation and device, "once and for all, is going to solve all our

function ofsuch a significance that conventionally genetical problems", be it biochemistry, chromo-

we would call them diseases or defects.

somes, electronic computer systems or some-

This common denominator in basic etiology, thing else.

very broadly speaking, exerts its important The improvement of cytological techniques

influence on the individual as well as on the since the early 1950s has increased significantly

population. Phrased differently, the two foci of the efficiency of human chromosome analysis.

interest and concern are the patient with his Pioneered in Sweden, England and France by the

personal medical problem and the population teams of Albert Levan in Lund, Charles Ford at

with its epidemiological problems presented as a Harwell, and Jerome Lejeune in Paris, this field

broad spectrum of genetical diseases or defects. of inquiry into human variability was raised from

Scientific inquiry into a field of such enormous a somewhat speculative stage to the level of exact

diversity and complexity, has necessarily to rely observation.

on a large number of special techniques and, of In human pathology and clinical medicine the

course, on longitudinal as well as cross-sectional associations between new cytological facts and

collaborative efforts of human minds.

deviations from normal development and func-

Emphasis and interest with respect to the tion, correctly interpreted, will increase our

manifold problems in human genetics has shifted understanding of a large number of hitherto

from time to time and will continue to do so. Up obscure pathogenetic events.

to about fifteen years ago the important, and frequently the only, tool used by human geneticists was statistics, eminently introduced by
Francis Galton in the nineteenth century and further developed by several British scientists,
such as Karl Pearson, R. A. Fisher, J. B. S. Haldane and L. S. Penrose.
The prime importance of statistics and mathe-

The facts which have been established up to
the present moment have less importance in terms of general biological principles because the types of chromosome variations, now observed in man, have been well known to geneticists for decades. However, the fact that it is now possible
to demonstrate that man is subject to the same type of variation represents a significant achieve-

* The Galton Lecture delivered in London on May 20th, 1964.
This paper was based on observations made by several staff-members who participated in our research programme "Clinical Cytogenetics" during 1957-64.

ment.
The main part of the data which have accumulated since 1959 are related to mental defects and physical malformations. From this

I ,I
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1964, 56, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

field of research it is now possible to give a series correlated with chromosome length a break-

of examples of the correspondence between down of this mechanism more frequently affects

chromosome abnormalities in man and those the shortest chromosomes of a given set.

previously known in a multitude of other organ- During the first meiotic metaphase such un-

isms. The developmental effects of a change of paired chromosomes, i.e. univalents, will not be

the chromosome constitution, on the other properly orientated on the spindle but rather

hand, will vary greatly between different species. distributed randomly in the cell. Therefore,

In the past five years, a very large number of during the following anaphase-telophase, either

papers on human chromosomes have been pub- one, two or no univalents will be included in the

lished. This makes necessary a drastic reduction daughter cells.

of the examples in this presentation. Moreover, Omitting the fine details of the two meiotic

I will mainly rely on examples drawn from work divisions, such an accident in human gonads will

in our own laboratories, and variations of the produce pre-gametic cells with twenty-two,

sex chromosomes will not be included.

twenty-three and twenty-four chromosomes.

Assuming that all of these cells are capable of

Heteroploidy and Aneuploidy

developing into functioning egg cells or sperms,

The addition of one or several chromosomes to the background is set for the occurrence of

the normal diploid set-in man twenty-two pairs exceptional zygotes containing one additional

of autosomes plus the XX or XY sex chromo- chromosome, homologous to a certain pair, or

somes-will generally have significant effects. zygotes missing one of the chromosomes of the

With the exception of polyploidy in many plants, same pair. In other words we should expect

viability and fertility suffer varying degrees of zygotes with forty-seven chromosomes, being

reduction down to zygotic lethality and sterility trisomic and with forty-five chromosomes, being

respectively. Abnormalities of morphology and monosomic.

function are common.

The loss of a whole chromosome is likely to

The chromosome complement of the gamete is have a lethal effect before birth. So far no indivi-

haploid (x) and of the zygote diploid (2 x), i.e. in dual with an unequivocal autosomal monosomy

man twenty-three and forty-six chromosomes, has been reported in man. On the other hand, we

respectively. In plants, it is fairly general that the have several examples of presumably trisomic

addition to the zygote of one or more complete conditions. The effect of such an added package

genoms (= x) causes less disturbance as com- of genetical information, contained in a chromo-

pared with the addition of an odd number of some, is drastic and much more so than in plants

chromosomes. The former conditions are bal- and lower animals. The internal homeostasis is

anced, being multiples of x, the latter are un- thrown off balance, resulting in a multitude of

balanced, i.e. 2x- [ ..... (x- 1) ]. It could be morphological and functional abnormalities.

that a general increase of the dose-effects of all There are now three generally recognised so-

genes has a small or no negative effect while an called trisomic syndromes in man, involving

increase of the number of certain blocks of genes chromosomes belonging to the groups (13-15),

and not others would disturb a delicate bio- (17-18) or (21-22), alternatively named D, E and

chemical equilibrium much more. However, the G.

margin of safety appears to be narrower in The last mentioned one, conventionally called

animals. This is evident in vertebrates and parti- trisomy 21 is associated with the well-known

cularly in mammals where even a low degree of Down's syndrome. It is the most common

polyploidy is deleterious. Triploidy is tolerated aneuploid condition observed in infants, with an

in Anura and Urodela but very likely lethal or incidence of 1/500-1/1,000 and the extra

sub-lethal in mammals.

chromosome is one of the small acrocentrics

The simplest type of an accident leading to a (Figure 1).

change of the chromosome number occurs when The other two syndromes are apparently quite

two homologous chromosomes fail to pair rare, at least in infants. In the E trisomy syn-

properly during meiosis. As pairing efficiency is dromel a relatively small submetacentric chromo-

I52

CHROMOSOME VARIATIONS AND HUMAN MALFORMATIONS
FIGURE 1 KARYOTYPE OF A MALE PATIENT
WITH DOWN'SSYNDROME. TRISOMY 21 AND 47 CHROMOSOMES
FIGURE 2 KARYOTYPE OF THE E TRISOMY
.l9 o:.;|1SYNDROME

....:c

:.

_. _

!a 31l^: ;g f^X f

0q:

FIGURE 3
KARYOTYPE OF THE D TRISOMY SYNDROME
(after Sergovich3 et al. 1963).

FIGURE 4
KARYOTYPE OF A BOY WITH MICROCEPHALY, IMPAIRED HEARING, VERY LARGE, LOW-SET MALFORMED EARS AND FORE-AURICULAR
PAPILLOMATA
Available data indicate that this might be a trisomy 22 syndrome.

i

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

j2~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~..... .....

E.i ~~~~~~~~~~

..--s m..

..S9

-''......

E~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~m z "X

ii

CHROMOSOME VARIATIONS AND HUMAN MALFORMATIONS
Pl FIGURE 6
A VARIANT KARYOTYPE IN DOWN'S SYNDROME. THE MAJOR PART OF
AN ADDITIONAL CHROMOSOME 21
HAS BEEN TRANSLOCATED TO ONE CHROMOSOME OF THE D GROUP. A
NEW 21 /D CHROMOSOME HAS ORIGI-
NATED BY THIS PROCESS.

FIGURE 7
A VARIANT OF THE D TRISOMY SYNDROME DISPLAYING A NEW
D/D TRANSLOCATION CHROMOSOME

13l

FIGURE 8 A PHENOTYPICALLY-NORMAL WOMAN
WITH A B/G TRANSLOCATION

FIGURE 9
THEORETICAL CHROMOSOME RECOMBINATIONS IN
ISSUES OF THE WOMAN OF FIGURE 8 WITH HER HUSBAND OF A NORMAL KARYOTYPE
The index case of this family was a boy with congenital malformations who died at the age of 31 months. His karyotype corresponded to recombination 1 in the scheme

iii

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
FIGURE 10
MALFORMATION SYNDROME (le cri du chat)
ASSOCIATED WITH A DEFICIENCY OF THE SHORT ARM OF ONE B CHROMOSOME
FIGURE 11 A. KARYOTYPE OF A 28 YEAR OLD MAN INVESTIGATED BECAUSE OF CLINICAL STERILITY. FORTY-FIVE CHROMOSOMES AND A D/D TRANS-
LOCATION
B, C, E and F. Schematical explanation of pairing and separation of the translocation chromosome and its homologues during the first meiotic division. D. Actual appearance of the trivalent structure
(cf. C) lying below the XY bivalent.
FIGURE 12 VARIATIONS OF THE TRIVALENT STRUCTURE (CF. FIG. 11 D) IN 10 DIFFERENT CELLS DURING THE
FIRST MEIOTIC METAPHASE
For comparison the XY bivalents of the same cells have been included. Photomicrographs
iv

CHROMOSOME VARIATIONS AND HUMAN MALFORMATIONS

some is involved (Figure 2) and in the D impairment, of deafness, impressively large, low-

syndrome2 a medium-sized acrocentric (Figure 3). set malformed ears and fore-auricular papillo-

Up to now twenty-six infants with E and eighteen mata. The karyotype of the boy is shown in

with D trisomy have been reported.

Figure 4.

All three are multiple malformation syn- The apparent clinical and cytogenetical simi-

dromes with overlapping pathological changes. larity between these cases argues against the

However, a number of distinctive signs and presence of an extra Y chromosome. Moreover,

symptoms will, in most cases, make clinical the two girls examined by us displayed normal

differentiation possible.

female genital tracts. The fact that all cytogeneti-

There are some further points of interest with cally investigated parents (of three of the four

respect to the origin of heteroploid conditions in families) had normal karyotypes and the occur-

man. A correlation with above-average maternal rence of two sisters with practically identical

age has been established for the Down's syn- syndromes and karyotypes8 makes it likely that

drome and it is very likely for the D syndrome. the extra chromosome is an additional No. 22

This suggests a connection with the fact that rather than being a heterologous chromosome

meiosis is timed differently in the two sexes. The arisen through structural rearrangements. These

first meiotic prophase of the oocyte lasts from are merely suggestions although interesting

early foetal life until ovulation occurs in the enough to encourage further systematic collection

adult female. This could very well contribute to of data which might eventually make it possible

an increasing risk of chromosomal accidents by to identify a trisomy 22 syndrome.

ageing.

However, aneuploidy could also originate in a Polyploidy and Mixoploidy

different way than through meiotic failure. The simultaneous fusion of the egg nucleus, the

During the first few cell divisions of the zygote the mitotic mechanism might fail in such a way that one daughter cell would become trisomic
and the other one monosomic. Since we have reason to anticipate that monosomic cells would not survive, the final result should be the same, i.e. a trisomic foetus.

sperm nucleus and one retained polar body will give a triploid zygote. We do not know if this simple mechanism operates in man.
Triploid cells have now been recovered from three infants.1621, 22, 23 They were all 2x/3x mosaics. Moreover triploid cells have on several occasions been recovered from aborted foe-

On the basis of general chromosome dynamics tuses.24' 25, 26 It is still doubtful whether or not

one should expect another small acrocentric these foetuses were mosaics. As no observations

trisomy to occur as frequently as the Down's support the explanation that a balanced diploid

syndrome. There is now some evidence suggest- cell could have originated from a triploid one by

ing the existence of this, let us say, trisomy 22 mitosis, we can fairly safely exclude the possi-

condition.

bility that the 2x/3x mosaics developed from

Several cases have been described, having an triploid zygotes.

extra small chromosome of the (21-22-Y) group My earlier suggestion of a normal fusion

but without conclusive signs of Down's syn- between egg and sperm nucleus followed by a

drome4.14. Some of them have undoubtedly an mitotic division into two diploid nuclei, one of

additional Y chromosome making the association which combines with one retained polar body,

with a rather disparate group of clinical syn- thus resulting in one diploid and one triploid

dromes coincidental. Others are still inconclusive nucleus, can now be supplemented through a

or too poorly investigated. However, there is a recent observation by Carr.2 Twins of 10-15 mm

remainder of five cases (three girls and two boys) length from a spontaneous abortion were karyo-

suggesting a trisomy 22 condition. Of these, two typed. Triploid cells were recovered from upper

girls8 and one boy15 have been examined by us. and lower limbs, cord and amniotic membrane

Among a variety of defects, including micro- of one apparently normal embryo. The other

cephaly, displayed by these cases, there is a embryo had been partly destroyed but the

common denominator of significant hearing remains suggested a malformation. The cultured

I ri

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cells had forty-seven chromosomes with D forty-five chromosomes but translocation hetero-

trisomy. These findings suggest a connection zygotes 21/D and D/D who have produced

between twinning and the origin of2x/3x mosaics children with Down's syndrome (Figure 6) and

If a tendency to form monozygotic twins is a the D-trisomy syndrome (Figure 7).

factor in the hypothetical mechanism just Other examples of structural variation are

sketched the result could be either a 2x/3x mosaic deletions and deficiencies, appearing as a shorten-

or a pair of twins, one diploid and the other ing of a chromosome arm. As they represent a

triploid.

loss of genetical information the effect in

Our observations on a 2x/3x mosaic boy have normally diploid organisms is usually deleterious.

shown that from the age of fourteen months to Such deletions and deficiencies may be caused by

4i years the triploid cells decreased in frequency, translocation or inversion processes and by

e.g. in material from skin from 84 to 10 per cent exposure to chemical mutagens or ionizing

and in connective tissue material from 49 to 7 per radiations.

cent. A similar reduction has been observed in Origin by translocation is exemplified by a

long term cell cultures where an abundance of family recently examined in our laboratory.27 The

mitotic irregularities, apparently, is an important mother had a piece of the short arm of a B

cause of cell elimination (Figure 5).

chromosome translocated to a G chromosome

These findings are of particular interest since (Figure 8). She had one son who displayed a

they indicate that the pathological changes multitude of congenital malformations including

occurring in such cases could be caused not only mental defect. He died at the age of 31 months

by the triploidy as a gene dose effect but also, and and was shown to have the major part of the

perhaps rather, by a large scale elimination of short arm of a B chromosome in triplicate.

cells. Such a process is likely to be particularly The different possibilities of chromosome re-

destructive when affecting the central nervous combinations in issues of this woman with her

system.

husband of a normal karyotype is shown in

Further analyses of cultured cells from the Figure 9.

bone marrow (988 cells) a lymph gland (1,029 Curiously enough, while speculating about the

cells) and colon mucosa (361 cells) showed a fate of a zygote of recombination 4 in Figure 9,

prevalence of 5, 6 and 0.3 per cent triploid cells another case21 who was investigated at the same

respectively. The patient was then 4i years old. time proved to have a karyotype of this appear-

Blood cultures continued to produce diploid ance (Figure 10).

balanced cells only. This is further confirmation This patient, a sixteen-months-old girl, dis-

of the mosaic, or, better, mixoploid constitution played a malformation syndrome with the

of this individual. It also supports the hypo- following main features, microcephaly, profound

thesis that a uniformly triploid bone marrow is mental defect, a broad face with a flat nose,

not likely to be compatible with survival.

micro- and retrognathism, hypertelorism, bi-

lateral epicanthus, impaired hearing, marked

Structural Changes

growth retardation and an alien high pitched

A large number of translocations have been wailing cry.

reported. They are probably quite common, but Another most interesting fact is that Lejeune

easy to recognize only when relatively large un- subsequently discovered another three infants

equal parts have been exchanged between two with nearly identical syndromes and, as far as

chromosomes. Translocations lead to the forma- one can judge, with the same B chromosome

tion of new chromosomes which, provided they deficiency.28 Impressed by the cat-like cry of

are monocentric, may be transmitted through these children, probably due to a malformation

several generations by phenotypically normal of the larynx, he named this syndrome "le cri du

heterozygotes. These translocation heterozy- chat".

gotes may run risks as high as 50 per cent of With a number of different techniques it is

having abnormal offspring.

possible to bring out in several chromosomes

Examples of this mechanism are women with what are probably secondary constrictions. One

I54

CHROMOSOME VARIATIONS AND HUMAN MALFORMATIONS

such constriction appears to be located in the The meiotic preparations showed an easily

short arm of one of the B chromosomes. recognized large trivalent association at dia-

Chromosome constrictions represent weak points kinesis and first metaphase (cf. Figures 11 and 12).

and are more susceptible to some agents causing The detailed observations on the mitotic as well

breaks. This might explain why a deficiency can as the meiotic chromosome strongly indicated

appear as nearly identical in several unrelated that the new large metacentric chromosome

individuals.

originated through a translocation between two

Moreover, these cases open another interesting heterologous chromosomes of the D group and

perspective. Should this explanation be correct, very likely between numbers 13 and 15.

specific deficiency syndromes are to be expected The probable segregation of the chromosomes

following exposure of the gonads to a variety of to the secondary spermatocytes is shown in

chemical mutagens, including pharmaceutical Figure 11. One class of cells will receive an un-

preparations. It is also possible that some chemi- balanced haploid set of chromosomes and the

cals have a specific affinity to chromosome con- other a balanced one.

strictions. If so, we would have a new chain of A similar or perhaps identical translocation

events leading to special malformation syndromes chromosome has been described earlier3l132,33 in

in man.

connection with a variant of the D trisomy syn-

drome mentioned in this paper. Female D/D

Meiotic Irregularities

translocation heterozygotes have produced child-

Human cytogenetics would remain seriously ren with this syndrome, with translocation

handicapped, should it rest on the observation of heterozygosity and with normal karyotypes. On

mitotic chromosomes only. Fortunately, im- the other hand, two out of five D/D males had

provements in cytological as well as surgical each only one normal child. Available data also

biopsy techniques have now made it possible to indicate that children with the translocation procede with examinations of the meiosis in variant of a trisomy syndrome who have in-

men'1,29. In women it is a little more complicated
and has to be reserved for a few selected cases.

herited the translocation chromosome, rarely have it from their fathers. Our observations offer

Meiotic investigations are essential for the some further evidence for the existence of a real

proper identification of most chromosome varia- D trisomy syndrome and suggest that transmis-

tions. This is based on the fact that homologous sion of translocation chromosomes occurs

chromosomes pair and exchange parts during mainly through females due to haplontic

meiotic prophase. Furthermore, in the following lethality and reduced fertility in the male trans-

phases of the two cell divisions, abnormal or location heterozygotes.

additional chromosomes often form character-

istic associations whereby they can be identified Concluding Remarks

as to origin or type of change.

The examples in this presentation were chosen to

This can be exemplified by the findings in' a explain some of the ways in which the recent

patient, selected from our project, on associations advances in human cytogenetics have contributed

between meiotic irregularities and impaired to a better understanding of the origin of con-

fertility in the human male.30 This patient is a genital malformations. I have also tried to

twenty-eight-year-old man who was examined emphasize the close relations with general cyto-

because of a second childless marriage. His genetics. Inherent in some examples were also

spermiogram showed a sperm concentration some indications as to future prospects. A large

considerably below normal, nearly 50 per cent number of individual scientists and research

abnormal sperms and 20 per cent motility only, groups all over the world have contributed to the

two hours after ejaculation. Analyses of mitotic remarkable advances in human cytogenetics made

metaphases showed a chromosome number of since 1956.

forty-five. There were only four chromosomes in

group D but an additional new large metacentric Summary

chromosome (Figare 11).

The development of new techniques since the

I N5

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

early 1950s has increased significantly the
efficiency of human chromosome analysis. This field of inquiry into human variability has now
been raised from a rather speculative stage to the level of exact observations.
In human pathology and clinical medicine the
associations between chromosomal aberrations and deviations from normal development and function, correctly interpreted, has and will increase enormously our understanding of a large
number of hitherto obscure pathogenetic events. The facts which have been established up to
the present moment have considerably less importance in terms of general biological principles because all details of chromosome variation now observed in man have been well known to plant and animal geneticists for decades.
However, the fact that it is now possible to demonstrate objectively that man is subject to the same type of variation represents a significant
achievement. The main part of the data which have been
accumulated since 1959 are related to mental defects and physical malformations. From this field of research it is now possible to give a series of examples of the correspondence between chromosome abnormalities in man and those previously known in a multitude of other organisms. The developmental effects ofa sudden change of the chromosome constitution, on the other hand, will vary enormously between the different species.
The following types of chromosome variation and their significance in human pathology, and in particular for the origin of malformation syndromes, were discussed.
1. Heteroploidy and aneuploidy. Aneuploidy as occurring in Down's syndrome and other malformations. Individuals with a mixture of triploid and diploid cells.
2. Structural variations. Translocations, deficiencies and the origin of new chromosomes. The recently observed deficiency syndrome "le cri du chat" (Book-Lejeune) is of great interest as it is very likely related to the breakage at a secondary constriction located in the short arm of chromosome 4.
3. Meiotic irregularities. Earlier observations were made on mitotic chromosomes. Improved techniques will now extend the observations to

the details of meiosis in the human male. This is exemplified by observations of meiosis in a D/D translocation heterozygote with so far no detectable anomalies except clinical sterility and an abnormal spermiogram.
REFERENCES 1. Edwards, J. H., Harnden, D. G., Cameron, A. M.,
Crosse, V. Mary and Wolff, 0. H. 1960. A new trisomic syndrome. Lancet i, 787-89. 2. Patau, Klaus, Smith, David W., Therman, Eeva, Inhom, Stanley L. and Wagner, Hans P. 1960. Multiple congenital anomaly caused by an extra autosome. Lancet i, 790-93. 3. Sergovich, F., Madronich, J. S., Barr, M. L., Carr, D. H. and Langdon, W. A. 1963. The D trisomy syndrome: A case report with a description of ocular pathology. Canad. med. Ass. J. 89, 151-57. 4. Hayward, M. D. and Bower, B. D. 1960. Chromosomal trisomy associated with the Sturge-Weber syndrome. Lancet ii, 844-46. 5. Turner, Brian and Jennings, A. N. 1961. Trisomy for chromosome 22. Lancet ii, 49-50. 6. Dunn, H. G., Ford, D. K., Auersperg, N. and Miller, J. R. 1961. Benign congenital hypotonia with chromosomal anomaly. Amer. J. Dis. Child. 102, 581. 7. Dunn, Henry G., Ford, Denys K., Auersperg, Nelly and Miller, James R. 1961. Benign congenital hypotonia with chromosomal anomaly. Pediatrics 28, 578-91. 8. Gustavson, K.-H., Hagberg, Bengt, Finley, Sara C. and Finley, Wayne H. 1962. An apparently identical extra autosome in two severely retarded sisters with multiple malformations. Cytogenetics 1, 32-41. 9. Biesele, John J., Schmid, Werner and Lawlis, Marjorie G. 1962. Mentally retarded schizoid twin girls with 47 chromosomes. Lancet i, 403-05. 10. Koulischer, L. and Perier, J. 1962. A propos d'un cas de trisomie 22. Bull. Acad. Med. Beig., S6rie VII, 2, 329-44. 11. Zellweger, H., Mikamo, K. and Abbo, G. 1962. Two cases of multiple malformations with an autosomal chromosomal aberration-partial trisomy D? Helv. Paediat. Acta 17, 290-300. 12. Ferguson, Jean and Pitt, David. 1963. Another child with 47 chromosomes. Med. J. Aust. 1, 545-46. 13. Hall, Bertil. 1963. Mongolism and other abnormalities in a family with trisomy 21-22 tendency. Acta paediatr., Stockh. 146, 77-91.
14. Beoak, W., Begak, M. L., Andrade, J. D. and Manis-
sadjian, A. 1963. Extra acrocentric chromosome in a case of giant cavernous haemangioma with secondary thrombocytopenia. Lancet ii, 468-69. 15. Bo6k, J. A. Unpublished observations. 16. Book, J. A. and Santesson, Berta. 1960. Malformation syndrome in man associated with triploidy (69 chromosomes). Lancet i, 858-59. 17. Bi6k, J. A. and Santesson, Berta. 1960. Further studies in clinical cytogenetics. Acta Univ. lund., ser. 2, 56, 19-20. 18. B6*k, J. A. and Santesson, Berta. 1961. Nuclear sex
in triploid XXY human cell. Lancet ii, 318. 19. B6k, J. A. 1961. Clinical cytogenetics. In: L. Gedda
(Editor) De Genetica Medica, 3, 21-47.

I S6

CHROMOSOME VARIATIONS AND HUMAN MALFORMATIONS

20. Book, J. A., Masterson, J. G. and Santesson, Berta. 1962. Malformation syndrome associated with triploidy-Further chromosome studies of the patient and his family. Acta genet. Basel, 12, 193-201.
21. Book, J. A., Atkins, L. and Santesson, Berta. 1963. Some new data on autosomal aberrations in man. Path. Biol. 11, 1159-62.
22. Ellis, J. R., Marshall, Ruth, Normand, I. C. S. and Penrose, L. S. 1963. Nature 198, 411.
23. Ferrier, P., Ferrier, S., Stalder, G., Biihler, E., Bamatter, F. and Klein, D. 1964. Congenital asymmetry associated with diploid-triploid mosaicism and large satellites. Lancet i, 80-82.
24. Delhanty, Joy D. A., Ellis, J. R. and Rowley, P. T. 1961. Triploid cells in human embryo. Lancet i, 1286.
25. Penrose, L. S. and Delhanty, Joy D. A. 1961. Triploid cell cultures from a macerated foetus. Lancet i, 1261-62.
26. Carr, David H. 1963. Chromosome studies in abortuses and stillborn infants. Lancet ii, 603-06.

27. Gustavson, K.-H., Finley, S. C., Finley, W. H. and Jalling, B. 1964. A 4-5/21-22 chromosomal translocation associated with multiple congenital anomalies. Acta paediatr., Stockh. 53, 172-81.
28. Lejeune, J6rome, Lafourcade, Jacques, Berger, Roland, Vialatte, Jacques, Boeswillwald, Marc, Seringe, Philippe and Turpin, Raymond. 1963. Trois cas de d6l6tion partielle du bras court d'un chromosome 5. C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris. 257, 3098-102.
29. Book, J. A. and Kjessler, B. 1964. Meiosis in the human male. Cytogenetics (in press).
30. Kjessler, B. 1964. Meiosis in a man with a D/D translocation and clinical sterility. Lancet i, 1421.
31. Walker, S. and Harris, R. 1962. Familial transmission of a translocation between two chromosomes of the 13-15 group (Denver Classification). Ann. hum. Genet. 26, 151-62.
32. Oikawa, K., Gromults, J. M. Jr. and Novins, J. 1962. 13-15 trisomy with translocation. Hum. Chrom. Newsl. 7, 11. (Personal communication.).
33. Dill, F. J. and Miller, J. R. 1963. (Quoted by Hamerton et al. 1963 as personal communication.)

THE ECONOMIC JOURNAL

No. 295

SEPTEMER 1964

Vol. LXXIV

I. ARTICLES

INDUCED BIAS IN INNOVATION AND THE THEORY OF DISTRIBUTION

C. KENNEDY

ARE FORMAL WELFARE CRITERIA REQUIRED?

S. K. NATH

LORD PREFERENCE AND LORD FUNDS

C. LLOYD

THE FISCAL ROLE OF THE MARKETING BOARDS IN NIGERIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT,

1947-61

G. K. HELLEINER

INVESTMENT ALLOCATION AND TECHNOLOGICAL CHOICE-A CASE OF COTTON SPINNING

TECHNIQUES

A. S. BHALLA

THE WELFARE AND EMPIRICAL IMPLICATIONS OF MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION

H. DEMSETZ

II. REVIEWS

III. RECENT PERIODICALS AND NEW BOOKS

MACMILLAN & CO. LTD., LONDON, W.C.2

Application for Fellowship to
ROYAL ECONOMIC SOCIETY, the Marshall Library, Sidgwick Avenue, Cambridge

' S7

