THE LAST TEN YEARS

Mrs. Hodson's Record of Work for Eugenics

O NLY one year before celebrating its
twenty-fifth birthday the Eugenics
Society loses, in Mrs. C. B. S.
Hodson, one of the bare half-dozen personalities to which it owes its existence and growth. She entered its service at a time, I92I, when, in common with most similar movements, eugenics was only stirring in its sleep after the anaesthesia of the War. From then until eighteen months ago she was principally responsible, with Major Darwin, for its activities and extraordinary growth, and up to the moment of writing she has played a greater part than any in popularizing eugenics among hundreds of small working-class bodies scattered all over
Great Britain. It was in January I92I that Mrs. Hodson
was appointed as the half-time salaried secretary of the Society; in that year only eleven propaganda meetings were held and inquiries revealed that the local branches of the Society which had at one time or another been created, were now all dead. The REVIEW was published without
interruption, and a few members' meetings were held from time to time. The general financial position of the Society was extremely insecure and certainly did not
permit of any expansion. Mrs. Hodson's first task, therefore, was to create an office and an organization without adequate funds for the purpose. Her genius for persuad-
ing the best out of other people rose to the occasion, and she collected a staff of volun-
tary workers to do all the humdrum,
necessary work of office routine-first of all
women of independent means who came in to do typing, carding, circularizing, and the rest, and then two men, an ex-sea captain
and a business man, who gave up their
scanty spare afternoons and evenings. The Society will never realize, probably, how great have been the money savings effected
by the regular and faithful work, then and

later, of anonymous volunteers, nor what it owes not only to them but to Mrs. Hodson's unusual flair for collecting and making them into a team.
Having thus created an organization, Mrs. Hodson's next task was to utilize it for the three-fold object of securing funds, increasing membership, and of popularizing eugenic ideas. She succeeded in all three, but her greatest success was, without doubt, in the third-and the most important. When the history of the eugenics movement comes to be written her name will come first as the woman who did more than any one to make a eugenist of the man in the street. In I92I, for instance, the Society gave ii propaganda lectures; in the last full year (I93I-2) that number had risen to 2IO* lectures systematically planned to suit their respective audiences and delivered by experienced speakers with a full knowledge of the subject. Mrs. Hodson herself has always given a large proportion of them.
THOSE OUR PROPAGANDA HAS REACHED
THE UNIVERSITIES: the Unions, Student Societies, Hospital Medical Schools.
EDUCATION: Teachers' Training Colleges, Public and Secondary Schools.
RELIGIous BODIES: The Modern Churchmen's Union, Brotherhoods, Sisterhoods, Adult Schools.
PUBLIC AND SOCIAL WORK: the personnel of Local Authorities, Relieving Officers, Rescue Workers, Police Women, Students of Social Work.
CITIZENS: Agricultural Organizations, Rotary Clubs, Labour Clubs, Co-operative Guilds, Women Citizen Societies, Women's Institutes, Scouts and Guides, Boys' and Girls' Clubs.
But the Society was not merely content with this old-fashioned form of propaganda, and adapted the most up-to-date methods of films and wireless to the needs of eugenics.
* This number does not include several addresses, perhaps more important, to the British Association and the British Medical Association.

23

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

It was in the autumn of I925 that the first secured a ' scoop ' in persuading the Royal

eugenic talks were broadcast, and in I926 Agricultural Society-to which we can

the Society acquired its first film, which never be sufficiently grateful-to give

greatly increased propaganda work, for in generous space in the Education section of

addition to its use in Health Exhibitions its annual show. Here we touched our own,

and the like, it was offered free to Picture ready-made public, and for ten hours a day,

Houses. Two reels became necessary, and five days in the year, ' put eugenics across '

went in and out of the office continually. to people who had never heard the word,

This led to the purchase of a second film, but thoroughly believed in the principle.

" Heredity: Master or Servant?" Mrs. But while her main object was always to

Hodson, too, was responsible at about the secure the support of the working classes,

same time for another adaptation of the Mrs. Hodson did not neglect the wealthier

methods of modern publicity, in her groups; and coincident with the first broad-

creation of a " Eugenics Exhibit " which casts-which then reached only the com-

went travelling round with a lecturer- paratively well-to-,do-an appeal was sent

usually herself-to a variety of those out to io,ooo business men. It was followed

popular educational-publicity exhibitions by a second issue the following spring

which have become so common since the (I926), and the net result was a considerable

War. rise in membership and subscriptions.

THE EXHIBIT 'ON THE ROAD'

Even more practical and effective was the persistent 'drive' at the economic factors in

The Exhibit consisted of chicks, rabbit the differential birth rate, finally resulting

skins, maize, and other simple examples in the increase, in I928, of the income-

of mendelian breeding, charts and pedigrees tax rebates for children (how many hard-

illustrating and explaining them, human pressed tax-payers realize that both those

pedigrees, animal pedigrees, simple vital and the original rebate were mainly due to

statistics, and the like; these were accom- the efforts of this Society ?).

panied by a selection of free or very cheap Another success was scored in vital

literature suited to the tastes and under- statistics, when we secured registration

standing of customers. One week it might reforms which will make possible the

be found at a small town in the Mid- ascertainment of true fertility by social

lands, sandwiched between a Clean Food class in future generations.

propaganda stall, a manufacturer's free Although research had never been a

distribution of hot ' beef ' drinks and bis- major function of the Society, in I923 a

cuits, and some horrible photographs of the permanent Research Committee was

results of being buried uncremated. Fac- formed, composed of prominent scientists,

tory ' hands,' their wives-especially-and to support Mr. Lidbetter's work, and for

their children gaped at it and realized, for three years it was possible to furnish him

the first time, that heredity meant some- with one and sometimes two competent

thing. The next week it would be in a investigators. A grant from this Com-

southern market town, taking a decorous mittee gave the first stimulus to researches

part in a municipal demonstration of mutual on race-crossing amongst hybrids in English

admiration, and being intelligently, critic- ports. The important Oxfordshire village

ally, and sympathetically investigated by study made by Mrs. Sturge Gretton was

farmers and rural labourers. It was (and encouraged in the same way.

is) always accompanied by a lecturer, whose The credit for all of these successes must

frequent five-minute talks to groups, rang- be ascribed mainly to the resource and

ing from three or four to twenty or thirty, energy of Mrs. Hodson herself, who was

form half the value of the show.

also responsible both for our campaign for

This democratizing of eugenics was all eugenical sterilization and for our entrance,

Mrs. Hodson's creation, and she finally in the most effective manner possible, into

THE LAST TEN YEARS

the field of birth control. Biological nation-wide movement for sterilization,

students of this subject, on the one hand, securing the help and support of a num-

demanded statistical data on the effects and ber of local authorities, social workers,

the extent of contraceptive practices and, on and others with especial knowledge of the

the other, were asking whether birth control practical problems of pauperism and defect.

could ever be an effective eugenic instru- While she also secured a great deal of sup-

ment. The prospect of a future sterilization port from the Press, from medical men,

policy called particularly for an answer to psychiatrists, and other intellectual quar-

this latter question, but it seemed clear that ters, undoubtedly the greatest achievement

no single clinic could supply adequate num- was the enlisting of a large number of

bers for a statistical study. The Society, working-class organizations. In other

standing in some sense outside the birth- words, she has been largely instrumental in

control movement, invited all the existing providing that the demand for sterilization

voluntary clinics to appoint delegates to should' be a spontaneous movement from

consider these problems. A model case-card below, from the general population, instead

was finally drawn up, and while each clinic of an attempted imposition-as it would

adapted this to its own needs, the plan made surely have been called-by a minority of

possible the collection of comparative data the ' privileged ' classes.

from different regions. The two most

important aspects of this endeavour are covered to-day by the Birth Control Investi-

THE INTERNATIONAL SPHERE

gation Committee and the National Birth Herself the Honorary Secretary of the

Control Association.

International Federation of Eugenic Orga-

In I922 a memorial was presented to the nizations, Mrs. Hodson has always had the

Ministry of Health asking that birth control ' international mind ' of the scientific

facilities be added to the public health worker, and has spent much of her energy

services. Signatures were secured from in fruitful co-operation with foreign euge-

prominent scientists in all our Universities nists. The result is that this Society now

to a Memorandum urging the creation of a stands as one of the chief leaders among

Chair of Eugenics in the London School of the many similar organizations all over the

Hygiene. (The subject has figured in lec- world, and further took a considerable part

ture syllabuses since the opening of the in the first World Population Conference

School.) In 1927 the second Mental Defi- (Geneva, I927), thus ensuring that the

ciency Bill, introduced by Mr. Crompton Union thereafter formed should pay as much

Woods, was passed owing in part to the attention to the qualitative as to the quanti-

energetic support of the Society.

tative aspects of population. In the same

year Mrs. Hodson secured our participa-

HER PART IN STERILIZATION

tion in the first International Congress of Social Work (Paris), most of the partici-

While the Society has always, of course, pants in which then considered heredity

been the driving force of the movement for irrelevant to discussions of destitution and

sterilization, the credit for first bringing relief. Her success is shown by the fact

the subject into the political arena belongs that eugenics now takes its place as a recog-

to the National Citizens' Union, which in nized aspect of the studies being prepared

1928 organized a strongly supported for the Second Congress (to be held this

address to the Minister of Health, calling July).

for legislation to promote the sterilization Of her many other activities and achieve-

of the unfit. Mrs. Hodson took a leading ments, two deserve especial notice-the

part in securing that this Society should at re-creation of the Eugenics Societies of

once support the address, and thereafter Cambridge and Oxford, the latter of which

she became the organizing centre for a is now a very vigorous body, and the

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

organization of this Society's study- of family councils, now published under the title of " Family Council Law in Europe." Finally, she took an especially active part
in securing interest and support for the studies of Mr. Lidbetter, whom she assisted in many other ways.
Fortunately for eugenics, Mrs. Hodson's
resignation is only partial, since she retains her Honorary Secretaryship of the International Federation of Eugenic Organiza-
tions, will continue to work for the
Leicestershire eugenic organization (which has already done much to make eugenics a practical affair of everyday life), and will come on to the Council of this Society.

Both the present writers have been intimately connected with the Society for
many years, have seen Mrs. Hodson create a eugenic sense in apparently the most impossible quarters, and are now experiencing the triumphant difficulties of an organization no longer shouting in an intellectual vacuum, but taking an active part in practical politics. And they hope that others, when they see one eugenic ideal after another being thus realized, will also feel as they do-that the main credit for these advances is due to the three who did the hard and thankless early work, Major Darwin, Mrs. Neville Rolfe, and Mrs. Hodson.
D. W. C. and E. M.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 1.

