DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT BRITAIN SINCE THE ROYAL COMMISSION
ON POPULATION*

By PETER R. COX, F.I.A., F.S.S.

AFTER a war, or in specially stimulating circumstances, there may be a boom in births. Publications seem to be subject
to similar influences, and during the five years between the issue of the Royal Commission Report and the holding of the Rome Conference a wealth of books and papers on demographic matters has been poured out. The period I949-54 has thus been eventful enough to provide material for discussion if we include not only the recorded population movements of the quinquennium but also the new facts brought forward about earlier times and the fresh ideas that have recently been advanced on certain subjects. Indeed, it will hardly be possible to touch upon everything within a reasonable space. A special interest attaches to the latest facts and ideas in that they throw some light on the more controversial aspects of the monumental work of the Royal Commission.
To give some examples of the topics that can fruitfully be considered, we have, first, the numbers of births, which provide a commentary on the Commission's estimates of the future size of the population of Great Britain and on its statement about the extent by which we are replacing ourselves; secondly, the changing balance of the sexes, which has altered their respective marriage prospects, and thirdly the rapid post-war reduction in deaths at the younger ages and the steadily increasing proportion of old people. These examples belong to what is sometimes termed the purer form of demography, in which consideration is restricted to the numbers of people recorded at censuses and registered at. birth, marriage and
*A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics
Society on December i5th, I954.

death, and the various indexes that can be derived from them. Such matters provide the essential background of fact which theorists can ignore only at their peril. As we are unable to make direct scientific experiments on our fellows we have to wait and patiently observe wbat happens to them. In doing so we may sometimes be no more than news reporters, but there may occasionally be opportunities for the use of subtler arts which imagination and inspiration may call into play.
Among other examples of possible topics are qualitative factors, for instance social class differences, which are of particular interest to members of the Society, and questions of cause and effect. In general it is best to get the facts out of the way first, then to recount some of the big debates and the subjects of recent researches, and finally to see to what extent it is possible to summarize-although it is hardly satisfactory to try to give a very condensed statement of all that has happened in the last few crowded years.
Actual Population and Projected Populations
The population projections of the Royal Commission, prepared under the supervision of the Statistics Committee, were published in full in I950; they were sixteen in number and included fairly wide ranges of assumptions. In the Commission's Report of I949 reference had already been made to three of these projections, a group somewhat narrower in range. In comparing the expectations of five years ago with subsequent events it seems reasonable to have regard not only to the Commission's short selection but also to the Committee's complete series of alternatives. In order to illustrate them two

21

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

kinds of chart have been prepared, one showing total population and the other giving the numbers of births. According to the American medical statistician Joseph Garland " the mathematics of research has expressed itself in a multiplicity of graphs, charts and tables with the aid of which the average reader at a quick glance can often learn next to nothing." In spite of this denunciation, it seems that we can find some use for a few diagrams if they are suitably
accompanied by textual explanation.

flowing from the range of five alternative fertility assumptions are indicated by the shaded area, which occupies nearly all the

POPULATION IN MILLIONS
60

CHART2

50S

WPOPULATION 60 IN MILLIONS
50t
40
30

CHART

40 GREAT BRITAIN
1
1911 1951
YEAR

"~~~~~~~~~~(4) 2001.

GREAT BRITAIN

space between the extremes. Variations outside the shaded area come about as the

result of alternative assumptions about ages

1860

1900 1960 YEAR

2000 at marriage or about emigration. The three projections selected by the Royal Commis-

sion for mention in their Report are repre-

Chart i shows the size of the population of sented by the heavily emphasized lines. We

Great Britain during the hundred years may draw two conclusions-first, that the

from I850 onwards and the Committee's future size of the population depends very

selection of possibilities for the next fifty largely upon the fertility assumption chosen

years; these possibilities include everything and secondly that the Commission's choice

from growth only a little less rapidly than of illustrative projections was rather less

in recent years to a steady decline com- optimistic than that of the Statistics Com-

mencing immediately. This may seem so mittee.

conflicting a series of alternatives as to be Comparisons with more recent projections

confusing, and of limited value, Neverthe- need to be made on an ,even larger scale, as

less, the British population prospect is in Chart 3. The shaded area shows the range

generally regarded as one of the least con- of the Royal Commission's five fertility

troversial in the world today, and in inter- assumptions, and the thicker lines on the

national comparisons is usually dismissed ,right show the results of two recent single

quickly in favour of a discussion of more projections of the British population. The

exciting problems elsewhere.

upper one is based on the latest forecast

In order to show details more clearly, shown in the Registrar General's quarterly

Chart 2 gives the same information on an returns and other recent official reports,', 2

enlarged scale for the upper right hand part and the lower is based on a projection made

of the diagram in Chart i. The extremes are for England and Wales in I953 by the French

indicated by the dotted lines, and the results demographer M. Bourgeois-Pichat3 as part

DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT BRITAIN

23

of a series of international comparisons. The official view here seems to be that a period of stability in fertility in the neighbourhood of present levels may be expected over the

,{ POPU LATION
IN MILLIONS
52

CHART 3
(II) R.

assuming that there would be a sharp fall immediately after I947; thereafter they fan out at different levels, some higher than that obtaining before the Second World War and some lower.
4 NUMBER OF BIRTHS CHART 4
PER ANNUM (THOUSANDS)
to0

80001

50 600

49

GREAT BRITAIN

(JP) 400

48 (lo)

(9)
(8)
(7) (lo)

1941 1951

1961

1971

1961 200

GREAT BRITAIN

YEAR

years immediately ahead. Precision is difficult because the full details are not available and because the Commission used a definition

1911 1931 1951 1971 YEAR

1991 2011

of population different from that currently In the event, the numbers of births

employed by the Registrars-General. It actually occurring, indicated by dots in the

would appear, however, that the actual above chart, fell immediately after I947

numbers of people in I954 on a basis com- much as predicted, and in I95I Sir Hubert

parable with that used by the Royal Com- Henderson4 was able to say that the number

mission were about 49.8 millions, or about during I9jO (then thought to be 785,000)

i million more than expected.

was very close to the Commission's expecta-

As may have been inferred from Chart 2, tion. The actual number of occurrences in

the numbers of births in future are much 1950 finally proved to be 790,000, and since

more significant than the numbers of deaths then birth rates have fallen but little during

or of migrants in determining the general I95I-54. In his Civil Text Volume for

shape of the population trend. To analyse the I946-50 the Registrar General for England

estimated prospects further, for the moment and Wales pointed out that during the

reference need be made, therefore, only to .period January I949 to June I952, the

fertility. The actual and projected numbers annual average had been 794,000, or 32- per

of annual births in Great Britain are given in cent above the Commission's expectation of

Chart 4. On the left of the Chart the history 767,000 (based on projection No. 8). Up to

of the last forty years is delineated-one can now, therefore, developments have been not

see the sharp fall in births during the war of unfavourable, and the latest official pro-

I9I4-I8, the boom of I920, the inter-war jection, reflecting these, follows broadly

decline and the big recovery during and along the lines of projection number 9 of

after the war of I939-45. All the five the Statistics Committee. Bourgeois-Pichat,

Statistics Committee projections start at a however, by following number IO appears

point well below the million mark, thus to have adopted a less hopeful long-term

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

view, and to have discounted recent tend- group from one class to the other and may

encies somewhat too heavily.

well bring about an alteration in average

It is useful when discussing the events fertility within marriage without there

of the last five years to have the Royal having been any change in individual abilities

Commission's projections available as a yard- or desires with regard to procreation. Owing

stick, and it is right to apply the well- to concurrent fluctuations in fertility arising

established actuarial technique, to which from other causes, such as wars and varia-

attention was again drawn by Myers5 at the tions in national prosperity, the extent of

Rome Conference, of comparing past expect- this alteration is difficult to measure. Clear

ations with actual developments. It is not evidence has however been found of the

intended to convey, however, an atmosphere effect of a change in the intensity of marriage

of criticism of the Commission, the Statistics upon the relative mortality rates of married

Committee or their staff in this matter, or a and unmarried women. For instance, in

sense of being wise after the event. There is I93I, in England and Wales, when the pro-

no need for criticism. The more philosophic- portion of women unmarried at ages 25-29

ally-minded among demographers have inter- was 4I per cent, the ratio of spinsters'

ested themselves in the question whether or mortality to that of all women in this age-

not success in prediction is the true criterion group was I.04, but in I95I when the propor-

of the merit of a population projection, and tion of spinsters had fallen to 22 per cent the

some hold that intelligent work based on the ratio had risen to I.48. It thus appears that

best available methods is more worthy of with the rise in marriage rates only the

respect than an unimaginative mechanical healthier girls had married, and the un-

exercise even if it turns out in the end to have healthier girls had remained single.

been the less successful of the two in portray- If an equally big influence were exerted on

ing the actual trend of the population. If this fertility by changes in the proportion marry-

view is correct, the comparisons made here ing, it would obviously be wrong to measure

do not constitute an adverse judgment upon marital fertility at all, but in fact the extent

the Royal Commission's projections, except of the importance of marriage selection on

in the limited sense that with the passage of fertility is probably not so great as to pre-

time they may need a little adjustment to clude such measurement entirely. The

be of use today.

inquiry into marriages and family size may

be made; one should, however, bear in mind

Marriages

that the results obtained from such analyses

Having ascertained the current situation cannot be entirely conclusive.

regarding births the next thing to do is io In the population projections of the

look at the numbers and ages of married Statistics Committee the expected numbers

couples and the composition of their families, of marriages of spinsters under age 45 in

and so analyse the birth data into their Great Britain averaged between 277,ooo and

component parts. Here we come to a subject 337,ooo a year during I947-52, but we now

of keen debate recently. Perks6 has empha- know that in fact they did not fall below

sized that marriage is a selective force that 340,ooo during that time and indeed aver-

tends to divide young adults into two classes aged as many as 355,000, or five per ce'nt

with different potentialities for fertility; the above the highest expectation, over these

married-mainly those capable of having years. The Committee's projections for

children and probably also those wanting to I952-57 ranged from 273,000 to 30I,000 per

have them-and the unmarried, who include year, but in I953 the number recorded was

a greater proportion of those who are about 330,ooo and there will probably have

disabled in various ways from having children been as many in I954. These surpluses in

and probably also of those who do not want the numbers of marriages are strong candi-

them. A variation in the intensity of mar- dates for our choice in explaining the rela-

riage will cause the passage of a marginal tively favourable position concerning births

DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT BRITAIN

25

to which attention was drawn a little earlier.
The numbers of marriages, although higher than the Commission expected, have fallen since I947. Such a development was almost
inevitable, not because of a decline in the proportions of spinsters marrying but because of a reduction in the numbers of youngwomen available for marriage. Not only did the numbers of births fall from year to year
twenty-five years before but also, as Hock-
ing 7 8 has shown, the numbers of marriages in recent years have been materially higher than the annual supply of girls reaching marriageable age for the first time. The number of women left unmarried thus diminishes. As a result the age at marriage tends to fall, for, as relatively fewer unmarried women are left available year by year at the normal ages for marriage, men turn to younger brides. In England and Wales the proportions of spinsters marrying were little different in I952, age for age, from
those in I947 but the age-distribution of first marriages of women had become younger and the number of first marriages had become smaller.
One reason why marriage has remained at high pressure for women is that the numbers of men available for marriage have increased relatively to those of women. The reasons for this change are well known and can readily be explained. Every year nowadays about six per cent more boys than girls are born in this country. In the past the corresponding male surplus was converted into a deficit because infant mortality, emigration and war losses were all greater for boys than for girls. These influences have been much reduced in scale for some time now, however, and recently have not been of sufficient strength to prevent the emergence of an appreciable excess of young men over young women in number at ages under twenty. Very broadly, between I922 (when the shortage of men was particularly acute owing to deaths in the first World War) and I947 the supply of potential husbands for women aged between twenty and twentyfour improved by one-third, and correspondinglv the supply of potential wives for men

aged twenty-five to twenty-nine declined by one-third. It is interesting to note that during this twenty-five-year period the marriage rates of both sexes of these ages rose but, as might be expected, the rate for women increased a great deal more than that for men -by 8o per cent as against I5 per cent. Thus the balance of the sexes had an important effect on marriage rates, but it was not the only influence; there was in addition a substantial general increase in marriage in the course of time.
The enhanced supply of men has had an effect in improving the marriage chances not only of girls but also of widows and older spinsters. Although young women are marrying younger, the accompanying increase in the number of older marriages has meant that the average age at marriage of women as a whole has not changed much.
Marriages and Fertility
In a paper9 published in I95I the proportions of first, second and third children born by I946 to women who had attained the age of sixteen in each year from I935 to I942 were compared. In general, the later the year in which age sixteen was attained the greater the number of children per woman at any specified age; the average rate of improvement from year to year was something like 4 per cent. The improving prospects of marriage during the period probably accounted for about 24 per cent, leaving i4 per cent as being due to improved fertility within marriage. A corresponding analysis of the fertility of married women according to year of marriage over the period I935 to I945 brought out an average annual rate of increase of roughly one per cent, thus broadly confirming this net figure of I4 per cent.
More recently, the Registrar General for England and Wales has given, in his Review for I946-5o'°, a comprehensive survey of fertility or, as he calls it, " reproductive capacity replacement" over the last hundred years according to year of birth of woman. He prepared a most interesting chart, which was printed in the EUGENICS REVIEW recently.* For generations ofwomen
* 46, 75.

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

who have reached the age of forty-five it reproduction rate there is undeniably some-

showed a steady decline as time advances in thing of a vacuum in demography, because

the total number of children born, but for all the trend of population is not defined.

generations who have not reached the age Efforts to fill the gap by making population

of forty-five it showed a recovery in the most projections are not very satisfactory. Realiz-

recent period. Much of the recovery is due to ing this, the Commission's staff developed

the increase in marriage frequency. In a substitute in what has been called a

another analysis the Registrar General has ' replacement" index and is much more

shown that the woman's effective reproduc- complex in construction than the net repro-

tion rate grew from 0.829 in I938 to I.OI7 in duction rate. The Commission used this in

I950. Of this increase of o.i88 he attributed their Report and went so far as to assert

no less than 0.I47 to higher marriage rates; categorically that there was a deficiency in

he found that another o.o56 arose from current family size in comparison with the

improvements in mortality and stillbirth requirement for replacement purposes and to

rates. The contribution of fertility within mention a figure of 6 per cent for the extent

marriage was actually negative-it fell by of the shortfall. In fact, however, Hajnal'2

about 0.04. In view of the impossibility of had obtained corresponding results varying

exact analysis these figures must not be from o to I9 per cent (that is, replacement

taken too literally but they do illustrate the rates of from I.00 to o.8i) and had admitted

importance of the enhanced prospects of that " the variety of reproduction rates is

marriage in connection with recent increases only a reflection of the limits of knowledge

in births.

about the demographic prospects." The

criticisms that have subsequently been

Reproductivity

directed at the Commission's assertion have had a discouraging effect on dogmatism on

As the word " reproduction " has been the subject of replacement and reproduction

mentioned, something should perhaps be and probably account in part for the

added about the latest developments in reticence on the subject in Rome.

connection with its measurement. Before In an effort to break the deadlock some

the Royal Commission was appointed, the alternative statistical models of self-repro-

function known as " net reproduction rate " ducing populations have recently been con-

had come into general use in statistically structed13 so as to represent the current

more developed countries because it was demographic situation fif Great Britain as

considered to be the best available single closely as possible in all respects other than'

measure of the long-term trend of population family size. The aim was to compare the

where the data were plentiful enough to numbers of children actually born to married

enable it to be calculated.' It did not, how- couples at the end of specified periods of

ever, survive five years of expert investiga- married life with the number they should

tion by the Statistics Committee and staff have had if there was to be exact replacement.

of the Commission or the critical analysis of The results obtained broadly supported the

Whelpton'1 in the U.S.A. It was shown to be Commission's statement and in addition

misleading, and as a result one hardly heard analysed recent variations in replacement in

the word " reproduction " mentioned at the this country from year to year and from

Rome Conference last year; certainly the couple to couple according to date of

subject was given no prominence. As a marriage. Nevertheless they did not escape

consequence, the proportion of time devoted the criticism that can always be directed

by the Conference to the theory and mathe- against studies of incomplete families-

matics of population was relatively small, namely that future developments within

and, practical work was prominent those families may vitiate the conclusions

instead.

reached-and the prospect of progress in this

Without an index of the kind of the net direction is for this reason rather discouraging.

DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT IBRITAIN

27

Family Size
If reproduction was not mentioned in Rome, fertility certainly was, and many alternative ways of measuring it were mentioned; one author referred to no less than fourteen methods. There is no agreement at the moment as to which of the many possible approaches is the best. An aspect that deserves particular attention here is the question of family size-not merely
average family size but rather the respective proportions of married couples who have had no children, one child, two children, three children and so on. The Royal Commission found that the average family size in this
country had remained fairly constant for some years, and demographers naturally attach great value to anything having the appearance of stability in the notoriously unstable field of population. It has been pointed out, however, that uniformity of average family size has really been the result of two important changes which have been going on in opposite directions and have roughly counterbalanced one another. On the one hand there has been a continuation of the long-term decline in the proportion of very large families (of six children or more) and on the other hand there has been some increase in the numbers of children born to couples who have small families.

These changes are illustrated in Chart 5, which has been derived from the statistics of the Family Census of 1946,14 the full
Report on which has recently been published. The percentages in the various categories of completed family size' (no children, one child or two children; three or four children; five to nine children; ten or more children) are shown by the thickness of the bands between the dividing lines. The dotted lines give not unreasonable forecasts for families that will be completed in tile near future. The year of marriage of the parents is shown along the bottom of the
Chart. In, comparison with the big alterations of the past half-century the change expected in the next two decades is small.

'\{ AVERACE 6 ^ FAMILY SIZE

CHARTa6

4 3
2>

~~~~~~~~~~(a)
(b)
I ..a......'.

( NUMBER OF CHILDFREN)
so90' (s-o9)
sofl,,

CHART 5

60 / 3 To4....
40 / GREAT BRITAIN

20 (0)

9873 IOS 9695 1905os l995 *925 1935 9945 YEAR OF MARRIAGE

GREAT BRITAIN
1875 IS1 1895 1906 1915 1926 1935 915 YEAR
The average family size corresponding to the distributions in Chart 5 is given by the heavy line and dotted line in Chart 6. The small upward kink on the extreme right represents the extent of the improvement due to the war-time and post-war developments. While encouraging, it is of no very great significance; it.may well be accounted for in substantial part by the lengthening, by the younger marriages of recent years, of

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the period of time during which wives are at -risk of having children. In this connection it is of interest to note that in spite of the fall in average family size in the first quarter
of the twentieth century the relationship between age of wife at marriage and relative family size has altered but little. Women
who marry before the age of twenty still have nearly twice as many children as those who -marry between the ages of twenty-five and
twenty-nine, and these in their turn have
more than twice as many as those who marry between the ages of thirty-five and thirtynine. This relativity has remained nearly the
same although the absolute family size has
fallen all round. The other two curves in Chart 6 show
respectively, on different scales so arranged that the graphs are closely juxtaposed (a) the course of the crude birth rate, and (b) the course of the legitimate fertility rate per thousand married women aged fifteen to
forty-five in the period of five to ten years following the marriage. While the shapes of the three curves are generally similar, both the birth rate and the fertility rate show trends that are a little more hopeful than that of the completed family size. The margin between the crude birth rate and the legitimate fertility rate indicates an increasing proportion in the total population of women who are aged fifteen to forty-five and are married. Although this margin may be eliminated if we wish to refine the data so as to measure fertility more appropriately,
it provides in fact a useful addition to the total potentiality of the population to reproduce. The further margin between the legitimate fertility rate and the average family size is a more subtle difference; it arises from the timing of births. The general superiority of the legitimate fertility curve to the curve of family size for the past sixty years has probably arisen from married couples having had their children earlier in life as time has passed.
By making comparisons such as these we can see that the post-war baby-boom is due largely, but perhaps not entirely, to earlier marriage and the temporary speeding up of family building.

Social Class Differences in Fertility An important aspect of recent develop-
ments is the continuance of differences in fertility between the various strata of our
society. What are these strata?. As members of the Society will know, they can be defined in various ways-according, for instance, to
earned income or educational standard-but having regard to what can accurately be measured at the census and at birth registration we have to think of them mainly as the different geographical and administrative areas and more particularly the various
groups of occupations. Social prestige is
closely related in the public mind to occupa-
tion, and there is a fair amount of agreement as to which occupations deserve high esteem
and which are less worthy of respect. A recent work edited by a member of the
Society, Professor Glass,15 has dealt with the differences between the occupational statuses of sons and those of their fathers in the first
half of the twentieth century in Great Britain, and has thus measured a form of "social mobility ". Special inquiries showed that, if occupations were assembled into
seven broad groups of "social classes ", there was a two-thirds chance that the son would achieve a class different from that of his
father and, apart from the top group, a two-
fifths chance of the son improving on his father's performance. These figures indicate that there has been considerable movement between the classes in the last few decades. Further, the sizes and compositions of the classes have also varied materially.
Having regard to all this movement and variation, it is interesting and perhaps rather surprising that the proportionate difference in fertility between the classes has changed relatively little since I9II. Information on this subject has become available, during the last year or two, from three separate sources and they all give the same general picture. According, for instance, to the results of the Family Census of I946 the average family size of couples married in I920-24 expressed as a ratio of the average family size of couples married in I900-I909 was 75 per cent for professional men and 75 per cent for labourers. For wage-earners, manual and

DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT BRITAIN

29

non-manual alike, it was 68 per cent. For marriage. Generally speaking, the more one

employers and salaried employees alike it goes down the social scale, the larger the

was 70 per cent. Thus there has been a family and the longer it takes to complete;

smaller reduction for the " highest " and hence the more lowly the Class the lower the

" lowest " social groups than for the inter- proportion of the completed family that is

vening strata, but the differences are rather already in being at the early marriage

narrow.

durations and the more the tendency of this

The other two sources of information proportion to rise with advancing marriage

referred to are the results of the Censuses of duration. For this and other reasons it is

I93I and I95I. Taken in conjunction with .unsafe to attempt to draw firm conclusions

the two preceding Censuses these provide no about recent changes in differential fertility

less than three different ways of comparing from the I95I Census data of partially

the trend of social class effects in fertility completed families.

during a period of forty years. All confirm

the thesis that the proportionate differences Mortality and Other Matters

between the social classes have remained The uniformity of the relative positions

broadly the same over the period I9II-I95I, of the social classes in fertility is matched by

with the one possible exception that Social a similar uniformity in mortality, again with

Class I (Professional and Managerial) appears the possible exception that Social Class I,

to have moved back a little nearer to the now a much enlarged group, differs less than

general average.

it used to do from the general average, for

The I95I Census One-per-cent Sample both men and their wives. In infantile

tabulations, which are at present the only mortality, the relative levels of the classes

published source of information concerning have remained the same in spite of big

the results of the special fertility inquiries reductions in the risk of death and an

that were made four years ago, show for improvement in the monetary rewards of

different areas and classes the number of some occupations-miners for instance-

children per married woman according to the relatively to those of others such as clerks.

length of the period of marriage. It m&y be The last five years have seen sharp falls in

inquired whether a comparison of the rela- mortality at all ages up to middle life, to

tive family sizes of the various social classes which almost every child recently born can

and groups at successively decreasing mar- now be expected to survive, but there are far

riage durations will indicate the extent of fewer signs of improvement at older ages.

changes in differential fertility that have Nevertheless, the proportion of older persons

occurred more recently than those shown by in the population continues to grow steadily.

the Family Census data of completed families It is desirable to touch on this question of

quoted above. Thus whereas for Social ageing, even though there are other interest-

Class I the percentage (standardized for age ing subjects-which also deserve attention

of mother) to the national average family but for which there is insufficient space in

size is eighty-six for durations of fifteen to this brief account-such as the increased

twenty-four years, it is ninety-four for incidence of divorce, which now brings no less

durations of ten to fourteen years and I00 than 7 per cent of marriages to a premature

for durations of five to nine years. The end, the post-war resumption of emigration,

corresponding figures for Social Class V the inward flow from the Colonies and the

(Unskilled labour) are I27, I20 and II5. large internal population movements of

These appear to denote some recent con- recent years.

traction in the disparity between classes.

Nevertheless they must be regarded with Ageing of the Population

considerable suspicion because the figures, Every year the addition of births, and the

although relating to different periods of deduction of deaths mainly among the aged,

time, relate also to different durations of are factors tending to reduce the average age

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of a population, but meanwhile all living persons are becoming older. To see whether, on balance, ageing or becoming younger predominates in the population as a whole, we have to measure from time to time the
proportions of people in various age-groups. Such measurements show that the population of this country is ageing at the present
moment. One of the two main reasons is that the annual numbers of births fifty to
seventy years ago were both high and increasing yearly, whereas later they declined. The other main reason has been diminishing mortality in early and middle life. The first of these factors is a known
quantity and the effect of the second is not difficult to forecast, so the numbers and pro-
portions of persons aged over sixty or sixty-five have generally been estimated with
comparative accuracy in population projections. Thus the proportion of persons aged over sixty-five in England and Wales in I95I was ii per cent almost exactly, whereas pre-war forecasts, made while it was only
about 8 per cent, had ranged from io.6 per cent to ii.6 per cent. Starting from IO.4 per cent in I947, the Royal Commission arrived at II.I per cent for the proportion in I952 in almost all its alternative projections for Great Britain. Looking further ahead, it expected that by I992 the percentage of persons aged sixty-five and over would lie
somewhere between I5 per cent and i82 per
cent.
Because of this steady increase apprehensions are felt lest Great Britain should experience a decline in the standard of living, a lowering of efficiency, mobility and adaptability in the economic system and a growing sense of frustration among young men and women. These apprehensions have been given point since the War of I939-45 by an enormous growth of pension schemes of all kinds. One result of the public interest aroused was the setting up of the Phillips Committee on the Economic and Financial Problems of the Provision for Old Age; its Report was published towards the end of I954. A Study by a small Research Group of the Institute of Actuaries and the Faculty of Actuaries, entitled The Growth of Pension

Rights and their Impact on the National Economy, has also been published. So far as population trends are concerned, the conclusions of the Group were that the present proportion of old people is, in a sense, unduly low and that its probable rise by half as much again during the next twenty-five years represents no more than an approach to a normal stable situation having regardto the reduced mortality risks of today. The Phillips Committee pointed out further that the future increases to be expected in the proportion of old persons are at no greater a rate than has already been experienced for some years.
The burden of the aged is likely to be partially offset by a reduction in the burden of child dependency. In I9OI there were over eleven million children under age fourteen in Great Britain, or 70 per cent of the number. of gainfully occupied persons of working age. The corresponding percentage in 195I was 49, and if the Royal Commission's projection No. 7 should prove to be representative this would fall by I977 to 4I. The corresponding percentages f6r persons of pension age (men sixty-five, women sixty) and over are I4, 30 and 44, giving totals of 84, 79 and 86. If non-gainfully occupied women of working age are added they become I30, I20, and I26. One possible prospect for the future at least is thus within the range of variation during the first half of the century. As the Phillips Committee observed, " to anyone viewing the matter exclusively in terms of the balance between producers and consumers . .. there might seem little cause for uneasiness." It went on to discuss, however, certain serious financial problems which are beyond the scope of the present survey.
Conclusion
The population of Great Britain today still exhibits the same general features as were so well delineated by the Royal Commission, that is to say, a moderately satisfactory level of births, declining mortality, a prospect of steady total numbers for some time to come and a prospect of an increase in the proportion of the aged. If this survey of the last

DEMOGRAPHIC DEVELOPMENTS IN GREAT BRITAIN

3I

five years has not revealed any startling developments it at least has drawn attention to some unsolved problems, such as the measurement of reproductivity; some interesting technical points, such as the effects of the change in the balance of the sexes; some odd features, such as the persistence of social class differences when a trend towards greater uniformity might perhaps have been expected-; and, generally, the need for constantly observing developments and extending the range of research. .An indication as to the nature of the research needed was given by Professor Bradford Hill in I953 in his Cutter Lecture at the Harvard School of Public Health,16 when he said: " One must go seek more facts, paying less attention to technics of handling the data and far more to the development and perfection of methods of obtaining them." Although his remarks related to research in medical statistics they have considerable relevance also for population studies.
REFERENCES
i. Report of the Committee on the Economic and Financial Problems of the Provision for Old Age
(1954). Cmd. 9333.

2. Report by the Government Actuary on the First iQuinquennial Review of National Insurance (1954).
3. Bourgeois-Pichat, J. (I953). Les problemes de population Europ6enne. Population, 8, 21.
4. Henderson, Hubert (1950). Contribution to a discussion on the Reports. of the Royal Commission on Population. J.R.S.S. 114, 38.
5. Myers, R. J. (I954). Comparisons of population
projections with actual data. (Paper submitted to the Rome Conference.)
6. Perks, W. (195I). As quoted in reference (g) below.
7. Hocking, W. S. (I950). The decline in spinsterhood. Journal of the Institute of Actuaries' Students' Society (J.S.S.), 10, 24.
8. Hocking, W. S. (I953). The decline in spinster-
hood (continued). J.S.S. 12, II9.
9. Cox, P. R. (I95I). Studies in the recent marriage
and fertility data of England and Wales. Population Studies, 5, 132.
I0. Registrar General for England and Wales; Annual Statistical Review for the Years 1946-50. Text Volume (Civil).
ii. Whelpton, P. K. (1946). Reproduction rates adjusted for age, parity, fecundity and marriage. J.A.S.A. 41, 50I.
12. Hajnal, J. (1950). Reports and Selected Papers of the Statistics Committee of the Royal Commission on Population, pp. 303-422. H.M.S.O.
13. Cox, P. R. (1953). Reproductivity in Great Britain: a new standard of assessment. J.I.A. 79, 239.
I4. Glass, D. V. and Grebenik, E. (I955). The Trend and Pattern of Fertility in Great Britain. H.M.S.O.
I5. Glass, D. V. (I954). Social Mobility in Great
Britain. Routledge. i 6. Hill, A. Bradford (1953). Cutter Lecture at the
Harvard School of Public Health. New England Journal of Medicine, 248, 995-1001.

