GALTON'S " HEREDITARY GENIUS"

And the Three Following Generations Since 1869.*

By B. S. BRAMWELL, M.A., LL.B., F.R.S.E.

fJEREDITARY GENIUS was the
first serious study of the inheritance
of intelligence. It was published in I869. A reprint containing no new matter
was issued in the 'nineties. As it is now very difficult to obtain, your Council is trying to arrange for a reprint, and as it is nearly eighty years since it was originally produced, I have tried to work out a small appendix to show whether the three succeeding generations have confirmed Galton's conclusions or otherwise. Dr. Blacker thought that some account
of my work would be of interest to you.
Galton makes great use of the word " eminence." What exactly did he mean by it ? He thought that the variation in human intelligence would follow a normal curve of distribution. If so, the majority up to about 8o per cent would be found clustering fairly close round the mean intelligence; on the downward side would be found the dull, shading off gradually to the mentally deficient, and so on to idiocy. The upward side he divided into seven classes, of which A and B are those nearest to the mean; as you pass
on to C, D, E, F and G, the intelligence increases, but the number in the class diminishes. Thus in F class he found in theory only one person of this intelligence in 4,000. So much for theory. He related it to fact in this way: there was a book recently published at the time he wrote called Men of the Time. He selected from it 500 names of
men over 50 years of age whom he thought would be considered eminent by their contemporaries. There were about 2 million men over 50 years of age in the British Isles at that time. This ratio of 500 in 2 million corresponds closely to his " F" class, which he therefore designated " eminent." To

dard of eminence. The work was begun in the
'nineties and completed in sixty-three volumes in the early years of this century. Since then eight supplementary volumes have been issued, coming down to I930. It is ten times as select as Who's Who. It is of very high standard and George Macaulay Trevelyan in his English Social History described it as " The best record of a nation's past which any civilization has produced." It has, of course, certain slight disadvantages for our purpose. It deals only with the dead, it stops at I930, there must be occasional omissions, and certain entries are for notoriety rather than ability, but these latter are very few.
Galton picked out men of eminence in different occupations, and then hunted out their relatives of eminence. His basis study was that of High Court Judges from the reign of Charles II to I865, 289 in all. He gave his reasons for considering them eminent. He found that io8, about 40 per cent, had relatives of eminence. I think by further research this number would be increased. His main findings, and they are important as they form the skeleton of his
further work, were:
i. The eminent relations of the judges are quite out of proportion to the chance distribution of high ability;
2. The nearer the relationsh,ip to the judge the greater the chance of eminence,
3. The greater the eminence of the judge, the larger the number of eminent relatives;
4. One in nine of the judges was father, brother or son of another judge;
5. But the ability of their eminent relatives was in no way confined to legal ability.

some extent it is rather indefinite.

He also reached the conclusion that there

Fortunately, since he wrote, we have in the was little if any difference between inheritDictionary of National Biography an outside ance through the mother and the father. standard, closely corresponding to his stan- And this before the days of Mendelism.

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on
October 2ISt, 1947.

Judges I made two enquiries into judges. First I

I46

GALTON'S "HEREDITARY GENIUS "

took those mentioned by Galton, who had been appointed to the Bench after I837, to see what their posterity had accomplished. They numbered i9. And second, I studied the families of Lord Chancellors appointed since I865, an entirely different set of people. They numbered i8.
Now let us see how they stand with regard to Galton's five points:
i. The expectation of eminent relatives for 37 men would be a fraction of I per cent. The actuality was over IOO persons.
2. The nearer relations were more eminent than the more distant.
3. I approach this point from the reverse. Who were the judges with the greatest number of eminent relations ? Lord Chancellor Haldane with I5, Sir Edward Alderson, Baron of the Ex-

chequer, and Sir J. T. Coleridge, both with I4, Sir Frederick Pollock, Bart., Chief Justice C.P., Baron of the Exchequer, and Sir John Vaughan, each with ii. Apart from legal ability Haldane was the best student of philosophy in his year in the four
Scottish universities, and Alderson and Pollock were both senior wranglers at Cambridge. 4. Galton found one judge in nine was father, brother or son of another judge. In my list eight judges out of 37 were father, brother or son of another judge. 5. So far from being confined to legal ability the 37 averaged two relatives apiece eminent in other directions.
By way of illustration let us look at the pedigrees of Haldane, Pollock and Alderson.

HALDANE
Sir Thos. Craig. D.N.B.

Bishop Burnet. D.N.B.

Sir Thos. Burnet. D.N.B.
I
Abercromby=Dundas.*

~ ~ ~I~~~~~I

Lord Eldon Lord Stowell.

D.N.B.

D.N.B.

Sir Thos. Skinne, Lord Mayor, Loi,don

Joass==Abercrombyt

5. H. =Duncan

Lord

Camperdown

D.N.B

I

Sir James S. =Skiirier Lord Mayor,
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~London Sir Thos. Burdon= Jane Scott_I
Richard Burdon =Sanderson

4. Robert H., James H., =Mary Joass Theologian. Theologian.
D.N.B. D.N.B.

3. Daniel, M.D., LL.D. D.N.B.

III

Robert,=M. E. Burdon Sanderson

Sir J. Burdon Sanderson

W.S. Bart. Prof., F.R.S. D.N.B.

2. Gea.
Sir J. A. H., G.C.M.G.

R. B. Haldane, Lord Chancellor.
D.N.B.

J. S. H., Prof. F.R.S.
I
I. Prof. J. B. S. H., F.R.S. 2. Naomi Mitcheson

Sir Wm. H., Crown Agent

Elizabeth C.H.-LLD.. J.P.

* Dundas is one of the four great Scottish legal families. There are seventeen Dundas entries in the D.N.B. t Sister of Sir Ralph and Sir Robert Abercromby, aunt of Sir John A., Alex. A. and James, Lord Dunfermlin@
the Speaker. These five all appear in the D.N.B. t Jane Scott was the sister of Lord Eldon and Lord Stowell. Her husband, Sir T. B., was Mayor of Newcastle.

I48 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I.
2. Sir David Pollock Chief Justice, Bombay. D.N.B.

POLLOCK
David Pollock, King's Saddle-maker
:
F oSFirred. Pollock, Bart.,
Sen. Wr. Chief Baron Exch. D.N.B.

|~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Sir George Pollock, Bart., Field-Marshal. D.N.B.

3. Maj.-Gen. J. A. H. P., Bengal Staff Corps
4. Mr. Justice R. E. Pollock, Judge, High Court, India
5-

I. 2nd Bart. Translator of Dante. D.N.B. 2. Maj.-Gen. Sir F. R. Pollock, K.C.S.I.
3. Sir E. J. Pollock, Official Referee
4- Sir C. E. Pollock, Baron of Exch. D.N.B.
I. Sir Fred. 3rd. Bart., 2nd Classic, Corpus Prof. Jurisprud., Oxford
2. Lord Hanworth, Master of the Rolls
3. Bishop of Norwich
4- Sir Adrian, K.C.M.G., City Chamberlain 5- Sir Henry, Judge, Hong Kong 6. W. H. Pollock, Editor, Saturday Review
Sir John Pollock, 4th Bart., Fellow Trinity,
Cambridge, Legal Historian
And many others of lesser note

I
John, M.A. D.N.B.
I. Sir James, 6th Wr., P.R.C.P. D.N.B.

ALDERSON
Rev. J. Alderson
I

I1.
Mrs. Woodhouse 2.
Robert, La. Wr., 3.
Plum. Prof. Ast. D.N.B.

2. Col. R., R.E. Rlys.

I. Sir C. H. A., Feliow of All Souls 2. Rev. F. C. A., Chap. Queen Victoria

l_________ l3. Georgia= Lord Salisbury

Maj.-Gen. Sir H. J. A.,=4. Florence Dir. of Armstrong's. 5. F. J. A.
D.N.B.15FI R. E. A.
Sir E. H. A., K.C.B., Clerk to House of Lords
2nd Lord Selborne

x.
2.

LLoorrd RSoabiesrbturCy.

=

Lady

C.

A.

Gore

3. Lord Hugh C. F.,
of Hertford

5. Lord Edward C. 6. Lady Beatrice

4. 5.

3rd Lord Selborne

I. Lord Cranborne
2. Lord David C., Fellow of New College

6.

GALTON'S " HEREDITARY GENIUS "

Statesmen
Galton had no high opinion of politicians for these reasons: politics is not an open profession; he thought that the standard was falling and nepotism was rife. As a class he would grant prime ministers eminence, but no others. I therefore took prime ministers since I869 for my study of statesmen. They had many relatives of high position in politics, but with the exception of Salisbury and Balfour few distinguished in
other spheres. Let us look at Salisbury's pedigree.

ningham and Tedder as instances, one from
each of the three services. They all had
eminent fathers, and two of them eminent grandfathers.
Scientists For scientists I took for my group the
nineteen holders of the Order of Merit. With the exception of Hooker they do not seem to run far back. But in several cases there is evidence of high scientific ability in the family. Thus Lord Kelvin's father, brother, nephew and cousin were all Fellows of the

LORD SALISBURY

Lord Burghley. D.N.B.

ist Early Salisbury. D.N.B.

Sir John Trevor, Speaker, H. of C.
D.N.B.

Crisp Gascoyne, Lord Mayor, London,
D.N.B.

7.

_- Marquis of = Trevor
Dowashire,
P. of B. of T. D.N.B.I

Bamber, G. M. P.,
Lord of Admiralty.
D.N.B.

6.

Lord S. = Hill

Bamber Gascoyne, M.P.=X General I. G., M.P. 5.

|_______________________________ _

,for Liverpool.

Lord S. =Gascoyne

I

~~~~~~~~~~~~D.N.B.
4.

Georg-LordSalisbury

Lady Blanche Cecil=J. M. Balfour

3.

Premier

i. A. J. B., Premier. D.N.B.
2. Gerald, F. Trin., Camb.

(See Alderson pedigree)

3. Francis, Prof. Animal Morphology, Camb., F.R.S. 2. 4. Mrs. Sidgwick, Prin., Newnham.

3rd Lord Rayleigh=5. E. G. M. B.

4th Lord Rayleigh, F. Trinity, F.R.S., Roy. Soc. Medallist

I.

Commanders
My work is limited to British subjects who have made some reputation since Galton wrote. He was not limited by country or period in his choice, so his examples were frequently of the class he termed illustrious. Thus in his selection he ranges back to Hannibal and Alexander the Great. I have to be content with ten leaders of the fighting forces who happened to have been raised to the Peerage after the late war. In all cases except one, I found relatives of distinct eminence. We can take Montgomery, Cun-

Royal Society. In Lord Lister's case we get father, brother and nephew, while the three physicists, Lord Rayleigh, Sir Joseph Thomson and Sir William Bragg, each had a son who is an eminent physicist, two of whom are Nobel prize winners, and all three Royal Society Medallists.
Novelists
I was rather puzzled as to how to select literary persons of the period. I thought I would confine myself to novelists. After all, Bacon classified fictional history with poetry;

150 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

imagination is a very important factor in it. I asked a friend, learned in these matters, to supply me with a list of the twelve leading novelists in his opinion. I added to it and made the number up to thirty. In twelve cases I know of no able relatives, but the other eighteen had many. There are several points to notice; several near relatives of distinction; one was the son of an archbishop, another the brother of a lord chancellor, a third the brother of a senior wrangler, a fourth first cousin of a prime minister. Eminent grandfathers were even more numerous than fathers, which is quite exceptional. Ability displayed in the ancestry of both parents was more common than usual. Also ability spreading very far back.
As time is short, I will give you only one pedigree, that of R. L. Stevenson, though I would like to have shown you those of Aldous Huxley and his aunt, Mrs. Humphrey Ward, Rose Macaulay, Hugh Walpole and Virginia Woolf, all of whom had relatives of distinction on both sides of their family.
Actors
As a contrast to novelists consider actors. Galton regarded them as a caste in which it was difficult to assess their histrionic ability. He mentions the Kembles as an exceptional family showing ability in directions other than the stage. Havelock Ellis notes that they are generally of humble origin, and that they are often Irish. In a publication, Who's Who on the Stage, Dr. J. M. Bullough, a wellknown genealogist, has given over a hundred pedigrees of actors. Some have been on the

stage for many generations. He, like Havelock Ellis, notes that the origin was frequently humble and often Celtic. Also that they nearly always marry " on the stage," so that Galton was right to regard them as a
caste. From these I picked out twenty-one well-
known names. Of these few had eminent
relatives off the stage, and these few (seven of twenty-one) were none of purely English origin in the narrow sense of the word. Two were of Irish and two of Scottish origin, the other three all had foreign blood. This struck me as strange. What about Henry Irving ? The D.N.B. stresses his Cornish mother, Celtic again.
A comparative table of the relatives of ability of our thirty novelists and twenty-one actors may be of interest to you.

Percentages Novelists Actors Novelists Actors
Total number 30 21-

Father Brother Son ...

... ...
...

9 6
2

2 30 JO I 20 5
I 75

Grandfather ... Uncle ... ... Nephew ...
Grandson ...

I2
7 2
0

0 40

0

2 30 10

0 7o

I 05

G.-grandfather Grand uncle ... First cousin ...
Grand nephew G.-grandson ...

8 6
II
o o

I 27 Is 2 20 10

I 37

5

I 05
00

65 I2

More remote ... I4

0 47

0

79 12

R. L. STEVENSON

Alan Stevenson W. Indian Merchant

James Balfour, Prof. Moral Philosophy. D.N.B.

(only child) Robert Stevenson

Rev. James Balfour

John Balfour

Alan Stevenson. David Stevenson.

D.N.B.

D.N.B.

I

R. A. M. Stevenson,

Prof. Fine Arts,

Liverpool. D.N.B.

Thomas Stevenson=Margaret Balfour D.N.B.
R. L. Stevenson

Surg. Gen. T. G. Balfour. D.N.B.
I
Sir T. Graham Balfour, Author.
D.N.B.

(Second cousin of White Melville, novelist, and of Leslie Balfour Melville, athlete)

GALTON'S "HEREDITARY GENIUS"

15I

Classical Scholars
As regards scholars, Galton noticed how in forty years four Kennedys (three brothers and a nephew) and two Lushingtons (brothers) had been senior classics at Cambridge. Without making an exhaustive study he recorded many instances of senior classics having relatives of note.

I have been able to add many% names to
those he noted in the succeeding generations. I have also been able to add several not mentioned by him and others of the senior classics in the years after I869.
I give you two pedigrees, those of Jebb and Butler.

JEBB

John de Witt
G=de \Yitt
I
Samuel Jebb=Elizabeth Gilliver Malster of Nottingham

Jacob de Witt
Grand Pensionary of
Holland

6. Richard
5. Alderman in Limerick

John, Dean of Cashel
I
John, 2nd Wrangler, F.R.S. D.N.B.

4. Irish High Barrister Irish Iishop.

Court Judge.

D.N.B.

D.N.B.

Hannah=Halifax
Samuel H., 3rd. Wrangler,Chanc.Med.,
Bishop of Gloucester.
D.N.B.
PhysiciRaonbetrotoPHr.i,ncMe.Do.f,Wales

Dr. Samuel, Editor of Roger Bacon. D.N.B.
Sir Richard Jebb, Bart., M.D., F.R.S.,
F.S.A. D.N.B.

32 Sir Richard Claverhouse Jebb,
Senior Classic O.M. D.N.B. 2.

Rev. H. H. Jebb

Robert Eglantine=A. T. Jebb

I.

Eglantine J.,

Geraldine H.,

R. Jebb.

Eglantine J.,

Tutor of

Principal of

W.W.

Philanthropist.

Somerville.

Bedford College.

D.N.B.

W.W.

W.W.

Samuel Jebb's wife, Elizabeth Gilliver, was Dutch. Her mother was a de Witt and a first cousin of John de Witt, the grand pensionary of Holland

I52 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
BUTLER
5. Weedon Butler. Schoolmaster, Chelsea, Friend of Burke. D.N.B.

4. Weedon, B. (Wrangler.) D.N.B.

George (Sen. Wr.) Headmaster of Harrow,
Dean of Peterboro'. D.N.B.

3. Wrangler

George,

Spencer,

Fellow, Exeter, Wrangler,

Headmaster of gth Classic

Liverpool. D.N.B.

|

2.

2. G.
G.

G.
G.

B.,I1DN.B
B., IWrangler

A. S. B., Prof., St.

Andrews

I. Sir Cyril, Civil Servant 2. Sir Harcourt, G.C.S.I. 3. Sir Montague, Master of

Pembroke

4. A. F. B., Wrangler

5. R. L. G. B., 2nd Chanc.,

Med., Fellow of Corpus

6. Sir Geoffrey, Fellow of

Corpus. D.N.B.

Arthur, Fellow of Oriel, Headmaster of
Haileybury.
H. E. B., Fellow of New Coll., Prof. of Latin, London

Montague,
Senior Classic, Headmaster
SeniorClassic, Headmaster Harrow, Master of Trinity.
J. R. M. I., xSt Ch.
Medal, Prof. of Mod. History, Camb.
2. Sir N. M. B., Ambassador, Brazil

R. A. B., M.P., Fellow of Corpus, late Minister of Education

I. E. F. M. B., ist Class Clas. Trip.
2. G.M.B.,
Open Quarter-mile Champion

Over twenty of the descendants of George B., the Senior Wrangler, have taken first-class honours at the universities

Mathematicians

regards mathematical ability itself, the

Galton was of opinion that great mathe- following pedigree of the Turnbull-Hudson

maticians neither transmitted general ability connection is probably new to you and

nor specialized mathematical ability. With highly suggestive.

due deference, I differ on both points. Three
of our most prolific pedigrees, Alderson, Pollock and Butler start from a senior

Galton had a chapter on athletes largely to point out that physical prowess and in-

wrangler at or near the top. Without telligence follow the same laws of inheritance.

making a systematic study, I was able of The pedigrees of professional scullers and

my own knowledge to record eminent rela- cricketers in recent years confirm the con-

tives of senior wranglers in sixteen cases. As clusions he drew.

TURNBULL HUDSON
Amateur Scientist (M.)

(II:.)

2nd Wr. * (M.)

()

(.)3rd Wr. (M.)

i6th Wr.
(M.)

26th Wr.
(M.)

2nd Wr. *
(M.)

Senior Wr. *
(M.)

8th Wr. Ist Cl. Math.
(F.) Oxford

Entr. Schol., St. John's (M.)

M.=Male. F. =Female. * =Smith's Prizeman Note.-The seven sibs and first cousins, all with first-class honours in mathematics

7th Wr. (F.)

GALTON'S "HEREDITARY GENIUS"

Conclusions

most eminent men are not the sons of

In conclusion let us compare Galton's eminent fathers. Galton puts the ratio at

aggregate figures with those I have quoted. 2 to 9, but the two are a product from
hundreds and the nine from millions of

Galton My figures fathers. How does it come about that any

Total number

300 227 eminent men arise from very unlikely

Percentage figures

per cent per cent parentage ? I suppose from a favourable but

Fathers ... ... ...

Brothers ... ... ...

Sons

......

...

31
41 48

25 very unlikely combination of genes. To take

39
I9

an analogy, supposing I toss ten pennies into

the air it is very unlikely I will toss ten heads,

Grandfathers
Uncles ...
Nephews ...
Grandsons

...
...
...

...
...
...
...

I7 i8
22
I4

I8 but it is not so wildly improbable as Jeans's

24
23

6oo monkeys playing on typewriters one of

II whom would in a million years tap out by

G.-grandfathers

...

Grand uncles ... ...

3 5

II TO

chance the fourteen lines of a Shakespeare sonnet. As a matter of fact {the chance is

First cousins ... Grand nephews ...
G.-grandsons ...

... 13 O10 3

22 one in I,024, and if one was dealing with

7 3

millions of tosses one would expect to accomplish it thousands of times. But sup-

They will not stand a fine comparison. pose nine of the pennies had heads on both

His total is larger than mine (300,227), and sides then one would expect to do it every

from his wider range includes many indivi- second time. This analogy is rather far

duals who were " illustrious." I have in- fetched because there is no sharp cut line

cluded an actor group which will somewhat between those deemed eminent and those

lower my figures for eminent relatives. My just below them in ability.

figure for first cousins, like his, appears to be The fact that only two-elevenths of

higher than that for other relatives in the eminent men are the sons of eminent men

third degree of relationship. There is, how- often leads to misunderstanding. It is

ever, one broad conclusion we may safely assumed that nine-elevenths spring hap-

draw; it is that the number of eminent sons hazard from all the rest of the community.

has diminished woefully. I think that there It is probable that Galton's E class will pro-

is but one explanation for this. It is the vide a greater fraction than any lower class,

great diminution in the number of sons. If and this will continue as one descends the

one has no son, one cannot have an eminent scale of intelligence. Very few eminent men

son. Do we lose much by this tendency? will spring from parentage in the lower half.

Who can doubt it ? Think of the families of Has anyone ever heard of even one eminent

Spenser Butler, of Lord Salisbury, of Dr. man both of whose parents were mentally

Vaughan and many others. It is true that deficient ?

