REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

213

Kelynaek, P. N., M.D. (Ed.) Defective Children. Bale Sons and Co.; 1915; 7s. 6d. net; I6+462 pp.
A COLLECTION of studies on the chief forms of defectiveness in childrenmental, moral and physical-by 27 well-known experts. The work is intended to serve as a complementary volume to " Medical Examination of Schools and Scholars," i9io, and to provide scientific workers for child welfare with information on problems which relate to the care and control of defective children of school age. It also affords helpful direction on prophylactic measures, where these can be adopted. The cure or alleviation of well-defined personal ailments such as those dealt with in the book, which must naturally interfere with a child's education, cannot fail to be a matter of concern to the whole community. For mentally defectives who are educable, special schools are required, while for the ineducable and the epileptic, farm colonies seem to be desirable. In his paper on the " Mentally Defective Child" Dr. Hamilton Marr devotes important sections to " Causation" and "Principles of Management."
The systematic medical examination of school-going children, in accordance with the Act of 1907, has revealed a very high percentage of
physical defects. A summary in percentage form gives the following: Defects of vision, io; hearing, 5; ear disease, 3; injurious decay of teeth, 50; malnutrition, Io. Papers of special importance are: Defective Children and the Co-relation of the Public Services, by Ed. W. Hope,
M.D., D.Sc.; School Clinics, by Lewis D. Cruickshank, M.D., D.P.H.; Defective Growth and Development in Infancy, Childhood and Youth, by Hastings Gilford, F.R.C.S.; 7he Mentally Defective Child, by Hamilton C. Marr, M.D.; Open-Air Schools and Residential Schools for Defective Children, by Lewis Williams, M.D., D.P.H.; Idiots and Imbeciles, by Douglas W. Hunter, M.B., D.P.H.; Crimtinal Children, by William C. Sullivan, M.D. Defective children in Canada, the United States, France, Hungary and Germany are also dealt with severally. A useful, working bibliography is appended to each paper.
Saleeby, C. W., M.D., F.R.S. Edin. The Progress of Eugenics. Cassell; 1914; price 5s. net; pp. 259.
THE publication of an extensive book by Dr. Saleeby is bound to be an important event to the Eugenic movement in this country. Persuasive, eloquent and dogmatic, his works inspire enthusiasm even more widely than they excite controversy. The truth is that Dr. Saleeby is among the few who have gripped the ethical significance of our power to modify the race, and he has the gifts of a popular preacher to make manifest the faith that is in him. In The Progress of Eugenics he preaches a bold, clear doctrine, the outcome of his practical thought and working enthusiasm. Positive advice is given freely, to mothers, to fathers, and to adolescents. Popular prejudices and popular fallacies are freely combated; misinterpretors and critics of eugenics are dealt with patiently, and on the whole, convincingly.
The discoursive nature of this book, and its inevitable omission of any deep and difficult problems, may be indicated to those who are not already familiar with Dr. Saleeby's works by a few paragraph headings. Eugenics and Natural Selection occupies four pages containing a vigorous denunciation of Neo-Darwinism, whose tenets, according to Dr. Saleeby, ' practically consist in the condemnation of charity and altruism in all their forms, and being contrary to every religion but Mammonism, have no sanction either in science or in morality." One is thankful to see that Charles Darwin himself escapes this fire of condemnation, but one is left doubtful as to whether or not it was his sprinkling of Larmarckianism which saves him. The Duties of Fatherhood, containing an excellent plea for the common parental care of children, passes on to the advantages of maternity benefits, and the need for State obstetricians. The Housing

214 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Problem is potlitical, and sometimes offensively so, but no harm is done by

presupposing noxious doctrines in order to destroy them, so long as one

does not, purposely or accidentally, associate them with more thoughtful

views. This is perhaps the most serious defect of Dr. Saleeby's work,

and arises directly out of his easy and superficial presentation of difficult

problems. If Dr. Saleeby had more respect for those who disagree with

him, and would realise that they are equally likely to have thought care-

fully over a subject before expressing an opinion, it would be possible to

commend his work with far fewer reservations.

R. A. FISHER.

NaSh, J. T. C. Evolution and Disease. Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton,

Kent and Co.; 19I5; price 3s. 6d. net; pp. 73.

THIS is one of those books that drive to despair the unhappy reviewer

anxious to do justice to his author. All books on science, certainly all

books on evolution, whether scientific or not, have a clearly defined aim.

The writer sets out to describe something, or prove something, and all

through the reader is able to perceive the trend of the endeavour. The

author of the book before us apparently kept a note-book, in which he

recorded the opinions of a great many people, principally eminent

medical men, on a variety of subjects, especially disease. He now gives

us the contents of that note-book and adds, occasionally, some of his own

opinions. He has divided his matter into chapters, to which he has given

titles which bear more or less clearly on their contents. He speaks of the

evolution of ideas, of sanitation, of epidemics, of diseases, of disease

germs. I think he most particularly wishes to demonstrate that diseases,

or disease germs, are not immutable. Of course they are not. It is, for

instance, only necessary to take lymph from a smallpox patient, pass it

through a series of calves, and bring it back to man to demonstrate that

point. The vaccination from which our children suffer to-day is merely

the smallpox, much modified, which afflicted their predecessors.

The following passage is a, fair sample of the author's method. It

is perhaps worth while noting that plants and lower animals have their

diseases as well as men, and that only some human diseases are influenced

by municipal and personal uncleanliness. For instance, uncleanliness,

however much we strain the term, has no effect on the air-borne group

of diseases-e. g., measles, common cold, bronchitis, pneumonia, influenza,

whooping-cough, mumps, chicken-pox, and smallpox.

" Municipal and personal uncleanliness are clearly among the chief

evolutionary factors in disease. I am not one of those who believe that

disease germs entered one by one into the ark to transmit each its own

species unchanged through the ages. It is very questionable if at that

early stage of probably their

phruotmoatnypehsisitnorythe#nfyorpmatohfogheanrimcleosrsgasnaipsrmosphyextiesstewde, rethtooungeh

found. As men began to crowd together and violated the laws of clean-

liness, through ignorance or gross neglect, so gradually came into

existence the necessary factors which resulted, as I conceive it, in the

evolutionised forms of organisms which are accountable for disease. It

is, or should be, our business to see, as far as it lies in our power, that

evolution should proceed on favourable lines, that bacteria should evolve

in the direction of usefulness and not of harmfulness. How interesting,

and natural, and (I say it with all reverence) divine, is the working out

of evolutionary law! In life as distinguished from death all processes

are gradual. Death may be gradual, but how often it is sudden and

catastrophic. The processes of digestion, the healing of wounds, the

working out of ideas-all these are slow, sure, and accomplished by

gradual change. The violent earthquake, the rending lightning, the

deadly bullet-these move swiftly working destruction, undoing in a

moment the work of years, of ages, of epochs."'

1 P. 58.

G. A. R.

