PAUL BLOOMFIELD

Some Studies of British Heredity

FOUR RECENT BOOKS

I DEALLY, SOCIAL MOBILITY is a guarantee eugenics England is shown by Dr. Wagner to

of social stability. This is not a paradox, but have gained from not being too caste-conscious.

tempo is the least studied aspect of social Relatively, our Society with a capital S has for a

change and it seems to have needed grave events long time been open to charm, push, talent and

in Africa to draw public attention to a factor as money. When in 1842 the daughter of an

essential for good progress as for the proper English earl married an Esterhazy, "her position

performance of a symphony-in which, too, a in the society of Vienna" (according to G. W. E.

co-operative effort has to be made to get the Russell) "was soon found to be intolerable,

right result. Violins, double-basses, trumpets, because the experts in genealogy discovered that

etc., are not expected to sound the same notes in her grandmother's father had been a banker, and

unison, but they are asked to keep time con- that therefore the requisite Sixteen Quarterings

sonantly with a general design. We should, more- were in her case incomplete". In England long

over, be surprised if we came across a score before that, nabobs like Robert Pitt, industrialists

marked prestissimo throughout. Although in like Sir Thomas Lombe and Jewish financiers

colonial as in domestic affairs there are differ- like Sampson Gideon had seen their sons and

ences of opinion as to what the best tempo of daughters marry into the aristocracy without

change really is, the British record is a remark- risk of ostracism. To this day charm rather

able one. In a word, the talent of the British for perhaps than talent or even a large bank balance

colonial administration owes a good deal to is the surest spell for procuring the suspension of

their experience at home, in the fortunate Mother condescending attitudes by people with pedigrees.

Country of bloodless revolutions.

Though we must not make too much of it, the

Dr. Wagner's admirable, full and authorita- undertow is there. In the mid-nineteenth century

tive English Genealogy* is a thousand-years' Lord Stanley at the Colonial Office never once

history of families rising and falling. It embraces talked to his eminent Under-Secretary, James

revolution and evolution, immigration and Stephen, about anything but public business. On

emigration, touches tactfully on eugenics and the last page of Social Mobility in England (edited

inspires reflection on the nature of class and the by D. V. Glass and published six years ago)

mechanism of change-from which the concept Rosalind Chambers writes: "The members of

of tempo is inseparable. A right understanding the Women's Institutes, the Red Cross and the

of class is at least as desirable as a sense of W.V.S. may work together harmoniously in

judicious timing, for though we may not always their activities. The policeman's wife may be an

be going to have the poor with us, class (possibly official, the doctor's wife an ordinary member;

masked, as individual character itself may in- the railwayman's wife may run a club for old

creasingly come to be) is inherent in every body people and the general's wife be her subordin-

politic. This is not to say that social snobbery ate. But they will not invite each other to lunch."

will never be eliminated, nor, on the other hand, An illustration of Dr. Wagner's axiom that a

that republicans and marxists have not already social class is "an endogamous class . .. whose

found means of bottling and serving up some of members normally marry within it"; invitations

the old wine.

to lunch-one must again qualify with "nor-

From the point of view of both politics and mally"-precede proposals of marriage.

* Wagner, Anthony Richard. English Genealogy.
Oxford, 1960. The Clarendon Press. Pp. xii + 397. Price 55s.

Dr. Wagner's history reveals not just one gradually expanding endogamous superior class, but also alongside of such a class (let us call it

i6i

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1960, 52, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

by its current name ofEstablishment), individuals life of Florence Nightingale-whose mother was

of uncommon ability founding families, families Joanna Maria's sister Fanny-tells us that "none

becoming cousinhoods, endogamous classes of his [William Smith's] ten children died before

becoming mutually acceptable to one another- the age of sixty-nine, six lived to be over eighty,

and to the Establishment. The circumstances and Fanny lived to be ninety-two". Florence

under which such classes emerged are ably Nightingale herself was over ninety when she

touched in. Soldiers, courtiers, sectarians-home- died. The Hampshire family into which Joanna

bred or immigrant-manufacturers, administra- Maria introduced the Smith vitality, longevity,

tors, all sorts have in their time invoked the charm and good-will was already well endowed

genealogists and the College of Heralds. It has by nature. In spite of a Dissenting phase they

always, and justly, been felt it was something, went through they remained to all intents and

to "arrive", an agreeable form of success which purposes Establishment; the law had its indul-

the Establishment has known how to acknow- gences for people of that social calibre. In

ledge with ceremony and the bestowal of Portsmouth they were paramount. "The family",

dignities. On at least one historic occasion it was says Mr. Victor Bonham-Carter, "controlled the

the new arrivals who took the initiative-by parliamentary nominations almost without ex-

inviting the Establishment to lunch. In June 1831 ception until the Reform Act of 1832....

T. F. Buxton, later the emancipator of the negro Between 1747 and 1835 Carters were Mayors of

slaves, and his Quaker in-laws entertained the Portsmouth thirty-two times, while the thirty-

Prime Minister, Lord Grey, and many other five aldermen elected between 1778 and 1832

leading Whigs and Tories to a feast of beefsteaks were all Carter nominees; likewise the majority

at the Truman brewery in Spitalfields. If these of new burgesses." In the main, then, this is a

high-minded men intended to show that they story ofsocial stability. Did the Carters (Bonham-

had arrived, it was less in order to inflate their Carter after 1827, when the fourth John Carter

own status than to remind those whom it inherited his Bonham cousin's property) ... did

might concern that they and the voters behind the Carters justify, have the Bonham-Carters

them were a force to be reckoned with. The party justified, their pull? They have been public

was a great success. Two years later their servants, civilly, and militarily by land and sea.

Abolition of Slavery Bill-drafted by the James They were liberal in sentiment, and the members

Stephen whom Stanley treated so coldly- of the family whom the eminent A. V. Dicey,

became law. In 1833 also Macaulay made the husband of Elinor Bonham-Carter, infected with

famous speech in which he prophesied that the his distaste for Gladstonian liberalism did not

day of Indian independence would be "the on that account become reactionaries or drones.

proudest in English history".

Anyhow Elinor's youngest brother did his best

Macaulay, like Buxton, belonged to one of the
most interesting of the endogamous classes to whom Dr. Wagner draws attention, an intellectual and philanthropic aristocracy mostly of middle-class origin. Macaulay's brother-in-law Sir Charles Trevelyan reformed the Civil Service, Buxton's sister-in-law, Mrs. Fry, reformed the prisons, his nephew, W. E. Forster, reformed public education. Among Buxton's abolitionist allies and prominent members of the Evangelical Clapham Sect was the wealthy and benevolent William Smith, M.P. for Norwich. With this Mr. Smith we come to the second of our books.

to provide a counter-irritant by marrying the Prime Minister Asquith's daughter Violet.
The Prime Minister Baldwin, son of one of the Macdonald Sisterst, came maternally from a Dissenting family very different from the Carters so long and comfortably entrenched at Portsmouth. The Reverend George Macdonald was not an Englishman from the south but a Celt from Skye; he was dependent for a living on a meagre salary, and so far from being entrenched anywhere had to change his manse every three
years. Between 1784 and 1814 his father, he himself and his son, all three in the ministry,

For of Mr. Smith's five daughters (he also had * Bonhm-Carter, Victor. In a Liberal Tradition.

five sons) one, Joanna Maria, married John Bonham-Carter*. Mrs. Woodham-Smith in her

London, 1960. Constable. Pp. xiii + 255. Price 30s.
t Baldwin, A. W. The Macdonald -Sisters. London,
1960. Peter Davies. Pp. x + 238. Price 30s.

I62

SOME STUDIES OF BRITISH HEREDITY

moved house no less than fifty-six times. But if Eugenists sometimes predict ability but genius

these rolling stones gathered no moss they never. The man of genius in the Macdonald con-

exhibited a second and more significant kind of nection was Kipling, son of Alice Macdonald

mobility. In spite of the awkward mode of life and John Kipling, whose father was another of

willingly embraced by him, George Macdonald those Methodist ministers and a man "of strong

and his splendid wife, born Hannah Jones, raised intellectual, literary and artistic gifts". Lord

a delightful and successful family, and were the Baldwin's description and well chosen quota-

grandparents of Stanley Baldwin and Rudyard tions, for which his book is remarkable all

Kipling. At the end of his book, which is very through, testify to the elder Kipling's humanity

well done indeed, Lord Baldwin gloomily asks a and good sense, and of his awareness equally of

question-and answers it himself. As follows. Western materialism, Eastern callousness, and

"Why was there such a flowering of talent for the inconsistencies found at both poles....

two generations, and then from that fertile plot The really strange thing is that the young

hardly anything more? . .. As with empires so Rudyard, equipped as he was with affectionate

with families, the causes of their rise and fall lie parents, that wonderful old grandmother and

far beyond our measuring. Poodles may be such sympathetic aunts, should have been left in

bred to type, but not Macdonald sisters."

charge of the abominable Mrs. Holloway while

The charm, wit and character ofthe Macdonald sisters was a product ofthe conjunction of George Macdonald with Hannah Jones, who had
eleven children of whom eight grew up. In the third generation, over which Lord Baldwin
mourns, there have not been eight times eight times eight children, that is to say 512: there were only twelve, including Kipling's beloved elder daughter who died aged seven and his

his father and mother were in India. There, at Southsea (by Portsmouth), in the reign so to speak of John Bonham-Carter II, the little fellow was put to the torture. "In 1871 there had
arrived a sturdy child of nearly six . . . happy, noisy, spoilt, and quite free from shyness. In 1877 when the rescue came, the boy was half blind and cowed to the point of suffering from delusions." How was it that his aunt Georgiana,

only son who was killed in the first world war. with whom he spent his holidays, never smelt a The third generation cannot in fact be denied rat? At least she "saved Ruddy from total

talent (witness the book under review, if one despair". Her gifts of sympathy constituted her a may say so), and in the fourth, not marked in the very important person in the Morris circle to author's table, there is a decidedly promising which her husband belonged, and she was writer. Lord Baldwin's final remark is perhaps William Morris's best friend and confidante. the only flaw in a warm and sensitive book. For There is no harm in guessing that Mrs. who at any time contemplated trying to breed Macdonald, born Hannah Jones, with what Macdonald sisters to type, as if they were Lord Baldwin calls her "gloom-shotwit", was the poodles? The famous four who got married- best of nature and nurture to her daughters; Mrs. Kipling, Lady Burne-Jones, Mrs. Baldwin she was a woman of great character. The same and Lady Poynter-no more chose their primacy can be accorded another Hannah, husbands with any idea of breeding to type than Hannah Smith, born Whittall, of our last book*, out of any nostalgie de la boue or other dysgenic though with the reservation that her children's impulse. The most engaging of them, Georgiana most distinguished ancestor had been on the Burne-Jones, in marrying her Ned infected father's side-James Logan from the north of

into the stock an element of the hypersensitive that was unlikely, among its potentially interesting consequences, to reinforce the peculiar sturdiness of the Macdonalds. Their descendants have had lively minds, and they were the great-
grandparents of the promising writer alluded to

Ireland who was Chief Justice and acting
Governor of Pennsylvania in the 1739s. A Family ofFriends tells a most odd, absorbing story. The outline of it is this. Hannah Whittall, daughter of a rich Pennsylvanian Quaker glass manufacturer, married one of her father's employees,

above who, it is true, had the distinguished Professor Mackail for a grandfather.

* Allerton Parker, R. A Family of Friends. London,
1960. Museum Press. Pp. 232. Price 27s. 6d.

I63

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Robert Pearsall-Smith. Robert, carrying his wife inclined individuals, the heirs of the Clapham

with him, became a preacher of the "Higher Sect with additions and subtractions. The

Life". He had his father-in-law's loyal support. significance of the kind of re-crystallization of a

These attractive fanatics made a hit in England class which this meant, lies in the progressive

among the more eccentric members of the social developments they foster. Though many

aristocracy, whom they reciprocally found to of the Bloomsbury coterie were tout ce qu'il y a

their taste. Of their three children who survived de plus choosy, unchristianly determined to

infancy Alys became Bertrand Russell's first suffer fools not at all, highly sceptical of vulgar-

wife, her sister Mary took as her second husband isation undertaken with even the best intentions,

the great Bernard Berenson, and the son, Logan for all their reaction against the ancestral

Pearsall-Smith, developed into an expatriate Evangelicalism (and philistinism) they extended

anglophile man of letters of the class of Henry the range of Clapham philanthropy. They used

James, H. 0. Sturgis and T. S. Eliot. One of their prestige to combat genteel anti-semitism,

Mary's children by her first husband married the cruel inconsistencies of conventional moral-

Oliver Strachey, the other married Virginia ity, the ill-treatment of animals. Lord Keynes

Woolf's brother Adrian Stephen, grandson of the took a keen interest in eugenics.... Why the

James Stephen of the Colonial Office already Pearsall-Smiths fitted in is soon explained. They

mentioned more than once in this article.

were sensitive and intelligent. They had charm.

There was, indeed, so much more that was They had character.

fascinating about the overtones of the Smiths'

social mobility than the brave author of this One point remains to be made quite clear at

book about them was in a position to convey, the end of a short and necessarily discursive

that it might seem rather a duty than a pleasure review like this one. Whatever the respective

to look at it from a social-historical viewpoint. merits of the four books discussed (and Lord

And yet, since the indications seem to be that Baldwin's is about as good as it could be of its

one must go to Bloomsbury for part of the kind) it should be understood that Dr. Wagner's

explanation of what happened, the duty would English Genealogy is an important standard

not be a distasteful one. For in the early days of work, learned, readable and suggestive, and

the Smiths' romantic period there was pre- justice is best done to it if one says so, hoping

paring to conglobulate in Bloomsbury a very those interested in the subject will lose no time

special, interesting assortment of endogamously in getting it for themselves.

I 64

