THE CONTROL OF POPULATION
By C. P. BLACKER

T HE need for controlling population-
for adjusting population to available
food supplies-can be seen in several contexts. It appears as a British problem,
as a Commonwealth problem and as a world problem.
Let us first consider how populations grow. A demographic cycle has been described with four phases or stages. The demar-
cations are not exact and the course through them is variable. They can be described as the high stationary, the early expanding, the late expanding and the low stationary phases. To these we could add a fifth or declining phase. The high stationary phase, of which China is a large-scale example, is characterized by high birth-rates-generally around or above 40 per thousand-and high death-rates, which balance the birthrates. The high stationary phase characterizes peoples living near the subsistence level, who have gained but little ' control over natural forces and fall easy victims of their vicissitudes. In good years, when crops are plentiful and when livestock prospers, death-rates fall and population increases. But in response to such catastrophes as droughts, pestilences or floods, the gains are lost through numerous deaths. A widely fluctuating death-rate, opposing a
continuously high fertility, mainly determines the size of the population, which varies from year to year. Countries perhaps to be counted in the high stationary phase are Afghanistan, Persia, Arabia and Ethiopia. So are many native peoples of Africa, Indonesia and South America.
The second or early expanding stage is characterized by birth-rates of the high stationary level, and by lower, often falling,
* Extract of a lecture given at the fourth annual conference of the Rationalist Press Associatio±, at Magdalen College, Oxford, on August gth, 1949. Dr. Blacker made it clear that he spoke for himself only. His remarks in no way committed any of the organizations with which he was connected.

death-rates. The difference between the two
rates, migration being ignored, is the measure of the natural increase. The fall in deathrates is brought about by improved nutrition and better medical services. All the countries of South-east Asia except China (which is in the high stationary phase) and Japan (which is in the late expanding phase) are, or were till recently, in this stage. The population of
the sub-continent of India, which is in the early expanding stage, probably increased by 50 million in the decade I93I-4I; the Health Survey and Development Committee of India, reporting in I946, regarded it as possible that the population of India might, in response to improved conditions, increase
by as much as 8o million in a decade.
The third or late expanding stage is
characterized by declining birth- and deathrates, the death-rates being consistently
lower than the birth-rates, thus yielding annual increases of population. The U.S.S.R.
is the largest and most important country included in this group. The birth-rate had fallen, in I934 and I935, to 30-I and the death-rate to about 20. Since that date the birth-rate has gone up and the death-rate down, thus accelerating the annual rate of increase. Japan is another country in the
late expanding stage. The fourth or low stationary phase is
characterized by low birth- and death-rates which, though not necessarily balancing each other exactly, so interact that the population about replaces itself. In this stage are most of the " Western " countries, despite the
fact that many have registered post-war
increases. To these four stages we can if we like add a
fifth, a declining phase. Between I936 and I943 the population of France (migration apart) was declining, deaths being more numerous than births.
Let us now turn from a consideration of stages of the demographic cycle to the

149

I50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

position of this country as found by the population of Great Britain thrived and

Royal Commission on Population whose multiplied it came to rely increasingly on the

report was published in June (I949). The granaries of the New World, much as Rome

report consists of three main parts. The and Constantinople waxed by drawing on the

first analyses the present trends of the granaries of North Africa. As long as we

country's population. The second assesses the remained a rich country with overseas credits

implications of these trends from the stand- few complained, though many disliked the

points of balance of payments, age balance, spoliation of countryside and coasts. But

migration and Great Britain's status in the when the end of the recent war came we

British Commonwealth; the result of this found our population larger than ever before,

assessment is expressed in the following our credits gone and many competitors for

words: " We have no hesitation in concluding our goods in the world's markets. It has

that a replacement size offamily is desirable in been calculated that we are now produc-

Great Britain at the present time." The third ing in this country about 40 per cent of

part advances recommendation as to how the food which, according to a dietetic

this replacement size could, in practice, be standard lower than that which prevailed

achieved. Various social measures are advo- before the war, we need to sustain Great

cated which are simultaneously designed to Britain's population of 48 million. Accord-

make parenthood voluntary, eliminating the ing to the fuller pre-war standard we produce

misconceived and unwanted child, and to but 3I per cent of our food requirements.

induce parents to replace their generation The Royal Commission clearly sees that the

by producing a sufficiency of wanted chil- necessary imports of food may be difficult to

dren. The Commission introduces a new maintain, though they take, on balance, an

measure of replacement which they think is optimistic view of the prospect. But their

to-day more meaningful than the net repro- optimism is not universally shared, and it

duction rate, namely the size of the family, may be belied by events. Conditions may

by which they mean the average number of well worsen when aid from America ends or if

live births to a marriage of completed ferti- markets for our industrial goods close against

lity. The average post-war size of the family us. They may even be transitorily worsened

is 2-2 children. To effect replacement a size by a dock strike. Our dense townships

of 2-4 is needed, an increase of 6 per cent. further make us the most vulnerable country

The social measures recommended in Part III in the world to atomic weapons. A growing

of the report are therefore suggestions for number of people may come to feel that our

controlling the population, in this case by basic position would be safer if our population

increasing births by about 6 per cent.

were reduced to within, say, 5 or io per cent

The Commission recognizes the unique of the number we could comfortably feed

position held by Great Britain in respect of from our own resources.

its population needs. The fact that this This sentiment may well be reinforced by

country entered earlier than other countries another set of considerations. Our present

into the industrial revolution enabled us, by standard of living, though defective when

selling our manufactured products, to import judged by pre-war standards, is incompar-

increasing quantities of food. Our population ably better than that prevailing over much

thus began to increase earlier than that of of the world. Most of the countries in the

other countries, and this numerical increase high stationary and early expanding phases

led, in its turn, to the process which Wood- of the demographic cycle, though suffering

row Wilson described as " the swarming of high death-rates and much hardship from

the English." Rich but sparsely populated malnutrition, have been afflicted by these

countries in the New World and in the conditions from time immemorial and accept

southern hemisphere were colonized by us. them with little protest. Will they go on

Immense new resources of food were opened doing so ? The social science departments of

up, of which we took advantage. As the India's future universities will be able to

THE CONTROL OF POPULATION

I5I

draw attention to direr needs and more glaring inequalities than have provided
material for our investigators at home; nor will encouragement be lacking from propagandists hostile to this country who proclaim
that the workers of the world have nothing to lose but their chains. In the councils of
U.N.O. and of the Food and Agriculture Organization (F.A.O.) voices may be increasingly heard asserting that needs rather than purchasing power should guide the distribution of the world's food surpluses. We can, it seems to me, predict with something like certainty that we will soon hear this
theme passionately advocated at international food conferences by speakers from
the starving countries; they will be equipped with a formidable armament of facts comparing the calories and vitamins in the dietaries of well-fed with those in ill-fed countries; they will be briefed with figures showing comparative rates of morbidity and mortality and with other nutritive indices. By these outcries the populations of the underfed countries who have hitherto
accepted their fate with apathy will be roused to a new awareness, and the populations of the well-fed countries will develop
new stirrings of conscience. No 'consciences
are more delicate in these matters than those of the British. Thus moral considerations may reinforce economic necessities in evok-
ing a picture of a Britain whose native food
resources should come nearer to meeting the
needs of its population than they do to-day, thus reducing the necessity to draw on the world's disposable food surpluses.
How could such an aim be realized ? Our Commonwealth provides for us an answer which is available to no other country. The Royal Commission was fully aware of this possible solution, and has commendably stressed the unity of the Commonwealth. It recommends that the problem of the likely diminution of the British element
in the Commonwealth " should be studied
jointly by the Governments of Great Britain and the other countries." It further hopes that the Interdepartmental Committee on Social and Economic Research, which they would like to see made responsible for

population research, " would co-operate with
the authorities in other parts of the Common-
wealth and Empire in the study of popula-
tion problems," but they go on to say that
" it would be premature to consider the
setting up of a permanent organization
on a Commonwealth and Empire basis,"
at least until the joint study above mentioned
has been carried out.
If I may speak for myself, I would express
the ardent hope that the joint study in question will be promoted as soon as possible,
and that there will emerge from it two
organizations which would be complementary
to one another. The first would be a Com-
monwealth institute of demographic studies. This institution would be concerned with
study and not with policy; it would collect and co-ordinate information about the populations of the Commonwealth, and it would promote special inquiries to remedy defects in that information. The second organization which I should like to see formed would be a Commonwealth office of population. Its function would be to devise and carry out a policy designed to weld the Commonwealth into a demographic unity supplementing the economic and strategic unities which others are seeking to realize. The nature of the policies devised and approved would depend on the interplay of forces in the countries attracting settlers, and in the mother country from which emigrants would disperse. Geographical ties of a sentimental kind could be established
between certain parts of the mother country and of the dominions and colonies. We have a New Hampshire and a New South Wales. Why not a New Sussex, a New Lincoln, a New Cumberland ? Centres of population, peopled from such counties or regions of the mother country as have natural unity-such, for example, as produce regiments-could be established in areas overseas needing development. Information about the new " coun-
ties "-there might be several, for more than one receiving country might have its new county-could be made available by photographs and exhibits in urban centres and village halls; and training schemes, designed to acquaint the prospective settler with the

I52 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

conditions in which he will live, and to pre- ject, the control of populations in the coun-

pare him for the new life, might be devised, tries now struggling in the high stationary

perhaps, on a county or regional basis. If and early expanding phases of the demo-

goodwill were sustained all round, the Com- graphic cycle.

monwealth Office of Population would have For these, migration is no solution. There

a big task.

is but one solution, the deliberate control of

The effective working of a scheme of large- fertility. But how formidable is the task of

scale Commonwealth settlement would transforming unbending forms of thought

present many formidable difficulties. The and custom evolved over millennia and

families emigrating would need to represent a woven into the texture of religion! At first

cross-section of the population, with its due sight the prospect of imparting, within time

proportion of young and old dependants, for limits which can avert catastrophe, to the

otherwise the mother country would be teeming millions of Asia and to African

depleted of its able-bodied population. The peoples whose tribal customs and traditions

adjustment of the mother country to a are disintegrating under the impact of the

shrinking population would be fraught with white man, a philosophy of life which aspires

stresses, some of which might seem now to to adjusting numbers to resources-this

be wellnigh insurmountable. To reduce the prospect may seem hopeless. But perhaps

population of this country to within io per reflection may slightly mitigate our pessim-

cent of what it could support from its native ism. For the conditions of the present have

food resources would involve a fifty- or never been matched before. Recognition of

perhaps a hundred-years' plan, and would demographic realities is increasingly spread-

involve a transformation of our status as a ing among enlightened men. I again quote

great Power. But such a transformation from the report of the Health Survey and

has already taken place in relation to Development Committee of India, which

the U.S.A., which, if history had taken a consisted of nineteen Indian and seven

slightly different course, might to-day be British persons, all with high medical and

within the Commonwealth. It might administrative qualifications. This com-

have taxed the imagination of our fore- mittee, reporting in I946, declared:

fathers of I50 years ago to visualize America

All of us are agreed that, when childbearing

as the giant of industrial power, numbers and is likely to result in injury to mother or infant,

wealth which now dwarfs us. In another I50 years we may be similarly dwarfed by
Canada and Australia. We need not regret the change if cultural and historical ties are

there is every justification for the practice of contraception. In such cases it would be the responsibility of governments to provide instruction regarding contraception in maternity and child welfare centres, dispensaries, hospitals and

preserved and loyalties do not wane. These any other public institutions which administer

islands would play a part in the Common- medical aid to women.

wealth like that of Jerusalem after the Since malnutrition which augments the

Diaspora.

risks of child-bearing is widespread in India,

These changes may not seem attractive where maternal mortality rates are high, this

to all of us; but they are possibilities which essentially medical recommendation is cap-

developments in the world may perhaps able of wide interpretation. Again, we can

convert into realities and which we should picture the effects of realistic social studies

therefore be ready to meet. My theme, it promoted in universities. New ideas, par-

will be remembered, is " the control of ticularly when disseminated by Government

population." I have tried to describe a agencies, can spread quickly. Consider as

method of controlling population (mainly by an example the experience of the U.S.S.R.,

migration) which is available uniquely to us where, in response (at least in part) to

but which, if realized, might be of deep Government-sponsored facilities forterminat-

significance in the world.

ing pregnancies, birth-rates fell from 45 per

I now turn to the second part of my sub- thousand in I927 to 30-I in I935; and con-

THE CONTROL OF POPULATION

I53

sider how, thereafter, in response to a reversal in Government policy virtually abolishing the
facilities for abortion and offering rewards to mothers of large families, the birth-rate rose
in four years to over 38 per thousand. No country in the world has yet made it
an article of Government policy deliberately to reduce fertility in the national interest.
Who can foretell the results ? If a health service were set up which made it the duty of those responsible for maternity and child welfare to give to every woman delivered of a child information on how to space further pregnancies there might result an ac-
celerated passage through the late expanding to the low stationary phase of the demographic cycle. Let us not forget, in this connection, how rapid was the decline in our own birth-rate from over 35 per thousand in i88o to under I5 in the year I933. This remarkable movement took place without
official encouragement, and similar changes have occurred in other countries. We should
remember that the general idea of adjusting population to food supplies is not essentially foreign to the human mind; Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders has shown how efforts in this direction, taking the form of abortion, infanticide and primitive methods of contraception, have existed in many communities from immemorial times. The spread of birth-control practices began in Britain among the privileged classes and spread to others. There are reasons for thinking that the same thing may be happening in India to-day. We can perhaps visualize the development in such countries of peripatetic services similar in kind to the caravan by means of which Dr. Marie Stopes provided instruction in birth control to rural areas. Winwood Reade, whose Martyrdom of Man is well known, speaking of how the early Egyptians learned to control
the waters of the Nile, wrote: " And then Calamity will come and teach them by torture to invent." It may take the calamities of further pestilences and famines to teach the rapidly multiplying peoples of densely populated countries not so much to invent as to imitate-surely an easier task. Under the impact of Government encouragement and

feminist propaganda, and in the presence of
specially provided facilities, what has been
called " the Cake of Custom " may break up more easily than might seem possible
now.
I will conclude with some general observa-
tions. First about France; the standpoints
of Sweden and France about birth control
and voluntary parenthood afforded a contrast for our Royal Commission, which held two conferences with French demographers. The Swedes have for some years taken the
view (which the Royal Commission itself espouses) that information about birth control should be made universally available,
that pregnancies should be planned and
births wanted. The French, on the other hand, have been confronted for many years
with the realities of a shrinking population which they have sought to mitigate by actively encouraging immigration. They are able to point to the undeniable fact that no country, or even any social element or con-
stituent of any country, has been demonstrably able to replace itself solely by means of planned and wanted pregnancies. French spokesmen are aware of the humanitarian character of the birth-control movement, to which they pay appropriate tributes; but it is their view that to universalize at the
present moment the knowledge of contracep-
tion might lead to " humanity being extinguished by an excess of humanitarianism." It would be a mistake to regard this standpoint as reflecting exclusively the views of the Roman Catholic Church; it springs at least as much from a purely secular apprecia-
tion of recent demographic trends, and of the position of France, which within living memory has thrice been ravaged by an aggressive and populous neighbour. During the two world wars wherein France has so
bitterly suffered, Sweden stood on the sidelines. It is at least possible that if Sweden
had suffered as France has suffered, her strong humanitarian spirit would have found less ready expression in social legislation.
France's birth-rate has recently recovered under the stimulus of massive allowances and
other benefits, some of which are described by the Royal Commission (para. 446).

I54 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

And here a respectful word about the
position of those Churches which oppose
birth control. The standpoint of the
Churches is in a sense more realistic than that adopted by certain humanists who
believe that human nature is quickly perfectible and that all the evils which beset us are traceable to ignorance and
superstition. Deprived of the spur of the goad and the incentive of the carrot, human beings easily lapse into self-indulgence, hedonism and sloth. Most civilized countries
have an element of their upper classes which is ostentatious, extravagant, pleasure-seeking and selfish. In a recent booklet on happiness Dr. R. D. Lawrence has stated that the rich,
spoiled and idle women who have been
among his patients are the most unhappy people he has come across. Such persons are frequently much preoccupied with sex, and their fertility is low. So is the fertility of the very classes who are economically most
favoured. The enervating effect of luxury and self-indulgence, culminating finally in an incapacity for military self-defence, is not to be overlooked. The abuses to which contraception has in the past been put, and to which it
is sometimes put to-day, are seen by some as
a danger which we are not yet morally fitted to challenge. There may be more in this contention than is generally conceded to-day. The position of the birth-controller would be stronger if he could point to any country or to any social element in any country which, by the " constructive " use of birth control, had eliminated the unplanned pregnancy and the unwanted child and yet produced enough
children for continuous replacement. I admit that investigators of human reproduction have only recently begun to inquire about
which pregnancies were planned and which children wanted. Further light will doubtless be thrown on this difficult but important question by further research. I for one will feel happier when this achievement is definitely confirmed.
Life can be said to be a balance between
rights and duties. In some phases of social
development duties are overstressed; in others, rights. In the inter-war period we heard much talk about the right to happiness,

a phrase which, as the late Major Leonard Darwin said, could be used to justify any
form and degree of selfishness. In a noteworthy passage which has been widely quoted in the Press, the Royal Commission
say (para. 363):
The cult of childlessness and the vogue of the
one-child family were symptoms of something profoundly unsatisfactory in the Zeitgeist of the
inter-war period, which it may not be entirely fanciful to connect with the sophistications and complacencies which contributed to the catastrophe of the second world war.
I will now venture to make a dogmatic
assertion. It is that a generation which replaces itself by means of wanted children,
employing contraception to that end in the " constructive " sense stressed by Dr.
Stopes, will have to think of duties before rights. If we can, in this country, produce such a population the outlook will be bright. Hitherto sexual impulses have mainly determined reproduction; but contraception dissociates parenthood from these impulses. In the animal world parental instincts unfold in due course after young are born in a natural and unconscious sequence. It has been contended that philoprogenitiveness, or " genophilia " (a word invented by Dr. Spencer Paterson to denote a love of and delight in children), is not sufficiently strong and consistent an instinct to guarantee of itself the effectivereproduction of human beings. Contraception thus brings philoprogenitiveness into a new prominence as a determinant of human survival.
If, then, replacement proves possible when contraception is fully used, genophilia will acquire a novel biological importance; and if, as has been contended, altruism has its source in parental instincts, we may witness a slow improvement of human nature. We will at least see an improvement in the conditions under which children are reared. The misbegotten and unwanted child will become the exception, and the distortions of character traceable to lovelessness and neglect in childhood will become rarer. On both social and biological grounds gains would be made; Nature would cooperate with Nurture in raising humanity to new levels.
Engeies Review, Vol. XLM, No. 8

