NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.

By NORMAN E. HIMES, Ph.D.

Hewitt Sterilization Case

illegitimate. Four years after her birth he

D URING January the American news- married the mother. According to a report

papers were filled with the so-called in Time (January 20th), Mrs. Hewitt II Hewitt sterilization case. Before com- (Mrs. McCarter) by the terms of his will

menting upon the possible effects of this publicity upon public opinion, I shall review

" receives one-third of the income from a
$I,300,000 trust fund, Ann Hewitt two-thirds

briefly the facts as nearly as they can be -the daughter's share to pass to her children,

pieced together. It is alleged that Ann if any, or to revert to her mother if she [the

Cooper Hewitt, who has since attained her daughter] should die childless." Hence a

majority, was recently sterilized by two California physicians upon the consent of her

motive for the operation. The daughter, in an affidavit, declared that the mother, though

mother and guardian, now Mrs. Maryon claiming descent from Southern aristocracy,

McCarter. The alleged motive was to secure was actually the daughter of a San Francisco

a larger portion of the income of the estate horse-car driver, an allegation confirmed by

of Ann's father, Peter Cooper Hewitt. On old inhabitants of that city.

August I4th, I934, a California State Health In thousands of columns this story has

Department psychologist rated the girl, then been spread over the pages of American

twenty, as having a mental age of eleven. newspapers. What will be its effect upon

The mother's physician, Dr. T. E. Tillman, public opinion? No one, of course, knows;

recommended that Ann be sterilized as but it is interesting to speculate. It is reason-

feeble-minded. On August i8th, in the course able to suppose that hundreds of thousands

of an appendectomy, the surgeon, Dr. S. G. and probably millions of American citizens

Boyd, at Mrs. Hewitt's request and without have learned for the first time that steriliza-

Ann's knowledge, performed a sterilizig tion is medically possible. Will it bring

operation. The mother is now being sued for sterilization into disrepute ? That seems

mayhem, and is at present near death in New doubtful. Certainly if the much-married

Jersey as a result of an overdose of a drug Mrs. Hewitt II (she lost one husband by

alleged to have been taken in an attempt to death, two by divorce, two by aulment)

commit suicide.

succeeds in what looks like a suicide attempt,

Ann comes of a long line of distinguished an interesting legal battle will be avoided.

inventors, her great-grandfather, Peter The case has brought into public focus the

Cooper, having built the first U.S. steam possibilities of abuse in sterilization; but, as

locomotive, the Tom Thumb. He pioneered Mr. E. S. Gosney, of the Human Betterment

in iron manufacture and promoted the first Foundation, pointed out in an interview to

transatlantic cable. Her grandfather, Abram the Press, this is the first case of its kind

Hewitt, who married Peter Cooper's only known in the United States in thirty-six

daughter, built the first U.S. open-hearth years of the history of sterilization. Mr.

furnmace, early manufactured steel, and be- Gosney further pointed out that we have

came mayor of New York by defeating numerous court records of heirs or bene-

Henry George and Theodore Roosevelt. ficiaries who have murdered relatives in

Abram's son developed the mercury vapour order to secure insurance money. But no one

lamp, discovered a basic principle of the proposes that life insurance should therefore

vacuum-tube amplifier, pioneered with be a olished. My personal judgmnent is that

numerous other inventions, and died in i92i. this case will not do material damage to the

Ann, Peter Hewitt's only child, was born voluntary sterilization movement in the

5'

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

United States. The California law, of course, marriage unless one partner is sterilized.

applies only to those legally committed to This seems an excellent step forward.

State institutions for the insane or feeble- It will be recalled that some of the earlier

minded. In California there have been American statutes on sterilization were

Io,ooo patients sterilized since I908-nearly declared unconstitutional as contrary to the

900 in I935.

" due process" clause of the Constitution,

or as discriminatory in nature, since they

The Human Betterment Foundation

allowed freedom from sterilization to the feeble-minded and insane outside of institu-

According to the report of -the Human tions, but provided for the sterilization of

Betterment Foundation for the year ending those incarcerated. Steps like those recently

February iith, I936, increasing interest in taken by Nebraska should do much to avoid

voluntary sterilization is being shown such criticisms in the future. Little is heard

throughout the United States. Some 436 nowadays, however, of these constitutional

college instructors, widely distributed geo- arguments. We have acquired sufficient

graphically over the United States, have experience to realize the necessity of pro-

asked for more than 40,000 copies of the tecting the legal rights of patients by

Foundation's pamphlet on sterilization dur- providing in sterilization statutes for due

ing the year. Leagues of women voters and process through appeal clauses.

clubs belonging to the General Federation of The Foundation is making a second case

Women's Clubs are increasingly seeking study of sterilization in California. This has

literature for study groups. There is also an been under way since I932, in collaboration

increasing demand for lectures from high with the California Bureau of Juvenile

schools and colleges. The Los Angeles Times Research (Director, Dr. Norman Fenton).

has introduced a department of Social The full results are expected to be available

Eugenics in its Sunday magazine. Though some time this spring.

the material is written up by members of the

staff, the data are largely supplied by the Foundation. This is believed to be the only

Report on Sterilization

permanent newspaper feature dealing with The American Neurological Association's

eugenics, at least in the United States. report on sterilization, published in I935,

Mr. Gosney and other members of the urged voluntary rather than compulsory

Foundation have been working for some sterilization, research rather than more laws,

years on a revision of the California steriliza- and, where indicated medically, the avail-

tion law. The Assembly Bill (A.B. I607) ability of sterilization for those in private as

passed by a vote of 42 to 32, but the corre- well as in public institutions and for those

sponding Senate Bill (S.B. 380) failed in the not in institutions. These findings caused

legislative congestion of the closing day. considerable comment in the newspapers,

South Carolina passed a sterilization law especially in the New York Times (February

during I935 modelled upon the Virginia law. 2nd) where Waldemar Kaempffert, an oppo-

Though Georgia and Alabama passed steri- nent of eugenics, gave an erroneous impres-

lization statutes, these were in each case sion of their nature. The errors were cor-

vetoed by the governor. A special session of rected in letters published by the editor; and

the Oregon legislature adopted a revision of the chairman of the Committee, Dr. Abrahan

its sterilization law, which was designed to Meyerson of Harvard, himself attempted to

make it more workable by simplifying pro- clear up the issues in a letter published in the

cedure and reducing expense. Nebraska has Times of March i5th.

recently provided by statute for the enrol- Dr. Meyerson took the view that "the

ment of the feeble-minded of t-he State claims of most eugenists as to the incidence

through county and State commissioners. of mental disease and mental defect are un-

Such enrolled persons are ineligible for warranted. There is no evidence of an actual

NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.

53

increase." He denied that the feeble-minded situations ofmaladjustment; that adjustment

are more prolific than the general population. never stops while all the facts are collected;

He stressed their low marriage-rate, low for all the facts are never there. From this

birth-rate and high death-rate, and even high standpoint the report of the Committee is

divorce-rate. A case could be made for this thoroughly utopian and impractical, though

view; but I suspect that it evades the real I have an idea that no charge would so

issue-the rate of reproduction of stocks of annoy them.

different genetic endowment. Dr. Meyerson Consider the history of restriction of

admitted that there might be an increase in immigration in the U.S.A. We were faced

the incidence of senile mental diseases, with the necessity of absorbing from one

especially owing to the increased average half a million to over a million new arrivals

age of the population. He has repeatedly each year for several decades. It was a

debunked-I think to excess-the studies of strain upon national unity, a problem in

defective families. He admits that Hunting- adjustment for large numbers of people.

ton's chorea, hereditary blindness and deaf- Many of our social problems were compli-

nesseare unquestionably of genetic origin, and cated by the disturbance set up in the social

thinks that there is an hereditary basis for equilibrium. There was a widespread feeling

manic-depressive psychoses and for dementia that it was necessary to protect our standard

prxcox, though the mechanism is " entirely of living as well as the integrity and unity of

unknown." He adds that " the attempt to our culture. Before restricting immigration

prevent these diseases by sterilizing those could we wait until all the scientific evidence

who themselves are not sick would be futile." was in upon which to base a perfectly in-

Sterilization would not reduce their inci- telligent restrictive policy? No. We had to

dence. A large proportion of feeble-minded- do the best we could in the light of what we

ness is inherited, but its mechanism is knew. This is exactly what America is

uncertain. " Epilepsy can be, practically doing with its sterilization statutes. The

speaking, eliminated from consideration as Committee's ignorance of elementary soci-

hereditary." He takes the view that steriliza- ology has led it into serious error. It is

tion cannot scientifically play any part in the to be hoped that less sociological ignorance

elimination of criminality. This seems to me will be revealed in future studies of this

an extreme view, even though no one would kind.

allege that criminality as such is inherited. Moreover, I have every reason to believe

The old notion that genius is associated with that the Committee of the American Neuro-

mental disease is dragged out.

logical Association was " packed." About

*Dr. Meyerson adds: " The crying need of ten years ago I heard Dr. Meyerson admit, in

eugenics, as this Committee sees it, is not an address before the Boston Ethical Society,

legislation but real research. There have been that, while training as a young man for

no researches which fully merit the term medical service, he was emotionally condi-

scientific." (Italics mine.) Need more be said tioned against the hereditary interpretation

about the diligence with which the Com- of any phenomenon. And yet this is the

mittee has searched the literature ? What the individual that the Association selected for

Committee means is that it found much of the scientific investigation of sterilization,

this literature unconvincing. To be sure, while adopting a superior attitude towards

much of it is, but can it all be dismissed so previous studies of the subject. Incidentally,

lightly? On controversial questions it is there is reason to believe that the Commit-

always safe to call for an increase of know- tee of the American Medical Association

ledge. That in itself is not controversial. appointed to study the problem of birth-

The Committee overlooked that, in the course control-yes, the Association has at last

of evolution, mankind moves from one crisis come round to the view that contraception

to another; that man is constantly at- is at least worthy of study!-has been more

tempting to bring about accommodations in or less packed in the same manner.

54 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Conferences

& Wilkins); Time of Ovulation in Women:

The National Conference of Social Work is to be held in Atlantic City, New Jersey, in

A Study of the Fertile Period in the Menstrual Cycle, by Carl G. Hartman (Baltimore:

the latter part of May. Inasmuch as the Williams & Wilkins). Attention should also

American Birth Control League is an affili- be called to the publication, under the

ated organization, there will be a discussion editorship of Dr. Victor Robinson, medical

for medical social workers at which short historian at Temple University, of the En-

papers will be read by Dr. Eric Matsner, Dr. cyclopaedia Sexualis, the first American

Hannah Stone, and probably also Dr. encyclop2edia of its kind. English students of

Norman E. Hixnes.

eugenics will be particularly interested in the

The National Council of Parent Education three articles on sterilization and possibly

(60 East 42nd Street, New York City) is to in those on contraception by the American

hold a congress on education for family life correspondent of the EUGENICS REVIEW.

and parenthood, from November IIth-I4th, There are also contributions by Professor

at the Edgewater Beach Hotel at Chicago. F. H. A. Marshall, Dr. Enid Charles, Dr. At the University of North Carolina, from Norman Haire, Dr. F. E. A. Crewe, and

July 6th to ioth, there will be held the second Professor Edward Westermarck.

one-week course on "Teaching Marriage and the Family." The first was held during

Population

the summer of I934, much to the interest According to a February release of the

of college teachers in the United States. Bureau of the Census, the official estimate

Although the present conference is concerned for the U.S.A. population on July Ist, I935,

primarily with problems associated with was I27,52I,000. Since the I930 census total

teaching courses on marriage, it is somewhat was I22,775,046, this estimate represents an

broader in its appeal, including conservation increase of 4,746,000, or nearly 4 per cent.

of marriage and the family. There will be Assuming that the same rate of increase con-

discussions led by Professor E. R. Groves, tinues until the end of the decade, we shall

professor of sociology, on " College Instruc- have as the U.S.A. population in 1940 about

tion in Preparation for Marriage." Professor 132,000,000. The average annual increase
Fred B. McCall, professor of law at the for the 5j-year period was 904,000-a little

University of North Carolina, will give an more than one-half of the I920-30 average of

address on the evening of July 6th on " The Family and the Law." Dr. E. C. Hamblen

i,665,ooo. The total number of births
between April Ist, I930, and July ist, I935,

of-the Duke University Medical School will discuss " Medical Aspects of Preparation for
Marriage." On July gth, Mr. Ralph P.
Bridgman, Director of National Council of Parent Education, will lead a discussion on

including an allowance for under-registration, was I2,420,000. The numnber of deaths in the same period, likewise allowing for under-
registration, was 7,423,000. There was a net
emigration in the 5j-year period of 25I,000.

" The Role of the Teacher in Counselling According to a report to Congress recently

and the Limitation of his Functions."

submitted by the Surgeon-General of the

U.S. Public Health Service, about 94,000

New Books

more babies were born in the U.S.A. in the calendar year I934 than in I933. Later

The National Committee on Maternal figures are not available. There was a slight

Health has just published three new books increase in the mortality in I934. However,

in its series on the Medical Aspects of Human the rate was lower than in I932. The death-

Fertility: A bortion-Spontaneous and In- rate was also slightly higher in I934 than in

duced: Medical and Social Aspects, by 1933; but again this was lower than any

Frederick J. Taussig (St. Louis: C. V. recorded rate earlier than 1932. The death-

Mosby); Medical History of Contraception, rate for 1934 was io09 per I,OOO.

by Norman E. Himes (Baltimore: Williams The provisional death-rate for eighty-six

NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.

55

major cities, for I935, based upon weekly children to care for the aged. The conclusion

telegraphic reports, was II4 per I,OOO of does not seem to me to follow necessarily.

estimated population. The I935 provisional

infant mortality rate for the eighty-six Miscellaneous Notes

reported major cities was 49 per I,OOO live Dr. James J. Walsh, a well-known Catholic

births. This is somewhat lower than the physician of New York City, created some-

55 reported for these cities in I934.

thing of a stir recently in admitting in a

New York City's Health Department, meeting before a Catholic group that the so-

which, on a budget of less than $4,000,000 called safe period was not yet well estab-

takes care of 7,500,000 people, reported its lished by medical science. This is the first

lowest death-rate on record for I935 (9-9); time, to my knowledge, that a Roman Catho-

its lowest infant mortality rate (47 8 per lic physician, at least one who has been strong

I,OOO births); and the fewest diphtheria in his condemnation of contraception, has

mortalities (66 deaths); the fewest typhoid publicly admitted that the Church has

deaths (37); and reduced mortality for founded its programme upon a technique as

pneumonia, tuberculosis, appendicitis and yet not completely scientifically demon-

suicide. Generally speaking, certain diseases strated.

of middle life increased. Commissioner J. L. We regret to record the death, on January

Rice in his annual report noted that while the 6th, of Dr. William J. Robinson, editor of the

birth-rate was 35 in I900, it is now I4. Critic and Guide and prolific author of many

Average age has also increased. Those over popular books on sex instruction. For three

sixty-five years of age constituted 2-8 per or four decades Dr. Robinson has waged a

cent. of the city's population in I900; in courageous campaign for sexual enlighten-

I935 they were 4 per cent. Accordingly, Dr. ment including instruction on contraception.

Rice thinks increased dependency in old age This he did at a time when such views were

quite certain, since there will be fewer not commonly expressed.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XVm, No. 1.

