LOUIS M. HELLMAN, M.D.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, State University of New York
One Galileo is Enough:
Some Aspects of Current Population Problems*

FOR THIS LITCHFIELD LECTURE I have chosen
to relate a story the significance of which I hope will do justice to this occasion and reflect the
honour I feel in accepting the kind invitation
extended to me by Professor Moir. Although the story begins in Rome, it is a
tale of many cities, for it provided the setting
last year for an event that may influence world
history.
Shortly before the adjournment of the Council of Fathers in the Vatican in November 1964, the population problem was debated under Schema XIII, Chapter 4, Paragraph 21, as it related to the dignity of marriage and the family. Of the nineteen addresses, three, all by liberal cardinals, had been published. Cardinal Suenans, Archbishop of Malines-Bruxelles, was eloquent in his plea for recognition ofthe significance of scientific advance and discovery. In concludingthatportion of his talk he urged, "I beg you my brothers; let us avoid a new Galileo case. One is enough
for the Church." Galileo, as you know, was tried and found
guilty by the Inquisition because he considered the current Ptolemaic geocentric concept incompatible with his observations with the newly discovered telescope. His objective findings placed him in direct conflict with established teaching. While the trial suppressed Galileo as an individual, it merely postponed the acceptance of certain scientific facts, a miscarriage that the Church failed to correct for 150 years. Conflicts between scientific discovery and established order are not confined to the remote past, but are rather reflections of human insecurity, which seeks refuge in familiarly structured canon. Religious bodies share with government and individuals in this search for security. The plight of the geneticists in Russia or of Robert Oppenheimer in my own country are relatively

benign examples of the results of the same pathologic thinking that often delays acceptance of the truth lest it destroy the established order. Cardinal Suenans protested, not in fear of eventual recognition or solution of the problem, but in fear that recognition and solution might be too long delayed. A short ten years ago his speech would doubtless have been considered unconscionable and mad.
What new facts involved the Fathers in such debate? Geometric expansion of population has long been recognized and dire warnings have frequently been sounded. These arguments have been heard and denied in one way or another. The change that has taken place is not in the facts but in dissemination of knowledge in the modern world, and true comprehension of the threat to established order implicit in unbridled fertility.
World Population Expansion
Until the middle of the last century population growth was held in check by high death rates coupled with the relatively slow breeding characteristic of the human female. Death rates then began to fall; the world's population doubled and attained the two billion mark eighty years later, or by 1930. By 1960 another billion had been added and, were the trend of growth to continue, not just another billion, but a staggering three billion will have been added by the year 2000.t
Demographers have vied with each other in presenting these cold statistics in the most startling and bizarre terms. For example,
* The Litchfield Lecture presented at the University of Oxford on 23rd June 1965.
t The word billion is not of course used here in its English sense, but, as in France and the United States, to indicate one thousand million.-Editor.

161

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, December 1965, 57, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Professor Charles Westoff of Princeton Univer-
sity declares, "If the current rate of world population growth had prevailed since the beginning
of the Christian era, the world would have
contained 90 billion times ten to the twelfth
power of 90 billion times a trillion persons," a figure he regards, to say the least, as "staggering to the imagination." The prize for a shocker of this sort should probably go to Professor Coale of the same institution for the following computation, "In about 6,500 years, approximately the period of recorded history, if current growth continues, the descendants of the present world population would form a solid spear of live bodies exploding with a radial velocity that, barring relativity, would equal the velocity of
light." It seems unnecessary to elaborate upon the
point with further similar data or to direct attention to the spread of hunger and poverty that resulted from the population explosion; nor is it necessary to detail its causes. In simplest terms, the prevailing high birth rate throughout the world to-day coupled with the spectacular fall in death rates, will inevitably create statistics even more startling than those just presented. These data would not in themselves have evoked either the urgency or the alarm voiced by Cardinal Suenans had they not been widely publicized and had a growing and increasingly well-informed segment of the public, aided by increased ease and speed of travel, not understood the warning and seen for itself the effects of unlimited growth of population.
When standards of living are so low and increases in population so rapid that there is never hope of a better life, as in India; or when a traditionally well educated people can send only the eldest son to the university because of lack of room, as in Taiwan, then, sooner or later, governments fall and long established order changes. These are no longer foreign concepts, for even in America there is an incipient sense of crowding. Formerly uncultivated woodlands sprout ranch houses and water is often in short supply. Megalopolis now extends from Maine to Virginia. Our universities are over-crowded and the best of them were forced to raise their admission standards to extraordinary heights. Only about half of the young people wishing to

study medicine can find a pJace in the medical schools. These facts and their implications for the future are understood by increasing numbers of people and with increasing clarity. Cardinal Suenans may have been advanced in his thinking but an aroused and vocal public forced the debate. The prelate does not doubt that his Church will eventually reconcile its doctrine with modern requirements, but he fears that a repetition of the delay of 150 years required to correct the error made in Galileo's case could put the world beyond the point of return.
New York City and Contraception
The effectiveness of public opinion in this situation is well illustrated by the changes wrought in my own city of New York during the past few years. I present the narrative with some hesitation, lest it become overly personal or immodest, but I feel that no event in recent times focusses the issue more sharply. The bitter controversy in New York City in 1958 over the distribution of birth control information in public institutions may well have marked a turning point in American thinking on the subject.
New York City operates about twenty municipal hospitals, which are the principal sources of medical care for the city's needy. They are tax-supported institutions in which there is no charge to the indigent for medical care. The municipal hospitals are the direct responsibility of the Commissioner of Hospitals appointed by the Mayor. He has an Advisory Board, made up of ten prominent citizens. The individual institutions are governed by a medical board of senior physicians with the approval of the Commissioner of Hospitals. Nearly half the city's babies are delivered in these facilities.
When I was appointed to the Chair of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the State University of New York, I automatically assumed the directorship of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Kings County Hospital, with the largest maternity service in the city. Although both tubal sterilization and therapeutic abortions could be carried out in municipal hospitals on proper indications, there was an unwritten ban on contraceptive prescriptions

162

ONE GALILEO IS ENOUGH

or even advice. In s.pite of clear permission for medical leaders of the community, including the

such practices for health reasons by the laws of New York Academy of Medicine, intensified

the State of New York, patients, regardless of their efforts to reach a solution. Finally, under

their religious beliefs or personal preferences, extensive pressure, a weak and vacillating

could not even be told where to obtain such Commissioner of Hospitals, who had blocked

advice. The ban was rigidly enforced, not by all previous efforts in a vain hope that the issue

any written directive, but by a sort of "un- would disappear, suddenly reversed his feelings

touchability", although the unfluential New York and replied to the New York Academy of

Academy of Medicine had contended for years Medicine that "In the municipal hospitals there

that the place for contraceptive clinics was in shall be no interference in proper and accepted

hospitals. The ban was attributed to the power therapeutic procedures nor intervention with the

of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New ethical relationships between patient and phys-

York, to the Mayor (a Catholic) and to the ician." I, and our medical board in general, took

many Catholic members of local medical boards. the statement at face value and proceeded to

Perhaps the strongest element of all was the fear order needed contraceptive supplies. Although

of the staff doctors to speak out lest they offend none were forthcoming they were obtained

their Catholic colleagues.

easily from private sources, and on 16th July

My position, as well as that of my fellow 1958 the climax of the story was reached in an

professors, was humiliating and paradoxical. In attempt to fit a diaphragm for a severely diabetic

lectures to medical students we talked of family multigravida, who had been delivered several

planning as an integral part of obstetrics, and times by caesarean section and whose life would

stressed its importance, especially among the clearly be jeopardized by future pregnancy. On

needy; but when asked where such services were the morning of the planned fitting, with the

provided, we were forced to confess that our patient already on the examining table, the

hands were tied. Tied by whom or what ? Commissioner telephoned an order prohibiting

Nothing was mentioned about our own fear to the procedure. I complied but gave the story to

speak out and take a stand.

an alerted press. The Commissioner's foolish

Although some members of our local medical prohibition and our compliance reduced the

board at the Kings County Hospital were issue to simple, easily comprehended elements:

Catholic, the majority favoured birth control a cause and a victim. When properly mixed,

services in the hospital. Not wishing to offend these elements assure victory in public contro-

the minority, the board unanimously approved, versy. The fight was on!

and sent to the Commissioner of Hospitals a

resolution that did not mention birth control. This resolution merely stated that Sections 1142

Pressure of Public Opinion

and 1145 of the State Penal Code (sections that For two months the situation occupied the

permit physicians to prescribe contraceptives) front pages of all the city's newspapers and

should be extended to apply to physicians of the received increasing attention in national news

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of the media. Spread upon the record was a more

Hospital. The Commissioner of Hospitals, who comprehensive picture of the current political

has power of approval in such matters, as well and religious status of contraception than had

as the ultimate power of appointment and dis- ever been seen. As expected, the Commissioner's

missal ofthe staff, by refusing comment, initiated position was defended by the chancery office of

a delaying process which was to last for fifteen the archdiocese, which issued a statement re-

months.

iterating traditional Roman Catholic positions.

But events more significant than man's pro- Further support was forthcoming from Catholic

crastination were already in progress. The city's medical and lay groups, which felt that public

unspoken ban on birth control was exposed to monies should not be spent for services they

the public through a series of newspaper articles. believed "immoral". Unexpected, however, was

With obvious public conflict in the offing, the near unanimity of the rest of the community.

163

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Vigorous denunciation of the Commissioner's enunciated by a young man destined to become

prohibition was spearheaded by the Council of our first Roman Catholic president. It is entirely

Protestant Churches, the Board of Rabbis and possible that without solution of the New York

the American Civil Liberties Union, as well as controversy, and without Mr. Kennedy's un-

the Planned Parenthood Federation and nearly equivocal stand on the matter, he might not

every other public-spirited organization in the have become President of the United States. In

city. The staid New York Times summarized any case, in face of an unmistakable public

public opinion in an editorial that characterized attitude, the ban was no longer tenable. Keenly

as "astonishing" any doubt that "birth control, aware of this situation, Mayor Wagner stated

which is regarded by many medical authorities that, despite his personal Catholic view, the

. . . as an important element in preventive issue was a medical matter to be decided by the

medicine, can be prescribed in city hospitals.... Board of Hospitals. Their decision, written

Birth control is profoundly objectionable to largely by a Catholic member, Dr. Charles

many persons, and, whether as patients or nurses Gordon, was a statesmanlike approach "When

or doctors, their views must be fully respected. there are clearly defined conditions in which the

These views cannot be controlling in regard to health of a woman may be jeopardized by

other persons in the community who also use pregnancy, it is generally recognized by the

the city hospitals and to whom medical pre- medical profession that contraceptive measures

scription of contraceptive devices presents no are proper medical practice. Municipal hospitals

moral or religious problem. Freedom of religion should provide such needed advice, preventive

works both ways."

measures and devices for female patients under

As the New York controversy reached this their care, whose life and health, in the opinion

stage, many thoughtful Catholics were embar- of the medical staff, may be jeopardized by

rassed and saddened to find their Church placed pregnancy and who also wish to avail themselves

in the undemocratic position of attempting to of such services."

impose its views on others. An unusual editorial The story is almost completed. As Finn had

by James Finn in The Commonweal, a Catholic intimated, the controversy did not remain con-

publication, reflects this concern. On the issue, fined to New York, but initiated a national

he writes, "It is evident that beliefs, teachings, revolution of opinion removing old taboos from

attitudes, and opinions have changed greatly much of the public press and changing attitudes

for many people during the past several decades. of many city health officials. Our Federal

Where consensus once existed, it no longer does. government switched from President Eisen-

Or more correctly, it has shifted ground. Other hower's "Nothing could be further from the

citizens cannot expect Catholics to change their business of government" to "advise if asked",

beliefs or their practices merely to conform to and finally, to "help if asked". The World

this new consensus. But neither can Catholics Health Organization, conservative to the bone,

expect to control the beliefs and practices of allowed that teaching of population problems

others concerning these measures.... There are was germane to medical education and now,

many sound and compelling reasons why quite recently, has offered help and information

Catholics should not strive for legislation which on these matters. Ex-presidents Eisenhower and

clashes with the beliefs of a large portion of Truman have become vice-presidents of the

society. In so doing, they do not only strain the Planned Parenthood Federation. In New York

limits of the community and considerably lessen City a new Commissioner of Hospitals asked

the persuasive force of their teachings, but they the Academy of Medicine to define medical

almost inevitably strengthen, in the minds of indications for contraception and received the

non-Catholics, the already present worries about reply, "Anything affecting the health of the

Catholic power."

mother." Health was defined, according to

This editorial was singularly effective, ex- WHO, as not only "physical well-being" but

pressing a basic concept of democracy deeply "mental and social well-being", as well. The way

held by our people and soon to be clearly was opened to a broad public health programme,

164

ONE GALILEO IS ENOUGH

but many still would not have it so. The argument at this time hinged on motivation. What is the use of expending all this effort on the poor when they are not properly motivated to use contraception anyway. The belief that the poor are a careless lot with little regard for their health or way of living is still held by many. Indeed, experience with older methods of contraception, such as the diaphragm, lent credibility to the concept of lack of motivation. It was, of course, naive to think otherwise for that particular device required an intelligent approach to sex, privacy, and a high degree of motivation. In addition, it necessitated a period of training best given in a private doctor's office, or at least in an unhurried clinic. Motivation is complex. People cannot generate enthusiasm for a device that they do not quite trust, have not the privacy to use and that an impatient husband will not tolerate. For the population in question, a usable contraceptive must be simple, cheap, virtually 100 per cent effective, and most important, must not be directly associated with coitus.
Income and Family Size
Demographic studies in the United States show that the historic differentials in family size have been disappearing since the war. Specifically the inverse ratio of size and family income, and the difference between urban and rural families are not so apparent as they were formerly. Several recent studies such as The Growth of the American Family* indicate that smaller families are desired. Nine out of ten women, white and non-white, considered two to four children the ideal number; furthermore, the number wanted was smaller than the number considered ideal, and the lower income families wanted fewer children than the more affluent.
A Health Department survey recently showed that 70 per cent of 2,600 clinic patients wanted no more children.
Desires have been far from fulfilment, for the 1962 census shows little restriction of fertility among the poor. Thirty-four per cent of families with four children, and 44 per cent of those with six had incomes below $4,000 per year as com-
* Freedman, R., Whelpton, P. K. and Campbell, A. A. 1959. New York, McGraw-Hill.

pared with 20 per cent of families with two and 22 per cent of those with three children. If excess fertility be defined in terms of families in which the last child is unwanted, the discrepancies among the income groups are even more striking. Low income, low educational achievement and excess fertility go hand in hand, but not necessarily because the people want it so.
Granted, all the known differences in sexual mores and living conditions between upper and lower class families, a most significant factor influencing excess fertility seems to be the health opportunities available. Over 80 per cent of the married non-white mothers in New York City are delivered in municipal hospitals, but until very recently, these institutions furnished their contraceptive services in hurried and crowded facilities, offering methods grossly inadequate for the population served. Little wonder then that there seemed to be a lack of motivation.
The New Contraceptives
The decision of the Board of Hospitals and the broadening of the definition of health happily coincided with two developments in the field of contraception: the advent of the pill and the re-introduction of intra-uterine devices. Both are simple, relatively inexpensive and not directly associated with coitus. The "pill" is known to act through inhibition of ovulation. The method of action of the intra-uterine devices, however, is still unknown, although there are suggestions that it may cause rapid passage of the egg down the fallopian tube with the result that the ovum arrives in the uterine cavity before the development of ideal conditions for implantation. Since there is no evidence that the intra-uterine devices cause abortion in the strict sense of the word, they are more compatible with the thinking of the relatively uneducated segment of the population. These methods of contraception have received widespread publicity in the United States, but newspaper and radio discussions have been insignificant compared with the spread of information by word of mouth. The growth of contraceptive clinics in the municipal hospitals of New York City has exceeded all expectation. In our own clinic we now enrol several hundred patients a week, and it is entirely
165

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

possible that new patients in the clinic this year will exceed half the number of women delivered in the hospital. About 90 per cent of women choose the pill, which they consider more positive protection. To date, there have been only one or two pregnancies with a dropout rate of about 10 per cent. This low rate figure is a clear indication of motivation, for not only do the patients have to return every three or four months for a new supply of pills, but they often have to stand in long queues to obtain them.
Our experience with the intra-uterine devices is somewhat limited, but their effectiveness and acceptability are clear, as indicated in the experience at the Sloane Hospital for Women, where one-third of the three thousand women delivered in 1963 had their contraceptive device inserted
postpartum. News of their availability spread rapidly
among the largely indigent clientele of the hospital. The Lippes loop D, probably the best of all the devices currently employed was expelled spontaneously by ten of 230 women; nine had it removed because of undesirable side effects; and one became pregnant with the device in place. On the basis of a much larger sample in a collaborative study conducted by the National Committee on Maternal Health, Tietze cites a pregnancy rate of 2- 4 per hundred women -years of exposure and a combined rate of expulsion and removal of about 25 per cent during the first twelve months of use.
It is estimated thatover45,000indigentmothers will receive contraceptive information and services from the municipal hospitals of New York City this year, a marked contrast with the situation of a few years ago, and even more marked when one considers that the dropout rate with the diaphragm during the early years was 50 per cent with a pregnancy rate greater than 20 per cent. Lack of motivation among the indigent thus appears to be a myth.

The situation in New York does not necessarily apply to all of America, nor to the rest of the world, but it seems not improbable that the events there may recur elsewhere in the world, provided knowledge and information are widely disseminated. If the thinking exemplified by Cardinal Suenans prevails, they too will come to pass. Methods of contraception are not yet perfect, but they are far superior to those of a few years ago, and moreover, there is real promise in future research.
If a moral is to be drawn from this story, it is that established tenets of neither the laity nor the clergy necessarily pose serious obstacles to the control of fertility in a population well informed and fully cognizant of the perils of unimpeded fertility.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Coale, A. 1959. Increases in expectation of life and population growth. Presented at International Population Conference, Vienna.
DeSantillana, G. 1955. The Crime of Galileo. University of Chicago Press.
Fermi, L. and Bernardini, G. 1965. Galileo and Scientific Revolution. New York, Fawcett World Library Premier Book.
Finn, J. 1958. Controversy in New York. Con,tnonweal, 12th September 1958.
Geymonat, L. 1965. Galileo Galilei-A Biography and Inquiry into his Philosophy of Science. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Gordon, C. Personal communication. Jaffe, F. 1964. Family planning and poverty. J. Mar.
Fam., 26, 467. Hall, R. 1965. Use of intrauterine contraceptives in an
indigent population. In A. J. Sobrero and S. Lewit (eds.). Advances in planned parenthood. Cambridge, Mass. Schenkmann, pp. 115-122. New York Board of Hospitals Decision Memorandum 34, from the Commissioner of Hospitals, 1958. Tietze, C. 1965. Progress report: cooperative statistical program for the evaluation of intrauterine contraceptive devices. Presented to the International Conference on Family Planning. Geneva, Switzerland, August 1965. Westoff, C., Potter, R., and Sagi, P. 1963. The third child: a study in the prediction of fertility. Princeton University Press.

166

