REVIEWS OF BOOKS

using special laboratory methods. For example, extensive studies of variants of bacteria, Neurospora and other organisms which are characterized by their special growth requirements, have produced a mass of evidence for the genic control of cell metabolism. Both
the mechanism of protein manufacture, illustrated by the haemoglobinopathies in man and
tryptophan synthetase in E. coli, and the regulation and modulation of cell chemistry-
the "switch-on, switch-off" mechanism-are considered. The third section of the book includes discussion of some of the problems relating
to extra-chromosomal inheritance, genes in development, and genes in populations. Here,
as elsewhere, the authors draw on a wide variety of animate sources for their examples. The particulate matter, kappa, which helps to make a "killer" paramecium and which is transmitted through the cytoplasmic line was one curiosity new to the reviewer; and the
effects of a semidominant lethal "Danforth's short-tail" (Sd) in mice, which gives a range of renal tract anomalies was of particular interest in view of possible comparable effects in humans. Quantitative inheritance and the effects of inbreeding are adequately presented in
Chapter 14 and the final chapter deals very briefly with some of the features special to man. Illuistrations are good and the print is clear and free from errors. Throughout the text
the reader is addressed by the writers, "As you proceed in this book you will find . . .",a style which grows more acceptable with usage. Biology students particularly will derive benefit from the problems following each chapter.
In conclusion, this comprehensive account of the subject is designed primarily as a teaching aid and as such can be thoroughly recommended for any course in introductory genetics. Apparently the scientifically-inclined lay public also find it stimulating since the book has found its way on to the shelves of more than one municipal library in this country.

ZOOLOGY

H. B.

The UFA W Handbook on the Care and Management of Laboratory Animals. Edited by The Staff of UFAW. Third Edition. Edinburgh, 1967. Livingstone. Pp. xvi+ 1015. Price £6.

THIS THIRD EDITION of a standard work has a remarkable scope. It begins with chapters on the law and laboratory animals and on the Laboratory Animals Centre; there are substantial sections on animal houses, their equipment and the methods of managing, handling and transporting animals. A notably good chapter is on genetics. Up-to-date information is given on germ-free animals and on stocks kept free of specific pathogens; these cover new developments whose importance for research in several fields is quickly
increasing. The species discussed are each given a chapter. They go far beyond the familiar labora-
tory animals. Among the mammals are bats, and a genus of marsupial mice; several species of monkey are dealt with; but not yet, unfortunately, armadillos of the genus, Tatusia. Four species of birds are covered, and there is a separate chapter on the chick embryo. There are four chapters on heterothermous vertebrates; one on marine aquaria; and a number on invertebrates, including the giant American cockroach, locusts, some molluscs
and, finally, earthworms. The editors must have had a grim task. They describe how they were badly held up by
laggard contributors. Though lamentable, this is not surprising in a book with nearly seventy authors. It probably accounts for some deficiencies, for instance in the index. An example is that nembutal, which is referred to under that name in the text, does not appear in the index. There are quite a number of minor deficiencies of this sort.
A more serious criticism concerns production. The book weighs about 2-3 kg. It could certainly have been lighter. The type area is 135 mm. wide, which is excessive. Printed

ER-I

121

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in two columns, and with much less waste of space for headings for sub-sections of only

one or two lines, the text could have been easier to read and much more compact.

However, these matters are trivial. This book will be a blessing to people who use

laboratory animals throughout the world and for many years-at least, until the next edition

appears.

s. A. BARNETIT

INTELLIGENCE

Shuey, Audrey M. The Testing of Negro Intelligence. Second enlarged edition. New York, 1966. Social Science Press. Pp. xv+ 578. Price $6.50.
TWO THINGS CAN be said at the outset about this book. First, that it is an extremely thorough and extensive survey of all the evidence derived from the testing of Negroes' intelligence in the USA from the early years of this century to the present day. Second, that it provides cold comfort for those who hold views about the innate equality of races, and attribute observed differences to lack of opportunity and privilege.
Professor Shuey is not presenting a point of view. All she believes in is evidence and logic, and the sheer weight of evidence she presents is overwhelming and is summed up on the last page by a magnificent sentence, thirty-three lines long, which begins, "The remarkable consistency in test results . . .", and ends, "all taken together, inevitably point to the presence of native differences between Negroes and whites as determined by intelligence tests".
It is impossible to summarize such an extensive review. The evidence from intelligence tests and other assessments of intellectual ability is followed through from childhood to school to high school and college, to the Armed Forces to veterans. There are also sections on the gifted, the retarded, the delinquent and the racial hybrid. Besides the cumulative effect of the evidence prescribed by Professor Shuey, these chapters are a mine of interesting miscellaneous information. For example, physical measures such as bone structure, thickness of lips, or breadth of nose did not significantly correlate with IQ among Negroes, but differences in skin colour did. Professor Shuey raises the relevant point that the"pure" Negro is rare in USA; what kind of whites mated with Negroes? Also, on common tests such as ACE, the average score of the Negro college student, presumably more highly selected than the white, was about the twelve percentile of the scores of white students; on the other hand, one study found the average intelligence of Negro criminals to be higher than that for Negroes drafted into the Armed Forces.
Professor Shuey is a demon for logic and the limits of evidence; she is also no respecter of persons or of those studies which have almost reached the status of legends. Otto Klineberg's two studies in 1935, on Negro Intelligence and Selective Migration, and on
Race Differences, are subjected to careful examination, and his often quoted conclusions on
the influence of Northern environment and the absence of selective migration become much
less convincing. In Differential Psychology (1958) Anne Anastasi gives a schematic
demonstration of what is meant by a 30 per cent overlap, and goes on rather rashly to say that this is close to that usually found between psychological test scores of whites anp Negroes in USA. Professor Shuey responds by quoting seventy-one studies, based on 34,784 Negroes, giving an average overlap of 11 per cent. Of these, five studies, all except one before 1936, and based on 872 Negroes, reported an overlap of 30 per cent or more.
It is this meticulous and objective presentation of evidence that is the strength of the book. It is not a readable book; it falls between a reference book and a textbook. Perhaps the reader had best begin with chapter XI, Summary and Conclusions. Professor Shuey does not discuss political, social or genetic implications; but it is a pity that she did not include at least one chapter on the testing of other racial groups, especially the Chinese and
122

