MENTAL DEFICIENCY-II

The Sub-Cultural Group

By L. S. PENROSE, M.A., M.D.
(Research Medical Officer, Royal Eastern Counties' Institution for Mental Defectives.)

N his address to the British Association in I93I, Dr. E. 0. Lewis proposed the
name sub-cultural for that group of
mental defectives who represent the lower
part of the frequency distribution curve of intelligence for the general population. The hypothesis was the outcome of his observations made during his survey in England on behalf of the Wood Departmental Committee. Lewis separated off from this group
what he termed pathological types of mental
defectives, that is to say, cases in which
mental deficiency is associated with some form of gross physical disease or deformity. The present writer finds it convenient to include also in the pathological class cases of psychosis, epilepsy, and severe neurosis. These two groups, sub-cultural and pathological, are not mutually exclusive and may overlap one another to any extent. The pure unmixed sub-cultural mental defectives form about a quarter of institutional cases. The problem of ascertaining causative factors in determining their condition is therefore of great importance.
The sub-cultural group is not to be confused with the so-called " social problem " group. Although it is true that most of the sub-cultural defectives to be found in
institutions are selected on account of some kind of behaviour difficulty or social maladjustment, not all sub-cultural mental defectives behave anti-socially. Probably the great majority of the people whose

judged by their performance at standardized
mental tests and their general ability. In order to study the causes of variation
in intelligence and its deviation from the
normal, in the sub-cultural group, it is first necessary to exclude from the investigation all cases in which physical disease is present, for this may be a contributory factor. The same applies to the mentally disordered or psychotic cases. Specific types must also be excluded such as mongolism, epiloia, or
microcephaly. There then remains a group of defectives who are physically sound, but who possess varying degress of dullness.
The present communication gives a summary of certain tentative results obtained from the analysis of ioo families containing sub-cultural mental defectives. A full analysis of the data is being published in the British Journal of Psychology. These families were selected by the presence of at least one child who is certified mentally defective (under the care of the Royal
Eastern Counties' Institution) and who appears to be of the pure sub-cultural type. The family is defined, for purposes of this investigation, as consisting of the parents and their immediate offspring only. The average intelligence quotient of the defectives, through whom the selection was made, was just 50. Their families were all investigated personally and every available member classed under one of the following four
headings, thus:

intelligence is sub-normal live usefully in the community. But it might perhaps be argued that, if such people are able to carry
on in society, they are not certifiable within
the meaning of the Mental Deficiency Acts

Arbitrary Class.

Approximate I.Q.

I. Superior intelligence ... I25

2. Normal intelligence ... 100

3. Dull

... . ..

... 75

4. Mentally defective ...% 50

and are, therefore, not mentally defective. Unfortunately it was not possible to measure

They are, nevertheless, indistinguishable the intelligence of many of the members of

from the certified mental defectives when these families by standardized tests. Great

289

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

attention was, however, paid to school- ANALYSIS OF ONE HUNDRED FAMILIES

masters' reports and these were compared PARENTS

OFFSPRING

with estimates given by relatives, employers, friends, and others.

(number of matings of each type)

AA AB BB (normal) (dull) (men-
tally de-

Some of the causes of variability in in-

telligence are probably to be looked for in hereditary factors; but the gradation of

AAxAA
(45)

Obs. Exp. (p=o)

I26 I43-0

fective) 13 49 0.0 45-0

intelligence in different individuals,* from AA x AB Obs.

36 20 24

the genius to the imbecile, is steady and (i8) Exp. (p=o) 3I.0 3I*O i8-o

continuous and we cannot hope to find, what AA x BB Obs.

III 14 20

Goddard looked for twenty years ago, one (I2) Exp. (p=o) o0o 33-0 I2'0

single mendelian character determining ABxAB Obs. these variations. But it has been shown by (g) Exp. (p=)

8 I2 I7 7.8 156 I3.6

Fisher that a great number of alternative genes behave in certain respects approxi-

AB x BB (9)

Obs. o Exp. (po=) =o

mately as a single character whose qualities

I 22 8.6 14.4

are intermediate between dominant and recessive: that is, the heterozygous form

BBxBB (7)

Obs. Exp. (p=i)

I 0.0

3 i8 0*0 22*0

is intermediate, in respect of the character Total Obs. under consideration, between the normal (ioo) Exp.

I82 63 I50 i8i*9 90X0 I23-I

and the homozygous. It may seem worth while, therefore, to
test the data from these ioo families against the hypothesis that a single gene determines the variation in intelligence from one individual to another, given that the dull persons in these families are heterozygous for a gene which produces mental deficiency in homo-
zygous individuals. It has been necessary
to correct the expected values of the proportions of offspring affected for each type of parent from the simple mendelian ratios. This is because the families are all selected by the presence of at least one mentally defective child. The genotypes are supposed
to be arranged thus:

It will be seen that there is only an approximate agreement between the
observed numbers of children in different classes born to different types of parents and the expected values. The approximation is, however, near enough to warrant the
assumption of the likelihood of multi-fac-
torial inheritance. It should be emphasized that results of
the type found here may be due to the effects of environment. A study of the familial incidence of rickets would probably give a very similar picture, since parents and children tend, on the whole, to have the
same diet and therefore to resemble one another as regards rachitic features. There

Normal or superior AA

Normal Genotype

Dull AB or BA Heterozygous ,

Mentally defective BB

Homozygous ,

are, in fact, quite definite indications that environment does play a part in the varia-

The accompanying table summarizes the results of the comparison.t

tion of intelligence even in this sub-cultural group. For example, there is a tendency, on the average, for the intelligence of the

* See Pearson, K.: On the Graduated Character of Mental Defect. 19I4. Questions of the Day and of the Fray. Mendelism and the Problem of Mental Defect, III.
t Expectations can be worked out by the application of any method which allows for the circumstance that at least one member in each fraternity is affected. The most satisfactory way of doing this is by use of the following formula for the expected number of affected offspring in such families.
Where p is the probability that an offspring is affected in a given family and n,, is the number of s-membered fraternities each containing at least

one affected member, the expected number of affected persons has the value,
p.m n, --( S
The expected relative proportions of the remaining types in the fraternity will be unaltered. Thus, in the case of both parents heterozygous,
i n8. ( children will be affected, two-thirds of
the remainder heterozygous and one-third of the remainder normal.

MENTAL DEFICIENCY-THE SUB-CULTURAL GROUP

29I

children born to mothers over the age of 35 cally for evidence of such factors. It was

to be lower than that of children born to found, for example, that a closer association

younger mothers. Moreover, seeing that the existed between mothers and children, in

class of defectives studied here is by defini- respect of mental ability, than between

tion the sub-group of normal persons, the fathers and children. By itself this criterion

causes of variation of intelligence which of sex-linked factors is inadequate, for a

have been found, or are likely to be found, similar result could be produced either by

among normal persons will apply also to this errors in allocating paternity or by environ-

group. The studies of Freeman, Holzinger, mental effects due to greater association of

and Mitchell are to be considered in this the offspring with the mother than with the

connection.

father. It was, however, also found that the

daughters were more like the fathers in

ASSORTIVE MATING

mentality than were the sons, and this fact

Certain further points of interest have seems to point more definitely to sex-linked

arisen in the course of this study. There factors, but the matter cannot be settled

has been no example found of a normal until a great deal more material has been

female mating with a mentally defective collected.

male, though the converse relation is fairly Two warnings are necessary against

frequent. Moreover, there is a much making hasty inferences from the data

stronger likeness between the parents in summarized in this paper. First, apart

respect of mentality than would be expected from the question of the accuracy of the

from purely random mating, the correla- assessment of the mentality of the members

tion being + .44 + - o8. This observation is of the families, it must be remembered that

in agreement with the view expressed in the those labelled mentally deficient are not

Wood Report that persons of poor intelli- necessarily so within the meaning of the

gence tend to intermarry. It is also in Acts, because the Acts are based on criteria

agreement with common sense. In five of social efficiency: the designation here is

instances the parents were consanguineous. simply to be taken as an estimate of I.Q.

Owing to the extreme frequency of sub- Secondly, any conclusion which may be

cultural mental deficiency, it cannot be drawn applies solely to the causation of pure

inferred that this high incidence of con- sub-cultural mental deficiency, i.e. to the

sanguinity points to the presence of rare group which apparently forms one quarter

recessive mendelian characters determining only of the defectives in an institution. The

the mental deficiency of the offspring. Prob- writer himself would, therefore, go little

ably the high incidence of consanguineous further than to say that the investigation

unions is merely a further indication of the summarized in this paper points to the

tendency for like persons to marry one multi-factorial nature of the genetic deter-

another.

minants of intelligence. This has, of course,

In view of the possibility of finding sex- long been suspected, but the application of

linked genetic determinants for mental defi- this hypothesis to the interpretation of the

ciency, as suggested by several investigators families of the sub-cultural mental defec-

(Goddard, Rosanoff), the families of these tives does not seem to have hitherto received

sub-cultural persons were examined criti- attention.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 4.

