SIR JULIAN HUXLEY, M.A. D.Sc., F.R.-S.
The Impending Crisis*

F IRST OF ALL I want to begin by reminding units, grew larger and more powerful, and after

this audience that this conference has two hundreds of millions of years, vertebrates, then

functions-one to discuss the population land vertebrates, and eventually the final domi-

crisis and the other, to honour Margaret Sanger. nant type, now spreading over the world-man.

Margaret Sanger, as you all know, is a great And man is now, whether he likes it or not,

woman, whose work has blossomed out through and indeed whether he knows it or not (but

the decades since she initiated it-first of all, her it is important that he is beginning to know it),

work for birth-control in the interest ofindividual the sole agent for the future of the whole

compassion and justice, then her work for evolutionary process on this earth. He is respons-

family planning, which soon branched out to ible for the future of this planet.

become a social movement of great importance, Now to come back to the present crisis. I

and took root in other lands, and finally is to- would describe the present crisis as one in which

day being transformed to a world-wide move- quantity is threatening quality, and also one in

ment concerned with population the world over. which the present is threatening the future.

As regards the Impending Crisis ofPopulation, Before we make up our minds what we ought to

your Chairman has reminded you that I am a do in the present crisis-it is no good just getting

biologist; accordingly I shall try to take the into a flap and saying that we ought to do some-

broad view of an evolutionary biologist, who thing-we must try to find what our ultimate

must try to look at things in the light of the aim is as agent or leader of evolution on this

enduring process of evolution of which we all earth.

form a part. Seen in this light, the population Surely, it isn't just power. Surely it isn't just

crisis is part of a very critical period in the history to eat, drink, and be merry, and say, " Well,

of the world.

what's posterity done for us? To hell with

Thanks to the new vision which we have posterity!" It isn't just mere quantity of pos-

attained through the knowledge explosion sessions or mere quantity of people. Nor is it

which has gone on parallel with the population only preparation for some rather shadowy after-

explosion in the last half-century, we have a new life. I would assert that it must be to hold in

vision of our destiny. To-day evolution in the trust, to conserve and to cultivate the resources

person of man is becoming conscious of itself. of the earth and the resources of our own nature.

I do not want to amplify this at great length. And so our aim should be to increase the rich-

I would remind you, however, that all reality is, ness oflife and enhance its quality.

in a perfectly genuine sense, evolution; that " Fulfilment " is probably the embracing word:

biological evolution on this planet has been going more fulfilment and less frustration for more

on for nearly 3,000 million years, and that human beings. We want more varied and fuller

in the course of that period life has advanced achievement in human societies, as against

(not only increased in variety, but advanced in drabness and shrinkage. We want more variety

organization) so that its highest forms, instead as against monotony. We want more enjoyment

of being submicroscopic, tiny, pre-amoebic and less suffering. We want more beauty and

less ugliness. We want more adventure and

* A speech at the Conference on the World Population Crisis, held in conjunction with the World Tribute to Margaret Sanger on May 11th and 12th, 1961 in New

disciplined freedom, as against routine and slavishness. We want more knowledge, more

York City. The occasion was sponsored by the World interest, more wonder, as against ignorance and

Population Emergency Campaign, and Sir Julian Huxley was Chairman of the International Committee of Sponsors for the World Tribute.

apathy. We want more sense of participation in some-

'35 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1961, 53, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

thing enduring and worthwhile, some embracing such a size that they are becoming impossible

project, as against a competitive rat-race, whether to live in. Just as there is a maximum possible

with the Russians or our neighbours on the next size for an efficient land animal-you can't have

street. In the most general terms, we want more a land animal more than about twice as large as

transcendence of self in the fruitful development an elephant-so there is a maximum possible

of personality; and we want more human dignity efficient size for a city. London, New York, and

not only as against human degradation, but as Tokyo have already got beyond that size.

against more self-imprisonment in the human Mr. Chagla has said that civilization has

ego or mere escapism.

already imposed a grievous burden on the

If we look at the present scene in the light of future. I entirely agree. We have to try to lighten

some such vision as this, what do we see? I that burden and in any case to prevent its getting

might begin by telling a little of what I saw in heavier. To take another metaphor, man is

Africa last year. I was sent there to report to losing his claim to be the lord of creation, and is

UNESCO on the conservation of wildlife and in danger of becoming the cancer of the whole

natural habitats. And in the wonderful Queen planet. Not a very nice prospect, but a perfectly

Elizabeth National Park in Uganda the animals genuine one. In the message which the Australian

had been so well preserved that the hippos were scientists sent to this conference, they made a

over-multiplying and had trampled down the profound and depressing remark that unless we

margins of the lakes and the channels; they had took some care, the peoples of all countries all

eaten up all the surplus food, and in fact were over the world would soon become under-

destroying their own habitat. The point I want privileged.

to make is that man is now busy destroying his To look at the crisis more specifically, first of

own habitat.

all there are nearly 3,000 million people on

As Professor Harrison Brown will tell us, earth. Whatever happens, there will be about

man has been over-exploiting the natural 6,000 million people by the end of the century,

resources of this planet and has been ruining its well within the lifetime of many of our children

soils and doing all sorts of other unpleasant already living. Even at the present moment,

things to it. He has wasted enormous amounts of over half the world's population are under-fed,

resources which he ought to have conserved. He under-healthy, under-housed, under-wealthy,

has cut down the forests and caused floods and under-educated and in general under-privileged.

erosion. As Mr. Fairfield Osborn put it in the There is an immense gap between the "haves"

title of his book, he has plundered our planet. and the "have-nots," the privileged and the

(Can we expect another book from him, with under-privileged; and the gap is widening instead

the title Our Blundered Planet?) And so we are of narrowing.

well on the way to ruining our own material The world's present rate ofpopulation-increase

habitat.

is something phenomenal. It is about 50 million

The further point I want to make is that we are a year, and increasing every year both for simply

beginning to ruin our own spiritual and mental arithmetical reasons and because the compound

habitat also. Not content with destroying or interest rate of increase is still itself increasing.

squandering our resources of material things, That means the equivalent of one good-sized

we are beginning to destroy the resources of true town every twenty-four hours-a hundred and

enjoyment-spiritual, aesthetic, intellectual, forty thousand odd. If you like to think of it in

emotional. We are spreading great masses of terms of minutes, it is the equivalent of ten base-

human habitation over the face of the land, ball teams complete with coach every minute.

neither cities nor suburbs nor towns nor villages, And yet there are people who have so little

just a vast mass of urban sprawl or subtopia. quantitative sense that they talk of getting rid of

And to escape from this, people are spilling out our surplus population by sending them off to

farther and farther into the wilder parts and so other planets!

destroying them. And we are making our cities Then there is the other great myth of the pre-

so big as to be monstrous. They are growing to sent day, that this crisis can be solved by

I 36

THE IMPENDING CRISIS

Science-Science with a capital S-a sort of discover better methods of birth-control. That

mystical magician. "Science will find a way." indeed is the key to the whole matter. Physio-

Well, it's not finding its way very well at the logical and medical science has already brought

moment; Japan, for instance, has done a wonder- about what we may call "death-control," with

ful job in bringing its population rate of increase the result that population is exploding; but it

down, but it is still increasing at nearly 1 per has not done the necessary converse of this-

cent per annum and is already bursting at the discovering what to do about birth-control. I

seams. Science is not finding a way to make our would say categorically that the control of

traffic problems in big cities much easier. And it population by means of birth-control applied on

is completely unable to cope with the appalling a large scale, is a prerequisite for anything that

problems of health and housing in great over- you can call progress and advance in human

large cities in under-privileged countries, such as evolution, even in the immediate future.

Calcutta.

The time has now come to think seriously

Then there is the point that our Chairman about population policy. We want every country

made with reference to what Mr. Eugene Black to have a population policy, just as it has an

has recently said-the point that science cannot economic policy or a foreign policy. We want

find a way of successfully industrializing under- the United Nations to have a population policy.

developed countries if their birth-rate is too We want all the international agencies of the

high. That is one of the important points that U.N. to have a population policy.

has emerged from careful economic studies. When I say a population policy, I don't

In order to industrialize an under-developed mean that anybody is going to tell every woman

country, you need a great deal of capital and how many children she may have, any more than

a great deal of human skill and expertize. If you a country which has an economic policy will

have too many human beings to feed, house, say how much money an individual businessman

educate and service, that capital and skill will be is going to make and exactly how he should do

used up in looking after the growing generation, it. It means that you recognize population as a

and you won't be able to industralize.

major problem of national life, that you have a

This comes out very clearly in the study of general aim in regard to it, and that you try

possible industrialization in India by Professors to devise methods for realizing this aim. And if

Coale and Hoover in which they pointed out that you have an international population policy,

unless India got its birth-rate down by about again it doesn't mean dictating to backward

50 per cent in the next thirty-five years or forty countries or anything of that sort; it means not

years, it would never be able to break through depriving them of the right (which I should

to a successful, advanced, industrialized assert is a fundamental human right) to scientific

economy.

information on birth-control and it means help

The same sort of thing applies even to in regulating and controlling their increase and

developed countries. You can't develop your planning their families.

educational system adequately if too many children are coming along. I noticed in the paper that the classroom deficit in the United States had not been reduced but had actually increased in the last year of the last administration. I was once Director-General of UNESCO, and there we are all the time struggling to keep up with the enormous deficiencies of educational systems all over the world: how can we do this when increasing floods of new children are

It was said that there are three countries which already have a population policy. Actually there are at least six: India, Pakistan, Japan, Singapore, Barbados and Puerto Rico. They have population policies, and in some cases they have been reasonably successful. It is most important that these countries should be given every aid in pursuing these policies.
When it comes to United Nations agencies, one of the great scandals of the present century is that owing to pressure, mainly from Roman

coming along all the time?

Catholic countries, the World Health Organiza-

One thing that science could do would be to tion has not been allowed even to consider the

I 37

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

effects of population density on health. It is remaining speakers. I would simply like to go

essential and urgent that this should be reversed. back to where I started and repeat that we must

There is great frustration in the minds of look at the whole question of population in-

medical men all over the world, especially those crease not merely as an immediate problem to

interested in international affairs, who, at the be dealt with ad hoc. We must look at it in the

cost of much devoted labour, have succeeded in light of the new vision of human destiny which

giving people information on how to control or human science and learning has revealed to us.

avoid disease. Malaria in Ceylon is a striking We must look at it in the light of the glorious

example. As a result of all this wonderful scienti- possibilities that are still latent in man, not

fic effort and goodwill, population has exploded, merely in the light of the obvious fact that the

and new diseases, new frustrations, new miseries world could be made a little better than it is.

are arising. Meanwhile medical men are not We must also look at it in the light of the appal-

allowed to try to cope with these new troubles on ling possibilities for evil and misery that still

an international scale-and indeed sometimes remain in evolving human life.

not even on a national scale. I think I am correct This vision of the possibilities of wonder and

in saying that even in this advanced and civilized more fruitful fulfilment on the one hand as

country there are two States in which the giving against frustration and increasing misery and

of birth-control information, even on medical regimentation on the other is the twentieth

grounds, is illegal.

century equivalent of the traditional Christian

It is essential that this whole question of view of salvation as against damnation. I would

population policy should be raised in the United indeed say that this new point of view that we

Nations itself. The U.N. Assembly should be a are reaching, the vision of evolutionary human-

forum for airing this major problem of our times. ism, is essentially a religious one, and that we

It is already a forum for airing other major can and should devote ourselves with truly

problems-disarmament, atomic warfare, and religious devotion to the cause of ensuring

so on. We must not, out of deference to religious greater fulfilment for the human race in its future

or national or political prejudice, put our heads destiny. And this involves a furious and con-

in the sand or pretend that the problem does not certed attack on the problem of population; for

exist. We must get it discussed in the most public the control of population is, I am quite certain,

way in the world's greatest forums.

a prerequisite for any radical improvement in

I do not want to stand between you and the the human lot.

1 38

