HEREDITY AND CRIME

Blood Tests and Inheritance in Law

By W. NORWOOD EAST, M.D., M.R.C.P.

T HE fact that inherited physical con- abling inherited disease gives rise to a sense

ditions may assist in determining the of inferiority or, as it is now fashionably

connection or otherwise of an accused described, an ' inferiority complex ' which

person with a particular crime is well demon- may be itself an important factor in pro-

strated by recent work on the blood groups. ducing anti-social conduct.

It is now generally recognized that human But privations and complexes do not

blood can be classified by the aid of sero- necessarily cause criminal conduct. More-

logical tests into four groups, and it is sug- over, they may act in concert with some un-

gested that these groups might be used to detected factor which is not connected with

test the claim of a prisoner that the blood organic inheritance; and the inquirer can

on his clothes came from a cut made whilst seldom be assured that he is cognizant of

shaving, and not from his alleged victim. all the contributing causes of any criminal

Dr. Roche Lynch, who has worked at this act. For it must be remembered always

subject, states that the test would act de- that crime results from a plurality of in-

finitely on a blood stain a year or so old, fluences, although in certain cases some out-

and that the examination of agglutinable pro- standing feature may seem to be the

perty of the blood corpuscle and agglutinin dominating factor.

in the serum provides a double test, and Some idea of the frequency with which

would be as valuable to prove innocence as mental disorder and crime are associated

guilt. For if the blood of an accused per- may be gathered from the following figures.

son belongs to group 2, and the blood on his During the years April ist, I923, to March

clothes to group 2, and the blood of the victim 3Ist, I926, the total number of receptions

to group 4, it is certain that the blood on the into prisons in England and Wales was clothes of the accused did not come from the 133,401. Of these I,750 were dealt with

victim. Dr. Roche Lynch found as the under the Lunacy or Mental Deficiency Acts

result of a large number of observations that -992 were insane and 758 were mentally

the blood groups followed Mendelian laws, defective. But since individuals who were

and that, for instance, the offspnng of reconvicted more than once were counted

parents whose blood belonged to groups 2 as a fresh reception on re-conviction, the

and 4 would have blood belonging to one or number of mentally affected prisoners was

other of those groups, but not to groups i larger than i in 76, the proportion shown

and 3. Dr. Roche Lynch and other workers by the figures. There were also un-

suggest that the tests may assist in doubtedly an additional number of un-

determining the paternity of a child.

recorded borderline cases, who should be

taken into consideration, and who would

PHYSICAL AND MENTAL STATES

still further increase the proportion of men-

The causal relation between inherited tally affected prisoners. Of I4,927 male

physical and mental dispositions and crime remand and trial prisoners who came under

is more difficult to assess. To take the my observation during a period of two years

causal relation between inherited physical 225 or I.5 per cent. were insane, 205 or I.3

states and crime first. Inheritable diseases per cent. were certifiable under the Mental

may incapacitate the sufferer for work and Deficiency Act, and 2I2 or I.4 per cent.

produce continuous or intermittent periods showed uncertifiable but abnormal mental

of destitution and privations which may re- conditions. In round figures, of I5,ooo

sult in crime. Further, in some cases a dis- remand and trial prisoners 3 per cent. were

i69

170 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

certifiable under the Lunacy and Mental officers, and visit many of the lads' homes

Deficiency Acts and another 2 per cent. and obtain information concerning their

were clearly abnormal mentally. Except as family histories, amplifying and checking

a statement of fact these figures may appear the statements made by the prisoners. It

unimportant. But practical experience ren- was found that in a series of I,ooo lads in-

\ders it abundantly clear that mental dis- sanity and mental deficiency or epilepsy was

order is an important factor in the causa- reported in 86 cases, and in another 26 there

tion of crime; although the crimes com- was a less precise history of familial neuro-

mitted by insane persons are at times so pathic taint. In a series of 650 insane and

dramatic that the un-informed are liable to mentally defective prisoners under my ob-

exaggerate the frequency of the association. servation whilst awaiting trial (350 insane

The highest authorities recognize an in- and 300 mentally defective) ioi were re-

herited predisposition to mental disorder. ported to have insane, mentally defective, or

Maudsley in his " Pathology of Mind " epileptic relations. I think there can be

says: " First that a person does not inherit little doubt that these figures are an under-

insanity, but a predisposition or tendency, estimate, for how many informants of good

and secondly that the tendency comes from intention can state accurately what diseases

the stock. Nor need the unusual strain in their grandparents and collaterals suffered

the stock show itself in any form of actual from? And how often is a conspiracy of

insanity, it may appear in some allied ner- silence concerning the presence of mental

vous disorder, in hypochondriasis and sni- disease and defect in the family adopted by

cide, in feeblemindedness, in dipsomania, in relatives, with consequent ignorance among

epilepsy in its manifold forms and other the descendants of the actual facts?

periodical nerve storms, in eccentricity, in A consideration of the official figures for

religious fanaticism, in the melancholic sus- I925 indicates that one person in every 204

picious temperament, in selfish cunning, of the population is known to be insane or

avarice and meanness."

mentally defective. But these figures

Professor Richard Berry in the Beattie clearly understate the facts, for all insane

Smith Lectures on Insanity delivered in persons are not certified, and the total num-

1926 said, " It is unnecessary here to stress ber of defectives among the general popula-

the enormous influence of heredity as a tion is not yet ascertained. It follows that

cause of the developmental insanities, be- the number of normal individuals possess-

cause the records of every properly con- ing relations who are mentally affected is

ducted mental hospital contains thousands very considerable, whereas the number of

of examples." And Agnes M. Kelly and persons who possess criminal relations is

E. J. Lidbetter, working under the direction probably small. But here again caution is

of the late Sir Frederick Mott, found that necessary, for although the number of in-

with sixty normal children only four insane dividuals who are convicted of crime is

or mentally defective relations were re- known, and also the number of offences re-

ported, whereas with 6o mentally defective ported to the police, there is no means of

children there were 30, and with 6o insane knowing how many crimes occur that are

patients 45.

not reported to the authorities, how many

BORSTAL BOYS' HEREDITY

undetected crimes are committed, nor how many potential criminals remain at

The medical investigations at the Boys' liberty. In fact, the estimates of the num-

Prison at Wandsworth indicate the associa- ber of cases of mental disorder, and the

tion of crime with familial mental disorder. number of criminals in the general popula-

The lads are physically and psychologically tion, and the number of criminals with an

examined before they are recommended for inherited predisposition to mental disorder

Borstal training. Voluntary social visitors have little value for purposes of accurate

work in co-operation with the medical comparison and deduction.

HEREDITY AND CRIME

To recapitulate: There can be no doubt example, and uncongenial surroundings

whatever that mental disorder may be may be important contributors. In some

directly a cause of crime, and most people cases the organic inheritance seems to be the

will agree that the hereditability of mental chief influence, in others the environment.

disorder is axiomatic. Further, there The matter is still further compli,r

seems to be a relation between insane crime cated, for what is inborn is not neces-

and familial mental disorder, but it can- sarily inherited, although what is in-

not be estimated with precision since the herited is inborn. And it may be impos-

amount of mental disorder and crime among sible to decide whether, for instance, con-

the general population is unknown.

duct dominated by the sex instinct is the

result of inheritance, or faulty environment,

THE LEGAL POSITION

or whether inborn influences have affected

This conclusion is of practical importance the secretion of the gonads, induced cortical

in the criminal courts. In trials for murder hyperplasia of the supra-renals, or produced

where the evidence of guilt is clear, and the some other endocrine imbalance affecting

nature and circumstances of the crime offer sexual conduct.

no prospect of the charge being reduced to Neither is it always easy for the inquirer

manslaughter, the defence frequently at- to approach the subject with unbiassed judg-

tempts to show that the accused is insane ment. The geneticist may be impressed with

on liftle evidence except a family history of the arguments for heredity, the physio-

insanity. It is noteworthy that in this logist with endocrine abnormalities, and the

event the medical witness is informed of the sociologist with the environmental condi-

number of insane relations belonging to the tions in the alteration of which he sees the

prisoner, but he is usually ignorant of the only chance of reformation.

total number of relations from whom these

cases are deducted, and his data are always "A PREDISPOSING CAUSE"

incomplete for the further reason that he is Cyril Burt, as the result of his researches

unable to determine the effect of miscar- into the causation of juvenile delinquency,

riages and contraceptives upon the propor- concludes that in rather less than half the

tion of insane in the stock under review. cases some deep constitutional failing proves

Even if the stock is heavily loaded with the to be the primary source of misconduct.

neuropathic taint or actual insanity the The lawless actions of the remainder are

prisoner may be unaffected, and for the precipitated primarily by the difficulties of

medical witness the personal history of the their environment or by the events of their

accused is always more important than the own past life. He considers that the pars

family history.

played by heredity or natural endowment is

Certain dispositions tend to be associated in a majority of cases that of a minor or pre-

with crime as a causative factor, and I sup- disposing cause.

pose most of us will accept the view that Mercier considered crime was due to

temperamental conditions such as impulsive- temptation or opportunity, the environ-

ness, violent temper, the wandering ten- mental factor or stress acting upon the pre-

dency, sexual peculiarities, and the like, disposition of the offender, the inherent or

which are sometimes causal factors of crimi- constitutional factor. The more potent the

nal conduct, may be inherited. But this one factor the less of the other was necessary

inheritance is compatible with a useful and to bring about the result. A very powerful

law-abiding life, if balanced by other con- and alluring temptation would break down

stitutional factors and satisfied by environ- the virtue of even a very moral person who

mental conditions. As I have said already, would not succumb to an ordinary tempta-

crime results from various influences, and tion. A thoroughly immoral person inured

environmental factors such as poverty, over- to crime would require scarcely any tempta-

crowding, defective parental control, vicious tion, no more in fact than would amount to

172 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

opportunity, to induce him to commit crime. cies, which may arise through any of a large

The late Sir Bryan Donkin devoted much number of possible biological, mental, or

thought to the inheritance of mental charac- social factors is altogether different from

ters, and to the influence of heredity upon studying the heritage of a Hapsburg lip or

crime. He considered that the mental the heredity of feeblemindedness."

make-up of all men, whether law-breakers Amidst so much doubt concerning the

or law-abiders, depended upon inborn essential nature of mental dispositions, and

capacities or possibilities of development, as so much doubt concerning the dividing line

well as on the multiform agencies from with- between inheritance and acquirement the

out, which act upon the germinal material ultimate conclusion seems to me to be this:

and may influence its development. He Heredity may condition crime in an impor-

concluded that the various qualities of man tant but variable and indirect manner, not

could not be considered for the purpose of by begetting criminals, but by the transmis-

any investigation as simply constitutional or sion through the germ plasm of tendencies

inborn, without taking account of the exter- to insanity, mental deflci'ency, tempera-

nal influences on their actual development. mental instability, or faulty development of

He considered it was impracticable to assess some primitive instinct antagonistic to social

with any precision the proportionate in- adjustment. If this be so eugenic en-

fluence 6a the two factors heredity and en- deavours to improve the physique and

vironment in the development of men's mental stability of the nation may have a

minds. This represents my own view, and part in the prevention of crime, but only a

I would add that no one accustomed to re- part. The acquired influences must be

search among criminals will gainsay that in dealt with also, and as a rule the environ-

their case the assessment is surrounded with ment can be more easily, more quickly, and

peculiar difficulties.

more certainly altered than the personality

of the delinquent. In some cases inherited

EXAMPLE AND OPPORTUNITY

personal failings may be socially adjusted

The presentation of elaborate genealogical by precept and example; in many delin-

trees showing pedigrees of crime leave me quent conduct can be checked only by

unimpressed, for they fail to show how changes in both personality and environ-

development and environment influenced the ment. And it seems probable, that those

descendants. The prostitute mother may who only commit crime occasionally have

have prostitute daughters because their, cir- environment as the basis of their delin-

cumstances strongly favour licentiousness quency.

and abort the growth of moral sentiment. However this may be, organic evolution

The sons of a thief may be thieves, but their ever lags behind social evolution, and motor

thefts may be begotten of example and car legislation and prohibition laws suggest

opportunity. As Healy observes, " Study- that eugenically controlled matings would

ing the significance of delinquent tenden- fail to produce a crimeless race.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.

