GALTON AND MID-CENTURY EUGENICS
By FREDERICK OSBORN

Science Since Galton
INCE the turn of the century there have been extraordinary developments in two fields of science which were close
to Francis Galton's heart. In genetics, Mendel's work was rediscovered, and a great science established, in what has undoubtedly been one of the triumphs of the human mind. In the social sciences, in which no figure of Galton's stature has appeared since his time, and to which he contributed the principle of correlation, and the application of Zuetelet's curve of normal distribution, the advances have been substantial but less spectacular.
It was on the advancement of these sciences that Galton based his hopes for an effective eugenics. The best tribute we can pay him, on this, the I34th anniversary of his birth, is to consider what would have been his views on the development of eugenics in the light of our new scieintific knowledge.
Galton, who died in I9II, would have been fascinated with the last half century's progress in the science of genetics which had become a subject of controversy during the last few years of his life. He would have given his powerful backing to the fuirther advancement of human genetics. He would have been present at the First International Congress of Human Genetics to be held in Copenhagen this summer. He would have urged exhaustive studies on the identification of carriers of harmful recessive genes. He would have supported heredity clinics.
Galton would have been disappointed in the little progress that has been made since his time in the study of the genetic factors which affect the development of personality
* The Galton Lecture delivered in London on February 15th, 1956

and intelligence. He would have been surprised that we to-day know so little more
than he did about the relative contributions of heredity and environment in the development of the subtle differences in the characteristics which distinguish men and women of unusual ability. I think he would have urged that we should not wait till scientific knowledge was complete, but should look for acceptable eugenic policies to put into effect during our own lifetimes.
I am sure Galton would have been pleased
with the methodologies of modern psycho-
logy, in which he was one of the great
pioneers. The use of the blood groups in anthropology would have stirred his imagination. The application of the niew measures for the selection and training of personnel now so widely used by governments and in industry would have seemed to him to realize some of the high hopes he expressed in the studies which he carried on throughouit his own lifetime. The new methods for gathering objective data on individual and group attitudes and motivations, and their statistical analysis, would have provided him with tools for working on some of the possible applications of science to human affairs- and to human beings. I think he would have been appalled to find that the major investments of brains and money were being spent in the physical sciences to the neglect of the sciences having to do with man. He would have been one of the first among us to recognize that the social sciences require work with large numbers over a long period of time to achieve results in any way comparable to the results achieved in physics and chemistry. He would have been disheartened that pure research, that is, research without any immediate practical aim, was being carried out on

15 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1956. 48, 1.

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

an enormous scale by governments and group. Since eugenics is not concerned with

industry in the fields of medicine and of all reducing the birth rate as a whole, a sound

the physical sciences, while the social process of purely genetic selection would

scientist was limited, with few exceptions, have to reach into every socio-economic and

to minor projects having some immediate every racial group to seek out the genetically

practical purpose.

valuable individuals and attempt to increase

We can put forward with some confidence that these would have been some of Galton's reactions if he were suddenly to appear among us to-day. But we have not answered the major question: How would he have applied to-day's new knowledge and new circumstances to the major problems of eugenics which held first place in all his

their rate of births, concurrently with the attempt to reduce births among the less valuable. The practical and scientific aspects of this matter are, I think, so well established as to leave us no reasonable alternative. I believe Galton would have agreed that not group, but individual differences must be the basis of eugenics.

thought ? It would be assuming the powers In Galton's time death differentials still

of his genius for anyone of us to say what he played an important part in selection. But

would have proposed. But we can be sure to-day in European countries 95 per cent of

that he would have reoriented his thinking the children born alive survive to reach the

wherever the findings of science required it. age of reproduction. The deaths of the five

per cent who do not survive are undoubtedly

highly selective against physical abnormali-

Indications of the New Sciences

ties and weaknesses, but they are certainly

We must start, I think, with a premise that would have been new to Galton. The studies made since his time do not indicate major differences in genetic potential for intelligence and the development of person-
ality between any of the large socio-economic groups or between the different races of man.

not selective for the higher qualities with which we are particularly concerned. Today the processes of selection affecting man's higher qualities operate not through deaths, but through differentials in the number of children born to people of different genetic
types.

These groups may differ in their average of Under these conditions fanciful utopias

genetic capacity, but if they do the differ-i have been proposed, in which there would

ences are too subtle for us to distinguish by be an arbitrary selection, by government or

any scientific methods at present available. other authority, of those who should have

Even if the average should be found to be children, based on some agreed on measures

higher in one group than in another, the of quality. There are many reasons why

overlapping must be very great. Genetic such proposals are repugnant to thoughtful

capacities are certainly distributed among people. Western ideals would not permit of

the individuals in such groups in a normal such an abrogation of individual responsi-

curve of distribution, as Galton was the first bility; no man or group of men can be

to point out. A process of selection based trusted to decide who should and who

on socio-economic or racial groups, which should not have children; even if our

failed to take into account individual varia- scientific knowledge were far greater than it

tions within groups, would be impractical is or is likely to be, there are questions of

because it would not supply enough births values here which no man is fitted to deter-

for replacement, and unsound because it mine.

would miss too many able stocks. We need Galton never envisaged any system of

the greatest possible number of births among arbitrary controls, except for the more

genetically superior individuals, whether serious mental and physical genetic handi-

they are among the able individuals who are caps, which should be treated like a form of

the majority in one group or among the able communicable disease. But he did propose

individuals who are the minority in another that we should attempt to assign eugenic

GALTON AND MID-CENTURY EUGENICS

I7

value to particular people, and single them out for rewards for having children. The
values he proposed related to health, intelligence and fine qualities of personality. They are generally accepted. No one could object to them. Yet somehow the idea of designating certain people as desirable progenitors of the next generation, and rewarding them for having children, has never found acceptance. It has not been neglected. Others have worked on it since Galton's time, and it has been quite constantly before the public in one way or another. But it seems to arouse more indignation than sympathy, and more ridicule than serious consideration. I believe that Galton would have recognized by now that public opinion was pretty well fixed in this matter.
This opposition does not seem reasonable to the eugenist. He recognizes more than others that the conditions of modern life may bring about a genetic degeneration of the race; he feels perhaps more deeply than others the need for genetic improvement and 'the possibility of accomplishing it. But the public in general is less willing to accept the idea that any individuals are genetically superior. In the United States they say
that there is no mother who does not sometimes think that her son might become President. It is a fine and universal human trait for a mother to have such aspirations. Indeed she has considerable support from science which has pointed out the heterogeniety of the human race and the infinite complexity of human inheritance. The genetic odds may favour one mother far more than another, but in races, horse or man, it isn't always the odds on favourite
which wins.
My own feeling is that if eugenics is to make any progress in the foreseeable future, we will not only have to dro) the idea of assigning genetic superiorities to social or racial groups, but we will even have to stop trying to designate individuals as superior or inferior. To many eugenists this would seem a radical step, almost the abandonment of eugenics. But a little consideration will show that there are means of selection which do not require that we humiliate one half of

the individuals who comprise the human race by telling them that they are not as fit as the other half to procreate the next generation.
Practical Eugenics Programme
In the latter part of his life Galton urged the study of " forces under social control" which would influence the distribution of births. He himself analyzed the effect on
survival of differences in age at marriage;
he pointed out the effect of the celibacy required of scholars by the colleges. To Galton these were examples of social forces which brought about a voluntary and quite unconscious though adverse form of selection.
Other studies of forces which affect selection have been made more recently. They were at first concerned with the effect of birth control and its differential use among socio-economic groups. All these studies reached the same conclusion: namely, that differences in the birth rates of different socio-economic groups were directly related to the practice and effectiveness of contraception. Both in England and in the United States contraception was first inti oduced among the wealthier and better educated classes, and resulted in widening class differentials. As the use of contraception spread downward through the entire population, the differentials have tended to narrow. Contraception, a " force under social control," greatly influences group differentials in rates of birth.
Differences in size of family as between individual couples appeared to vary in the past inversely with income. But in the early nineteen-thirties Eden in Sweden began publishing studies indicating that above a certain income level, (presumably those practicing birth control), the size of individual families varied directly and not inversely with income. Further studies appeared to confirm this finding. The largest study of this sort was the " Study of the Social and Psychological Factors Affecting Fertilitv" carried out in Indianapolis and reported in the Milbank Fund Quarterly.

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Because of the size of the sample in this study, it was possible to make an analysis of births among several hundred couples all of whom could be recorded as practicing
family planning effectively. In this family planning group, the rate of births was much below the rate required for replacement, but the number of children per couple was directly related to income. Those couples with the lowest incomes had the fewest children, and size of family increased with each increment of a thousand dollars per year of income, the couples with the most children being those with the highest incomes. I believe we can now assume that the ideal of planning family size, coupled with effective means of preventing conception, constitutes " a force under social control" which permits individual couples to respond to the varying pressures of the environment with a considerable variation in size of family; and that among such couples economic pressure tends to reduce the number of children.
We still have much to learn, but it seems fairly certain, subject to confirmation by further studies, that when family planning has spread to all elements of the population, and means of effective contraception are readily available to all, couples will tend to have children in some proportion to their ability to give them proper care. The present evidence permits us to speak only of their economic care. But there seems to me every reason to believe that other aspects of ability to care for children are also involved. Given equal economic security, it can be assumed that parents who have the vitality, the patience, the character, the human sympathy, the affection and the intelligence to give their children the kind of care most valuable for their development will, under favourable conditions of the environment, be found to desire and to have more children than parents who do not have as much of these qualities.
Such an assumption is subject to two important conditions: means must be found to make early marriage and children economically possible to ambitious young people, and the influences of the eatlly environment

must be such as to provide the proper psy-
chological conditioning for parenthood. By this I mean that the parents of the future should be exposed from earliest childhood to influences which will tend to increase the desire for children, and will increase this desire most among individuals with the ability to give their children the kind of affectional and intelligent care we have indicated. These psychological influences would have to be selective ; that is, they would have to have mnore effect on potentially good parents than on potentially poor parents. But it does not seem impossible to find influ-
ences which are selective. In the case of intelligence, the more intelligent people are,
the more susceptible they are to influences which arouse their intelligence. It does not seem unreasonable to believe that psychological influences can be found which will have the same selective effect on traits of personality, and will tend to increase qualities of affection, sense of responsibility, and interest in others, in proportion to the potential of each individual for developing these traits. We are assuming that we can find " forces under social control " which when incorporated into the environment, would have a selective effect on size of family.
Perhaps the greatest handicap to the effectiveness of a selective environment of this sort would be the tendency of people everywhere to conform to the current fashion, which seems to apply to size of family as well as to size of bustle, design of clothes, or other matters of taste. The Indianapolis study which was made during the depression, found almost no families of more than three children among. these moderate income, urban, educated people practicing contraception. To-day with a higher birth rate, there is a greater variation in size of family and a substantial proportion of families of four or five children. To maintain an effective selection of births. it would be important to develop a public opinion which would not expect couples to have a particular number of children, but which would find it entirely natural for some couples to have large families and others small families or no children at all, depending solely on

GALTON AND MID-CENTURY EUGENICS

their own choice or taste in the matter. much sense. I think that most of us would

Fortunately a process of selection, to be be content if we felt that the individual

effective, does not have to be exact. It is couples throughout the nation who provided

enough if the general trend is in the right their children with the most intelligently

direction. That was certainly the case with planned, the most affectional, and the most

natural selection, and we should be content responsible care, were having the largest

if it is the case with the kind of man-made families. It is hard to see how such a trend

selection now being considered.

could be dysgenic. Until the science of

The most immediate and notable effect of human genetics is very much advanced it is

this kind of selection would be environ- the only kind of broad, overall selection we

mental; a rapid increase in the proportion can work for. If we can succeed in giving

of children brought up in homes which direction to the social forces which will

would give them the best affectional care. effect this kind of environmental selection,

This would be the most effective argument we will be better equipped to direct them to

for getting such a programme accepted. a specifically genetic selection as soon as the

Everyone is anxious to improve the home necessary genetic information is available.

environment in which children are brought

up, 'and of course the easiest way to do so

is to have the children born in the homes Advantages of the Broad Programme

which provide the best environment. These proposals should therefore, when properly

of Selection

understood, have the enthusiastic support of There are a number of practical advan-

the public, which everywhere wants to see tages in this proposed method of selection.

children brought up in better home environ- First of all is the fact that with the advent

ments. There is here no interference with of family planning, there seems already to

individual choice as to size of family. There be a trend in this direction. We would be

is no question of assumed superiority or in- working with the tide instead of against it.

feriority; indeed the eugenic question need Equally important is that such a process 6f

not be raised, and it would probably be selection would make for great diversity, and

better not to raise it. The results of this thus avoid one of the most justified criti-

environmental selection would be apparent cisms directed at eugenics. Finally, a pro-

in the first generation brought up in the cess of selection based on early success in

better environments, and should be cumu- responding to the environment would be

lative thereafter.

democratic; lack of parental support would

We have at present no scientific studies to tell us whether this environmental improvement would result in a corresponding genetic
improvement, or if not, whether it could be modified in such a way as to bring about a

be no bar to early marriage among scholars, artists, and others headed towards the professions. Those who had to fight their way up would have an equal chance at raising a family. It should therefore enlist the solid

genetic improvement. But there are good support of public opinion, to an extent not

a priori grounds for believing it would raise possible with any proposal for a solely

the genetic average.

eugenic selection.

Since at present we lack knowledge of the The proposal we have been discussing

genetic components underlying intelligence develops out of common sense and would be

and personality and of the methods by which put forwar(d on the groundl that more child-

these components are transmitted, a certain ren wouild grow tup in the best home environ-

number of geneticists will object that such a mlents, with no public argument made for

selection is not in any way related to eugenics. I think that Galton, if he were

eugenics. But by their own admission they here with us to-day, and had reviewed the

have no evidence to prove this negative. history of the eugenic movement since his

It is a negative which logically does not make death, would endorse such a proposal. He

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was an eminently practical man. He be- Research

lieved we could take a lesson out of the Even such a limited programme of eug-

evolutionary processes of the past. The enics needs the support of continuing re-

present proposal, except that it is necessarilv search. A larger proportion of able young

based on births rather than on deaths, pro- men should be encouraged to enter the field vides, in the manner of natural selection, of medical genetics and be trained in both

for the survival of those who are best genetics and medicine. Medical and genetic

adapted to the requirements of modern research would both be advanced by setting

civilization. I doubt that Galton would up genetic registers such as those already

have viewed it with the scepticism that is established in a number of Scandinavian

expressed by some geneticists to-day.

countries. More medical schools should

This programme meets the requirement teach and conduct genetic research.

that a process of selection should sort out The study of human genetics is at a

individuals throughout the whole popula- critical point from which it may make rapid

tion. It makes a beginning, and it has the advances if it receives proper support. Pro-

advantage that as our scientific knowledge fessional societies of human geneticists have

increases and public opinion is increasingly been established in a number of countries,

informed, it can be more and more directed and for the first time there are scientific

to a genetic as well as an environmental journals devoted exclusively to this field.

selection. Already enough is known of The first International Conference of Human

medical genetics to make it almost obligatory Genetics is being held this summer at Copen-

that we should set up heredity clinics in hagen. There have been great advances

connection with medical schools and mar- since the war. But the ablest of the younger

riage counselling services. Galton would, I men seldom go into human genetics, nor in-

believe, have adopted the view now gener- deed into the various fields of the social

ally held, that heredity counselling should sciences. They are still going into the

not go beyond advising on the degree of risk physical sciences, and until this condition is

of defective heredity, leaving it to the changed our knowledge of human beings is

parents themselves to decide whether or not not going to advance as it should.

it is to their interest and that of society to
run this risk. He would have hoped that
by educating the public through such services, individual parents, backed by public opinioni, would increasingly hesitate to run the risk of bringing defective children into the world. The public education resulting from the use of heredity clinics should develop a eugenic awareness which would make the public more understanding of eugenic measures, and individual couples more anxious to play a eugenic part.

Genetics and social science meet in the study of the relative parts played by heredity and by environment in the development of individual differences. No field of knowledge is more important to eugenics. A scientific knowledge of how individual differ-
ences develop would be a great stimulant to education, to job selection, and to almost every phase of human activity. It seems amazing that so little serious work is being done on this subject. In this field the studies of twins in which Galton was so great

Galton clearly saw that eugenic policies a pioneer should be pushed with renewed

would fail unless geared to " existing condi- vigour. A longitudinal study of identical

tions of law and sentiment."

and fraternal twins, comparing them with

I doubt whether, at the present time, he each other, with their brothers and sisters,

would have gone beyond these specific pro- with foster children, and with unrelated

posals. I think they would have seemed to pairs, and carried out over a long period of

him sufficient for a start on which to build time, would, I think, change public attitudes

a eugenic form of society. I have no doubt in a great variety of ways, and give us an

that he would have put the whole force of entirely new base for the development of

his position behind these proposals.

eugenic policies.

GALTON AND MID-CENTURY EUGENICS

2I

Only a few studies have reported on size average of human intelligence and character

of family in relation to the measured per- could be raised to the level of the upper five

sonal qualities of the parents. But there is or ten per cent to-day; since he envisaged

now under way in the United States a major the eugenic movement as something that

study, successor to the Indianapolis study, would sweep the world and make man at

which among other things will attempt to last the master of his own destiny on earth.

determine relationships between size of It has not happened. The eugenic move-

family and the personal qualities of the ment is nothing but a few small handfuls of

parents. The outline of this study is re- men in various countries; here in England,

ported in the Eugenics Quarterly for Decem- in the United States, in India, in France.

ber, I955. In using measures of personal They are not influencing public opinion.

qualities, this study will not attempt to The very word eugenics is in disrepute in

separate genetic differences from differences some quarters. Yet I still believe in Gal-

in intelligence and personality caused by the ton's dream. Probably most of you do.

environment. Here we must, for the pres- We must ask ourselves, what have we done

ent, rely on the rather general indications wrong ?

given us by studies on the relationships in intelligence and personality between parents and own children versus parents and foster children, and particularly on the twin
studies. All of these indicate a correlation between developed qualities and the genetic base.

I think we have failed to take into account a trait which is almost universal and is very
deep in human nature. People simply are not willing to accept the idea that the genetic base on which their character is formed is inferior and should not be repeated in the next generation. We have asked

Finally, further practical advances in whole groups of people to accept this idea

eugenics require intensive study of all forces and we have asked individuals to accept it.

" subject to social control " which may They have constantly refused, and we have

affect size of family. Such studies are wholly all but killed the eugenic movement.

in the field of the social sciences. They are People will accept the idea of a specific

most immediately useful in countries where hereditary defect. They will go to a here-

information is needed as to the best means dity clinic and ask what is the risk of our

of reducing a too rapid rate of births. But having a defective child. They balance that

these studies do not now provide information risk against the chance of their having a

on how to make the birth rate selective. It sound child, and they usually come up with

should not be too difficult to include in such a pretty sound decision. But they won't

studies an investigation of the differential accept the idea that they are in general

effects of various environmental factors on second rate. We must rely on other motiva-

different types of couples. This information tion.

would be valuable for many purposes, and Given the right circumnstances, people will

particularly to indicate trends of signific- have children in proportion to their ability

ance, and for developing eugenic principles. to care for them. If they feel financially

It seems clear that the advance of pro- secure, if they enjoy accepting responsibility,

grammes which would make for selection if they have warm affectional responses, if

based on personal qualities of intelligence they are physically strong and competent,

and character must go hand in hand with they are likely to have large families, pro-

advances in studies on social and psycholog- vided they have a reasonable psychological

ical motivation.

conditioning to this end. If they are un-

Conclusion

able to feed the children they have, if they are afraid of responsibility, if their affec-

It is eighty-six years since Galton pub- tional responses are weak, people don't want

lished his Hereditary Genius, eighty-six many children. If they have effective

years since he gave us the hope that the means of family planning, they won't have

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

many. Our studies have shown this to be true all over the world. On such a base it is
surely possible to build a system of voluntary unconscious selection. But the reasons advanced must be generally acceptable reasons. Let's stop telling anyone that they
have a generally inferior genetic quality, for they will never agree. Let's base our pro-
posals on the desirability of having children

born in homes where they will get affectionate and responsible care, and perhaps our proposals will be accepted.
It seems to me that if it is to progress as
it should, eugenics must follow new policies and state its case anew, and that from this rebirth we may, even in our own lifetime, see it moving at last towards the high goals which Galton set for it.

the Review of the ITALIAN COMMITTEE FOR THE STUDY OF POPULATION PROBLEMS
and of the ITALIAN SOCIETY OF GENETICS AND EUGENICS edited under the auspices of the National Research Council

Editor: CORRADO GINI

Sumnmary of Volume XI, December 31 1955

C. GINI

Problemes demographiques en Europe: I Introductioni; II. Les migrations

interieures; III. Les migrations internationales; IV. Le vieillissement des populations.

C. GIN!

Possono e devono i caratteri psichici e culturali essere tenuti presenti nella

classificazione delle razze umane?

C. C. ZIMMERMAN American roots in an Italian village: Part I, The migrants from S. Giovanni

Incarico; Part II, The Ciociaria Culture; Part III, Data from Ceccanio.

C. GIN!

Methodes et resultats de l'6tude des populations primitives.

G. GIUROVICI!

L'origine sociale e il rendimento differenziale degli studenti romani classificati

secondo la professione paterna.

A. SOFIA

Sulla variabilita e la correlazione delle ossa delle mani e dei piedi nei due sessi.

A. OKASAKI

Politique eugdn6sique au Japon et resultats obtenus.

Reviews of Italialn, English, American, French, German, Danish, Portuguese, Swedish, Russian,

Greek, Egyptian, Indian, South American, South African and Australian books.

GENUS

accepts scientific articles, papers, notes and communications written in Italian, English, French, German and Spanish in the field of the different sciences related to population problems (Demography, Sociology, Economics, General Biology, Genetics, Eugenics, Anthropology, Social Hygiene, Psychology, Geography) Orders should be addressed to: Segreteria del Comitato Italiano per lo Studio dei Problemi della
Popolazione, Via dele Terme di Diocleziano, no lO-Roma (M-8S) (Italy).

