PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF CONSTITUTION

By W. LINFORD REES, M.D., B.Sc., M.R.C.P., D.P.M.

J UST as men have always tried to judge causation and attempted to explain indi-

mental and moral qualities by the vidual differences in behaviour. Galen's

external configuration of their fellow
beings, so have physicians, from the time of ancient Greeks, tried to find relations between physique and susceptibility to

teaching influenced medical thought fdr many centuries, and was taught by Thomas Laycock, professor at Edinburgh, as late as the eighteenth century.

disease. The former activity led to the With the rise of knowledge of bacteriology

development of the science of physiognomy and cellular pathology, interest in the con-

and the latter to the development of the doc- stitutional aspect of medicine steadily de-

trine of the humoral basis of temperament. clined, and up to the latter part of the nine-

Aristotle in his book Physiognomica tried teenth century constitutional study had made

to justify the universal and popular concept- little significant progress since the time of

of a correlation between the external linea- Hippocrates. The modem recrudescence of

ments of man and his mental and moral interest in constitutional medicine is mainly

characteristics. His work was revived in due to the pioneer work of Beneke in Germany

the sixteenth century by della Porta, and and Di Giovanni in Italy. Beneke in I878

again in the eighteenth century by Lavater. published data on the measurements of the

These works, however, are speculative to a various internal organs and the variations

ludicrous degree, and based on a minimum in size associated with age, disease and

of observation. In the late eighteenth and somatic type.

early nineteenth centuries the study of Di Giovanni, during the same period,

physiognomy was deflected by the studies founded the Italian School of Clinical Anthro-

of Gall, Coombe and Spurzheim into the pology. He described various physical types,

now discredited science of phrenology.-

but went to the extreme of trying to prove

Parallel in development to the study of that the cause of the morbidity of an organ

physiognomy was the study of the humoral resided in its special morphology. His work

basis of temperaments. Hippocrates (460-377 was continued by Viola, who regarded the

B.C.) regarded health as being due to the occurrence of antithetical physical types as

optimum mixture of humours, and disease to being due to the interdependent growth of

a disturbance of this relationship. The trunk and limbs. He found that the greater

humours were blood, lymph, black bile and the development of the trunk the smaller

yellow bile, corresponding to the four would be the limb development and vice

primary elements, fire, water, earth and air, versa. He described a megalosplanchnic

from which (according to Empedocles and type with large trunk and short limbs, a

Pythagoras) all substances were constituted. microsplanchnic type with small trunk and

Galen (A.D. I29-C.200) described nine tem- long limbs, and a normosplanchnic type

peraments which he regarded as being due which lies midway between the other types,

to various humoral mixtures. He described and shows a harmonious development of

various physical characteristics associated trunk and limbs. Pende described various

with these temperaments, the perfect tem- endocrinal sub-types to these main types,

perament being characterized by physical thus reviving the humoral theories of

symmetry. The Galenic theory of tempera- temperament of the early Greco-Roman

ments constituted a general theory of disease writers.

23

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A great impetus was given to constitu- show that the various indices of body build

tional research in psychiatry by Ernst are " normally" distributed, showing a

Kretschmer, who, in I92I, propounded his continuous variation from the extreme lepto-

theory of the biological affinity between the some to the extreme pyknic type, indicating

psychic disposition of manic depressives and a leptosomatic-pyknic continuum, rather

the pyknic type of body build, and that of than the existence of discrete and inde-

schizophrenes and the leptosomatic, athletic pendent types.

and certain types of dysplastic physique. Sheldon (1940) distinguished 67 somato-

The pyknic type is characterized by pro- types on criteria based on the relative

nounced development of the body cavities, development of endodermal, mesodermal

and, in general, by excessive breadth in and ectodermal structures. These types are

relation to length; the athletic type by really parts of the normal continuous varia-

strong development of skeleton and muscular tion of physique bracketed by definite

system and by wide and projecting shoulders, boundaries. Pearl's (1936) classification of

and the leptosomatic or asthenic type by physique into asthenic, intermediate and

deficiency in thickness compared with length. pyknic types is both simple and satisfactory,

In this paper the term constitution is used and is in keeping with the concept of a

in its wider connotation, and refers to the continuous variation of physical habitus.

sum total of an individual's physical, psycho-

logical and physiological characteristics, all Indices of Body Build

of which are mainly determined by heredity, As there are no sharp natural dividing

but influenced in varying degrees by en- lines between physical types, the points of

vironmental factors.

demarcation between the types are, of

necessity, arbitrary. Diagnosis of physical

Classifications of Physical Type

type by impression, being a subjective pro-

The tendency to classify individuals, an cedure, has inherent disadvantages, and the

ancient and deep-rooted trait of human need for satisfactory objective methods of

nature, aims at reducing the manifold indi- distinguishing physical types is widely recog-

vidual differences to some degree of order. nized.

Hippocrates recognized a dichotomy in To meet this need various indices of body

physique and described a habitus phthisicus build have been devised. A comprehensive

and a habitus apoplecticus, roughly corre- list is given by Tucker and Lessa (I940).

sponding to the modern leptosomatic and Many of the indices seem to have little

pyknic types. Since this time there have scientific basis (e.g. that of Pignet), and

been numerous classifications of physical there has been little work carried out to test

type, based on physiological, dietetic, im- their validity.

mrunological,-morphological or developmental New light has been thrown on the subject

characteristics, e.g. the digestive, muscular by factor analysis. Though factor analysis

and respiratory-cerebral types of Sigaud; L,d proved useful in the study of mental

the herbivorous, normal and carnivorous growth and temperament, the technique has

types of Bryant (I9I6) ; the gall bladder and only recently been applied to the study of

ulcer types of Draper (I928) ; the eurysomic physique. It was first used by Burt (I938)

and leptosomatic types of Wiersma (I933); and later by Cohen (I938) and Hammond

and the endomorphic, mesomorphic and (i942).

ectomorphic types of Sheldon (1940). The Using a larger group and a greater number

main point of interest is not the diversity of of physical measurements than previously

dlassifications, but the fact that these investigated, Dr. H. J. Eysenck and the

observers, many unknown to each other, writer have recently carried out a factor

have described more or less corresponding analysis of some twenty-one physical traits

types of physique.

on a group of 200 soldiers. All the

Investigations by the writer and others physical measurements were found to be

PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF CONSTITUTION 25

positively correlated, indicating the presence of a growth factor determining the general size of the body.
When the effect of this factor was removed from the intercorrelations a second factor became apparent. The second factor is bipolar, expending itself in length in some individuals (e.g. stature, length of limbs) and in breadth, width and circumferential measurements in others. This factor is responsible for the existence of two antithetical physical types, namely the slender and the broad or the leptosomatic and pyknic types.
The measurements having greatest saturation with the second factor, and therefore most useful in discriminating types, were stature, transverse chest diameter, chest and hip circumference and sagittal chest diameter. Stature and transverse chest diameter have the greatest saturations for the positive and negative aspects of the type factor, and as the saturations of both with the general factor are similar, an index such as
Stature
Transverse chest diameter
should prove efficacious in the objective diagnosis of somatic habitus.
It is interesting to note that the two factors of growth revealed by factor analysis correspond to the two types of growth (isogony and heterogony) found by Huxley (1932) in lower animals.
Physique and Temperament
Of great interest to psychology was the extension of Kretschmer's theory to include normal personality types. He traces the gradation of characteristics from the pathological schizophrenes through the schizoid to the normal schizothymic personality. Similarly he demonstrates ia gradation of characteristics from the manic depressives through the cycloid psychopath to the normal cyclothyme. He maintained that schizoids and schizothymes tend to have leptosomatic, athletic or certain dysplastic physiques, whereas cycloids and cyclothymes tend to have a pyknic habitus.
This alleged relationship between physique

and personality has not yet been clearly established. The investigations of Pillsbury
(I939) and Kraines (I938) do not support
the theory, whereas Wertheimer and Hesketh's (I926) does.
Recently published is the work of Sheldon (1942), who determined correlations between a large number of psychological traits and found that they tended to form three clusters in which the traits showed positive intracorrelations, but negative correlations to the traits of the other groups. He regarded these groupings as indicating the three primary components of personality which he named viscerotonia, somatotonia and cerebrotonia.
Viscerotonia is characterized by relative love of comfort, pleasure in digestion, greed for affection and approval and rteed of people when in trouble. The personality seems to centre round the viscera.
Somatotonia is characterized by an assertive posture, energy, need of exercise, directness of manner, unrestrained voice, over-maturity of appearance and need of action when troubled.
Cerebrotonia is characterized by restraint in posture, quick reaction, sociophobia, inhibited social address,, vocal restraint, youthful intentness and need of solitude when troubled.
Sheldon's (1940) work led him to conclude that there were three primary components of physique endomorphy, mesom6rphy and ectomorphy. When endomorphy predominates the digestive viscera are massive and highly developed. In predominant mesomorphy, somatic structures (bone, muscle and connective tissue) are in the ascendancy. Ectomorphy is associated with fragility, flatness of chest and delicacy throughout the body, with a relatively slight development of visceral and somatic structures. He finds that there is a correlation of + 79 between viscerotonia and endomorphy; + *82 between somatonia and mesomorphy; and
+ - 83 between cerebrotonia and ectomorphy.
These findings indicate a much higher correlation between physique and temperament than hitherto found by other workers.

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Intelligence

the effort intolerance was usually of recent

Considerable research has been carried onset and mainly precipitated by extrinsic

out on the relationship between physique factors such as febrile illness or severe enemy

and intelligence with the main object of action.

affording aids to the assessment of the

latter. The consensus of the results indi- Neurosis

cated that the correlation between physique and intelligence is too slight to be of any value in diagnosis.
This is confirmed by a recent investigation by the writer in which correlations were

A study of the relationship between physique and neurosis was carried out on a group of 450 neurotic soldiers successively admitted to Mill Hill Emergency Hospital. Body type, determined by the

calculated between intelligence grade on the

Progressive Matrices test, and twenty-one

Stature

absolute measurements and four indices of

Transverse chest diameter

body build. The correlations were small, the highest being + - I7, and all were in the realm of chance.

index, was correlated with some 2oo psychiatric trait ratings.

It was found that leptosomes showed a

Effort Syndrome
Since the condition was first described by Da Costa in I87I, various endogenous and ,exogenous factors have been postulated to explain the pathogenesis of effort syndrome.

marked tendency to the affective group of
symptoms, i.e. anxiety, depression and obsession, while pyknics showed a tendency to hysterical symptoms. Leptosomes showed
a higher incidence of schizoid personality traits.

The relative importance of endogenous (constitutional) and exogenous factors varies with the individual case.
The morphological aspect of the constitution of soldiers suffering from effort syndrome has been investigated by the

The results are not presented as final proof but as evidence both confirmatory and
suggestive of a constitutional basis to
neurosis and of complex relations between physical type and personality.

writer. A detailed anthropometric examina-

tion of 240 successive admissions to the Psychosis

Effort Syndrome unit of an E.M.S. neurosis An anthropometric investigation was

centre was carried out, and the results carried out on a group of forty-nine schizo-

compared statistically with those obtained phrenes and a group of forty-two manic

from a similar investigation of a control depressives in order to test Kretschmer's

group of ioo normal soldiers. The signifi- hypothesis of the relationship between psy-

cant differences found in breadth and length chotic type and physical type.

measurements and body-tuild indices showed Statistical comparison of twenty-three

that the effort syndrome group was signifi- absolute measurements and eleven body-

cantly more leptosomatic in somatic habitus build indices showed that the manic depres-

than the control group.

sives were significantly larger in sagittal

Body build seems to play a part in the chest diameter, bicristal diameter, trans-

development of effort syndrome. Comparison verse chest diameter, hip and chest circum-

of the development of the syndrome in ference; seven indices showed statistically

leptosomatic and pyknic patients revealed significant differences indicating that the

stnrking differences. In leptosomatic patients manic-depressive group was significantly

constitutional factors were predominant, as more pyknic in somatic habitus than the

shown by lifelong duration of effort intoler- schizophrenic group. The best indices for

ance, hypochondriasis and general neuroti- discriminating the two groups were Strom-

cism, whereas in patients of pyknic build gren's index and

PHYSICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF CONSTITUTION

Stature

to study constitution he has been obliged to

Sagittal chest diameter

pay more attention to physique because it

These findings confirm Kretschmer's hypothesis of the affinity of schizophrenia to the leptosomatic physique, and of manicdepressive psychosis to the pyknic type of physique.
The relationship between schizophrenia and leptosomatic body build has been given greater significance by the work of Kallman (1938), who showed that the predisposition to schizophrenia is transmitted' by a single recessive genetic factor, and that the de-

can be more accurately measured than any other constitutional attributes. There are
many branches of medicine in which studies of bodily habitus have proved clinically valuable. In the field of mental illness the detection of certain bodily types has been found to influence diagnosis and prognosis.
Bodily habitus has to be given due weight by the physician in assessing a case and
cannot be safely ignored in 'the matter of
eugenic prognosis.

velopment of the various clinical forms depends on the degree of constitutional resistance which the affected organism is
able to put up by means of its system of defence mechanisms. He states that the

REFERENCES
BRYANT, J. (I9i6) Boston med. surg. J., 174, 412. BURT, C. (I938) Brit. J. med. Psychol., 17, I58. COHEN, J. I. (I938) J. ment. Sci., 84, 495. DRAPER, G. (I928) Human Constitution, Baltimore.

evidence is strongly in favour of a here-
ditarily weak reticulo-endothelial system as the anatomical basis of the genetic predisposition to schizophrenia. Now the reticulo-endothelial system is derived from

HAMMOND, W. H. (1942) Man, 42, 3. HUXLEY, J. S. (1932) Problems of Relative Growth,.
London. KALLMAN, F. J. (1938) The Genetics of Schizo-
phrenia, New York.
KRAINES, S. H. (I938) J. nerv. ment. Dis., 88, 3og9

the mesoderm, and Sheldon (1940) and others KRETSCHMER, E. (I92I) Physique and Character,.

have shown that persons of leptosomatic (or ectomorphic) physique have a relative deficiency in mesodermal structures. Though

English translation by SPROTT, W. J. H., London. PEARL, R. (1933) Constitution and Health, London. PENDE, N. (1928) Constitutional Inadequacies,
Philadelphia.

these interrelations are of great interest and PILLSBURY, W. B. (I939) J. abnorm. (soc.) Psychol..

probable significance, it must be borne in mind 34, 400.

that Kallman's hypothesis of an hereditarily weak reticulo-endothelial system as the ana-

SHELDON, W. H. (1940) Varieties of Human.
Physique, New York. SHELDON, W. H. (1942) Varieties of Temperament,

tomical basis for the genetic predisposition to New York.

schizophrenia is at present speculative, and TUCKER, W. B., and LESSA, W. A. (1940) Quart.

further research will be required before the Rev. Biol., 15, 265.

hypothesis can be accepted. Studies of constitution have become of

WERTHEIMER, F. I., and HESKETH, F. B. (I926) Medicine, 5, 375.
WIERSMA, E. D. (1933) Bodily Build, Physiologicat

increasing interest to the physician. In order and Psychological Functions, Amsterdam.

