A SCHOOL CELEBRATION FOR A
"EUGENICS DAY."
By DR. F. H. HAYWARD.
(As a rule men of science who wish to popularise their principles are not clever propag.andists. One of the causes of their failure is that they expect everyone else's mind to be .like their own. Bec.ause reasoning from cut-and-dried facts interests them and convinces them of truth, they think that the same process will bring conviction to other peopIe. For the most part, however, it is only facts of the two-and-two-make-four kind which can be taught in this way. Educationists ate now coming to see that subjects which intimately concern, hu,man nature and bring the emotions into play cannot be drummed into the pupils' minds by means of lessons, but must be presented by a synthetic method. The great truths Nwhich, are embodied in works of art cannot be taught at al.l. They must simply be shown to the pupil, for the most pairt without comment or exposition. The visio,n will tell its own tale, and of -itself will lead, in most cases, to the analytic thought which alone appears to -the man of science to be useful and thoroughly honest. Interest in the subject matter must be aroused by th-e artist. Inspired by the ideals that he sets before them the spectator and the listener will eagerly seek the knowledge without which they cannot work up to those lofty standards, and they will be deep in the science of the subject before they have the least idea that they are learning anything or becoming laborious fact-finders at alil.
This kind of unconscious learning is particularly necessary in all branches of knowledge which relate to the strongest human passions, especially those which originate in sex. In themselves those departments of science will never become attractive to the general public. But let the artist work with the eugenist and make pictures of the family and the commonwealth as love miade perfect would shape these institutions, and the people wvould soon master the facts of eugenics.
The public work of individuals like Miss Elizabeth Clark' and Miss Lena Ashwell, and of societies like the League of Arts and the National L'eague of Pageantry and Music, show that this kind of teaching will .play .a large part in the regenerative movement by which idealists are determined to -redeem civilisation from war. The Committee of the EUGENICS REVIEW itherefore hope that eugenists, far and wid'e, will read with interest and appreciation the following pages which Dr. F. H. Hayward :has kindly written by way of making suggestions for a " Eugenics Day " in 'the schools. Readers will see that to a certain extent the "celebration " rese.mbles those which have been carried out, in various parts of the country, on Shakespeare Days, Empire Days, St. David's Days, and other important occasions. Dr. Hayward is preparing many other celebrations which will impress on the minds of the people ideas that are of importance to the human race-with regard, for instance, to temperance, liberty and

66 EUGENICS REVIEW.

orider-and it is to be hoped that this article will lead eugenists, if they

have not alxeady done so, to consult the book on " The Spiritual Founda-

tions of Reconstruction," in which he and Mr. Arnold Freeman have

demonstrated the new educational method, with many illustrations.)

Unusual difficulties, arising out of (i) the age and sex of children

and youths and (2) the total ignorance in which most of them are kept

with regard to the evolution of plants, animals, and mankind, and to the

meaning of heredity, attend the framing of the present celebration.

Certainly it is not suitable for children below the a.ge of 12, and on the

whole its place appe.ars to be the continuation school.

The main purposes of the celebration should be to surround parent-

hood with sanctity, even with glamour, and, on behalf of those who cannot

be .parents for many years, or perhaps at all, to convey the idea that there

is a second parenthood, of id-eas, influence, etc. The dangers of venereal

disease are indicated vaguely, but full ex.plicitness on this question, and

an exact understanding of the relations of the sexes, are neither assumed

nor attempted to be gi.ven. Adult organisations an.d medical and. ethical

literature wil.l supply what is missing in explicitness. The celebration

itself aims at creating an. emotional background, a group of memory

elements, and a sense of the vastness and gravity of the sex question.

The author does not pretend to be satisfied with the celebration.

Except in the two details of employing (i) the old motif of the three fates

and (2) the Beethoven biography and music, there is practically norting

that, he would suggest, cannot be greatly improved upon. Suggestions

for the inclusion of poetical, symbolical, scriptural, and other miaterial

will be gratefully considered in the hope that, at a later time, an

improved celebration will be issued. The Tennyson passage is more

suitable for adults than for the young.

Possibly the celebration should follow, at a few days' distance, one

in honour of Charles Darwin, and should be followed, a few.days later,

by celebraitions in praise of health! (" Chadwick Day "), temperance and

chastity (in the Britomart sense, not the ascetic).

It has not been t;hought well to *crowd the Discourse Notes with

*material. Frances G. Jewett's book, " The Next Generation " (Ginn and

Co.), supplies in itself enough material for several discourses. The diffi-

culty has been to make an artistic, shapely, impressive, and dignified

who-le. It is here, and not in the suggestion of facts to be set forth, that

suggestions are particularly desired.

Diagrams of *the evolution of the horse; portraits of Darwin aind

Mendel; types of pigeons and their ancestor, the rock pigeon; diagrams

of the " Jukes-family " heredity; and similar apparatus will be necessary

either in the celebration itself or in preparatory and oonplementary

exercises. Separately from these a portrait of Beethoven.

THE CELEBRATION.

D. = Di-rector (Master or Mistress).

S. = Speaker

(do.)

M. = Mother

(do.)

Instrumental Music. First Movement of Beethoven's Fifth Sym-

phony, played with the maximum amount of contrast between the first

A SCHOOL CELEBRATION FOR A " EUGENICS DAY." 67
subject (" fate-knocking-at-the-door ") and the second consolatory subject. Stop at the beginning of the "wworking out."
M. (recites). Hlow many a father have I seen, A sober man, among his boys, Whose youth was full. of foolish noise, Who we.ars his manhood hale and gireen:
And dare we to this fancy give, That had the wild oat not been sown, The soil, left barren, scarce had grown
The grain by which a man may live?
[Or, if we held the doctrine sound For life outliving heats of youth, Yet who would! preach it as a truth
To those that eddy round and .round ?]
Hold thou thie good: -define it well: For fear -divine Fhilo:sophy Should push beyond her mark, and be
Procuress to the Lords of Hell.
Oh yet we trust that somehow good Will be the final goal of ill, To pangs of nature, sins of will,
Defects of doubt, and taints of blood. -Tennyson's " In Memoriam," LIII.-LIV.
Music (above) is repeated. D.: We, this day, looking back upon the past race of mankind, and seeking to know how we have come to be what we are, look also forward and hail the future, more glorious, we hope, than the past. And we ask from the Past and the Future what are the Duties of the Present. Curtain is withdrawn and discovers Michael Angelo's picture of the Three Fates. Their three names, Clotho, Lachesis and Atropos, should be printed beneath, and their general title, the Mocrae, Parcae, or Fates. Music is repeated while the picture is being observed. S. Discourse Notes. Yes, you are looking at Michael Angelo's picture. The Fates ! Clotho, spinning the thTead of destiny; L.achesis, measuring it off into, longer or shorter pieces; Atropos, cutting -the thread with her shears. The Greeks used to believe that every one's life, even the life of the gods, was in the hands of these three mysterious goddesses. And did you notice the music just now? The four quick knocks *followed by a pause? Beethoven, who composed it, said that those notes represented " Fate-knocking-at-the-door "; or, shall we say, Atropos snapping her shears and preparing to cut the thread of someones life? Poor Beethoven I He knew something of " Fate-knocking-at-thedo I " He could never marry the lady he loved, and his ne.phew proved ungrateful to him. (Details.) What was worse, he became gradually

68 EUGENICS REVIEW.
deaf-what a terrible thing for the greatest of musicians not to be able to hear his own music ! And d:eafness was not all. (Quote such details as are advisable: see below.) No wonder he spoke of "fate." But he was
brave, too, and said: "I will grapple with fate; it shall never drag me
down " (I8oI).
But of course you know that there is no such thing .as Fate or the
Three Fates. They a.re simply words that stand for something we do not
fully understand. What was the real cause of Beethoven's deafness and disease ? Had he done anything foolish or wicked ?
No, there is no proof that he had. I fear that the fault was with. his father, who had been a drunken, .immoral man. You heard those woirds
of Tennyson about " wild oat " and "taints of blood." I fear that Beethoven inherited a disease called syphilis from his father. It was just as if Clotho, instead of supplying good thread when Beethoven. was born, supplied thread of two kinds twisted together, a splendid thread of music and a bad thread of disease; and that Lachesis measured off 58 years of this mixed thread for Atropos to cut.
Where did Beethoven get his genius from? From his father, as he got his disease? From, his grandfather ? From his teachers, such as the great musician Haycdn? These are great and solemn questions. Wise men are studying them earnestly.
(Discuss briefly some of the facts bearing on biological heredity and
social heredity (i.e., environment).) [Note on Beethoven's deafness and disease.
The post-mortem on Beethoven showed that the liver was shrunk to half its proper size, and was hard and tough like leather. . . There were also marks of ulceration of the pharynx, about the tonsils and Eustachian tubes. The arteries of the ears were atheromatous (inflamed) and the auditory nerves .... degenerated. The whole of these appearances are most probably the result of syphilitic affections at an early period of his life.
The pains in the head, indigestion, colic, and jaundice, of which he frequently complained, and the deep depression which gives the key to so many of his letters, would all follow naturally from the chronic inflammation and atrophy implied by the state of the liver, and the digestive derangements to which it would give rise, aggravated by the careleps way in which he lived. . . . [But] his splendid oonstitution and his extreme fdndness for the open air must have been of great assistance to him.]
But before I tell you some of the things they have discovered let us hear that piece of music completely, remembering that those four quick notes stand for the hard knocks of fate, and the oither beautiful notes (second subject) stand for the more cheerful side of life. For there is a cheerful side; we are not quite helpless. in the hands of fate.
The First Movement is now completely played. At the end of it the curtaii, is restored.
D. reads from the Scriptures selected passages. (Proverbs, v. and vii., contain imp,ressive matter, but the message needs to 'be bro.adened out. A cento of passages should be devised; will the Churches please supply?)
S. Second Discourse Notes. Now follows as much information as Speaker can wisely convey. Expatiate on the glory of improving the race either in stamina or in. traditions; racial and personal poisons-alcohol, nicotine, etc. Close on

A SCHOOL CELEBRATION FOR A "EUGENICS DAY." 69
an inspiring note. Beethoven's Fifth Symphony closes on such a note! ALL (sing): " Out of the night that covers me " (Henley),
or ather rousing song or hymn against fate. Portions of the Fifth Symphony Music are played-some of the First
and all ot the Closing MVovement. [In Spenser's Faerie Queen, Book IV., Canto II., there is a quaint
employment of the, Three Fates idea, but it is too lengthy for this celebra-
tion. On repetition of the celebration the passage might possibly be employed'. Goethe's famous aocounit of his own heredity, " Vom Vater hab' ich die Statur ...." should be employed somehow. The question is, How?]

