P. E. VERNON
M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc., Professor of Educational Psychology, Institute of Education, University of London
Race and Intelligence*

T HE TOPIC OF racial differences in inteffi- their average corresponding to an intelligence

gence has for long been a controversial quotient (I Q) of not much above 80: the average

one, probably because of its serious I Q for European and North American whites

social and political implications. If it were is defined as 100.

proved, for example, that Negroes were poorer However, critics soon pointed out, first that

in innate ability than whites, there might be the men tested were not necessarily represent-

some justification for the latter regarding the ative samples of their countries. The western

former as relatively unfit for self-government, Europeans were more likely to be of early

or for educational or vocational advance. This pioneering stock, whereas those from, say,

belief is indeed widely held, particularly in parts of the Balkans were poorer peasant immigrants.

Africa and of the United States. But it is con- Secondly it was obvious that the obtained

tested by the majority of social anthropologists hierarchy of national intelligences corresponded

and psychologists on the ground that the ob- closely with the degree of economic advance-

served intellectual inferiority of Negroes (and ment and educational development. Many

ofothermore primitivepeoples such asAustralian social scientists therefore jumped to the

aborigines) may be largely due to their lack conclusion that the Army tests merely measured

of educational opportunity and their socio- educational differences, and that the results

economic repression.

could be attributed wholly to the effects of

What then are the facts? There has been a environment and upbringing. Actually, ofcourse,

tremendous amount of investigation, especially they did not prove this explanation; it would

of Negroes in the United States; a recent book be quite plausible to maintain that the higher-

by A. M. Shuey surveys 170 studies in this scoring national or racial groups, because of

area alone. For present purposes it will be their higher intelligence, had achieved greater

sufficient to accept such broad distinctions as economic advance and better education.

the Caucasian (European and North American Even more striking, though, than the group

white), the Negro and the Australasian without differences, were the individual differences

going into the tricky problem of just what within groups. In other words there was tre-

constitutes a "race".

mendous overlapping; at least 10 per cent of

As early as 1918 group intelligence tests- Negroes scored higher than the average white,

the Army Alpha (verbal) or Army Beta (pic- and 10 per cent of whites lower than the average

torial)-were applied to nearly two million Negro. Later studies have confirmed this and

American recruits, who were classified by have indeed revealed occasional Negroes ranging

country of origin or descent. White recruits all the way up to I Q 180 and over, and whites

who were immigrants or descendants from down to 20 and below, though the proportions

most northern and western European countries of such high and low scorers respectively are

all obtained similar average scores; those from very small. Moreover there were, and are,

southern and eastern countries were mostly marked differences in different parts of the

somewhat lower, and Negroes were lower still, country, Negroes in the northern states (largely

* This article appeared in T7he New Scientist on January
22nd, 1959, and is here reprinted by kind permission of the Editor and of Professor Vemon.

urban) averaging some 10 points higher I Q than those in the south (largely rural). Indeed
the average for northern Negro recruits was

99
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1959, 51, 2

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

actually superior to that of whites in some of Scores on tests involving verbal reasonig are

the southern states.

naturally somewhat dependent on education.

This of course raised the question of whether When tests based on pictures or practical

northern Negroes improved because their tasks (performance tests) are used, differences

economic circumstances and education were between national or racial groups are often

more nearly similar to those of whites, or diminished, though they do not by any means

whether the brighter stocks were more apt disappear. But surely it is obvious that the British

to migrate from the south. 0. Klineberg's or American white child gets far more experience

famous investigation in New York City (1935) with pictures, blocks and puzzles similar to

and Lee's similar research in Philadelphia (1951) such tests than does the southern-state Negro

indicated indeed that the longer the period of or the Australian aboriginal child. For example,

residence in a northern city, the higher the it has been noted that some African peoples

I Q. But in fact such increases amounted only cannot readily recognize drawings of familiar

to about 6 I Q points in all, and the highest objects or animals on paper, though they carve

level reached-I Q 87j in New York-was still just the same shapes on ivory or leather.

well below the white average of 100. Moreover, But over and above these handicaps, psycho-

despite Klineberg's evidence to the contrary, logists realize that test performance depends

later workers have discovered a distinct trend considerably on motivation or attitude. The

towards selective migration. Probably about white middle-class child is brought up to answer

half the north-south difference can be attri- questions or carry out tasks quickly, by indi-

buted to this.

vidual effort. The Negro or more primitive

Testing in other parts of the world has child approaches such a test situation in quite

been on a much smaller scale. But mention a different frame of mind and does not see the

should at least be made of S. D. Porteus's point of it; his culture may, for instance, stress

investigations with his test of tracing the most group consultation rather than individual com-

direct path through a maze-the maze is drawn petition. Important differences of this kind

in the forn of a plan, rather like a children's have been brought out by Davis's and Havig-

puzzle. Here is a type of intelligence test having hurst's sociological studies of child-rearing

no apparent educational bias. Porteus has used practices in America, and by Biesheuvel's

it in many African communities, in Australia observations of Africans in the Union.

and Hawaii, and found marked variations, the We are forced to conclude, then, that the

average score for non-whites being considerably question of genuine racial differences in intelli-

lower than that for whites. However, his groups gence cannot be answered. For whether we

were small, as the test must be given individually, use formal tests, or whether we observe the

and therefore doubtfully representative; and cultural achievements of different groups, the

the differences are puzzling to anthropologists, results are always going to depend as much on

since some of the most primitive peoples did the whole upbringing and environment as on

better than others relatively culturally advanced. innate potentialities. One might indeed go

Apparently, however, the lowest scoring further and say that the whole controversy

groups were those which had had least access rests on a confusion of terms. The layman

to any kind of educational facility. It may insists on using the word intelligence in two

be, too, that Australian aborigines did somewhat radically different senses. On the one hand

better than expected because of the resemblance he thinks of it as "native wit"-the capacity

of the task to tracking with which their culture of the brain to build up intellectual abilities,

is familiar. Thus here also the results are com- which is ultimately determined by the genes.

plicated by possible environmental effects, On the other hand he describes people as

and similar objections can be raised against intelligent when in daily life, at school or in

other researches using all kinds of test materials. employment, they can comprehend, reason,

Most psychologists would nowadays agree learn and judge effectively. And such abilities,

that no tests are, or can be, "culturally neutral". we now realize, although they are based funda-

100

RACE AND INTELLIGENCE

mentally on innate brain potentiality, only develop in so far as they are stimulated by upbringing, and they develop very differently with different kinds and amounts of stimulus.
Our tests measure intelligence in the second sense quite successfully, and indeed do a useful job in revealing differences in those intellectual capacities which are valued by white middleclass culture. But we are not entitled to infer from

of similar education and similar socio-economic status; yet I Q differences still persist. It is noteworthy too that these differences are smallest with younger, pre-school children, and tend to become more marked when older children and
young adults are tested in powers of abstract reasoning. Thus it is a plausible hypothesis
that they may be somewhat lacking in the genes that underly these intellectual functions.

them to differences in genetically-determined potentiality, when conditions of upbringing have been very diverse.
At the same time, the pendulum may well have swung too far towards environmentalistic explanations. The existence of genetic differences has not been disproved, even if it has not been securely proved. But many American researches have endeavoured more or less
successfully to compare whites and Negroes

Yet even if we regard this hypothesis as
reasonable, we should not forget the very great degree of overlapping. It may be that relatively few Negroes or members of other more primitive societies are capable of the highest intellectual development even in favourable environments, but some are. And there is certainly no justification for assuming that any one race should be wholly differentiated from any other on the
ground of a universal inferiority.

POPULATION STUDIES
A Journal of Demography
Edited by D. V. GLASS and E. GREBENIK

Vol XI No. 3.

CONTENTS

March 1959

W. F. WERTHEm NoRA MCARTHUR DAVM GOLDBERG CECL GORDON, A. R.
EMEON and D. S. PUGH N. H. CARmER and A. M. FAtRAG Book Reviews.

Sociological Aspects of inter-Island Migration in Indonesia. Fijians and Indians in Fiji. The Fertility of Two-Generation Urbanites. The Age Distribution of an Industrial Group (Scottish Railwaymen).
The Reduction of Errors in Census Populations for Statistically Underdeveloped Countries.

Subscription price per volume of 3 parts 42s. net, post free (or American currency $6.75).
Single parts £1 each plus postage (American $3.25, post free).

Published by the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE, at the LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE, 15 HOUGHTON STREET, LONDON, W.C.2.

II

