EUGENICS ABROAD

I.-IN AMERICA, by PAUL POPENOE, D.Sc.

O NE of the scientific events of the accompany adolescence are not favourable to

past year in the United States the maintenance of the most highly-

has been the White House Con- organized intellectual capacities among

ference on Child Health and Protection, women.

which brought together specialists on While many eugenists feel that the posi-

every phase of the subject, and is tive side of the eugenic programme is

resulting in the publication of a long really more important than the negative,

series of reports. Inevitably the point of the greater simplicity of the latter continues

view was environmentalist, but room was to attract adherents. H. S. Jennings, of

found for a detailed report on heredity and Johns Hopkins University, one of the lead-

eugenics, and the Conference went on record ing American biologists, endorses it in his

unequivocally in favour of sterilization. book The Biological Basis of Human

Birth control propagandists were disap- Nature, but looks on the positive pro-

pointed by the decision of those in authority gramme as little less than Utopian. Dr.

to avoid that subject as one that was more Jennings' book has been criticized, how-

controversial than scientific.

ever, as showing closer acquaintance with

On the positive side the Conference col- genetics than eugenics.

lected valuable material on education in the Not much less pessimistic is the Presi-

public schools. The subject of home econo- dent of the American Eugenics Society, Dr.

mics has long been taught to girls in Henry Pratt Fairchild (Professor of Socio-

secondary schools; it is now being logy in New York University). " In the

broadened and deepened into a more field of positive eugenics research has

thorough preparation for home-making for scarcely even been visualized, not to say

both sexes. Personally, I consider this started, and it would be difficult to put one's

trend of home economics to be the most finger on any notable accomplishments," he

significant change in American education declares in an article in the April issue of

just now.

the Survey Graphic. This number is en-

titled " Science Looks at People " and is

SEX DIFFERENCES IN INTELLIGENCE

given over to a series of papers by outstanding authorities, many of them eugenic

The positive side of eugenics is likewise in tone. Among others, Roswell H. John-

emphasized in the appearance of a third son writes specifically on the positive pro-

volume of L. M. Terman's monumental gramme of eugenists.

study of the bright children in California Dr. Fairchild likewise deplores the pre-

schools. This study was based on re-tests ponderance of biologists among American

seven years after the first ones, and showed exponents of eugenics., Granting that their

that these children, who represented the contribution has been useful, he urges that

brightest one in each thousand of the State's the application of eugenics is a problem for

school population, were holding their own sociologists, and must be turned over to

both educationally and socially. One inter- them. Unfortunately, however, most of the

esting development was noted, however. other sociologists of the United States are

Whereas the boys stand just where they out of step, having held the cultural view

did, in IQ, the girls have lost an average of of sociology until they have lost sight of

I7 points. Evidently the changes that eugenic fundamentals.

I5'

IT2

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TWO STERILIZATION LAWS
One of the few policies on which nearly all schools agree is eugenic sterilization, or selective sterilization, to use a name that is gaining ground. Two more States (Vermont and Oklahoma) adopted sterilization
laws last winter, making 27 that now have such legislation in force. The book of E. S. Gosney and Paul Popenoe, Sterilization for Human Betterment, has been translated into German and Japanese.
A new bibliography of eugenics, by a committee of which Professor S. J. Holmes, University of California, is chairman, has been issued by the American Eugenics Society. S. Wayne Evans, for the Eugenics Research Association, is at work on a his-
tory of the eugenics movement, which will
be much more extensive than anything hitherto attempted. The secretary of the American Eugenics Society, Leon F. Whitney, has been compiling the views of the
ancients on heredity and eugenics, and is
publishing this as a historical study. Mr.
Whitney has also attempted to get some

sound eugenic ideas before boys in story form by a novel, Pigeon City, which
received wide circulation through its adoption by the Juvenile Book-of-the-Month
Club. On the didactic side, its purpose is to call attention to the importance of inherited
mental differences. The race problems which are so important
in the United States continue to bring forth
a literature that is, for the most part, only
ephemeral. A committee of specialists worked for several years to determine the
racial make-up of the American population to-day, in the light of its recorded history, and much was hoped from this " National
Origins " study, the main purpose of which was to furnish a background for Congres-
sional legislation. The word is now passed out that it is in too unsatisfactory a form to
be published, and probably will remain buried in manuscript. From the sociological point of view E. B. Reuter (University of
Iowa) has published a book on Race Mix-
ture, but it offers little of significance eugenically.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 2.

