EUGENICS AND SOCIETY*

By JULIAN S. HUXLEY, M.A., D.Sc.

The Future of Eugenics

deavour to point out what, in my opinion, is

FUGENICS, Dean Inge writes in one of his essays, is capable of becoming the
most sacred ideal of the human race, as a race; one of the supreme religious duties.

the next step towards the graduation of eugenics into the dignity of an established
science. It will be an inquiry into the methodology of our subject.

In this I entirely agree with him. Once the
full implications of evolutionary biology are
grasped, eugenics will inevitably become part
of the religion of the future, or of whatever
complex of sentiments may in the future take
the place of organized religion. It is not merely a sane outlet for human altruism, but is of all outlets for altruism that which is most comprehensive and of longest range.
However, in addition to holding out these emotional possibilities, the eugenic movement must obey practical necessities. If it is to grow into a soul-compelling ideal, it must first achieve precision and efficiency as a
branch of applied science.
At the moment, it is idle to pretend that it
has advanced very far in either direction. True that to a limited number of men and women, it is already an inspiring ideal: but for the bulk of people, if not a subject for a jest, it remains either mistrusted or wholly neglected. True that, thanks to the genius of
Darwin and his cousin Galton, the notion of evolutionary improvement through selection has provided a firm scientific base for eugenics, and that in recent years distinct
progress has been made in applying the triumphal discoveries of modem genetics to the human species: yet for the bulk of scientists, eugenics is still hardly reckoned
as a science.
It may be that, as a scientist myself, I overrate the importance of the scientific side. At
any rate, it is my conviction that eugenics
cannot gain power as an ideal and a motive until it has improved its position as a body of knowledge and a potential instrument of control: and in this lecture I shall en-

Social Science and Natural Science
Eugenics falls within the province of the
Social Sciences, not of the Natural Sciences. It shares with the rest of them a suspicion,
often very frankly expressed by the pundits
of more respectable branches of study, such
as physics or pure biology, of being not quite scientifically respectable. Some indeed, go
as far as to assert that the social sciences can
never be truly scientific, and imply that they have illegitimately used the word science in their title in order to exploit the prestige
attaching to it in this scientific age. Personally, I do not think that this
criticism is justified. All young sciences are attacked by their elders on the ground of irregularity in their canons of scientific
behaviour: but they cannot expect to establish rigorous canons until they are no longer young, any more than an untried adolescent can be expected to possess the assurance and practical skill of a man in the prime of life, In addition, young sciences are not merely young like young human beings owing to the accident of the date of their birth. The date of their birth is no accident: they are young because they are more complex and more difficult. Physics is an older science than biology because in physics it is easier to isolate phenomena and to discover simple but fundamental laws. The social sciences are younger than the natural sciences because of the appalling complexity of variables which make up their subject-
matter. This, however, is not all. The social
sciences in certain respects differ radically from the natural sciences; they cannot

* The Galton Lecture, delivered before the Eugenics Society on February I7th, I936.

expect to achieve success by applying the same simple methods as served their elder

II

12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sisters, but must work out new methods of because we cannot isolate our material or

their own. In the natural sciences, we isolate control all its variables. Again a different

phenomena in order to analyse them. If technique from that of the natural sciences

possible we isolate them in the form of a has to be worked out-here a different prac-

controlled experiment, as in physics or tical technique. Properly planned regional

genetics; if this cannot be achieved, we experiments are an example.

isolate them in thought, make deductions, But perhaps the most fundamental dif-

and test our conclusions by empirical obser- ference between natural and social science

vations, as in astronomy or stratigraphical is that the social scientist is himself part of

geology. By refinements of technique, we can his own material, and that the criteria for

eliminate for practical purposes all irrelevant judging the outcome of an experiment are

variables; the geneticist wanting to under- partially subjective. Thus the social scientist

stand some new type which has appeared in cannot escape bias, and he cannot hope to

his cultures can eliminate, say, the variable check his work against objective criteria that

of environment, then the variable of single- will be accepted by all normal men.

gene mutations, then the variable of addition As regards bias, we may compare this with

or subtraction of whole chromosomes, and experimental error in natural science. Just

finally pin responsibility for the phenomenon as it is possible to reduce experimental error,

on, for example, the inversion of a particular but never entirely to eliminate it, so it is

chromosome section.

clearly possible to a large extent to discount

But the social scientist cannot do this and reduce bias. Discovering the technique

sort of thing: he can at the best find a corre- of reducing bias will be as important in social

lation between several variables. In terms of science as has been in natural science the

causation, the natural scientist can sometimes long and often tiresome process of discovering

find a single definite cause for a phenomenon; the technique of reducing experimental error.

the social scientist must always be content The difficulty of finding an objective cri-

with several partial causes. He has to work terion of truth in social science cuts deeper.

out a system based on the idea of multiple But it is based upon an intellectualist philo-

causation. The attractive simplicity of simple sophy which hankers after abstract truth. It

and single causation is for him a false sim- largely disappears if we take the more robust

plicity: he needs a different intellectual view that science is control as well as know-

technique. Anyone who asserts that so-and- ledge, and that these two aspects cannot be

so is the cause of a social phenomenon is separated. There can be some measure of

bound to be wrong: it can at best be a cause. general agreement on the practical results

Let us as eugenists therefore beware of mak- of social experiments, especially if these are

ing such assertions as that the celibacy of the properly planned. Thus in social science,

clergy was the cause of the decadence of experiment is not the remote preliminary to

Spain, or that the differential birth-rate is the action that it is in natural science, but is itself

cause of the increase of feeble-mindedness: partly action-both pure and applied science

for by so doing we are being scientifically simultaneously. Solvitur operando should be

disreputable.

the working principle of the social sciences.

And, of course, the inevitable obverse of It implies that progress in social science and

the principle of multiple cause is the prin- its applications will be slower and more

ciple of multiple effect. I need not labour the sprinkled with practical mistakes than pro-

point, save to stress the need for the working gress in natural science; but it does not mean

out of suitable methods, of partial correlation that we should deny the possibility of

and the like, to deal with this multiple progress.

complexity.

Another peculiarity of the social sciences, Eugenics as a Social Science

closely linked with the first, is that we cannot These general considerations have many

make rigorous and repeatable experiments, particular applications to our subject.

EUGENICS AND SOCIETY

I3

Eugenics is not, as some ox its devotees have which in a brief quarter-century have raised

perhaps unconsciously assumed, a special it to the position of being that branch of

branch of natural science: it is a branch of biology which in its method and its progress

social science. It is not merely human most nearly conforms to the standard set by

genetics. True that it aims at the improve- physics.

ment of the human race by means of the But in eugenics this is not possible. The

improvement of its genetic qualities. But purpose of eugenics is on the one hand to

any improvement of the sort can only be study the presence of different inherited

realized in a certain kind of social environ- types and traits in a population, and the fact

ment, so that eugenics is inevitably a par- that these can be increased or diminished in

ticular aspect of the study of man in the course of generations as the result of

society.

selection, unconscious or deliberate, natural

Up to the present, eugenics has concerned or artificial, and on the other, eventually to

itself primarily with a study of the hereditary use the results of this study for control.

constitution, and with deductive reasoning Eugenics studies the selective implications of

on the effects of selection. It was rightly human genetic differences.

shocked at the intellectual excesses of the However, these implications may and

perfectionists and sentimental environmen- often indeed must differ in different en-

talists, who adhered to the crudest form of vironments. Since the social environment is

Lamarckism and believed that improvements now by far the most important part of the

in education and social conditions would be environment of man; and since the social

incorporated in an easy automatic way into environment differs from one nation to

human nature itself and so lead to continu- another, one period to another, one class to

ous and unlimited evolutionary progress. another, and its differences are outside the

As a result, it converted the distinction control of the eugenist, he must not neglect

between nature and nurture into a hard it. Its uncontrolled variables bring the

antithesis, and deliberately or perhaps sub- eugenist face to face with the principle of

consciously belittled or neglected the effects multiple causation, at work here as in all the

of the environment and the efforts of the social sciences.

social reformers-except in so far as their

real or alleged dysgenic effects might be used to point a moral or provide a horrid

Need for a Study of Environment

warning.

The study of the environment is necessary

This was natural, and perhaps necessary; for the eugenist on a number of counts.

but it was nefther scientific nor sufficient. It First, because he cannot equalize it experi-

was an example of the error to which I have mentally, he must learn to discount its effects

already referred, the error of assuming that if he is not to mistake their pinchbeck glitter

the methods of the natural sciences will serve (as he would be apt to think it) for the true

for the social sciences. The pure natural gold of genetic influence. If, for instance, the

science of genetics was able, at least during observed lower stature of the so-called lower

its early career, to neglect consideration of classes should prove to be due to an inade-

the environment. It could do this because quate diet, it is eugenically of no significance.

in its experiments it can and does control the Secondly, because by the limited control of

environment in order to deal solely with social conditions which is open to us already,

constitutional factors. By this means it has it is often possible to alter the effect of a

succeeded (and by no other means could it genetic factor. Inherited eye-defects, once a

have succeeded) in making those spectacular grave handicap in almost every walk of life,

discoveries about chromosomes and their are now, in most cases, thanks to the pro-

doubling and halving, about the existence, gress of the science of optics and the art of

number and localization of the genes or here- spectacle-making, no more than a minor

ditary units, their mutation and its effects, inconvenience.

I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Thirdly, the environment itself exercises a Environment and the Expression of Genetic

selective influence. This fundamental truth, Traits

long axiomatic in evolutionary biology, has Let me develop these points a little more

not been properly recognized in human fully, one by one. In the first place, one and

biology so far as the social environment is the same genetic outfit will give different

concerned. A young pioneer civilization, for effects in different environments. This is so

instance, will both initially attract and later elementary and fundamental a fact that it

encourage different types from those attrac- has often been neglected, by the geneticist as

ted and encouraged by a civilization that is well as the eugenist. In the early literature of

old and settled.

modem genetics, you will often find refer-

Fourthly, in planning a eugenic pro- ences to the inheritance of such and such

gramme, the eugenist must take account of characters. But characters are not and can-

the social system in which he hopes or expects not be inherited, in the sense in which in-

his improved race to live. Cattle-breeders heritance is used by the geneticist. What are

will set about their work quite differently inherited are genes, factors, genetic outfit.

according to whether they are building up a Any character whatsoever can only be a

stock for use in a rich pasture country where resultant between genes and environment.

winter feed is provided, or one for an un- A given character expresses the interaction

developed and semi-arid land, like parts of between a particular set of genes and a par-

Africa. Similarly the eugenist must adopt ticular set of environmental conditions. Thus

different aims according as to whether he at the outset we see that the old question,

envisages a world of nationalism and war or whether nature or nurture is the more

one of peace and cultural progress. This is important, is meaningless. It is like the

already patent in the crude eugenic efforts of question " When did you stop beating your

to-day-in the encouragement of high fecun- wife? " in conveying implications which do

dity in Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, not correspond with reality. In general,

together with the persecution of so-called neither nature nor nurture can be more

" non-Aryans " and the glorification of the important, because they are both essential.

Nordics in the latter.

You will note that I say " in general." In

Finally, there is the question of bias. It is particular cases, one or the other may be

probably inevitable that most men who come more important. Do not let us forget that all

fresh to a problem in social science, however genetics depends on a study of differences.

scientifically-minded they may be by nature We take two individuals and strains, and

and training, will have some bias due to their ask what is the cause of the difference

own social environment. This bias in social between them. By adjusting the conditions

outlook which besets the pioneers in the of our experiment, we find that this is due

social sciences is comparable to the bias in either to a difference in their environment or

favour of common sense and accepted modes to a difference in their inherited constitution

of thought which equally inevitably beset the (or, often, to a difference in both). We then

pioneers in the early stages of the natural proceed further and find out, say, that the

sciences. And just as in the natural sciences genetic difference is due primarily to a dif-

men had to develop the technique of con- ference in a single gene. Let us suppose that

trolled experiment and verified prophecy and the difference was one between red and white

to be willing to follow their findings wherever flowers in a plant. Then we say, if the white-

they might lead, far away from the beaten flowered variety is the aberrant one, that we

track of common sense if need be, so in the have discovered " a gene for white flower-

social sciences a means must be found to colour." But this is a shorthand notation.

detect and discount bias in the observer Scientifically, we have discovered that the

himself, even though this lead him far from main cause of the difference in flower-colour

the comfortable road of his preconceived is a difference in the nature of one unit-section

notions.

of the chromosome outfit. That is why certain

EUGENICS AND SOCIETY

authors tried at one time to substitute the it does not show at all, and the flies resemble

term differential for gene.

the normal wild type. Environment may

This rather tedious argument has two thus wholly mask the effect of a pathological

corollaries of immediate eugenic importance. gene.

The first is this. The more similar are the These cases introduce us to the further

environments of two human samples, the principle, somewhat paradoxical at first

more likely are the observable differences sight, that equalizing the environment may

between the samples to be inheritable. The either increase or decrease the amount of

opposite is also true in theory, that the visible variation in a group. In a universe

more similar are their genetic constitutions, containing both dry and moist conditions, a

the more likely are any differences to be mixture of wild-type and abnormal-abdomen

environmental and non-inheritable; but in strains of fruit-fly would show a certain

view of our ignorance of the precise genetic range of variation. Equalize the environ-

constitution of human populations, this has ment by making the universe wholly dry, and

little applicability save in special cases like the population becomes uniform: but equal-

that of identical twins.

ize it by making the universe wholly moist,

When on the other hand there are obvious and the variability is increased. Hogben has

differences in environment between two drawn attention to the importance of this

groups, there is a strong presumption that point.*

many of the differences between them will In variouis biometric studies, it has been

turn out to be mere modifications, which shown that unfavourable conditions tend to

would disappear if the environmental condi- increase the degree of observed variation.

tions were equalized. This is not, of course, But the attempt to erect this into a general

to say that the groups will not differ genetic- principle cannot be correct, since the oppo-

ally also: merely that the observed differ- site may in other cases hold good. This is so,

ences in characters are not likely to be wholly for instance, in our fruit-fly example-moist

inherited.

conditions, being associated with abundance

Genetics can provide interesting examples and availability of food, are favourable; yet

in which certain conditions of environment they here increase variability. A human

may wholly mask the effect of a gene. The example of the same sort, also cited by

classical case is that of Primula sinensis. In Hogben,t concerns education. " The effect

this plant there is a white-flowered variety of extending to all classes of society the

and a red-flowered variety, which differ in educational opportunities available to a

regard to a single mendelian gene. The white small section of it would presumably be that

remains white at all temperatures; but the of increasing variability with respect to

red variety when raised at a high tempera- educational attainment. The effect of depriv-

ture produces white flowers. A hot-house ing the more favoured of their special ad-

will thus entirely mask the perfectly real vantage would be to diminish variability i

genetic difference between the two.

educational attainments." Either policy

Even more significant for our purpose is would result in an equalization of environ-

the case of the mutant of the fruit-fly Droso- ment; but equalizing it by making it more

phila known as abnormal abdomen, which favourable would bring out genetic differ-

depends on a single recessive gene. Flies ences more fully, while the reverse process

characteristic of this strain show a bloated would mask them.

and rather abnormal-looking abdomen, with However, whether equalizing the environ-

an extremely poor and irregular development ment will in this or that case increase or

of the normal pattern of black bands. How- decrease variability, what differences then

ever, all gradations from this to normal remain must be genetic in their origin. Thus

appearance are found. Analysis has shown without either equalizing or discounting the

that in moist conditions the character mani-

fests itself fully, while in very dry conditions * Hogben, I933, p. I15.

t Op. cit., p. 115.

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

effect of environment, we cannot be sure transcending what we originally thought

what differences between groups are due to possible.

inheritance.

In the early years of vitamin research,

attention was concentrated upon the defi-
Eugenic Bearings of Environmental Influence nitely pathological states resulting from

This point is of extreme importance total or almost total deprivation. During the

in eugenics. For instance, it is well known last ten years, it has been shown that

that memnbers of different social classes moderate insufficiency of these accessory

differ in their average of stature, physique food-factors will result in retardation of

and intelligence-all of them characters of growth, stunting, lack of physical and mental

the greatest evolutionary importance. I take energy, and reduced resistance to infectious

one or two examples from Carr-Saunders.* disease. Even boys who by all ordinary

In a sample of fourteen-year-old Liverpool canons were regarded as in fine health and

schoolboys, the boys from a secondary school well above the average in physique were

were on the average no less than 6i inches shown to benefit both in growth and in

(over IO per cent.) taller than those from energy from the addition of extra milk to

a council school in a poor neighbour- their diet. Sir John Orr has shown that the

hood; and differences in weight were equally diet actually consumed by the poorer classes

marked. In a similar investigation in Lon- in Aberdeen, when given in unlimited quanti-

don, the " mental age " (as determined by ties to rats, results in poor physique, small

intelligence tests) of boys from a superior litters, low expectation of life, and prone-

school was far above that of boys from a ness to numerous diseases, while the same

school in a poor neighbourhood. Twelve- diet with the addition of various vitamins

year-olds from the superior school had a and mineral salts kept the animals in tip-top

mental age nearly a year above their real condition.*

age, while those from the poor school were a In the face of such facts, it is no longer

whole year behind their real age-a difference legitimate to attribute the observed differ-

of I5 per cent.

ences in physique and intelligence between

Such differences are usually cited by social classes mainly to genetic factors.

eugenists as proof of a real and considerable Genetic differences may of course exist; but

difference in genetic qualities. For instance, the strong probability is that most of the

Professor Carr-Saunders, after quoting these differences are dependent on differences in

facts, concludes that " so far as persons in nutrition. Further, the defective nutrition of

this country are concerned, the mental dif- the poorer classes is in part due to ignorance,

ferences which we observe, after stripping off but in a large measure to mere poverty.

the obvious acquirements in the form of Until we equalize nutrition, or at least

knowledge of facts, habits, customs, manners, nutritional opportunity, we have no scientific

are due only in very small part to differences or other right to assert the constitutional

in the physical environment, and in a varying inferiority of any groups or classes because

though never to a large degree to differences they are inferior in visible characters.

in the social environment, and for the greater The extreme importance of applying

part to inherited differences." And he draws accurate methods to the problem is shown by

the same general conclusion with regard to the results of recent investigations on twins.

the physical differences. Yet in the few years As is well known, twins may be identical or

since Professor Carr-Saunders' book was monozygotic, always of the same sex and

written, this conclusion has become ex- both derived from the same fertilized egg; or

tremely unlikely. For recent work has shown they may be fraternal or dizygotic, either of

that vitamins and- other accessory food- like or unlike sex, and derived from two

factors have physical and mental effects far separate eggs. The former will have identical

Carr-Saunders, 1926, pp. 126, 97, 105.

Cited in Orr, 1936.

EUGENICS AND SOCIETY

I7

hereditary outfits, the latter will have here- general and non-committal phrase) differ in

ditary outfits as different as those of members genetic characters. Ethnic groups obviously

,of the same family born at different times. differ in regard to the mean values, and also

Yet it is true that in regard to intelligence the range and type of variability, of physical

tests, fraternal twins of like sex, though as characters such as stature, skin-colour, head-

we would expect they show considerably less and nose-form, etc.; and these differences are

resemblance than identical twins, are more obviously in the main genetic. There is every

alike than pairs of brothers or pairs of sisters reason to believe that they will also be proved

born at different times. The additional to differ genetically in intellectual and emo-

similarity of their environment, due to their tional characters, both quantitatively and

developing pre-natally and post-natally in qualitatively. But-and this cannot be too

more similar conditions, has assimilated strongly emphasized-we at present have on

them. this point no evidence whatever which can

Writing of these results, Hogben* says that claim to be called scientific. Different ethnic

"the ambiguity of the concept of causation " groups have different languages and cultures;

inherent in classical biometrical method has and the effects of the cultural environment

" completely obscured the basic relativity are so powerful as to overrde and mask any

of nature and nurture." The difficulties genetic effects.

inherent in multiple causation are here Most so-called racial traits are in point of

pithily summed up, and attention also drawn fact national traits; and being so, they have

to the practical impossibility of comparing no genetic or eugenic significance. In illus-

results obtained on material from different tration we may think of those chief contri-

environments, and drawing genetic conclu- butors to our own ancestry, the ancient

sions on their face value.

Britons and the even less civilized Picts and

The Race-Concept and the Social Environment

Scots, of the Roman Imperial period. They were truly described by the Romans as bar-

The same is true of racial differences. It barians. It is obvious that the difference

seems clear that the very idea of race as between their then barbaric state and our

applied to man is a misnomer under present present level of relative civilization is due

conditions. Professor Gates has indeed re- entirely or almost entirely to changes in

cently assertedt that the major races (colour tradition and culture, material and other.

varieties) of man should be regarded as true The genetic basis on which this progress has

species. This appears to me to be a grave been erected was doubtless a good one; but

error, arising from a failure to recognize the the only way to see whether other ethnic

biological peculiarities of the human species, groups now in the barbaric stage of culture,

as a species. These are due to man's mobility such as the Bantu, differ in their genetical

and his tradition, and result in a unique quality is to give them a similar opportunity.

degree of variability combined with a failure To assert, as is often done, that the present

of the usual tendencies to speciation: the barbarism of, say, the Bantu is proof of their

incipient species are brought together again genetic inferiority is a gross error of scientific

by mnigration and mingled by inter-crossing method.

before any mutual infertility has been The dangers of pseudo-science in these

established.

matters are being illustrated on a large scale,

While, however, modern genetics has and with the accompaniment of much indivi-

shown that the term race only has meaning dual suffering and political danger, in present-

as a description of somewhat hypothetical day Germany. The Nazi racial theory is a

past entities or as a goal for even more hypo- mere rationalization of Germanic nationalism

thetical future ideals," yet it is of course clear on the one hand and anti-Semitism on the

that different ethnic groups (to use the most other. The German nation consists of men-

* Op. cit., p. 95-

t Gates, I934.

t Huxley and Haddon, 1935, especialy Chapter IV.

delian recombinations of every sort between Alpine, Nordic, and Mediterranean types.

B

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The theory of Nordic supremacy and initiative is not true even for their own population :* it is a myth like any other myth, on which they are basing a pseudo-religion of
nationalism. When we come to the distinction between
Aryan and non-Aryan, the scientific error is
magnified; for the very term Aryan denotes the speakers of a particular type of language, and can by definition have no genetic significance. As Max Muiller himself wrote in a belated recantation: t " To me an ethnologist who speaks of Aryan race, Aryan blood,
Aryan eyes and hair, is as great a sinner as a
linguist who speaks of a dolichocephalic dictionary or a brachycephalic grammar."
And when it comes to anti-Semitic measures, we must remember the elementary fact that the Jews are primarily a pseudo-national
group, with a cultural and religious basis, not primarily an ethnic group with a genetic basis. Laws that lay down the amount of Jewish " blood " permiss-ible in an " Aryan " have no quantitative basis and no real
biological meaning. The alleged inferiority of half-castes be-
tween whites and black or browns is another
case in point. If the inferiority really exists, it is much more likely to be the product of the unfavourable social atmosphere in which they grow up than to any effect (which would be biologically very unusual) of their mixed
heredity. The results of intelligence tests applied to
different ethnic stocks are for the same reason
devoid of much value. Intelligence tests are now very efficient when applied to groups with similar social environment; they become progressively less significant as the difference in social environment increases.
Again, we must equalize environment upwards-here mainly by providing better
educational opportunity-before we can
evaluate genetic difference. To sum up, in the practical handling of
every so-called racial problem, the error seems invariably to have been xnade of confusing genetic with cultural factors. The former alone could legitimately be called

* Huxley and Haddon, op. cit., Chapters III, VI,

vii, Ix.

t Muller, M., I888, p. 245.

racial: but indeed the very term race disintegrates when subjected to modem genetic analysis. The net results are, firstly that it would be best to drop the term race from our vocabulary, both scientific and popular, as applied to man; and secondly, and more importantly for our present purpose, that until we equalize environmental opportunity, by making it more favourable for those now less favoured, we cannot make any pronouncements worthy to be called scientific as to genetic differences in mental characters between different ethnic stocks.
In point of fact, so-called racial problems on analysis invariably turn out to be problems of culture-contact. A dominant civilization or class desires to continue its dominance over a civilization or class of different colour or ethnic type, or is afraid that its values will be impaired if it tries to assimilate those of the other group. These are very real problems: but let us tackle them as such,
sociologically, not on the basis of a false
appeal to genetic science.
Genetic Differences Between Races and Clksses
My hearers must not imagine that I underrate the extent of the genetic differences between human groups, be they classes or socalled races. Man as an animal organism is unique in several respects: and one of them is his abnormal range of genetic variability. A reminder of the basic nature of this variability is given by the recent work of Blakeslee on taste and smell.* He finds that a number of substances which have a strong taste to some people, are not tasted at all by others. Thus the perceptive worlds inhabited by different human beings may be different on account of differences in genetic make-up. What far greater differences in conceptual worlds must be due to genetic differences in intelligence and emotion!
It would be most unlikely that this variability should be evenly distributed between different social and ethnic groups. As regards the latter, indeed, the existence of marked genetic differences in physical characters (as between yellow, black, white and brown) make it prima facie likely that differences in
Blakeslee and Fox, I932.

EUGENICS AND SOCIETY

intelligence and temperament exist also. For social environment between nation and

instance, I regard it as wholly probable that nation, class and class, normally mask any

true negroes have a somewhat lower average genetic differences that may exist, and, so

intelligence than the whites or yellows. But far as visible and effective characters are

neither this nor any other eugenically sig- concerned, largely override constitutional

nificant point of racial difference has yet been influences, it is clear that the social environ-

scientifically established.

ment itself often exercises a selective influ-

Further, even were the probability to be ence which may be of great importance.

established that some " races " and some This selective influence is of two distinct

classes are genetically inferior to others as a kinds, which we may call pre-selective and

fact, it seems certain, on the basis of our post-selective. In simplest terms, pre-selec-

present knowledge, that the differences would tive influences are those which attract certain

be small differences in average level, and that types into an environment and discourage

the ranges would overlap over most of their others. Post-selective influences are those

extent-in other words that a considerable which act on the population subjected to the

proportion of the " inferior " group would be environment, favouring certain evolutionary

actually superior to the lower half of the trends within it at the expense of others.

" superior" group. Thus no really rapid As a biological example, think of the

eugenic progress would come of encouraging assemblage of animals found living in caves.

the reproduction of one class or race against They are characterized broadly by poor eye-

another: striking and rapid eugenic results sight and reliance on touch; the extreme

can be achieved only by a virtual elimination types are eyeless, and pale or even colourless.

of the few lowest and truly degenerate types It seems clear that both pre- and post-

and a high multiplication-rate of the few selective processes must have here been at

highest and truly gifted types.

work. Animals with somewhat poorly de-

Do not let us forget that the over-believers veloped eyes, which shun the light and norm-

in genetics are not the only ones in error. ally live in dark corners, will more frequently

While the view that the observed differences find themselves in caves, and will be likely to

in achievement and behaviour between class survive there better than more active and

and class, nation and nation, are primarily more " normals" types. But once a cave-

genetic, is untrue and unscientific, the oppo- population is established, selection will be at

site view that opportunity is all, and that we work to encourage the development of tactile

need only work at reforming the social en- and other organs for use in the dark; it will

vironment, is precisely as unscientific and also cease to operate strongly or at all on the

untrue. For instance, up to the present, the genes responsible for keeping up full pig-

theoretical foundations of Communism have mentation or perfect eyes, so that these will

prevented the Russians, in spite of their great in many cases degenerate.

achievements in pure genetics, from paying A striking example is that concerning the

proper attention to eugenics. It now appears, selective influence of the environment pro-

however, that they are being confronted with vided by fields of cultivated cereals. As

problems, such as the rarity of qualities Vavilov has shown,* this favoured certain

making for leadership and the inherent other plants, which could then flourish as

difference between a born leader and an what the farmer calls weeds, in association

ordinary man, which are bound to bring with the crop. Among these weeds were wild

them face to face with eugenics. Here we see grasses related to the cultivated cereal; and

a social bias operating in the first place, to in certain climatic conditions, these weeds

be checked later by the realities emerging flourished relative to the crop, became the

from the social situation.

dominant species, and were then used by

The Selective Action o/ the Environment

man as the basis for a new crop-plant.

But while the enormous differences in

* Vavilov, I926.

20 THRE EUGENICS REVIEW

Just as cultivation of one crop-plant here at work, and would produce genetic dif-

provided the basis for the later development ferences: the only question is the extent of

of another, so the social environment those differences.

appropriate to one stage of human culture Whenever there are mass-movements of

gives opportunities for the expression of population, we are sure to find similar selec-

human traits which may be destined to tive effects. The difference between the

become dominant at a later stage. The Southem Irish in America and in Ireland

eliciting effect of environment is in both cases strikes every observer: we can hardly doubt

essential.

that it is due in part (though doubtless not

The United States furnishes a classical entirely) to a sifting of more from less adven-

human example. Pre-selection was at work turous types. And the same holds true

on the pioneers. The human cargo of the of the obvious differences between rural

Mayflower was certainly not a random sample and urban population in a country like our

of the English population. Religious zeal, own. Whatever be the effect of country life

independence of character, perhaps a ten- and labour on a man's temperament, we can

dency to fanaticism, together with courage, be sure that those who stayed behind were

must have been above the average among the not as a group genetically identical with

leaders, and probably in the whole band. The those who ventured away into the new life

early settlers in Virginia and Carolina were of the towns.

pre-selected on other lines, though some of One of the profoundest selective influences

the characters involved were the same. After ever brought to bear on the human popula-

the first settlements were made, further tion of the globe must have been that exerted

immigrants until near the end of the nine- by the invention and spread of agriculture,

teenth century were pre-selected for restless- as has been well stressed by Ellsworth

ness, initiative, adventurousness, and the Huntington.*

qualities making up the pioneer spirit. The A settled agricultural civilization demands

easily contented, the unadventurous and the qualities in its members very different from

timid, were pre-selected to remain behind. those demanded by a nomadic or a hunting

So, too, on the average, must have been those existence. Agriculture demands constant

with artistic, philosophic, literary, or mathe- application; the pastoral life is freer, and

matical gifts. Even if the mean differences hunting demands rather occasional outbursts

between those who went and those who of maximum energy. Agriculture demands

stayed were not large, they must have been foresight and the sacrificing of present com-

significant.

fort to future benefit; in the more primitive

Once the immigrants were established in modes of life, activity springs more imnmedi-

the country, selection continued. This post- ately from events. Agriculture demands

selection, so long as there was an open steady routine in one spot; the nomad and

physical frontier to the west, and an open the hunter can profitably indulge the spirit

economic frontier in the more settled regions, of restlessness.

must on the whole have encouraged and dis- Inevitably, it would seem, where early

couraged the same qualities favoured by agricultural civilizations were growing up,

pre-selection: in addition, assertiveness and there must have been a considerable drift of

ambition were encouraged in the acute the more restless types out of them into the

phase of " rugged individualism," while nomad and hunting cultures on their borders;

artistic and literary endowment still were at and quite possibly there occurred also a con-

a discount. Of course the direct moulding verse movement inwards of more calculating

effect of the social environment must have and less restless types.

acted in the same sense as its selective effect; Further, once the agricultural civilizations

so that here again genetic differences would were well established, a dominant class

be masked. Yet on deductive grounds we can

be certain that the selective effect would be

$ Huntington. z928, Chapte XIV.

EUGENICS AND SOCIETY

always appeared whose interests were bound a large sample of employed men, were

up with the success of the group. The mem- slightly less tall and distinctly less strong.

bers of this class therefore were bound to These were mainly men who would be the

encourage submissiveness and industry in first to be turned off and the last to be taken

the cultivators of the soil: and although on, so that selection seems definitely to have

much was in fact accomplished by purely been at work here.

environmental means, such as religion and This brings up the large and important

law, there must again have been a selective question of the selective effect of the class

effect, so that the level of inherent docility system as a whole in an industrial capitalist

would tend to rise in the peasant class. Thus society. As many writers have pointed out,

in the long run, agriculture must have in so far as there is any ladder of oppor-

markedly increased the selective value of tunity by which men may rise or sink in the

tendencies making for the humdrum hard- social scale, there must be some selective

working human virtues, and in its secondary action. With the passage of time, more

effects, as in the birth of the merchant class failures will accumulate in the lower strata,

and in other ways, have encouraged fore- while the upper strata will collect a higher

sight and calculation.

percentage of successful types.

Class differences in environment may also This would be good eugenically speaking

be selective. It seems to be established that if success were synonymous with ultimate

the inhabitants of our industrial towns are biological and human values, or even par-

on the average smaller and darker than those tially correlated with them; and if the upper

of the rural and small-town population.* It strata were reproducing faster than the lower.

may well be that there is a selection against However, we know that reproduction shows

tall and therefore rapidly-growing types on the reverse trend, and it is by no means

account of the unfavourable diet and living certain that the equation of success with

conditions of the slum dweller, since slow desirable qualities is anything more than a

growth makes less demands upon a low naive rationalization.

supply of vitamins: and that tall stature is Before, however, we discuss this further,

on the whole correlated with fair complexion. let us look at some other effects of our pattern

But whatever the cause, the fact remains, of class-system. Once we begin to reflect, we

and can only be due to selection of some see that certain qualities are more favoured,

sort. often much more favoured, in some classes

A recent report of the Industrial Health than in others. For instance, initiative and

Research Boardt points out that in the independence have less opportunity among

early part of the industrial era, the demand in unskiUed labourers than elsewhere. Inclina-

factories was for men of good physique irre- tions to art, science, or mathematics will be

spective of build, while appearance or pres- more favoured in the upper and upper-middle

ence counted for more in shops and offices. classes than elsewhere. The result may be

This may have laid the basis for the observed truly selective, for instance by encouraging

fact that manual workers average shorter types genetically above the average in sub-

than blackcoated workers, but are stronger. missiveness among the proletariat. For the

It is quite likely that with the recent intro- most part, however, it is likely merely to

duction of more automatic machinery, which mask genetic differences. The fact that an

does not demand strength, the type of selec- undue proportion of artists, writers and

tion will alter, and the factory workers come scientists spring from the upper strata of

to lose their better physique.

society would then not mean that these strata

The same report mentions that a fairly were proportionately well endowed by here-

large sample of unemployed, contrasted with dity-merely that in the rest of society the

Darwins and the Einsteins, like the Miltons,

* Carr-Saunders, I926, pp. 195-6. t Ind. Health Res. Bd. Rept., 1935.

were mute and inglorious. Two interesting recent studies by Gray and

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Moshinsky* confirm and extend this conclu- may not produce them at all, if they are con-

sion. They show, on the basis of intelligence ducted in the unreal environment of an

tests, and without discounting any of the academic breeding station where optimum

superior performance of upper-class children conditions are provided. They should be

as partly due to their superior environment, conducted in an environment similar to that

that our present educational system leaves in which the animals are destined to be used.

vast reservoirs of innate intelligence un- An extreme illustration of this is provided

trained in the children from lower social by cattle. In various parts of tropical Africa,

strata. Contrary to usual belief, only about a the semi-arid bush country provides but

third of the children whose performance is scanty nutriment, and erosion has led to

in the top thousandth,;come from the higher various mineral deficiencies. The native

social and the professional classes, while cattle are scrubby little beasts, no bigger than

wage-earners contribute 50 per cent. of these ponies, yielding not more than two gallons of

children of " exceptional intelligence." Thus milk a day, and growing so slowly that they

our society is not utilizing the innate do not breed until four to five years old.

intelligence of its members as it might, nor Contrasted with cows of a good modern

does the system give adequate opportunity British milking breed, which. are double the

for intelligence to rise.

size, give up to nine gallons of milk daily, and

Again, highly-strung types are less likely breed at two to three years of age, they are,

to achieve success in the lower economic you would say, very inefficient bits of bio-

strata, more likely to become neurotic or logical machinery. Yet if we try to introduce

insane. People from the lower-middle and European breeds into such areas, they are a

working classes who are apparently mentally complete failure. They make demands which-

deficient or abnormal have often reached their are greater than can be met by the environ-

unfortunate condition because they have not ment. And it is they which suffer; they be-

had either the care or the opportunities for come stunted, rickety or otherwise diseased,

self-expression which would have been avail- and cannot hold their own in competition

able in a more generous social environment. with the native breeds. The native stock will

Let us also remember that society as a stand a little genetic grading up in present

whole can have a similar effect. Those same conditions; but the only chance for radical

types which in Siberian tribes would achieve improvement is to begin with improvement

prestige and power as shamans and medicine- of the environment-the provision of mineral

men, or in the medieval world would have fertilizers, salt-licks, watering facilities, and

become candidates for sainthood, would here so on-and then practice genetic selection to

and to-day often find their way into asylums. keep pace with the environmental change.

Artificial Selection in Relation to Different Environments

Another example is that of Stapledon's remarkable work on moorland grazings.* By his methods, rough hill grazings can be con-

This brings us on to a biological point verted into real pastures, capable of carrying

whose importance has not always been many more sheep, and carrying them all the

realized. It is that selection is theoretically year round instead of only in the summer.

meaningless and practically without value But this can only be done by the simultane-

except in relation to a particular environ- ous transformation of the environment and

ment. The practical implications are both of the herbage stocks. The environmental

the easiest to grasp and the more important transformation consists in breaking up the

for our purpose. In breeding domestic soil, followed by the application of certain

animals, as Hammond of Cambridge has so mineral fertilizers. The genetic transforma-

well stressed,t selection and breeding will not tion consists first in the destruction of the

produce the desired results so quickly, and original plant covering, brought about by

* Gray and Moshinsky, I935, a and b.
t Hammond, I932 (pp. 251-2), I935.

* Stapledon, 1935.

EUGENICS AND SOCIETY

23

the breaking-up of the soil, followed by the courses to be pursued. Either we may accept

sowing of more nutritious pasture grasses as given our present type of social environ-

and clovers. Furthermore, the new plants ment, and adjust our eugenic programme to

must be of special strains, previously bred it. In practice we shall of course be forced to

and selected to resist the climatic conditions take a dynamic instead of a purely static

of the higher altitudes; the ordinary strains point of view, and consider the trends of

that give good lowland pastures will not change within that environment, while

maintain themselves.

assuming that the social system will not be

fundamentally altered. Or, going to the

Eugenic Selection in Relation to Different Social Environments

opposite extreme, we may assume an ideal social environment-more scientifically, one which is the optimum we can imagine-and

Precisely the same considerations apply to plan our eugenic measures in relation to that,

the improvement of man. Our schemes for piously hoping that in the long run social

improving the genetic qualities of the nation change will adjust itself to our ideal or to

or the species are meaningless except in whatever measure of genetic change we may

relation to some particular environment, have brought about. Or finally we may

present or future. Our eugenic ideals will be envisage, as in Stapledon's grassland work, a

different according as we relate them to a joint attack upon environment and germ-

slave order or a feudal order of things, plasm. Assuming that we have some measure

a primitive industrial or a leisure order, of control over the social environment, we

a this-worldly or an other-worldly order, a shall adjust our genetic programme to that

capitalist or a socialist order, a militarist or a programme of environmental change which

peaceful internationalist order. Even if we represents, both in direction and tempo, a

imagine we are working to absolute genetic happy mean between Ithe ideal and the
standards, we are in reality thinking of them, immediately practical, between what we

albeit unconsciously, in relation to some ideal should like and what we are likely to get.

environment of the future, or to the needs Let us look at these three alternatives and

and realities of the present social environ- their implications. First, however, it should

ment, or, very frequently, to our bias and a be pointed out that they are not wholly

priori views about this present environment alternative to each other. Even if we take the

and how in our opinion it ought to be environment for granted, we must face the

changed. If we were really treating of abso- fact of social change and attempt to meet it

lute genetic standards, we should have eugenically; and in so doing we shall find it

deserted reality for a metaphysical vacuum, difficult to avoid giving some play to our

and our reasoning and deductions would wishes, fears, and hopes. Even if we assume

have even less value than a discussion of, an optimum environment, our ideal must be

say, eugenics in heaven. (Even in this latter based on our conscious or unconscious esti-

case, be it noted, the discussion would mate of what developments are inherently

inevitably be related to the environment possible to the present system. We shall, in

which we supposed was awaiting us in the effect, be attempting to forecast social

next world!)

improvement, and we shall prove, we can be

Now all such unconscious thinking is sure, as widely out in our forecasts as if we

inevitably irrational or at best non-rational: were attempting to prophesy the future of

if it had been submitted to the light of reason, scientific discovery. And the third method,

it would no longer be unconscious. So that a of necessity, must take into account both the

prime task before eugenists is the reasoned hard fact of the present and the ideal of

formulation of their views on the environ- wishes and hopes for the future.

ment to which their schemes of genetic None the less, there are real differences

betterment are to be related.

between the three; and we must consider

There are, it seems to me, three possible these more in detail.

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Eugenics in Relation to the Actual and the population. We must therefore try to

Ideal remedy this state of affairs, by pious exhor-

To accept the continuance of the present tation and appeals to patriotism, or by the,

type of social environment as essentially more tangible methods of family allowances,

given (whether given in reality or in our cheaper education, or income-tax rebates for

hopes and fears will make no difference to children. The lowest strata, allegedly less

our eugenic plans) means, I take it, two main well-endowed genetically, are reproducing

things. It means that we must plan for a relatively too fast. Therefore birth-control

capitalist class-system, and for a nationalist methods must be taught them; they must

system. We accept the division of society not have too easy access to relief or hospital

into economic strata, with large differences in treatment lest the removal of the last check

standard of living, outlook, and opportunity on natural selection should make it too easy

between the different classes; and we accept for children to be produced or to survive;

all the implications of the principle that the long unemployment should be a ground for

earning of a return on capital is the primary sterilization, or at least relief should be con-

aim and duty of business and finance, tingent upon no further children being

whatever minor modifications and regulations brought into the world; and so on. That is

may be found desirable or opportune. We to say, much of our eugenic programme will

accept individualist competition, however be curative and remedial merely, instead of

much toned down in practice, as essential. preventive and constructive.

Further, we accept the division of the world Then, in systems like the present, man-

into nationalist states, which, however their power is important, and for man-power,

sovereignty and independence of action may quantity of population above a certain

be modified or curtailed by international minimum qualitative standard is as essen-

agreements, will be competing as well as tial as raising quality; and if the two

co-operating with each other, and must in conflict, quantity supply must not be inter-

certain eventualities be prepared to resort to fered with. For qualitative change, a dual

war. standard is indicated-docility and indus-

Coming down to results, we accept the trious submissiveness in the lower majority;

economic and spiritual frustrations of the intelligence, leadership and strength of

system also-that is to say, we accept the character in the upper few. Since a high

necessity of some degree of unemployment, degree of intellect and imagination, of

for without that there can be no approach to scientific and artistic ability and other

a free market for labour; we accept the con- qualities, cannot be adequately expressed or

tinuance of trade cycles of boom and slump, utilized, under any system resembling the

even though they may be toned down in present, in the great majority of the lower

amplitude. We accept the need for restric- strata, it is useless to plan for their genetic

tion of output whenever surplus interferes increase in these strata. Indeed, it is more

with profit. We accept the existence of a than useless, it is dangerous; for the frustra-

cheap supply of unskilled and semi-skilled tion of inherent capacity leads to discontent

workers; we accept the need for man-power and revolution in some men, to neurosis and

i case of war.

inefficiency in others. The case is strictly

If so, then we must plan our eugenic policy analogous to that of cattle in Africa; in an

along some such lines as the following: unfavourable environment, too drastic gene-

First comes the prevention of dysgenic tic improvement is worse than none.

effects. The upper economic classes are Next we come to planning for an ideal or

presumably slightly better endowed with optimum environment. An obvious difficulty

ability-at least with ability to succeed in here is that the various optima conceived by

our social system-yet are not reproducing different minds, or groups of minds, will be

fast enough to replace themselves, either so different as to be irreconcilable. Putting

absolutely or as a percentage of the total this on one side, however, it is I think

EUGENICS AND SOCIETY

25

possible to state the sort of optimum which always be practised in relation to an appro-

would commend itself to the mass of what priate environment, then it is an unscientific

we may call " men of goodwill." It would, and wasteful procedure not to attempt to

I take it, be a social environment which gave control environment at the same time as

the opportunity, first of work which was not genetic quality. Science is simultaneously

excessive, which was felt to be useful, and both theory and practice, both knowledge

whose rewards would provide not only the and control. For the applied science of

necessities but a reasonable supply of the eugenics to neglect the environment is a

comforts and amenities of life: secondly, of source both of confusion and of practical

a reasonable amount of leisure: thirdly, the weakness. I would go farther: I would say

opportunity to everyone of expressing what- that we cannot succeed in achieving any-

ever gifts of body and mind they might thing in the nature of adequate positive

possess, in athletics or sport; in art, science eugenics unless we attempt the control of the

or literature, passive or actively enjoyed; in social environment simultaneously with the

travel or politics, in individual hobbies or in control of the human germ-plasm, any more

social service.

than Stapledon could have iniproved his

If so, then we should plan a eugenic pro- rough mountain grazings save by a similar

gramme with a single and very high standard. double attack.

We should aim at a high level of inherent Let us then look more in detail into this

physical fitness, endurance and general third or dual method of approach. It has

intelligence; and we should encourage the two facets, theoretical and practical. On the

breeding of special talent of any and every theoretical side, we shall only progress in our

sort, for mathematical as much as for busi- attempt to disentangle the effects of nature

ness success, artistic as much as adininistra- from those of nurture in so far as we follow

tive. We should realize that, if we succeeded, the footsteps of the geneticist and equalize

our genetic results would over a great range environment. We shall never be able to do

of the population be out of harmony with this in the same radical way as the pure

their social surroundings, and would either scientist, by testing out a whole range of

be wasted or lead to friction and discontent, controlled and equalized environments on

or might express themselves in characters selected stocks. We must therefore concen-

such as neurosis or a sense of maladjustment trate on producing a single equalized environ-

which would represent a lower level than that ment; and this clearly should be one as

from which we started. For ultimate success favourable as possible to the expression of

we should rely on creating a demand for the genetic qualities that we think desirable.

changing the environment towards our opti- Equally clearly, this should include the

mum. The supply of genetic types which following items. A marked raising of the

could only reach proper expression in such standard of diet for the great majority of

an environment would help to create the the population, until all should be provided

demand; the friction and discontent would both with adequate calories and adequate

add themselves to the forces of change. accessory factors; provision of facilities

for healthy exercise and recreation; and

Simultaneous Control of Heredity and Environment

upward equalization of educational oppor-
tunity. The further we move in this direction, the more readily shall we be able to

It will, however, by now have become distinguish inherent physical and mental

clear that neither of these approaches is so defects from environmental stunting and

satisfactory as the third. Indeed, neither frustration; the higher we raise the average,

is methodologically sound. If the aim of the more certain shall we be that physical or

eugenics be to control the evolution of the mental performance above the average is

human species and guide it in a desirable dependent upon genetic endowment and

direction, and if the genetic selection should therefore provides the raw material for

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

positive eugenics. Not only this, but we effort to realize a wish, a desired control. It

know from various sources that raising the is planned, like more crucial experiments in

standard of life among the poorest classes the natural sciences, to verify deductions

almost invariably results in a lowering of from known facts. In so far as the desired

their fertility. In so far, therefore, as dif- end is attained, the deductions are veri-

ferential class-fertility exists, raising the fied and knowledge is increased: and

environmental level will reduce any dysgenic even if the control is not attained, know-

effects which it may now have.

ledge is increased, thcough not to the same

Returning, however, to the more important extent.

aspect of the eugenic knowledge to be gained This more empirical mode of attack must

by levelling up the social environment, I also be used in eugenics. We must attempt

anticipate that at the bottom, the social to control the change of social environment

problem group, though shrinking in size, will and at the same time to control the change of

be left, clearly marked out by its inadequate human germ-plasm, along lines which appear

performance in the new and favourable con- likely to yield tangible and desirable results.

ditions, as a well-defined target for measures It is the results which interest us. Admirable

of negative eugenics such as segregation and germ-plasm unable to realize itself owing to

sterilization; and that minor targets of the unfavourable conditions does not interest us:

same nature will emerge out of the present nor do the most alluring social conditions,

fog, in the shape of nests of defective germ- if they permit or encourage the deterioration

plasm inspissated by assortative mating and of the germ-plasm. Thus the two attacks

inbreeding, such as have been imnaginatively must be planned in relation to each other,

glimpsed by Lidbetter and others. I further and also in relation to practicability.

anticipate that the professional classes will

reveal themselves as a reservoir of superior
germ-plasm, of high average level notably in regard to intelligence, and therefore will

The Dysgenic Character of our Present Social System

serve as a foundation-stone for experiments When we think along these lines, we shaUl

in positive eugenics. And I anticipate that find, I believe, that a system such as ours, a

society will tap large resources of high ability competitive and individualist system based

that are at present unutilized, thus facilitat- on private capitalism and public nationalism,

ing the social promotion of at least certain is of its nature and essence dysgenic. It

fitter elements; and without social promo- is dysgenic both in the immediate respect

tion we cannot proceed to reproductive of failing to utilize existing reservoirs of

encouragement. This is the scientific ideal valuable genes, and also in the long-range

at which we should aim. Like many other tasks of failing to increase them, failing to

ideals, we shall not achieve it; but any trap and encourage favourable mutations,

approach to it will help us towards a more and failing to eliminate harmful mutations.

certain knowledge.

Under our social system, the full stature or

Science, however, is control as well as physique of the very large majority of the

knowledge; and new practice may advance people is not allowed to express itself;

theory as much as new theory lay the basis neither are the full genetic potentialities of

for practice. This is especially true for health permitted to appear except in a small

the social sciences, where, as we have fraction of the whole, with a consequent

seen, rigorously controlled experiment, on social waste of energy and time, not to men-

the pattern of pure physics or physiology, tion a waste of individual happiness which is

is impossible, and problems must fre- formidable in extent; and finally, innate

quently be solved ambulando. We make high ability is encouraged or utilized only

a partial experiment which is simultaneously with extreme inadequacy. For the first two

pure and applied science. The experiment is wastes, ignorance is partly responsible,

both an attempt to gain knowledge and an but in the lower economic strata, poverty

EUGENICS AND SOCIETY

27

is the chief cause. For the latter, our The Eugenic Approach to Control ol the

inadequate educational system is chiefly Social Environment

responsible.

What sort of practical changes, then,

Then R. A. Fisher has brilliantly and should we as eugenicists try to encourage in

devastatingly shown* the relentless way in the social and economic system ? In the first

which such a system as ours promotes both place-what we have already noted as desir-

infertility and certain types of talent, and in able on theoretical grounds-the equalizing

so doing ties together the genetic factors of environment in an upward direction. For

responsible. In the course of the generations this, by permitting of more definite know-

-genes making for small families become in- ledge as to the genetic constitution of dif-

creasingly bound up with those making for ferent classes and types, will at once give us

social and economic success; and conversely more certainty in any eugenic selection,

those making for social and economic failure negative or positive, upon which we may

become bound up with those making for high embark; and secondly, we must aim at the

reproduction rates. Eugenically speaking abandonment of the idea of national sovereign

our system is characterized by the social states, and the subordination of national

promotion of infertility and the excess disputes to international organization and

fertility of social failure.

supernational power.

If this be true, then so long as we cling to But we need something more radical than

a system of this type, the most we can hope this-we must try to find a pattern of econo-

to do is to palliate its effects as best we may, mic and communal life which will not be

by extending birth-control facilities down- inherently dysgenic; and we must also try

wards, instituting graded systems of family to find a pattern of family and reproductive

"llowances, providing for sterilization here life which will permnit of more rapid and con-

and financial relief for children there. But structive eugenics.

even if we thus reduce the distortion we can- On the first point, it seems clear that the

not hope to change its sign.

individualist scramble for social and finan-

Then, in so far as our system remains cial promotion should be dethroned from its

nationalist, the demand for man-power and present position as main incentive in life,

quantity will continue to interfere with the and that we must try to raise the power

higher aim of quality. Furthermore, modem of group incentives. Group incentives are

war itself is dysgenic. This has often been powerful in tribal existence, and have been

pointed out as regard its direct effects. It powerful in many historical civilizations,

appears, however, also to hold for its indirect such as the old Japanese. What interests us

effects; many among the more imaginative chiefly, however, is to find that they have

and sensitive types are to-day restricting been to a large extent effective in replacing

their families, sometimes to zero, because individualist money incentives, or at least

they feel that they cannot bear to bring diminishing their relative social importance,

children into a world exposed to such a risk in several modern States, notably Germany

of war and chaos.

and the U.S.S.R.

As eugenists we must therefore aim at It is not for a biologist to discuss the

transforming the social system. There may purely social merits of different political

of course be those amongst our ranks who philosophies: but he may be allowed to

prefer the not disagreeable role of a Jeremiah point out that not all group-incentives are

darkly prophesying gloom to settling down at equally valuable from the eugenic stand-

the more prosaic job of constructive work. point. Those of Nazi Germany, for instance,

But as a body, we shall wish, I take it, to see presuppose an intensification of nationalist

at least the possibility of our dreams comning feeling and activity instead of their diminu-

true. tion: and this, we have concluded, is

actually anti-eugenic. It may of course be

* Fisher, 1930, Chapter XI.

urged that it is in its immediate effect

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

eugenic; and there will be many to uphold separated as species, is greater than that of

the value of the eugenic measures recently any wild animal. And the extreme variants

adopted in Germany under the stimulus of thrown up by the constant operation of this

National-Socialist ideas and emotions, even genetic kaleidoscope have proved to be of the

if some of them be crude and unscientific. utmost importance for the material and

But if in the long run it leads to over- spiritual progress of civilization. Whatever

population and war, it is essentially dysgenic, bias or prejudice may beset the individual

and in matters of evolution we must, I eugenist, eugenics as a whole must certainly

think, take the long view.

make the encouragement of diversity one of

Further, if the social environment is such its main principles. But here again the

as to give satisfaction to the possessors of environment comes in. If extreme types are

social traits such as altruism, readiness to to be produced, especially gifted for art,

co-operate, sensitiveness, sympathetic enthu- science, contemplation, exploration, they

siasm, and so forth, instead of, as now, put- must not be wasted. The social system must

ting a premium on many antisocial traits such provide niches for them.

as egoism, low cunning, insensitiveness, and As a special and important special case of

ruthless concentration, we could begin to providing for variability, there are the needs

frame eugenic measures for encouraging the of the educational profession. At the mo-

spread of genes for such social virtues. At ment, this social category seems definitely

the moment this is hardly possible, for the selective in that it attracts and encourages

expression of such genes is so often inhibited men and women of an intellectualist and

or masked by the effects of the environment. academic type. This is partly because there

This is a human illustration of Hammond's are not sufficient outlets provided elsewhere

general principle, that breeding and selec- in our social system for such types, partly

tion for a given type can only be efficiently because the educational profession as at

carried out in an environment favouring the present constituted does not provide suffi-

fullest development of the type.

cient attraction for contrasted types. This

There is no doubt that genetic differences restriction of type among those responsible

of temperament, including tendencies to for the upbringing of the next generation

social or antisocial action, to co-operation or cannot be satisfactory, and an altered status

individualism, do exist, nor that they could for the educational profession so that its

be bred for in man as man has bred for genetic basis is broadened is an important

tameness in and other temperamental traits task for social biology, and, since it involves

in many domestic animals, and it is extremely genetics, legitimately part of the eugenic

important to do so. If we do not, society movement.

will be continuously in danger from the anti-

social tendencies of its members.

Eugenics and Reproductive Morality and

Just as the basic structure of our present Practice

social system is essentially dysgenic, so we Still more important for the comparatively

may say that the genetic composition of our immediate future is the relation of the

present population is largely and perhaps dominant group-incentive to reproductive

essentially antisocial. Thus both environ- morality, law, and practice. We all know

mentally and genetically the present state of that certain schools of Christian thought

mankind is unstable, at war with itself. to-day are opposed on grounds of religious

Another important point to remember, principle to birth-control, that indispensable

especially in these days when the worship of tool of eugenics as well as of rational control

the State is imposing a mass-production ideal of population, and even to the very notion

of human nature, is the fact and the sig- of eugenics itself. But even if this opposition

nificance of human variability. The vari- could be overcome, there would remain in

ability of man, due to recombination between this field grave obstacles, both to the spread

divergent types that have failed to become of the eugenic idea and to the rate of its

EUGENICS AND SOCIETY

29

progress in practice. These are the prevailing that some persons and bodies on theological

individualist attitude to marriage, and the or metaphysical grounds either ostrich-like

conception, based on this and on the long deny the existence of this separation, or assert

religious tradition of the West, of the subor- that it ought not to be practised; but this

dination of personal love to procreation. The does not alter the fact.

two- influences together prevent us collec- The perfection of birth-control technique

tively from grasping the implications of the has made the separation more effective; and

recent advances in science and technique the still more recent technique of artificial

which now make it possible to separate the insemination has opened up new horizons, by

individual from the social side of sex and making it possible to provide different objects

reproduction. Yet it is precisely and solely for the two functions. It is now open to man

this separation that would make real eugenics and woman to consummate the sexual func-

practicable, by allowing a rate of progress tion with those they love, but to fulfil the

yielding tangible encouragement in a reason- reproductive function with those whom on

able time, generation by generation.

perhaps quite other grounds they admire.

The recent invention of efficient methods This consequence is the opportunity of

on the one hand of birth-control and on the eugenics. But the opportunity cannot yet be

other of artificial insemination have brought grasped. It is first necessary to overcome the

man to a stage at which the separation of bitter opposition to it on dogmatic theologi-

sexual and reproductive functions could be cal and moral grounds, and the widespread

used for eugenic purposes. But it is of real popular shrinking from it, based on vague but

interest to note that these inventions repre- powerful feelings, on the ground that it is

sent merely the last steps in an evolutionary unnatural.

process which started long before man ever We need a new attitude to these problems,

existed.

an attitude which for want of another term

In lower mnammals, the existence of limited we may still call religious. We need to

breeding seasons, and, during these, the replace the present attitude fostered by

restriction of mating to the cestrous phase in established religions by a new but equally

th-e female's reproductive cycle, do in fact potent attitude.

link sexual behaviour firmly with reproduc- As regards the sense of salvation, we need

tion. But in the great primate stock to which to substitute social salvation for individual

we belong, a new trend early becomes salvation; and as regards the need of some

apparent. Breeding seasons are less definite, escape-mechanism from the pressure of

and mating may occur at any time during the present difficulty, we need to substitute the

female cycle, so that most acts of union are real possibility of evolutionary progress for

in fact and of necessity infertile, without other-worldly phantasies. Once this possi-

reproductive consequences. This trend be- bility of true human progress, both social and

comes more mnarked as we ascend the evolu- genetic, is generally apprehended, and the

tionary scale, and culminates in man. In social system remodelled so that individual

civilized man, the faint traces of a breeding success does not conflict with communal wel-

season apparent in certain primitive ethnic fare, and self-expression and personal satis-

stocks have wholly disappeared, and there faction can be largely achieved in serving

is no greater readiness to mate during the society, then sex and reproduction can take

short periodwhen alone conception is possible their due places as individual and social

than at most other times of the female cycle.* functions respectively. Gone will be many

This has already led in point of fact to the of the conflicts inherent in present-day

widespread separation of the personal func- marriage: any sacrifice involved in parent-

tion of sexual union from its racial conse- hood will be made on the altar of the race,

quences, of love from reproduction. It is true and in the knowledge that it will be accept-

able. Those who wish to pursue further the

Zuckerman, 1932, p. 73f.

possibilities of such a step should consult

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Mr. Brewer's recent article on Eutelegenesis* (though the correlation between broad social

and Professor Muller's book Out o/ the Night.t or ethnic divisions and genetic values can

Here it must suffice to point out that never be high), yet they will not be based

unless we alter the social framework of primarily upon eugenic considerations, but

law and ideas so as to make possible the upon social or national bias. The public-

divorce between sex and reproduction, or if school ideal, or that of the, working-class

you prefer it between the individual and the movement, or that of colonial imperialism,

social sides of our sexual functions, our efforts may be good ideals; but they are not

at evolutionary improvement will remain eugenic ideals.

mere tinkering, no more deserving the proud

title of eugenics than does the mending of The Danger of Man's Genetic Degeneration:

saucepans deserve to be called engineering. Conclusion

That consummation, you will perhaps say, Before concluding, I should like to draw

is impossibly remote from our imperfect attention to one eugenically important con-

present, hardly to be affected by any of our sequence of recent progress in pure genetics.

little strivings to-day. That may be so: but In all organisms so far investigated, dele-

I am not so sure. Let us remember that terious mutations far outnumber useful ones.

modem science is a mere three centuries old: There is an inherent tendency for the here-

yet it has already achieved changes in out- ditary constitution to degrade itself. That

look that are of comparable magnitude. Bio- man shares this tendency we can be sure, not

logical science is only now attaining its only from analogy but on the all-too-obvious

maturity, and the social sciences are mere evidence provided by the high incidence in

infants. Looked at in the long perspective of " civilized " populations of defects, both

evolution, the present phase of human mental and physical, of genetic origin.

activity is one of transition between that of In wild animals and plants, this tendency

acceptance and that of control of destiny, is either reversed or at least held in check by

between magic and science, between un- the operation of natural selection, which

consciously-nurtured phantasy and con- here again proves itself to be, in R. A.

sciously-faced reason. It is, in the sense of Fisher's words, a mechanism capable of

the word used in physics, a critical phase: generating high degrees of improbability.

and being so it cannot be either stable or In domestic animals and plants, the same

long-enduring.

result is achieved by our artificial selection.

It is to my mind not only permissible but But in civilized human communities of

highly desirable to look far ahead. Otherwise our present type, the elimination of defect

we are in danger of mistaking for our by natural selection is largely (though of

eugenic ideal a mere glorification of our course by no means wholly) rendered in-

prejudices and our subjective wish-fulfil- operative by medicine, charity, and the

ments. It is not eugenics but left-wing social services; while, as we have seen, there

politics if we merely talk of favouring the is no selection encouraging favourable varia-

survival and reproduction of the proletariat tions. The net result is that many deleterious

at the expense of the bourgeoisie. It is not mutations can and do survive, and the

eugenics but right-wing politics if we merely tendency to degradation of the germ-plasm

talk of favouring the breeding of the upper can manifest itself.

classes of our present social system at the To-day, thanks to the last fifteen years'

expense of the lower. It is not eugenics but work in pure science, we can be sure of this

nationalist and imperialist politics if we speak alarming fact, whereas previously it was

in such terms as subject races or miscegena- only a vague surmise.* Humanity will gradu-

tion. Our conclusions in any particular case ally destroy itself from within, will decay in

may be on balance eugenically correct its very core and essence, if this slow but

* Brewer, H., 1935.

t Muller, H. J., I935.

* Muller, H. J., 1935.

EUGENICS AND SOCIETY

31

relentless process is not checked. Here again,
dealing with defectives in the present system can be at best a palliative. We must be able to pick out the genetically inferior stocks with
more certainty, and we must set in motion counter-forces making for faster reproduction
of superior stocks, if we are to reverse or even arrest the trend. And neither of these, as we have seen, is possible without an alteration
of social system.
Whether or not I have been asking you to accompany me too far into the visionary future, I will end this lecture with a very
concrete suggestion for the present, backed by a warning from the immediate past.
Twenty-five years ago, when I had just taken my degree, the field of heredity was still a battle-field. The Mendelians and the Biometricians were disputing for its possession, and in the heat of the struggle little mercy was shown by either side to the other. In the last dozen years or so, however, the
apparent conflict of principle has been shown
not to exist, and now, thanks to the work of
such men as R. A. Fisher and J. B. S. Haldane, we realize that the two methods of
approach are complementary, and that certain important problems can only be solved by their simultaneous employment.
The present position of Eugenists appears to me to be closely parallel with the position of the Mendelians a quarter of a century ago. They find themselves in apparent conflict with the environmentalists and the protagonists of social reform. Speaking broadly, the field of human improvement is a battle-field between Eugenists and Sociologists, and the battle is often as violent as that between the Mendelians and Biometriciansor between Swift's Big-endians and Littleendians. In my opinion, it is also as unreal and useless. We eugenists must no longer think of the social environment only in its possible dysgenic or non-eugenic effects, but

must study it as an indispensable ally. Changes in social environment are needed both for the adequate expression of eugenic progress, and as a means for its realization.
The next step for eugenics is, as I urged at the beginning of this address, a methodological one. We eugenists must familiarize ourselves with the outlook and the concepts of sociology, with the technique and practice of social reform; for they are an indispensable part of the machinery we need to realze our aims.
REFERENCES
Blakeslee, A. F., and Fox, A. L. 1932. " Our different taste worlds." J. Hered., 23.
Brewer, Herbert. 1935. " Eutelegenesis," EUGENICS
REVIEw, XXVii, I2I.
Carr-Saunders, A. M. I926. Eugenics. Home University Library. Williams and Norgate. London.
Fisher, R. A. 1930. The Genetical Basis of Natural Selection. Clarendon Press. Oxford.
Gates, R. R. I934. " Racial and Social Problems in the Light of Heredity," Population, I (2).
Gray, J. L., and Moshinsky, P. 1935 (a) "Ability and Opportunity in English Education." Sociological Review, XXVii, 2, 1935. (b) "Ability and Educational Opportunity in Relation to Parental Occupation." Sociological Review, xxvii, 3, 1935.
Hammond, J. 1932. Growth and Development of
Mutton Qualities in the Sheep. Oliver and Boyd. Edinburgh.
Hammond, J. 1935. " Inheritance of Productivity in Farm Livestock. I. Meat," Empire Jour. Exper. Agric., 3, I.
Hogben, L. T. I933. Nature and Nurture. Williams and Norgate. London.
Huxley, J. S., and Haddon, A. C. 1935. We Europeans. Cape. London.
Huntington, E. 1928. The Human Habitat. Chapman & Hall. London.
Industrial Health Research Board, Fifteenth Annual Report, I935. H.M. Stationery Office. London.
Muller, H. J. 1935. Out of the Night. Vanguard
Press. New York.
Muller, Max. i888. Biographies of Words and the Home of the Aryas. Longmans. London.
Orr, Sir J. B. I936. Food, Health and Income.
Macmillan. London. Stapledon, R. G. 1935. The Land Now and To-
morrow. Faber & Faber. London.
Vavilov, N. I. 1926. Bull. Appl. Bot., Leningrad,
i6, I39.
Zuckerman, S. 1932. The Social Life of Monkeys and Apes. Kegan Paul. London.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XVI, No. 1.

