EUGENICS AND CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES *

By ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI

WE live in an age in which science is extremely powerful, almost as powerful as religion once was. But
a free-lance scientist like myself is sometimes left wondering whether science is not often a mask behind which the old powers of magic and religion may still be seen grinning. One piece of magic which I propose to divorce from my science is the gratuitous segmentation of the human organism into body and mind (soma and psyche); and contemplating the problem of culture on this basis, I find, a priori, that culture, in so far as it is social harmony and order, must be the product of an ordered, harmonious man. If, moreover, I turn from the social chaos of to-day back to the origins of the most harmonious and orderly cultures, I suspect, without inquiry, that the people who created these cultures must have been unlike us at least in this, that they were harmoniously constituted.
INBREEDING IN EARLIER CIVILIZATIONS
Turning from these a priori conclusions to fact, we find not only that these early cultures were extremely harmonious, but that their power and influence have been so great that our own culture owes what little beauty and harmony it possesses entirely to them. A further interesting fact is that all these early cultures arose in naturally or artificially confined areas-in islands like Crete and Japan, peninsulas like India, Greece, and Italy, naturally enclosed areas like Peru, Mesopotamia, and Egypt, and more or less artificially enclosed areas like China and Palestine-where broad-mindedness, the universal brotherhood of man, the love of one's neighbour, and other superior forms of claptrap were unknown. Furthermore, we know that where intercourse with the outside
* The substance of a paper read before the Eugenics Society on July i8th, I933.

world, with the neighbour, is checked, the secluded people are condemned to inbreeding and close inbreeding; indeed, in the only
cultures that have left a permanent mark on the world, we find not only inbreeding, but
also a strong conscious tendency to keep
apart, to segregate. This tendency caused not only a frontier of prejudice to spring up between the secluded nation and the world, but also a series of frontiers within the
nation itself, dividing off classes and castes, so
that within the inbred mass, smaller inbred
classes were formed. It would seem as if men who had acquired
a set of special qualities possessed an instinct
to keep aloof from anyone who could adulterate these qualities. In healthy cultivated man, this instinct is so pronounced as to be
a matter of common knowledge. Even among the primitive peoples, it has been noticed by scores of observers. Among the peoples principally responsible for civilization -the Egyptians, the Jews, and the Greeksthe abhorrence of the stranger was so great that the very word for stranger was a term of opprobrium. And each of these peoples was not only inbred but incestuous.
Can there be any connection between these sets of facts-the fact that these peoples created our civilization, the fact that they lived in enclosed areas, and the fact that they were closely inbred and incestuous? There is a marked prejudice against consanguineous and particularly against incestuous matings in the modern world. Is it possible that like other superstitions, like the belief in the superiority of the psyche over the soma, it is based on ancient magic ? If it is, it is important to get rid of it, because the people who were responsible for civilizing the world were probably greater than a people like ourselves who have left no stone unturned
in order to decivilize it.

'47

I48 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

GENETICS OF BREEDING

the health and physical harmony of his off-

Breeding is the process of producing a new spring become a more or less calculable

individual by the conjunction of two germ certainty if he is mated with his like.

cells, male and female. In random-bred If, however, inbreeding occurs in a stock

stocks, the hereditary equipment of the hitherto random-bred, it must be obvious

couple is different. Each contains factors or that, since deleterious factors are always

developmental determiners of a kind dif- latent in the germ-plasm of such a stock,

ferent from the other. In mixed breeding, similar morbid factors may be brought

therefore, one can picture the process of together by joining a male and female of the

their conjunction as an intermingling of wools same family. This, it is true, quickly elimin-

not only of different sets of colours, but of ates the " unlucky strokes," and purifies the

different quality; and, as in random-bred stock. But the process may be expensive.

stocks there is always latent in the germ Its expense will be proportionate to the

plasm much that is deleterious, we must amount of latent morbidity in the stock.

imagine some of these wools as being It is important to remember, however,

diseased or morbid.

that random-breeding and mixed breeding

Mixed breeding from a pair taken at do not eliminate bad hereditary factors from

random in an unstabilized stock has three a stock, but merely cover them up. While

principal results. It may, by a stroke of luck, inbreeding does not create bad hereditary

produce a new individual who is harmonious, factors, but merely tends to bring them out.

i.e. who presents a symmetrical pattern, and This is roughly what science has to say

who is free from morbid manifestations; it about the two methods of breeding. It was

may, and usually does, produce an individual all perfectly plain eighty years ago. If the

who is inharmonious; and if, by a similar biologists of the nineteenth century had

chance conjunction to that which united the looked at history and life, they would have

health-determining factors in the lucky seen that Nature was, as far as we can tell,

individual, the ill-health determining factors almost everywhere striving by inbreeding to

happen to unite, it may produce an individual produce the desirable state of homozygosity,

with some more or less grave morbid mani- and had implanted instincts in Man and most

festation. It should, however, always be beasts to that effect.

remembered that even the lucky individual who looks healthy and sound in a random- CONSANGUINEOUS MATING IN ANIMALS

bred stock, bears in his hereditary equipment What about the actual practice of Nature

the deleterious elements common to the and the breeder of animals? In the first

stock which produced his less-fortunate place, we know that the closest inbreeding

brothers.

occurs in some plants-for example, the

In inbred stocks the hereditary equipment common blue violet, garden beans, the many

of the breeding pair is the same-i.e. except species of the small evening primrose-in

probably for sex, each has the same factors which the egg-cells are fertilized by pollen

for determining the characters of the progeny. produced by the same individual. Self-

Moreover, since inbreeding favours the fertilization is also the rule in wheat, oats,

mendelizing out of determiners for develop- and the majority of other cereal crops-the

mental defects, and since, in an inbred stock most important of cultivated plants. The

which has reached stability or become com- process cannot, therefore, be attended by

pletely homozygous, morbidity-determining evil results, at least to these plants, otherwise

factors have been eliminated, the new in- they would not be with us to-day.

dividual, except in the case of a morbid Turning to animals, we find in them no

mutation, is unlikely to be morbid. He is instinctive safeguard against incestuous mat-

likely to be harmonious and healthy, his ing. Reproduction in rats, mice, rabbits and

morphological characters afford some definite other rodents, according to Dr. Briffault,

indication of his hereditary equipment, and takes place without any regard for relation-

EUGENICS AND CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES

ship, and these animals are notorious for their New Zealand, the cattle of South America

fertility and vigour. Among antelopes in- all offspring of a few individuals let loose on

cestuous matings are the rule. The African the soil. According to Harnady a classical

reedbuck, for instance, has two young at a example of a stock of animals bred from only

birth, male and female, which mate together three ancestors is afforded by the red deer of

when mature. Only when one happens to die New Zealand. The original three specimens

by accident does out- or cross-breeding occur. were introduced from England in I864, and

Brehm Strassen says this is true of the only ten years ago the herd numbered 5,000.

smaller antelopes also, and MacDonald says Yet they show no signs of disease but are

it is true of the red deer. Lyddeker claims indeed superior in vigour and constitution

brother and sister mating for the tiger. to the original parent stock.

Among African buffaloes, Seton says, breed-

ing occurs mainly among the immediate offspring of the same cow. The cattle from La

THE EXPERIENCE OF BREEDERS

Plata in the Falkland Islands, not only The evidence from the practice of ex-

quickly multiplied from a few individuals, perienced breeders conclusively points to the

but also broke up into smaller herds accord- best results being obtained from the closest

ing to colour, and the close inbreeding out of inbreeding.

which the race sprang was thus intensified by But, just as natural selection eliminates

the animals' own instincts. Rengger reports individuals which are the outcome of two

the same conditions of horses in Paraguay polluted streams becoming confluent in con-

and Circassia. Darwin himself, after enumer- sanguineous unions, so the wise breeder,

ating a number of cases of close consanguine- imitating Nature's way, carefully weeds out

ous mating in cattle, sheep, and antelopes, unhappy specimens. If morbid or lethal

says " almost all the animals as yet mentioned factors still exist in the stock's germ-plasm,

are gregarious, and the males most frequently and they happen to come together from both

pair with their own daughters, for they expel sides in the mating of close relatives, then

the young males as well as all intruders." instead of a confluence of rivers of pure

According to Dr. A. C. Brehm, the nature water, a confluence of impure streams

of the troop among monkeys makes constant occurs, which results in a stream doubly

matings between the head of the horde and contaminated.

his daughters, sisters and other close relations But it is remarkable that owing to the

wholly inevitable, and in fact among all poly- ethico-theological superstition against in-

gamous animals, whether gorilla, wild boar, breeding and incest, bad and ignorant

or elephant, the leading male must enjoy the breeders have, until recently, always ascribed

favours of his daughters, grand-daughters, to close inbreeding per se, and not to the

and great-grand-daughters, so long as he is pollution of the confluent streams, the

able to keep other males away. Nor, as Huth disappointing results of their methods-so

points out, does the incest cease when he is at much so, indeed, that not only Darwin, who

last turned out; because the first in the field consulted many such ignorant breeders, but

will most probably be his own sons and grand- countless other authorities, took it for

sons. granted that inbreeding must be bad, par-

A new, and recently authenticated, case of ticularly as it was forbidden by the Table of

naturally determined incest, appears to have Affinities.

been discovered by the British Museum Settegast, in i868, in Germany, took an

Expedition to the Gobi Desert in I929, when even stronger stand than Darwin against in-

a bird, the Eornis Pterovelox Gobiensis, was breeding, with the result, as Kronacher

found, which hatches twins at each birth, a shows, that for fifty years nobody ever heard

male and a female, and these same individuals of a reputable breed of German cattle or

later mate and are monogamous. We also horses. And it was only when de Chapeau-

know the rabbits of Australia, the pigs of rouge and Lehndorff reversed Settegast's

150 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

theological prejudices that Germany began daughter's daughter's daughter. The product

once again to produce reputable strains of of this last union had 93 75 per cent. of

animals.

Favourite's blood in her, and was put to the

Apart from all theorists, however, know- bull Wellington, who had 625 per cent. of

ledgeable breeders all over the world have Favourite's blood. This union produced

from time immemorial practised inbreeding, Clarissa, an admirable cow, who with the

accompanied by careful selection. As long bull Lancaster (having 68-75 per cent. of

ago as I823, N. H. Smith, a famous breeder, Favourite's blood in his veins) produced the

long resident among the Arabs, wrote: " I celebrated cow Restless.

cannot say how often an incestuous breed may be carried on before degeneracy occurs,

FURTHER EXPERIMENTAL DATA

as I am not aware of that being the case in Such was the practice of Nature's ex-

any instance, and experience is in favour of perienced breeders when Darwin wrote the

breeding from son and mother, father and first authoritative book on breeding, and yet

daughter." And it is this incestuous stock so great was the ethico-religious bias of the

that has given our race-horses some of their day that, although he recognized crossing as

finest qualities. The Clydesdale breed of a cause of degeneracy, he concluded that too

horses, as Calder shows, is also closely inbred, close consanguinity must lead to weakness,

8o or 90 per cent. of the horses in the recent sterility and greater susceptibility to disease.

volumes of the Shire Stud Book going back Overlooking a good deal of what experi-

in direct line to three stallions, living 6o or 70 enced breeders said, and all the historical and

years ago-William the Conqueror, Lincoln- anthropological evidence, other nineteenth-

shire Lad, and Matchless. Among dog- century scientists seem to have been in-

breeders, de Chapeaurouge produced a closely fluenced by the cases where the inbreeding of

inbred stock of pugs with complete success. tainted stocks had, of course, led to bad

N. H. Gentry reports from America a suc- results. Moreover, they performed experi-

cessfully inbred stock of Berkshire pigs, ments of their own, which, astonishing as it

while a Dutch landowner recently reared a may seem, without exception proved that

stock of middle white breed without any evil inbreeding was harmful, thus confirming the

results from one imported boar and two sows. following of Darwin's findings:

Kronacher, starting with one male and three females (a mother and two daughters) bred a stock of ordinary goats, in and in for eight generations, without any loss of size, physical development, milking capacity, fertility or vitality. Indeed their fertility tended to increase. And he declares that in this case he

(a) That the consequences of close inbreeding were loss of size, constitutional vigour, and fertility.
(b) That the crossing of animals and plants not closely related was highly bene-
ficial and even necessary.

practised no selection whatever.

Recently these conclusions began to be

In cattle the success of close inbreeding is doubted. In I9I6 Professor Castle stated

so startling that Darwin felt compelled to that he had successfully bred Drosophila,

suggest that some exception to Nature's brother and sister, for 59 generations, with-

supposed law against incest must have been out obtaining any diminution in either vigour

made in their favour! The famous cow or fertility. Moenkhaus crossed the same fly,

Restless came of the most persistent in- brother and sister, for 75 generations, without

breeding. The bull Bolingbroke, with his harmful consequences. Hyde and Schultze

half-sister Phoenix, produced the bull Fav- achieved the same result with mice. Castle

ourite. Favourite, with his mother, produced tried rats, and Popenoe guinea-pigs, and both

the cow Young Phoenix, a celebrated animal. concluded that no deleterious effects could be

With his daughter, Favourite then produced ascribed to the system of mating. King

the famous bull Comet. He was then put to experimented with white rats, mating brother

his daughter's daughter, and again to his and sister regularly for 22 generations, and

EUGENICS AND CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES

among these inbred rats some were obtained
which proved actually superior to the stock rats from which they had sprung. The males were I5 per cent. heavier, and the females 3 per cent., while the fertility was nearly 8
per cent. higher. Commenting on these experiments, Rice
says: "These results lead to the very definite suspicion that the earlier investigators unconsciously selected the animals in such a way as to lead to the diminished fertility and vitality, or else even used defective strains in their experiments." According to Crew, " Consanguinity itself is no bar to mating. If inbreeding results in disappointment, all that has happened is that that which previously was hidden in a heterozygous stock has now been brought to the surface. Inbreeding is only disastrous if the ingredients of disaster are already in the stock. If inbreeding exposes the undesirable, it equally thoroughly emphasizes the desirable, and the desirable will breed true when complete homozygosis in respect of these characters is attained." Thus to be successful, inbreeding must be attended with the most rigorous selection.
As a formula for the respective effects of inbreeding and out- or cross-breeding, I suggest the following:
Inbreeding canalizes and isolates health and desirable qualities, just as it canalizes and isolates ill-health and undesirable qualities. Cross-breeding conceals and spreads illhealth and undesirable qualities, and thus contaminates desirable stocks. But it also tends to improve poor or degenerate stocks at the expense of sound stock.
INCEST IN MAN
In discussing the problem in relation to Man, it is interesting to recall how far the endogamic instincts of cultivated human stocks led to intensive inbreeding within certain groups. In Egypt, in addition to the national endogamy which forbade mixing with the foreigner, incestuous unions prevailed both among the people and within the ruler groups. In the golden age of the Theban Empire, seven kings in the Eighteenth Dynasty married their sisters; in the Nine-

teenth all but three did so; in the Twentieth
every king married his sister. Kings married their sisters in the Sixteenth, Thirteenth and
Twelfth Dynasties, and as early as the
Fourth. And when the Lagidae ruled Egypt,
they could not afford to disregard this
ancien-t custom. Thus Cleopatra, whose wit,
beauty and intelligence are proverbial, was the daughter of a brother and sister, great-
grand-daughter of another brother and sister,
and a great-great-grand-daughter of Berenice
who was both cousin and sister to her husband. Egypt declined only when her
endogamic fences broke down.
Persia, strictly endogamic, had an incestu-
ous royal house, and the Magian aristocracy married their mothers, daughters and sisters.
According to Robertson Smith, the Phoenicians, and according to P6rier the Assyrians, were regularly incestuous, as were also the Scythians and the Tartars. The Jews, also an endogamic people, were surrounded by nations who were all mating consanguineously for the sake of purity, and probably health, too. It is likely, therefore, that at least the aristocrats among the Jews also practised incest, in spite of the table of prohibited degrees. Incestuous practices are known to have been common in the Siamese aristocracy, among the Arabs who allowed them
down to Mahomed's time, and among the Burmese, Cambodians and Mongols.
In Britain, as late as the fifth century, we find Vortigern marrying his own daughter. Nor could the practice have been condemned, since the issue of this sinful union was none
other than St. Faustus. According to Strabo, the ancient Irish married without distinction their mothers and sisters, and Heineccius tells us it was customary for the ancient Germans to marry their sisters. There is overwhelming evidence that the Peruvians were strictly endogamic. The proud Incas, refusing to mix their blood, married their sisters; and.it is said that the so]diers and nobility customarily followed the royal example.
As to more recent instances of incest
among human beings, I have collected accounts of no less than thirty primitive communities in which incest was practised

I52 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

when they were first visited, but here I can first-cousin marriages, and the latter are even

do no more than refer to them, as also to the said to be dying out, while the former have a

monographs of authorities like Shapiro, higher birth rate and greater vitality.

Rodenwaldt, Fischer, and Voisin on such According to Junghuhn the Bataks of

closely inbred, though originally crossed Sumatra, who also habitually marry their

stocks as the Pitcairn islanders, the Kisar first-cousins, are the finest people in the

Hybrids, the Bastards of Rehoboth, and the Indian Archipelago. The chiefs in Polynesia

people of the island of Batz, all of whom are and New Zealand have all been noticed for

examples of almost contemporary experi- their superior height, looks and vigour. And

ments in human breeding with close con- throughout Polynesia the closest consan-

sanguinity without harmful results. Con- guinity occurs in mating among the chiefs.

cluding his study of the hybrids of Kisar, There can, therefore, be but little doubt

Rodenwaldt says: "We are surely entitled that Man is as capable as some of the animals

to conclude that men in the past have been of thriving on close consanguineous matings,

too hasty in ascribing to the consequences of if the streams that become confluent are

consanguinity what were really the result of pure; in fact that when once a human stock

environmental influences."

has become quite pure close inbreeding is

Thus we have seen that Man, like some of the only means of maintaining it so.

the animals, seems to have an instinct

impelling him to canalize qualities acquired BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF MISCEGENA-

with pains. It seems as if it were a law of

TION

Nature, not, as Darwin thought, to have I cannot enter now into the history of the

crosses, but to avoid them. Even in those controversy that has raged between the

tribes and races where incest is illegal, we advocates of inbreeding and their opponents.

often find the rulers or chiefs deliberately I cannot do more than affirm that none of

infringing the prohibited degrees to keep their the ancients had the faintest notion that it

blood pure. For instance in Burmah, mar- could be condemned on biological grounds.

riage with half-sisters is forbidden, but the Even to-day hardly any two authorities

King always marries his half-sister. In Siam agree as to why inbreeding and incest were

the people may not marry nearer relatives condemned among many peoples, at least for

than third cousins, but the King may marry the populace, and profound students, like Sir

his sister and his daughter. The same is true James Frazer, Ernest Crawley, Malinowski

of the higher classes in Cambodia, of the and Freud, account for the condemnation,

chiefs of the Marianne and Ladrone Islands, each in his own way.

in Hawaii, Nukuhiva, Tahiti and Madagas- The moment, of course, that men began to

car, and it was also true of the Northern think biologically, it is easy to see why they

American Indians of New England. In fact, were prompt in ascribing to divine wisdom a

as the Kalmucks say, " Great folk and dogs rule which, when broken by badly tainted

have no relatives." Nor are the people addic- stocks, appeared to lead to havoc. They

ted to these practices degenerate or diseased; reasoned that the havoc was due to the con-

on the contrary, all travellers conunent on sanguinity, and did not know it was due to

their great vigour and beauty.

the confluence of two tainted streams. And

There is even a case of a people living, thus, arguing backwards, they justified

more or less in a state of Nature, who, pseudo-scientifically a rule that had once

according to Sir Basil Thomson, are actually arisen for no biological reason whatever.

benefited by inbreeding. Among this people What do inbreeding and outbreeding or

-the Fijians-those stocks which have cross-breeding respectively mean to the

adhered to the ancestral custom requiring health of a people ? It is impossible to separ-

first-cousin marriages, are very much the ate the psychological from the physiological;

superiors from every physical point of view but Charles Darwin and many others, who

of those who no longer practise, or else forbid, contrive to do so, agree that outbreeding,

EUGENICS AND CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES

I53

cross-breeding and miscegenation are in- fresh light remains to be shed on the etiology

jurious to the mental and moral qualities of of dysfunction.

a race or variety.

Any intelligent man facing the facts could

Random breeding may destroy mental have come a priori to the conclusion science

harmony by combining in one individual is reaching to-day. For, if breeding is the

emotional reflexes which may be, and often conjunction of two cells and their production

are, conflicting. In this sense, the extreme of a new individual can be pictured, as I

random breeding of to-day is probably not pictured it in the opening, as the intertwining

unconnected with the increase in mental of two sets of wools, then it seems elementary

instability and possibly,ltoo, with the increase that, if harmony and beauty are to be the

in insanity and mental defectiveness. In result, the wools should come from parents

fact, it is probable that to-day not one of us who, apart from sexual differences, have at

knows the supremely exalted and exhilarat- least the same hereditary equipment. Other-

ing feelings of a being who is thoroughly wise something inharmonious must result,

harmonious and healthy because he is inbred. something in conflict with itself not only in

The chief effects of miscegenation on the the morphological sense, but also in instincts

constitution are: firstly, degeneracy, by the and impulses as well; and in a living

reversion that is induced; secondly, dys- organism, discord and disparate parts mean

function and disease owing to the production ill-health, mental instability, degeneracy.

of individuals whose bodies are discordant jumbles of parts from various unlike stocks;

"DISHARMONIES " DUE TO OUT-

and thirdly, increasing morbidity, owing to

BREEDING

the fact that there is no canalization of The evidence confirmatory of these views

disease, none of health, and deleterious is very disquieting. For example, Professor

hereditary factors are spread even among Lundborg tells us that in the lower jaw alone

sound stocks. Let me take these in their two parts can be inherited independently:

order.

the angle of the jaw from one parent and the

Darwin and others have shown that out- chin from the other. He further declares that

breeding and cross-breeding lead to reversion, there are at least four different parts of the

or at least to the loss of acquired characteris- nose that can be inherited independently, and

tics, which is the same thing. This has been that cross-breeding, or out-breeding, fre-

demonstrated in pigeons, ducks, horses and quently leads to defects in the endocrine

other animals. Darwin claimed that it was balance of the body. Davenport and others

so in Man. It may, as Otto Seeck maintains, have found that the size of the jaw and of the

have caused the rapid decline of the ancient teeth can be independently inherited. But,

Greeks and Romans. But I think I have said as Davenport points out, and as was obvious

enough to show that culture and civilization to me twenty years ago, if parts of the jaw

have been almost exclusively the creation of and nose can be inherited independently,

inbred stocks, and therefore to lead to the why not other parts of the body, so that

view that the present age of extremely when the parents are unlike, or display any

random breeding must or should be an age disparity in build, size, or constitution, there

of disintegration and decay.

may follow all kinds of disparities in the

The fact that out- and cross-breeding must organs-a heart too small or too large, a liver

lead to ill-health often of the most obscure out of all proportion to the intestine, and so

and undiagnosible kind, by producing dis- on. And Davenport, in studying the mis-

cordant individuals-or to put it moderately, cegenation in the North and South of

the fact that miscegenation and random America, says that this is what actually

breeding cannot lead to such perfect health happens. In this population there are tall

as inbreeding and incest-has not yet been men with internal organs too small, or cir-

recognized by medicine, but it soon must be. culatory system inadequate, and short men

And here I suggest an enormous amount of with similar disharmonies.

I54 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In Hirschsprung's disease, which leads to A further reason for condemning out- and

stubborn constipation, the colon is out of all cross-breeding is that they disseminate

proportion to the size of the sufferer; in taints; they do not get rid of deleterious

congenital dislocation of the hip, a condition factors. Darbishire's experiments have

which, according to Bryn, is unusually clearly shown that a recessive gene, although

common among miscegenated stocks, there it may be associated with its dominant

is a disproportion between the ball of the allelomorph for generations, and made in-

femur and the socket in the pelvis. Dr. active, is not influenced by this long associa-

Kathleen Vaughan and others think that the tion and loses none of its effectiveness. So

fundamental cause of obstetrical difficulty is that random and mixed breeding, in addition

lack of accord between the foetal head and to causing psycho-physical disharmony,

the maternal pelvis; while the condition merely covers up tracks and hands on

known as heterochromia also gives rise to deleterious factors. In a biological prole-

trouble in one eye.

tariat like the population of modem England,

But these are extreme cases. How much in which most stocks possess the utmost

of the subacute and chronic dysfunction we variety of morbid factors, mixed breeding

see to-day may not be due to less pronounced merely conceals taints until the cumulative

disharmonies of this kind, because of our effect produces total degeneration or lethal

rooted bias in favour of mixed and random disease. As Professor Castle says: " Con-

breeding ?

tinuous crossing only tends to hide inherent

Although to-day in England and Europe, defects, not to exterminate them, and in-

we may be no longer concerned with actual breeding only tends to bring them to the

races, but only with populations, within surface, not to create them."

these populations the utmost confusion of

types prevails. There is complete confusion PRACTICAL PROPOSALS

of different sizes, shapes and symmetries. I suggest, therefore, not only that we are

And this " biological proletariat," forbidden in need of a purification of our stocks, but

incest, and led by magic prejudice to avoid that by prolonging our present method of

even cousin marriages, cannot help producing random and mixed breeding, we are merely

generation after generation of people who living on, and destroying, the health capital

must inevitably suffer from all the conse- still represented by our uncontaminated

quences of mental and bodily disharmony. stocks. While there is yet time we must

True, Rodenwaldt discovered that there canalize our healthy streams and canalize our

appeared to be a limit to the independent morbid streams. And if we cannot compel

inheritance of psycho-physical characters. the unhealthy not to breed, and cannot

He says that he was led to ask the question guarantee the healthy spouses worthy of

whether a limit did not exist to the characters them, let us at least encourage both lots to

which remain correlated in crossing, and to marry their like or else make them do so.

the characters which crossing allotted at The simplest way to accomplish this end

random.

is not to found research councils and then to

But even if, on his authority, we conclude wait patiently until endless experiments at

that psycho-physical characters are as a rule last provide the criteria for artificial human

handed on in groups which prevent a too selection-for this process may last so long

frequent occurrence of lethal combinations, that at the end of the work we may be too

on his own showing, an enormous number of degenerate to wish to avail ourselves of the

psycho-physical characters are inherited knowledge derived from it. The simplest

independently, and can therefore combine in way is to break down the barriers now pre-

the child of disparate parents to produce all venting the mating of close relatives, to make

kinds of mental and physical maladjustments it plain to all that these barriers are based on

-a fact confirmed by Lenz, Lundborg, magic, and to spread a new feeling and a new

Fischer, Ruggles Gates and others.

prejudice through the world, which will be

EUGENICS AND CONSANGUINEOUS MARRIAGES

I55

against the marriage of unlike or unrelated tainted or morbid stocks, so that disease and

people.

deleterious hereditary factors should become

This policy would have the effect of canalized as soon as possible, it would

immediately canalizing desirability and un- probably be wise to delay for a generation or

desirability, and would straightway separate two an immediate recourse to the closest

the sheep from the goats. True, the deaths consanguinity in sound stocks, because of the

from disease and the incidence of insanity in fear of over-rapidly isolating strains with a

the unsound stocks would be heavy, and it too limited set of desirable qualities; and

would require the utmost courage to go on. for such stocks it would probably be advis-

But English people do not usually lack the able to be content with using pressure to

courage to pursue the things they want. The obtain as many first-, second-, and third-

question is, do they really want health and cousin marriages as possible for a little while.

sanity ? Or are they already too debilitated But for both schemes, a new and very

to care ?

enlightened attitude will have to be adopted

Between I925 and I930, 29,I32 people by modem mankind, and much latter-day

were killed in England and Wales by motor magic will have to be axed. For it is probable

vehicles of all kinds; 5,3I9 of these were that a scheme of canalization of disease and

children under ten. In spite of this high and health would not be practicable without

utterly futile death rate from cars, there has artificial selection accompanied by legalized

been no national protest. Why? Because infanticide for the worst products of the

English people want cars, and are quite pre- diseased stocks.

pared to see 30,000 other people sacrificed in Many years ago, long before a number of

five years in order to get what they want. the facts I have laid before you were known

But do English people want health and to me, I read a paper before the British

sanity to the same degree ? Are they pre- Society for the Study of Sex Psychology, in

pared to sacrifice constructively and usefully which I answered affirmatively the question:

more people than they now sacrifice uselessly Would a revival of incest not be the salvation

for the motor car? It may be doubted. of modem man? I was, of course, jeered at.

There is no reason, however, to suppose But it may interest you to know the views

that it would necessarily be an expensive of an eminent biologist on this very point.

experiment in the healthy stocks. The investigations of G. H. Darwin into the results of first-cousin marriages, even among
random-bred and deeply contaminated stock, revealed a surprisingly low incidence of
morbidity. In fact, he discovered that the
percentage of offspring from cousin marriages to be found in asylums is no greater than the
percentage of offspring from non-related persons; and as regards fertility, he found that the balance was slightly in favour of cousin marriages.
Truth to tell, from the point of view of

Writing in I927, Professor Crew of Edin-
burgh said: " Inbreeding is only disastrous
if the ingredients of disaster are already in the stock. Inbreeding will purify a stock, but the process may be most expensive. It would seem to be a fact, sufficiently secure for the foundation of sociological practice, that
incest between individuals of undoubtedly sound stock is a sound biological proposi-
tion." But it may be a long time before mankind,
in these democratic times, so hopelessly

sound eugenic policy, while incestuous mat- under the sway of magic, will see the wisdom

ing might immediately be encouraged among of this course.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 3.

