THE ASCERTAINMENT OF PROMISING FAMILIES*

By SIR CHARLES DARWIN, K.B.E., F.R.S.

W E have ventured to come here on behalf of the Eugenics Society in the hope of getting your advice,
and also I hope the help of some of you, in a project that we are trying to get going. We call it the Promising Families project, but to explain what this means you must allow me to go a little way back into the past.
The Eugenics Society was founded some fifty years ago, and its aim is to study the possibilities of benefiting humanity, through working on the inherent qualities of the human species. There are a great many organisations-including our national government-which aim at making us all better and happier, but this they try to do entirely by controlling external conditions. We try to look deeper, being moved to this by the consideration that natural selection, which is Nature's method of keeping any species of animal up to the mark-if I may so put it-is a brutal method, and that in fact the mere controlling of external conditions is wholly directed towards destroying the influence of natural selection, that is to say it is tending not to keep us up to the mark. We fear therefore that there may be a danger that, under present conditions, generation by generation, the human species may be becoming steadily stupider and lazier, and weaker in character, and it is the aim of our Society to study how such a trend should be combated.
Francis Galton, the founder of the subject of eugenics, gave a phrase which embodies these ideas so admirably that it has been adopted as the motto of our Society. He said " Man is gifted with pity and other kindly feelings; he has also the power of preventing many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall well within his province to replace Natural
* An address given on behalf of the Eugenics Society at the Thirty-eighth Co.nference of Educational Associations, December 30th I954 to January 5th I955.

Selection by other processes that are more
merciful and not less effective. This is pre-
cisely the aim of eugenics." This is precisely the aim of eugenics, and
it is the aim of our Society to see how far it
is possible to carry it out. The essential
matter that we think about is one that plays
rather a small part in the general planning
of the human world. It is heredity, because
it is by encouraging the better members of
the community to have more children, and
the worse members less, that we may hope to replace the action of natural selection in the
way proposed by Galton. There is of course
by now a lot of fairly deep knowledge about the laws of heredity, but there is no need to think about them, because in fact we all do know that a child is rather more likely to resemble its own parents than somnebody
else's parents. As to personal appearance this is obvious, but I think -most sensible people will agree that it also applies to things like character and intelligence. There is of course nothing absolute about it ; just as ugly parents may sometimes produce beautiful children, so stupid parents may sometimes have intelligent children, and vice
versa. But in spite of this it is true more often than not that the good will reproduce the good, and the bad the bad, and that is quite enough to work on. It is with this background of thought about the importance of the family that we have embarked on our
present project. It is obvious that a small Society like ours
cannot hope by itself to accomplish much in the way of actually changing the world, but we think we could help by discovering ways in which it might be done, so that if some other larger body-even perhaps the government-should some day adopt a eugenic policy, we could tell them how to implement it. We would like to be able to

I7

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
tell them how to discover which are the really provides them with better housing, the only valuable types of family which should be effect is to turn that into a slum too. encouraged to multiply, and conversely for We now want to turn our attention the other end of the scale, the bad families to the other end of the scale, and we have that are to be discouraged. Now it is easy adopted the name Promising Families, as for any of us to think over our acquaintances Contrasted with Problem Families. We have and decide to which of them either of these of course always had in mind to do this sort rules should apply, but that is not enough. of thing but, as I have said, it is a very much We want to discover a much more objective more difficult matter to work on, and the way of " ascertaining" who the families more you look at it the harder it is seen to be. of either type-are, if possible on something It is not a bit like judging race-horses, for like a national scale, because only so would there you can see both which horse wins and the results be practically useful. In attempt- which comes in last. The breed of raceing this we have to reckon that the results horses has been improved-and indeed to a will not by any means be perfect-we shall quite remarkable degree during as short a miss some, and shall accept some that we time as the past two centuries-by sending ought to have rejected-but we would like the winner to the stud, and by ensuring that to know whether we cannot find the majority the horse that ends last leaves no offof them. If we could get results that were spring. The first of these things is obviously seventy or eighty per cent right, that would, the more important, and we would like to do on statistical principles, be quite good enough. the same for humanity, but it is a very differ-
There are two ends to the problem; what ent business deciding what human beings I may call the good end and the bad end, and have won the race of life, compared to the I. think you will see that it is very much horses that win races, whereas it is fairly easier to treat of the bad end. This is because easy to see which people can certainly be you can get an easy start in it through classified as ending last in the race of life. Police records, the special schools, slums It is easy to have a standard of badness and so on. Our Society very rightly started that will be accepted by all responsible at this easy end, because one can thus expect people, but for a standard of goodness there quicker results, and ever since then it has will never be the same agreement. Some directed attention to the disastrous way in people value intelligence highest, some which the feeble-minded children of feeble- strength of character, some virtuous conduct, minded parents were being carefully pre- and some such things as good health, good served, so that they should be able to grow physique or the capacity to acquire skill in up and carry on the same good work for one of the arts or in games. Undoubtedly themselves. I think we may claim to have we should like to have a race of perfect played an important part in waking the human beings possessing all these qualities, country up to the existence of this state of but that is not the question because we affairs, but it has now certainly got into the certainly shall not get it. But fortunately general consciousness, and there are other it does not seem necessary to make any exact organisations considering how to deal with choice between this list of rival merits. In it by some form of control or legislation. the first place we take the line that there I need hardly say more about this side of is no point in thinking about the most the subject, but I may mention that one superior people of all ; they cannot be kept of our recent activities has been a study of down and will reveal themselves anyhow, what we call Problem Families, by which and you have to recognise that even if some we mean families above the feeble-minded people like the " village Hampden " of level, but so low-grade that dealing with Gray's Elegy are going to be missed, it would them is an important problem to their be, out of all proportion, difficult to try and betters. They are the sort of people who live devise any system for the task of finding in slums, and if a benevolent municipality them. Of course we should not reject any

THE ASCERTAINMENT OF PROMISING FAMILIES

such people that we did find, but we have school-days of moral force of character and of

made up our minds that we are not thinking instincts to lead and to take an interest in his

about budding Shakespeares or Newtons or school-mates. Fondness for sport. There is

Churchills.

of course nothing sacred about these defini-

Our interest, then, is not at all in the tions, but they do give a very good descrip-

supreme geniuses, but rather to find how easy tion of what I will call the " valuable

it is to " ascertain" the distinctly lower, citizen; I would have said simply " good

but still immensely valtiable part of the citizen " if that term were allowed to have its

population, say something like the top fifth true meaning, and were not likely to be

of the community. We very definitely do taken, as it sometimes is nowadays as a term

not want to pick out any special quality of slightly contemptuous abuse.

at the expense of the rest, but rather we want How are we to start these families? The

to accept any combination of the generally chief question is to know where to start.

meritorious qualities which will be accepted We do not want to be open to the charge of

by most reasonable people. We want to favouritism by simply looking round for

discover the Promising Families, but for them, and this anyhow could not work on

reasons I shall explain later we plan that the anything like a national scale. We want a

starting point should be promising pupils at good objective start, and this we hope to get

school. This is to give us our start, but our with your help. We are proposing to ask

aim is very definitely not merely to be able the headmasters of the schools of a few

to say " I know that this boy promises to be districts to nominate some of their pupils

a valuable citizen," but the rather different as having the sort of superior qualities that I

matter " I know that this boy is a member have mentioned. We definitely do not want

of a family which is likely to produce a lot an automatic nomination of the pupils at

of valuable citizens." This is our aim, and the top of each class, though I expect that a

we hope we may in this way be able to get a good many of those nominated will be near it,

line on the way to discover Promising Fami- because after all intelligence and application

lies, for if we succeed, it may be that one and interest in school work are qualities

day some larger organisation would say which go to make up the valuable whole

" We like these promising families so much man ; but we certainly want attention

that we will endow them so that they may given to the other qualities enumerated by

produce more children for the succeeding Rhodes, in particular the type of quality

generations."

that goes with leadership. There are also

As I have said we want to keep the field other qualities he did not enumerate that

broad, that is to say, we do not want simply many people would want to include, for

to pick the boy at the top of the class, though example artistic ability, and these we should

we do not in the least want to under-rate certainly accept as part of a qualification

that as.one of his merits. We are looking for nomination. What we do not want is

for much wider good qualities than that, the type of boy whom his masters think

such as capacity for leadership and for to be intelligent, yet who is always at the

co-operation with his fellows and so on. bottom of the class, not because he has other

In fact, broadly speaking, the selection we over-riding interests but just because he is

are aiming at is for all or any of the qualities too lazy to try. In fact we want to leave the

that we most of us do value in our fellow choice really quite open to the schoolmasters

men. -Now it happens that a very fair who are making the selection and we shall

prescription of this kind was given long ago welcome a good deal of variation in the

by Cecil Rhodes when he founded his types of choice they may make, so long as

scholarships; He prescribed: literary and the selectors are genuinely of the opinion

scholastic ability and attainments ; qualities that the boys they are nominating are the

of truth, courage, devotion to duty, unselfish- best in their schools in the general sense I

ness and fellowship ; exhibition during have tried to describe.

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

One other point may be mentioned. It naires have not been answered spontaneously.

will sometimes happen that the master is I need hardly say that the whole business is

acquainted with the parents of a boy he is to be absolutely confidential. We will very

thinking of nominating, and this might willingly show the master a blank copy of the

influence him in his choice, for he may well questionnaire, but not the answers of the

himself feel that the family is promising parents. These will be kept secret and will be

or the reverse. In so far as it is possible, we dealt with statistically by a classification of

would like this not to happen. We would the answers into groups, which we hope will

prefer the judgment made on the boy him- show us how to find the Promising Families.

self, because only if that is done is the That is the outline of our scheme, but I

comparison fair between him and another would like to make a point that may not have

boy whose parents are unknown to the emerged from what I have said. 'One of the

schoolmaster.

great advantages of English over most other

To give an idea of the size we contemplate languages is its abolition of grammatical

for our list, we are thinking of something genders, but the abolition is not complete,

like five per cent. of the school. As to their because we still have no single word for

ages we propose that they should not be " he-or-she " or " his-or-her." If I had

younger than about eight, because it would actually used " he-or-she " in all I have

be hard to recognise easily the qualities been saying the result would have been quite

we demand until that age. As upper limit intolerably clumsy, and I have therefore

we fix twelve or thirteen, but for quite a spoken as though the nominees were all

different reason. The reason is that the male, which I certainly did not mean. So

ultimate aim of the inquiry is to find you must believe that I had in mind a sort

families which ought to be encouraged to of grammatical Sex Disability Act implying

have more children because of the excellence sex equality ; girls are just as good as boys

of those they have already produced, but by to act as the starting point in discovering

the time one of these children has reached Promising Families. This equality is par-

twelve or thirteen the parents would prob- ticularly true in our subject, because from

ably usually be unwilling to have any more. the genetical point of view the two sexes

We shall thus have fairly short lists of are of exactly equal importance whatever

pupils nominated by the headmasters to start the difference between them may be in

on. We call the selected pupils nominees. other things of life.

We then propose to approach the parents of We do not, of course, know what will be the

all the nominees with a questionnaire asking outcome of the inquiry. At the best we shall

about the circumstances of the family which find it easy to detect which of the nominees

are appropriate to our inquiry. The ques- really do lead us to be able to identify

tions ask about the careers of the parents Promising Families, and it will be important

themselves, and also outlines of the careers for us to know what fraction of them do.

of the fathers and mothers and the brothers At the worst we might be forced to the con-

and sisters of the parents. There are also clusion that, though we believe there are

questions about the brothers and sisters of such things as Promising Families, this is

the nominees, and it is hoped that permission not the way to discover them ; but there is

will be given by the parents for us to follow absolutely no reason to expect such a disap-

up the school careers of these. Though we pointing result. However we cannot tell

hope that most of the parents will be co- without trying ; and in our trial we hope we

operative, we are planning to have in each may interest some of you to help us, at any

district a local committee to follow the rate by criticism of our scheme to-day, and

matter up and to give help if the question- perhaps later by active co-operation.

