SIR JULIAN HUXLEY,
M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.
Eugeni*cs i0 n
Evolutionary Perspective*

I AM HONOURED AT having been twice asked to give the Eugenics Society's Galton Lecture. The first occasion was a quarter
of a century ago, when Lord Horder was our President, and I am proud of the remarks which he and my brother Aldous made about these.
Let me begin by broadly outlining how eugenics looks in our new evolutionary perspective. Man, like all other existing organisms, is as old as life. His evolution has taken close on three billion years. During that immense period he-the line of living substance leading to Homo sapienshas passed through a series of increasingly high levels of organization. His organization has been progressively improved, to use Darwin's phrase, from some submicroscopic gene-like state, through a unicellular to a two-layered and a metazoan stage, to a three-layered type with many organ-systems, including a central nervous system and simple brain, on to a chordate with notochord and gill-slits, to a jawless and limbless vertebrate, to a fish, then to an amphibian, a reptile, an unspecialized insectivorous mammal, a lemuroid, a monkey with much improved vision, heightened exploratory urge and manipulative ability, an ape-like creature, and finally through a protohominid australopith to a fully human creature, big-brained and capable of true speech.
This astonishing process of continuous advance and biological improvement has been brought about through the operation of natural selection-the differential reproduction of biologically beneficial combinations of mutant genes, leading to the persistence, improvement and multiplication of some strains, species and
* The Galton Lecture, delivered in London on
June 6th 1962.

patterns of organization and the reduction and extinction of others, notably to a succession of so-called dominant types, each achieving a highly successful new level of organization and causing the reduction of previous dominant types inhabiting the same environment. During its period of dominance, which may last up to a hundred million years or so, the new type itself becomes markedly improved, whether by specialization of single subtypes like the horses or elephants, or by an improvement in general organization, as happened with the mammalian type in general at the end of the Oligocene. Eventually no further improvement is possible, and further advance can only occur through the breakthrough of one line to a radically new type of organization, as from reptile to mammal.
In biologically recent times, one primate line broke through from the mammalian to the human type of organization. With this, the evolutionary process passed a critical point, and entered on a new state or phase, the psychosocial phase, differing radically from the biological in its mechanism, its tempo, and its results. As a result, man has become the latest dominant type in the evolutionary process, has multiplied enormously, has achieved miracles of cultural evolution, has reduced or extinguished many other species, and has radically affected the ecology and indeed the whole evolutionary process of our planet. Yet he is a highly imperfect creature. He carries a heavy burden of
genetic defects and imperfections. As a psycho-
social organism, he has not undergone much
improvement. Indeed, man is still very much an
unfinished type, who clearly has actualized only
a small fraction of his human potentialities. In addition, his genetic deterioration is being

1 23

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1962, 54, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

rendered probable by his social set-up, and definitely being promoted by atomic fallout. Furthermore, his economic, technical and cultural progress is threatened by the high rate of increase of world population.
The obverse of man's actual and potential further defectiveness is the vast extent of his possible future improvement. To effect this, he must first of all check the processes making for genetic deterioration. This means reducing man-made radiation to a minimum, discouraging genetically defective or inferior types from breeding, reducing human over-multiplication in general and the high differential fertility of various regions, nations and classes in particular. Then he can proceed to the much more important task of positive improvement. In the not too distant future the fuller realization of possibilities will inevitably come to provide the main motive for man's overall efforts; and a Science of Evolutionary Possibilities, which to-day is merely adumbrated, will provide a firm basis for these efforts. Eugenics can make an important contribution to man's further evolution: but it can only do so if it considers itself as one branch of that new nascent science, and fearlessly explores all the possibilities that are open to it.
Man, let me repeat, is not a biological but a psychosocial organism. As such, he possesses a new mechanism of transmission and transformation based on the cumulative handing on of experience, ideas and attitudes. To obtain eugenic improvement, we shall need not only an understanding of what kind of selection operates in the psychosocial process, not only new scientific knowledge and new techniques in the field of human genetics and reproduction but new ideas and attitudes about reproduction and parenthood in particular and human destiny in general. One of those new ideas will be the moral im-
perative of Eugenics.
***
In the twenty-five years since my previous lecture, many events have occurred, and many discoveries have been made with a bearing on eugenics. Events such as the explosion of atomic and nuclear bombs, the equally sinister "population explosion," the reductio ad horrendum of racism by Nazi Germany, and the introduction

of artificial insemination for animals and human
beings, sometimes with the use of deep-frozen sperm; scientific discoveries such as that of DNA as the essential basis for heredity and
evolution, of subgenic organization, of the wide-
spread existence of balanced polymorphic
genetic systems, and of the intensity and efficacy of selection in nature; the realization that the
entities which evolve are populations of pheno-
types, with consequent emphasis on population genetics on the one hand, and on the interaction between genotype and environment on the other; and finally the recognition that adaptation and
biological improvement are universal phenomena in life.
I do not propose to discuss these changes and
discoveries now, but shall plunge directly into my subject-Eugenics in Evolutionary Perspective. I chose this title because I am sure that a
proper understanding of the evolutionary process and of man's place and role in it is necessary for any adequate or satisfying view of human
destiny; and eugenics must obviously play an important part in enabling man to fulfil that
destiny. As I have set forth at greater length elsewhere,
in the hundred years since the publication of the Origin of Species there has been a "knowledge explosion" unparalleled in all previous history. It has led to an accelerated expansion of ideas, not only in the natural sciences but also in the humanistic fields of history, archaeology, and social and cultural development, and its effects on our thinking have been especially violent, not to say revolutionary, during the quarter of a century since my previous Galton Lecture. It has led to a new picture of man's relations with his own nature and with the rest of the universe, and indeed to a new and unified vision of reality, both fuller and truer than any of the insights of the past. In the light of this new vision the whole of reality is seen as a single process of evolution. For evolution can properly be defined as a natural process in time, self-varying and selftransforming and generating increasing complexity and variety during its transformations; and this is precisely what has been going on for all time in all the universe. It operates everywhere and in all periods, but is divisible into a series of three sectors or successive phases, the

124

EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECT1VE

inorganic or cosmic, the organic or biological, tive organization, and marked by the growing

and the human or psychosocial, each based on importance of awareness as mediated by brains.

and growing out of its predecessor. Each phase And its results are organisms-organisms of an

operates by a different main mechanism, has a astonishing efficiency, complexity, and variety,

different scale and a different tempo of change, almost inconceivably so until one recalls R. A.

and produces a different type of results.

Fisher's profound paradox, that natural selection

Between the separate phases, the evolutionary plus time is a mechanism for generating an

process has to cross a critical threshold, passing exceedingly high degree of improbability.

from an old to a new state, as when water passes In the course of biological evolution, three

from the solid to the liquid state at the critical sub-processes are at work. The first (clado-

temperature-threshold of 00 C and from liquid genesis, or branching evolution) leads to

to gaseous at that of 1000 C.

divergence and greater variety; the second

The critical threshold between the inorganic (anagenesis, or upward evolution) leads to

and the biological phase was crossed when improvement of all sorts, from detailed adapta-

matter and the organisms built from it became tions to specializations, from the greater effici-

self-reproducing, that between the biological and ency of some major function like digestion to

the psychosocial when mind and the organiza- overall advance in general organization; the

tions generated by it became self-reproducing third is stasigenesis or stabilized limitation of

in their turn.

evolution. This occurs when specialization for a

The cosmic phase operates by random inter- particular way of life reaches a dead end as with

action, primarily physical but to a small degree horses, or efficiency of function attains a

chemical. Its quantitative scale is unbelievably maximum as with hawks' vision, or an ancient

vast both in space and time. Its visible dimen- type of organization persists as a living fossil

sions exceed 1,000 million light-years (1022km), like the lungfish or the tuatara.

its distances are measured by units of thousands Major advance or biological progress is always

of light-years (nearly 1016km), the numbers of its by a succession of dominant types, each step

visible galaxies exceed 100 million (108) and those achieved by a rare breakthrough from some

of its stars run into thousands of millions of established type of organization to a new and

millions (1015). It has operated in its present form more effective one, as from the amphibian to

for at least 6,000 million years, possibly much true dry-land reptilian type, or from the cold-

longer. Its tempo of major change is unbelievably blooded egg-laying reptile to the warm-blooded

slow, to be measured by 1,000-million-year self-regulating mammal with intra-uterine de-

periods. According to the physicists, its overall velopment. The new dominant type multiplies at

trend, in accord with the Second Law of Thermo- the expense of the old, which may become

dynamics, is entropic, tending towards a decrease extinct (as did the jawless fish) or may persist in

in organization and to ultimate frozen immo- reduced numbers (as did the reptiles.)

bility; and its products reach only a very low The psychosocial phase, the latest of which

level of organization-photons, subatomic par- we have any knowledge (though elsewhere in the

ticles, atoms, and simple inorganic compounds universe there may have been a breakthrough to

at one end of its size-scale, nebulae, stars and some new phase as unimaginable to us as the

occasional planetary systems at the other.

psychosocial phase would have been to even the

The biological phase operates primarily by most advanced Pliocene primate), is based on a

the teleonomic or ordering process of natural self-reproducing and self-varying system of

selection, which canalizes random variation into cumulative transmission of experience and cul-

non-random directions of change. Its tempo of ture, operating by mechanisms of psychological

major change is somewhat less slow, measured and social selection which we have not as yet

by 100-million- instead of 1,000-million-year adequately defined or analysed. Spatially it is

units of time. Its overall trend, kept going of very limited; we know of it only on this earth,

course by solar energy, is anti-entropic, towards and in any case it must be restricted to the sur-

an increase in the amount and quality of adap- face of a small minority of planets in the small

1 25

ER-C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
minority of stars possessing planetary systems. sub-process, that of convergence (or at least On our planet it is at the very beginning of its anti-divergence), operating by diffusion-diffucourse, having begun less than one million years sion of ideas and techniques between individuals, ago. However, its tempo is not only much faster communities, cultures and regions. This is tendthan that of biological evolution, but manifests a ing to give unity to the world: but we must see new phenomenon, in the shape of a marked to it that it does not also impose uniformity and acceleration. Its overall trend is highly anti- destroy desirable variety. entropic, and is characterized by a sharp increase As in the biological phase, major advance in in the operative significance of exceptional the human phase is brought about by a succesindividuals and in the importance of true pur- sion of generally or locally dominant types. pose and conscious evaluation based on reason These, however, are not types of organism, but and imagination, as against the automatic of cultural and ideological organization. Monodifferential elimination of random variants. theism as against polytheism, for instance; or in
The most significant element in that trend has the political sphere, the beginning of one-world been the growth and improved organization of internationalism as against competitive multitested and established knowledge. And its results nationalism. Or again, science as against magic, are psychologically (mentally) generated or- democracy as against tyranny, planning as ganizations even more astonishingly varied and against laissez-faire, tolerance as against intolercomplex than biological organisms-machines, ance, freedom of opinion and expression as concepts, cooking, mass communications, cities, against authoritarian dogma and repression. philosophies, superstitions, propaganda, armies Not only does the succession of dominant and navies, personalities, legal systems, works types bring about progress or advance in of art, political and economic systems, enter- organization within each of the three main tainments, slavery, scientific theories, hospitals, evolutionary phases, but it also operates, though moral codes, prisons, myths, languages, torture, on a grander and more decisive scale, in the games and sports, religions, record and history, evolutionary process as a whole. A biological poetry, civil services, marriage systems, initia- organism possesses a higher degree of organization rituals, agriculture, drama, social hier- tion than any inorganic system; as soon as living archies, schools and universities. Accordingly organisms were produced, they became the evolution in the human phase is no longer purely major dominant type of organization on earth, biological, based on changes in the material and the course of evolution became predomisystem of genetic transmission, but primarily nantly biological and only secondarily inorganic. cultural, based on changes in the psychosocial Similarly a psychosocial system possesses a system of ideological and cultural transmission. higher degree of organization than any bio-
In the psychosocial phase of evolution the logical organism: accordingly man at once same three sub-processes operating in the bio- became the new major dominant type on earth, logical phase are still at work-cladogenesis, and the course of evolution became predomioperating to generate difference and variety nantly cultural and only secondarily biological, within and between cultures; anagenesis, opera- with inorganic methods quite subordinate. ting to produce improvement in detailed techno- The evolutionary perspective includes the broad logical methods, in economic and political background of the cosmic past. Now against this machinery, in administrative and educational background we must face the problems of the systems, in scientific thinking and creative present and the challenge of the future. Let me expression, in moral tone and religious attitude, begin by reiterating that man is an exceedingly in social and international organization; and recent phenomenon. The earliest creatures which stasigenesis, operating to limit progress and to can properly be called men, though they must be keep old systems and attitudes, including even assigned to different genera from ourselves, date outworn superstitions, persisting alongside of or from less than two million years ago, and our actually within more advanced social and intel- own species, Homo sapiens, from much less than lectual systems. But there is an additional fourth half a million years. Man began to put his toe
126

EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

tentatively across the critical threshold leading the large-scale positive possibilities of all-round

towards evolutionary dominance perhaps a general improvement.

quarter of a million years ago, but took tens of Take first the problem of intelligence. It is to

thousands of years to cross it, emerging as a man's higher level of intelligence that he owes

dominant type only during the last main glacia- his evolutionary dominance; and yet how low

tion, probably later than 100,000 B.C., but not that level still remains! It is nowwell established

becoming fully dominant until the discovery of that the human I.Q., when properly assayed, is

agriculture and stock-breeding well under largely a measure of genetic endowment. Con-

10,000 years ago, and overwhelmingly so sider the difference in brain-power between the

with the invention of machines and writing and hordes of average men and women with I.Q.'s

organized civilization a bare five millennia before around 100 and the meagre company of

the present day, when his dominance has become Terman's so-called geniuses with I.Q.'s of 160 or

so hubristic as to threaten his own future.

over, and the much rarer true geniuses like

All new dominant types begin their career in a Newton and Darwin, Tolstoy and Shakespeare,

crude and imperfect form, which then tieeds Goya and Michelangelo, Hammurabi and

drastic polishing and improvement before it can Confucius; and then reflect that, since the

reveal its full potentialities and achieve full frequency curve for intelligence is approxi-

evolutionary success. Man is no exception to this mately symmetrical, there are as many stupider

rule. He is not merely exceedingly young; he is people with I.Q.'s below 100 as there are abler

also exceedingly imperfect, an unfinished and ones with I.Q.'s above it.

often botched product of evolutionary impro- Recollect also that the great and striking

visation. Teilhard de Chardin has called the advances in human affairs, as much in creative

transformation of an anthropoid into a man art and political and military leadership as in

hominisation: it might be more accurately, scientific discovery and invention, are primarily

though more clumsily, termed psychosocialisa- due to a few exceptionally gifted individuals.

tion. But whatever we call it, the process of Remember that on the established principles of

hominisation is very far from complete, the genetics a small raising of average capacity

serious study of its course, its mechanisms and would of necessity result in an upward shifting of

its techniques has scarcely started, and only a the entire frequency curve, and therefore a con-

fraction of its potential results have been siderable increase in the absolute numbers of

realized. Man, in fact, is in urgent need of such highly intelligent and well-endowed human

further improvement.

beings that form the uppermost section of the

This is where eugenics comes into the picture. curve (as well as a decrease in the numbers of

For though the psychosocial system in and by highly stupid and feebly endowed individuals

which man carries on his existence could obvi- at the lower end).

ously be enormously improved with great Reflect further on the fact, originally pointed

benefit to its members, the same is also true for out by Galton, that there is already a shortage of

his genetic outfit.

brains capable of dealing with the complexities

Severe and primarily genetic disabilities like of modem administration, technology and plan-

haemophilia, colour-blindness, mongolism, some ning, and that with the inevitable increase of our

kinds of sexual deviation, much mental defect, social and technical complexity, the greater will

sickle-cell anaemia, some forms of dwarfism, that shortage become. It is thus clear that for any

and Huntington's chorea are the source of much major advance in national and international

individual distress, and their reduction would efficiency we cannot depend on haphazard

remove a considerable burden from suffering tinkering with social or political symptoms or

humanity. But these are occasional abnormali- ad hoc patching up of the world's political

ties. Quantitatively their total effect is insignifi- machinery, or even on improving general educa-

cant in comparison with the massive imperfec- tion, but must rely increasingly on raising the

tion of man as a species, and their reduction genetic level of man's intellectual and practical

appears as a minor operation in comparison with abilities. As I shall later point out, artificial

1 27

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

insemination by selected donors could bring about such a result in practice.
The same applies everywhere in the psychosocial process. For more and better scientists, we need the raising of the genetic level of exploratory curiosity or whatever it is that underlies single-minded investigation of the unknown and the discovery of novel facts and ideas; for more and better artists and writers, we need the raising of the genetic level for disciplined creative imagination; for more and better statesmen, that of the capacity to see social and political situations as wholes, to take long-term and total instead of only short-term and partial views; for more and better technologists and engineers, that of the passion and capacity to understand how things work and to make them work more efficiently; for more and better saints and moral leaders, that of disciplined valuation, of devotion and duty, and of the capacity to love; and for more and better leaders of thought and guides of action we need a raising of the capacity of man's vision and imagination, to form a comprehensive picture, at once reverent, assured and unafraid, of nature and man's relations with it.
These facts and ideas have an important bearing on the so-called race question and the problem of racial equality. I should rather say racial inequality, for up till quite recently the naive belief in the natural inequality of races and people in general, and the inherent superiority of one's own race or people in particular, has almost universally prevailed.
To demonstrate the way in which this point of view permeated even nineteenth-century scientific thought, it is worth recalling that it was largely subscribed to by Darwin in his comments on the Fuegians in the Voyage of the Beagle, and in more general but more guarded terms in the Descent of Man: and Galton himself, against a similar background of travels among backward tribes and on the basis of his own rather curious method of assessment, concluded that different races had achieved different genetic standards,
* There is the further point that races may differ considerably in body-build and that Sheldon and others have made it highly probable that body-build is correlated with temperament. Unfortunately, racial differences in body-build have not yet been analysed in terms of Sheldon's somatotypes: here is an important field for research.

so that, for instance, "the average standard of the Negro race is two grades below our own."
This type of belief, after being given a pseudo-
scientific backing by non-biological theoreticians like Gobineau and Houston Stewart Chamber-
lain, was used to justify the Nazis' "Nordic"
claims to world domination and their horrible
campaign for the extermination of the "inferior,
non-Aryan race" of Jews, and is still employed
with support from Holy Writ and the majority
of the Dutch Reformed Church in South Africa,
to sanction Verwoerd's denial of full human
rights to non-whites. Later investigation has conclusively demon-
strated first, that there is no such thing as a
"pure race." Secondly, that the obvious differences in level of achievement between different
peoples and ethnic groups are primarily cultural, due to differences not in genetic equipment but in historical and environmental opportunity. And thirdly, that when the potentialities of
intelligence of two major "races" or ethnic groups, such as whites and negroes or Europeans and Indians, are assessed as scientifically as possible, the frequency curves for the two groups overlap over almost the whole of their extent, so that approximately half the population of either group is genetically stupider (has a
lower genetic I.Q.) than the genetically more intelligent half of the other. There are thus large differences in genetic mental endowment within single racial groups, but minimal ones between
different racial groups. Partly as a result of such studies, but also of
the prevalent environmentalist views of Marxist and Western liberal thought, an anti-genetic view has recently developed about race. It is claimed that though ethnic groups obviously differ in physical characters, and that some of them, like pigmentation, nasal form, and number of sweatglands, were originally adaptive, they do not (and sometimes even that they cannot) differ in psychological or mental characters such as intelligence, imagination, or even temperament.*
Against this new pseudo-scientific racial naivete, we must set the following scientific facts and principles. First, it is clear that the major human races originated as geographical subspecies of Homo sapiens, in adaptation to the very different environments to which they have

128

EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

become restricted. Later, of course, expansion waiting to be elicited by a combination of chal-

and migration reversed the process of differenti- lenging opportunity, sound educational methods,

ation and led to an increasing degree of conver- and efficient special training. I recently attended

gence by crossing, though considerable genetic an admirable symposium on nutrition in Nigeria

differentiation remains. Secondly, as Professor where the scientific quality of the African contri-

Muller has pointed out, it is theoretically incon- butions was every whit as high as that of the

ceivable that such marked physical differences whites; and African politicians can be just as

as still persist between the main racial groups statesmanlike (and also just as unscrupulously

should not be accompanied by genetic differ- efficient in the political game) as their European

ences in temperament and mental capacities, or American counterparts.

possibly of considerable extent. Finally, as pre- The basic fact about the races of mankind is

viously explained, advance in cultural evolution their almost total overlap in genetic potentiali-

is largely and increasingly dependent on excep- ties. But the most significant fact for eugenic

tionally well-endowed individuals. Thus two advance is the large difference in achievement

racial groups might overlap over almost the made possible by a small increase in the number

whole range of genetic capacity, and yet one of exceptional individuals.

might be capable of considerably higher achieve- The evolutionary biologist can point out to the

ment, not merely because of better environ- social scientist and the politician that this

mental and historical opportunity, but because importance of the exceptional individual for

it contained say 2 instead of 1 per cent of psychosocial advance is merely an enhancement

exceptionally gifted men and women. So far as I of a long-established evolutionary trend. Excep-

know, proper scientific research on this subject tional individuals can be important for biological

has never been carried out, and possibly our improvement in mammals, in birds, and possibly

present methods of investigation are not ade- even in insects. New food-traditions in Japanese

quate for doing so, but the principle is theoreti- monkeys are established by disobedient young

cally clear and is of vital practical importance.* individuals. The utilization of milk-bottles as a

This does not imply any belief in crude racism, new source of food by blue tits was due to the

with its unscientific ascription of natural and activities of a few exceptional tit geniuses in a

permanent superiority or inferiority to entire few widely separate localities. All male satin

races. As I have just pointed out, approximately bowerbirds construct bowers and assemble col-

half of any large ethnic group, however superior lections of stimulating bright objects at them,

its self-image may be, is in point of fact geneti- but only a minority deliberately paint their

cally inferior to half of the rival ethnic group bowers with a mixture of berries, charcoal and

with which it happens to be in social or economic saliva, and only a still smaller minority indulge

competition and which it too often stigmatizes as the species' natural preference for blue objects

permanently and inherently lower. Furthermore, by deliberately stealing bluebags to add to their

practical experience demonstrates that every display collection. And there is some evidence

so-called race, however underdeveloped its that even in ants, those prototypes of rigidly

economic and social system may happen to be, instinctive behaviour, a few workers are excep-

contains a vast reservoir of untapped talent, only tionally well-endowed with the exploratory urge,

and play a special role in discovering new sources

* On the supposition that genetic intelligence is of food for the colony.

multifactorially (polygenically) determined and that its distribution follows a normal symmetrical curve, it can be calculated that the raising of the mean genetic I.Q. of a

But I must return to man as a species. The human species is in desperate need of genetic

population by 1 per cent would result in a 50 per cent improvement if the whole process of psycho-

increase in the number of individuals with an I.Q. of 160 or over. The proportion of such highly-endowed individuals would rise from 1 in about 30,000 of the total

social evolution which it has set in train is not to get bogged down in unplanned disorder,

population to 1 in about 20,000. Sir Cyril Burt informs me negated by over-multiplication, clogged up by

that if, as is possible, some types of high genetic intelligence are determined by single genes, the increase might be still greater.

mere complexity, or even blown to pieces by obsessional stupidity. Luckily it not only must

I 29

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

but can be improved. It can be improved by the its occurrence, though multiform in its mode of

same type of method that has secured the im- action.

provement of life in general-from protozoan to Some over-enthusiastic geneticists appear to

protovertebrate, from protovertebrate to prim- think that natural selection acts directly on the

ate, from primate to human being-the method of organism's genetic outfit or genotype. This is not

multi-purpose selection directed towards greater so. Natural selection exerts its effects on animals

achievement in the prevailing conditions of life. and plants as working mechanisms: it can oper-

On the other hand, it can not be improved by ate only on phenotypes. Its evolutionary action

applying the methods of the professional stock- in transforming the genetic outfit of a species is

breeder. Indeed the whole discussion of eugenics indirect, and depends on the simple fact pointed

has been bedevilled by the false analogy between out by Darwin in the Origin that much variation

artificial and natural selection. Artificial selection is heritable-in modem terms, that there is a high

is intensive special-purpose selection, aimed at degree of correlation between phenotypic and

producing a particular excellence, whether in genotypic variance. The correlation, however, is

milk-yield in cattle, speed in race-horses or a never complete, and there are many cases where

fancy image in dogs. It produces a number of it is impossible without experimental analysis to

specialized pure breeds, each with a markedly determine whether a variant is modificational,

lower variance than the parent species. Darwin due to alteration in the environment, or muta-

rightly drew heavily on its results in order to tional, due to alteration in the genetic outfit. In

demonstrate the efficacy of selection in general. certain cases, environmental treatment will

But since he never occupied himself seriously produce so-called phenocopies which are indis-

with eugenics he did not point out the irrelevance tinguishable from mutants in their visible

of stock-breeding methods to human improve- appearance.

ment. In fact, they are not only irrelevant, but This last fact has led Waddington to an im-

would be disastrous. Man owes much of his portant discovery-the fact that an apparently

evolutionary success to his unique variability. Lamarckian mode of evolutionary transforma-

Any attempt to improve the human species must tion can be precisely simulated by what he calls

aim at retaining this fruitful diversity, while at genetic assimilation. To take an actual example,

the same time raising the level of excellence in all the rearing of fruitfly larvae on highly saline

its desirable components, and remembering that media produces a hypertrophy of their salt-

the selectively evolved characters of organisms excreting glands through direct modification.

are always the results of compromise between But if selection is practised by breeding from

different types of advantage, or between advan- those individuals which show the maximum

tage and disadvantage.

hypertrophy of their glands, then after some ten

Natural selection is something quite different. or twelve generations, individuals with some-

To start with, it is a shorthand metaphorical what hypertrophied glands appear even in cul-

term coined by Darwin to denote the teleonomic tures on non-saline media. The species has a

or directive agencies affecting the process of genetic predisposition, doubtless brought by

evolution in nature, and operating through the selection in the past, to react to saline conditions

differential survival and reproduction of gene- by glandular hypertrophy. The action of the

tical variants. It may operate between conspecific major genes concerned in reactions of this sort

individuals, between conspecific populations, can be enhanced (or inhibited) by so-called

between related species, between higher taxa modifying genes of minor effect. Selection has

such as genera and families, or between still simply amassed in the genetic outfit an array of

larger groups of different organizational type, such minor enhancing genes strong enough to

such as Orders and Classes. It may also operate produce glandular hypertrophy even in the

between predator and prey, between parasite and absence of any environmental stimulus. It is only

host, and between different synergic assemblages pseudo-Lamarckism, but no less important for

of species, such as symbiotic partnerships and that-a significant addition to the theoretical

ecological communities. It is in fact universal in armoury of evolutionary science.

1 30

EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

I repeat that the most important effect his early protest against speculative phylogeny

achieved by natural selection is biological im- into the far more speculative suggestion made

provement. As G. G. Simpson reminds us, it ex cathedra at a British Association meeting, that

does so opportunistically, making use of what- all evolution, whether of higher from lower, or of

ever new combination of existing mutant genes, diversity from uniformity, had been brought

or less frequently of whatever new mutations, about by loss mutations; and the great T. H.

happens to confer differential survival value on Morgan once permitted himself to state in print

its possessors. We know of numerous cases that, if natural selection had never operated, we

where phenotypically identical and adaptive should possess all the organisms that now exist

transformations have been produced by different and a great number of other types as well! This

genes or gene-combinations.

anti-selectionist avant garde of fifty years back

Here I must digress a moment to discuss the has now come over en masse into the selectionist

concept of evolutionary fitness. The biological camp, leaving only a few retreating stragglers to

avant garde has chosen to define fitness as "net deliver some rather ineffective parthian shots at

reproductive advantage," to use the actual words their opponents.

employed by Professor Medawar in his Reith Natural selection is a teleonomic or directional

Lectures on The Future of Man. Any strain of agency. It utilizes the inherent genetic variability

animal, plant, or man which leaves slightly more of organisms provided by the raw material of

descendants capable of reproducing themselves random mutation and chance recombination,

than another, is then defined as "fitter." This I and it operates by the simple mechanism of

believe to be an unscientific and misleading differential reproductive advantage. But on the

definition. It disregards all scientific conventions evolutionary time-scale it produces biological

as to priority, for it bears no resemblance to improvement, resulting in a higher total and

what Spencer implied or intended by his famous especially a higher upper level of evolutionary

phrase the survival of the fittest.* It is also non- fitness, involving greater functional efficiency,

sensical in every context save the limited field of higher degrees of organization, more effective

population genetics. In biology, fitness must be adaptation, better self-regulating capacity, and

defined, as Darwin did with improvement, "in finally more mind-in other words an enrich-

relation to the conditions of life"-in other ment of qualitative awareness coupled with more

words, in the context of the general evolutionary flexible behaviour.

situation. I shall call it evolutionary fitness, in Man almost certainly has the largest reservoir

contradistinction to the purely reproductive fit- of genetical variance of any natural species:

ness of the evangelists of geneticism, which I selection for the differential reproduction of

prefer to designate by the descriptive label of net desirable permutations and combinations of the

or differential reproductive advantage.

elements of this huge variance could undoubtedly

Meanwhile, I have a strong suspicion that the bring about radical improvement in the human

genetical avant garde of to-day will become the organism, just as it has in pre-human types.

rearguard of tomorrow. In my own active career But the. agency of human transformation cannot

I have seen a reversal of this sort in relation to be the blind and automatic natural selection of

natural selection and adaptation. During the the pre-human sector. That, as I have already

first two decades of this century the biological stressed, has been relegated to a subsidiary role

avant garde dismissed topics such as cryptic or in the human phase of evolution. Some form of

mimetic coloration, and indeed most discussion psychosocial selection is needed, a selection as

of adaptation, as mere "armchair speculation," non-natural as are most human activities, such

and played down the role of natural selection in as wearing clothes, going to war, cooking food,

evolution, as against that of large and random or employing arbitrary systems of communica-

mutation. Bateson's enthusiasm rebounded from tion. To be effective, such "non-natural" selection

must be conscious, purposeful and planned. And

* Darwin did not use the phrase in the first edition of the Origin of Species, though in later editions he added it as an equivalent to natural selection.

since the tempo of cultural evolution is many thousands of times faster than that of biological

'3'

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

transformation, it must operate at a far higher speed than natural selection if it is to prevent
disaster, let alone produce improvement. Luckily there is to-day at least the possibility
of meeting both these prerequisites: we now possess an accumulation of established know-
ledge and an array of tested methods which could make intelligent, scientific and purposeful planning possible. And we are in the process of
discovering new techniques which could raise the effective speed of the selective process to a new order of magnitude. The relevant new knowledge mainly concerns the various aspects of the evolutionary process-the fact that there are no
absolutes or all-or-nothing effects in evolution and that all organisms and all their phenotypic characters represent a compromise or balance between competing advantages and disadvantages; the effect of selection on populations in
different environmental conditions; the origin of adaptation; and the general improvement of different evolutionary lines in relation to the conditions of their life. The notable new techniques include effective methods of birth-control, the successful development of grafted fertilized ova in new host-mothers, artificial insemination, and the conservation of function in deep-frozen
gametes. We must first keep in mind the elementary but
often neglected fact that the characters of organ-
isms which make for evolutionary success or failure, are not inherited as such. On the contrary, they develop anew in each individual, and are always the resultant of an interaction between genetic determination and environmental modification. Biologists are often asked whether heredity or environment is the more important. It cannot be too often emphasized that the question should never be asked. It is as logically improper to ask a biologist to answer it as it is for a prosecuting counsel to ask a defendant when he stopped beating his wife. It is the phenotype which is biologically significant and the phenotype is a resultant produced by the complex interaction of hereditary and environmental factors. Eugenics, in common with evolutionary biology in general, needs this phenotypic approach.
Man's evolution occurs on two different levels and by two distinct methods, the genetic, based

on the transmission and variation of genes and
gene-combinations, and the psychosocial or cultural, based on the transmission and variation
of knowledge and ideas.
Professor Medawar, in his Reith Lectures on
The Future of Man, while admitting in his final chapter that man possesses "a new, nongenetical, system of heredity and evolution"
(p. 88), claims on p. 41 that this is "a new kind of
biological evolution (I emphasize, a biological evolution)." I must insist that this is incorrect.
The psychosocial process-in other words, evolving man-is a new state of evolution, a new phase of the cosmic process, as radically
different from the pre-human biological phase as that is from the inorganic or pre-biological phase; and this fact has important implications for eugenics.
An equally elementary but again often neglected fact is that organisms are not significantin plain words, are meaningless-except in relation to their environment. A fish is not a thingin-itself: it is a type of organism evolved in relation to an active' life in large or mediumsized bodies of water. A cactus has biological significance only in relation to an arid habitat, a woodpecker only in relation to an arboreal one. Man, however, is in a unique situation. He must live not only in relation with the physicochemical and biological environment provided by nature, but with the psychosocial environment of material and mental habitats which he has himself created.
Man's psychosocial environment includes his beliefs and purposes, his ideals and his aims: these are concerned with what we may call the habitat of the future, and help to determine the direction of his further evolution. All evolution is directional and therefore relative. But whereas the direction of biological evolution is related to the continuing improvement of organisms in relation to their conditions of life, human evolution is related to the improvement of the entire psychosocial process, including the human organism, in relation to man's purposes and beliefs, long-term as well as short-term. Only in so far as those purposes and beliefs are grounded on scientific and tested knowledge, will they serve to steer human evolution in a desirable
direction. In brief, biological evolution is given

1 32

EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

direction by the blind and automatic agency of if some of them may possibly come to be

natural selection operating through material utilized in neutral or even favourable new gene-

mechanisms, human evolution by the agency combinations.

of psychosocial guidance operating with the aid Now that we have realized these portentous

of mental awareness, notably the mechanisms of facts, it is up to us to reverse the process and to

reason and imagination.

plan a society which will favour the increase

To be effective, such awareness must clearly be instead of the decrease of man's desirable genetic

concerned with man's environmental situation as capacities for intelligence and imagination,

well as his genetic equipment. In my first Galton empathy and co-operation, and a sense of

Lecture, I pointed out the desirability of eugen- discipline and duty.

ists relating their policies to the social environ- The first step must be to frame and put into

ment. To-day I would go further, and stress the operation a policy designed to reduce the rate

need for planning the environment in such a way of human increase before the quantitative claims

as will promote our eugenic aims. By 1936, it was of mere numbers override those of quality and

already clear that the net effect of present-day prevent any real improvement, social and eco-

social policies could not be eugenic, and was in nomic as much as eugenic. I would prophesy that

all probability dysgenic. But, as Muller has within a quite short time, historically speaking,

demonstrated, this was not always so. In that we shall find ourselves aiming at an absolute

long period of human history during which our reduction of the population in the world in

evolving and expanding hominid ancestors lived general, and in overcrowded countries like

in small and tightly knit groups competing for Britain, India and China, Japan, Java and

territorial and technological success, the social Jamaica in particular; the quantitative control of

organization promoted selection for intelligent population is a necessary prerequisite for

exploration of possibilities, devotion and co- qualitative improvement, whether psychosocial

operative altruism: the cultural and the genetic or genetic.

systems reinforced each other. It was only much Science seems to be nearing a breakthrough

later, with the growth of bigger social units of to cheap and simple methods of birth-control, or

highly organized civilizations based on status reproduction-control as it should more properly

and class differentials, that the two became an- be called. The immediate needs are for much-

tagonistic; the sign of genetic transformation increased finance for research, testing, pilot

changed from positive to negative and definite projects, motivation studies and the education of

genetic improvement and advance began to halt, public opinion, and an organized campaign

and gave way to the possibility and later the against the irrational attitudes and illiberal

probability of genetic regression and degenera- policies of various religious and political organ-

tion. izations. Simultaneously, responsible opinion

This probability has been very much height- must begin to think out ways in which social and

ened during the last century, partly by the differ- economic measures can be made to promote

ential multiplication of economically less desirable genetic trends and reproductive

favoured classes and groups in many parts of the habits.

world, partly by the progress of medicine and Many countries have instituted family allow-

public health, which has permitted numbers of ance systems which are not graded according to

genetically defective human beings to survive number of children, and some, like France, even

and reproduce; and to-day it has been converted provide financial inducements which encourage

into a certainty by the series of atomic and undesirably large families. It should be easy to

nuclear explosions which have been set off since devise graded family allowance systems in which

the end of the last war. There is still dispute as the allowances for the first two or three children

to the degree of damage this has done to man's would be really generous, but those for further

genetic equipment. There can be no dispute as children would rapidly taper off. In India, there

to the fact of damage: any addition to man's have even been proposals to tax parents for

load of mutations can only be deleterious,even children above a certain number, and in some

' 33

ER-D

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

provinces, men fulfilling certain conditions are problems of population in relation to their

paid to be vasectomized.

special fields of competence.

A powerful weapon for adequate population- At last I reach my specific subject-eugenics,

control is ready to the hand of the great grant- with its two aspects, negative and positive.

giving and aid-providing agencies of the modem Negative eugenics aims at preventing the spread

world-international agencies such as the UN and especially the increase of defective or

and its Technical Assistance Board representing undesirable human genes or gene-combinations,

its various Specialized Agencies like F.A.O. and positive eugenics at securing the reproduction

Unesco, the World Bank and the International and especially the increase of favourable or

Finance Corporation Administration; national desirable ones.*

agencies like the Colombo Plan and the Inter- Negative eugenics has become increasingly

American Development Fund; and the great urgent with the increase of mutations due to

private Foundations (wittily categorized as atomic fallout, and with the increased survival

philanthropoid by that remarkable man Frederick of genetically defective human beings, brought

Keppel) like Rockefeller and Ford, Gulbenkian, about by advances in medicine, public health,

Nuffield and Carnegie.

and social welfare. But it must, of course,

At the moment, much of the financial and attempt to reduce the incidence, or the mani-

technical aid provided by these admirable bodies festation, of every kind of genetic defect. Such

is being wasted by being flushed down the drain defects include high genetic proneness to diseases

of excess population instead of into the channels such as diabetes, schizophrenia (which affects

of positive economic and cultural development, 1 per cent of the entire human population), other

or is even defeating its own ends by promoting insanities, myopia, mental defect and very low

excessive and over-rapid population-increase. I.Q., as well as more clear-cut defects like

Bankers do not make loans unless they are colour-blindness or haemophilia.

satisfied of the borrower's credit-worthiness. When defects depend on a single dominant

Surely these powerful agencies, public or private, gene, as with Huntington's chorea, transmission

should not provide loans or grants or other aid can of course be readily prevented by persuading

unless they are satisfied of the recipient nation's the patient to refrain from reproducing himself.

demographic credit-worthiness. If an under- With sexlinked defects like haemophilia, Duch-

developed nation's birth-rate is excessive, the aid enne-type muscular dystrophy,. or HCN

will go in providing the basic minima of food, "smell-blindness," this will help, but the method

care, shelter and education for the flood of should be supplemented by counselling his

babies, instead of the capital and the technical sisters against marriage. This will be more

skills needed to achieve the breakthrough to a effective and more acceptable when, as seems

viable industrialization. Wherever this is so, the possible, we can distinguish carriers heterozy-

aid-providing institution should insist that the gous for the defect from non-carriers. This is

nation should frame an approved policy of alreadypracticable with some autosomic recessive

population-control, and that some of the aid defects, notably sickle-cell anaemia. Here,

should be devoted to the implementation of that registers of carriers have been established in

policy and to research on the subject. And the some regions, and they are being effectively

U.N. should, of course, take steps to prepare the advised against intermarriage. This will at least

way for a World Population Policy, should carry prevent the manifestation of the defect. The same

out or in any case encourage research on popu- could happen with galactosaemia, and might be

lation-control, and should ensure that its applicable to relatives of patients with defects

Specialized Agencies like W.H.O., Unesco, like phenylketonuria and agammoglobulinaemia.

F.A.O. and I.L.O., pay due attention to the In addition, the marked differential increase of

lower-income groups, classes and communities

* In the past, these aims have been generally expressed during the last hundred years cannot possibly

in terms of defective or desirable stocks or strains. With the progress of genetics, it is better to reformulate them in terms of genes.

be eugenic in its effects. The extremely high fertility of the so-called problem group in the

' 34

EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

slums of many industrial cities is certainly carry on the business of bare existence in the

anti-eugenic.

midst of extreme poverty and squalor. All too

As Muller and others have emphasized, frequently they have to be supported out of

unless these trends can be checked or reversed, public funds, and become a burden on the

the human species is threatened with genetic community. Unfortunately they are not deterred

deterioration, and unless this load of defects is by the conditions of existence from carrying on

reduced, positive eugenics cannot be successfully with the business of reproduction: and their

implemented. For this we must reduce the mean family size is very high, much higher than

reproduction rate of genetically defective indi- the average for the whole country.

viduals: that is negative eugenics.

Intelligence and other tests have revealed that

The implementation of negative eugenics can they have a very low average I.Q.; and the indica-

only be successful if family planning and tions are that they are genetically subnormal in

eugenic aims are incorporated into medicine in many other qualities, such as initiative, pertin-

general and into public health and other social acity, general exploratory urge and interest,

services in particular. Its implementation in energy, emotional intensity, and will-power. In

practice will depend on the use of methods of the main, their misery and improvidence is not

contraception or sterilization, combined where their fault but their misfortune. Our social system

possible with A.I.D. (artificial insemination by provides the soil on which they can grow and

donor) or other methods of vicarious parent- multiply, but with no prospects save poverty and

hood. In any case, negative eugenics is of minor squalor.

evolutionary importance and the need for it will Here again, voluntary sterilization could be

gradually be superseded by efficient measures useful. But our best hope, I think, must lie in the

of positive eugenics.

perfection of new, simple and acceptable methods

\ Jn cases of specific genetic defect, voluntary of birth-control, whether by an oral contracep-

sterilization is probably the best answer.* In the tive or perhaps preferably by immunological

defective married male, it should be coupled methods involving injections. Compulsory or

with artificial parenthood (A.P.) by donor semi-compulsory vaccination, inoculation and

insemination (A.I.D.) as the source of children. isolation are used in respect of many public

In the defective female, the fulfilments of child- health risks: I see no reason why similar meas-

rearing and family life will have to be secured by ures should not be used in respect of this grave

adoption until such time-which may not be problem, grave both for society and for the

very distant-as improved technique makes unfortunate people whose increase has been

possible artificial parenthood by transfer of actually encouraged by our social system.

fertilized ova, which we may call A.O.D. In both Many social scientists and social workers in

cases, it must be remembered that sterilization the West, as well as all orthodox Marxists, are

does not prevent normal healthy and happy environmentalists. They seem to believe that all

sexual intercourse.

or most human defects, including many that

Certified patients are now prevented from western biologists would regard as genetic, can

reproducing themselves by being confined in be dealt with, cured or prevented by improving

mental hospitals. If sterilized, they might be social environment and social organization.

allowed to marry if this were considered likely Even some biologists, like Professor Medawar,

to ameliorate their condition.

agree in general with this view, though he admits

In the case of the so-called social problem a limited role for negative eugenics, in the shape

group, somewhat different methods will be of what he calls "genetic engineering." For him,

needed. By social problem group I mean the the "newer solution" of the problem, which

people, all too familiar to social workers in large "goes some way towards making up for the

cities, who seem to have ceased to care, and just inborn inequalities of man," is simply to improve

* It will be even more satisfactory if, as now appears
likely, reversible male sterilization (vasectomy) becomes practicable.

the environment. With this I cannot agree.
Although certain particular problems can be dealt with in this way, for instance proneness to

135

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tuberculosis by improving living conditions and preventing-infection, such methods cannot cope with the general problem of genetic deterioration, because this, if not checked, will steadily increase through the accumulation of mutant
genes which otherwise would have been
eliminated. It is true that many diseases or defects with a
genetic basis, like diabetes or myopia, can be
cured by treatment, though almost always with some expense, trouble, or discomfort to the defective person as well as to society. But if the incidence of such defects (not to mention the many others for which no cure or remedy is now
known) were progressively multiplied, the burden would grow heavier and heavier and eventually wreck the social system. As in all other fields, we need to combine environmental and genetic measures, and if possible render them mutually reinforcing.
Against the threat of genetic deterioration through nuclear fall-out there are only two courses open. One is to ban all nuclear weapons and stop bomb-testing; the other is to take advantage of the fact that deep-frozen mammalian sperm will survive, with its fertilizing and genetic properties unimpaired, for a long period of time and perhaps indefinitely, and accordingly to build deep shelters for sperm-bankscollections of deep-frozen sperm from a representative sample of healthy and intelligent males. A complete answer must wait for the successful deep-freezing of ova also. But this may be achieved in the fairly near future, and in any case shelters for sperm-banks will give better genetic results than shelters for people, as well as being
very much cheaper. Positive eugenics has a far larger scope and
importance than negative. It is not concerned merely to prevent genetic deterioration, but aims to raise human capacity and performance to a
new level.
For this, however, it cannot rely on measures designed to produce merely a slight differential increase of genetically superior stocks, generation by generation. This is the way natural selection obtains its results, and it worked all right during the biological phase, when immense spans of time were available. But with the accelerated tempo ofmodern psychosocial evolu-

tion, much quicker results are essential. Luckily modem science is providing the necessary tech-
niques, in the shape of artificial insemination and the deep-freezing of human gametes. The effects of superior germ-plasm can be multiplied
ten or a hundredfold through the use of what I call E.I.D.-eugenic insemination by deliber-
ately preferred donors-and many thousand-
fold if the superior sperm is deep-frozen. This multiplicative method, harnessing man's
deep desires for a better future, was first put forward by H. J. Muller and elaborated by Herbert Brewer, who invented the terms eutelegenesis and agapogeny for different aspects of it. Some such method, or what we may term Euselection-deliberate encouragement of superior genetic endowment-will produce immediate results. Couples who adopt this method ofvicarious parenthood will be rewarded by children outstanding in qualities admired and preferred by the couple themselves.
When deep-frozen ova too can be successfully engrafted into women, the speed and efficiency of the process could of course be intensified.
Various critics insist on the need for far more detailed knowledge of genetics and selection before we can frame a satisfactory eugenic policy or even reach an understanding of evolution. I can only say how grateful I am that neither Galton nor Darwin shared these views, and state my own firm beliefthat they are not valid. Darwin knew nothing-I repeat nothing-about the actual mechanism of biological variation and inheritance: yet he was possessed of what I can only call a common-sense genius which gave him a general understanding of the biological process and enabled him to frame a theory of the process whose core remains unshaken and which has been able successfully to incorporate all the modifications and refinements of recent field study and genetic experiment.
Neither did the automatic process of natural selection "know" anything about the mechanisms of evolution. Luckily this did not prevent it from achieving a staggering degree of evolutionary transformation, including miracles of adaptation and improvement. From his seminal idea, Darwin was able to deduce important general principles, notably that natural selection would automatically tend to produce both diversifica-

136

EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

tion (adaptive radiation) and improvement the British population is in a state of natural

(biological advance or progress) in organization, balance. If so, it would be difficult to try to raise

but that lower types of organization would its average level by deliberate selective measures,

inevitably survive alongside higher.

and equally difficult for the level to sink auto-

Critics of positive eugenics like Medawar matically as the result of differential fertility of

inveigh against what they call "geneticism." the less intelligent groups.

However, he himself is guilty on this count, for Although Medawar (op. cit. p. 125) appears

he has swallowed the population geneticists' to disagree with Penrose's main contention, he

claim (which I have discussed earlier) that theirs concludes that: "If a tyrant were to attempt to

is the only scientifically valid definition of raise the intelligence of all of us to its present

fitness; and this in spite of his admission that maximum . . . I feel sure that his efforts would

one organic type can be more "advanced" than be self-defeating: the population would dwindle

another, and that "human beings are the out- in numbers and, in the extreme case, might die

come of a process which can perfectly well be out." It is true that he later enters a number of

described as an advancement." However, he minor caveats, but his main conclusion remains.

equates advancement with mere increase in This to me appears incomprehensible. If selec-

complexity of the "genetical instructions" given tion has operated, as it certainly has done in the

to the animal: if he had thought in broad evolu- past, during the passage from Pithecanthropus

tionary instead of restricted genetic terms he to present-day man, to bring about a very large

would have seen that biological advance involves rise in the level of genetic intelligence, why can

improved organization of the phenotype; that it not bring about a much smaller rise in the

fitness in the geneticismal sense is a purely immediate future? There are no grounds for

reproductive fitness; and that we must also take believing that modem man's system of genetic

into account immediate phenotypic fitness and variance differs significantly from that of his

long-term evolutionary fitness. To put it in a early human ancestors.

slightly different way, "fitness" as measured by As regards balanced morphisms, it is of course

differential survival of offspring is merely the true that they constitute stable elements in an

mechanism by which the long-term improve- organism's genotype. However, when their

ment of true biological fitness is realized.

stability is mainly due to linkage with a lethal,

Recent genetic studies have shown the wide- and therefore to double-dose disadvantage

spread occurrence of genetic polymorphism, in rather than to heterozygote advantage, they may

animal species and man, whether in the form of be destabilized by breaking the linkage. In any

sharply distinct morphs (as with colour-blindness case, morphisms stable in one environment may

and other sensory morphisms), in multiplicity of sometimes be broken up in another. This has

slightly different alleles, or merely in a very high happened, for instance, with the white-yellow

degree of potential variance. Some critics of sex-limited morphism of the butterfly Colias

positive eugenics maintain that this state of eurythema, which in high latitudes has ceased

affairs will prevent or at least strongly impede to exist, and the local population is mono-

any large-scale genetic improvement, owing to morphic, all homozygous white.

the resistance to change offered by genetic poly- Certainly some morphisms show very high

morphisms maintained by means of heterozygote stability. For instance the PTC (phenylthio-

advantage, which appear to comprise the carbamide) taste morphism occurs in apparently

majority of polymorphic systems.

identical form both in chimpanzees and man,

It has further been suggested, notably by and so must presumably have resisted change for

Professor Penrose, that people heterozygous for something like 10 million years. However, this

genes determining general intellectual ability, remarkable stability of a specific genotypic com-

and therefore of medium or mediocre intelli- ponent of the primate stock has not prevented

gence, are reproductively "fitter"-more fertile the transformation of one branch of that stock

-than those of high or low intelligence, and into man!

accordingly that, as regards genetic intelligence, Similar arguments apply to linked polygenic

'37

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

systems and to the general heterozygosity in Both these objections reveal the same lack of

respect of small allelic differences shown by so understanding of psychosocial evolution as the

many organisms, including man. In the former genetical objections revealed about biological

case, Mather has shown how selection can break evolution: more simply, they demonstrate the

the linkage and make the frozen variability same lack of faith in the potentialities of man

available for new recombinations and new that the purely genetical objections showed in

evolutionary change. In the latter case, the the actual operative realizations of life.

stability need not be so intense as with clear-cut For one thing, dogmatic tyranny in the

morphisms.

modem world is becoming increasingly self-

Frequently, it appears, polymorphism depends defeating: partly because it is dogmatic and

not so much on heterotic advantage as on a therefore essentially unscientific, partly because

varying balance of advantage between the alleles it is tyrannical and therefore in the long run

concerned in different conditions: one allele is intolerable. But the chief point is that human

more advantageous in certain conditions, another improvement never works solely or even mainly

in other conditions. The polymorphism is there- by such methods and is doing so less and less as

fore a form of insurance against extreme ex- man commits himself more thoroughly to the

ternal changes and gives flexibility in a cyclically process of general self-education.

or irregularly varying environment (Huxley Let me take an example. Birth-control re-

1955). Such loose polymorphic systems can sembles eugenics in being concerned with that

readily be modified by the incorporation of new most violent arouser of emotion and prejudice,

and the elimination of old mutant alleles and human reproduction. However, during my own

the incorporation of new ones in response to career, I have witnessed the subject break out of

directional changes in environment. In any case, the dark prison of taboo into the international

their widespread existence has not stood in the limelight. It was only in 1917 that Margaret

way ofdirectional evolutionary change, including Sanger was given ajail sentence for disseminating

the transformation of a protohominid into man. birth-control information. In the late twenties,

Why should they stand in the way of man's when I was already over forty, I was summoned

further genetic evolution?

before the first Director-General of the B.B.C.,

The same reasoning applies to those numerous now Lord Reith, and rebuked for having con-

cases where high genetic variance, actual or taminated the British ether with such a shocking

potential, is brought about by multiple genic subject. Yet two years ago an international

polymorphism, when many genes of similar gathering in New York paid tribute to Margaret

action exist, often in a number of slightly Sanger as one of the great women of our age.

different allelic forms.

Time and Life Magazines both published long

In all these cases the critics of eugenics have and reasoned articles on how to deal with the

been guilty of that very "geneticism" which they population explosion, and two official U.S.

deplore. They approach the subject from the committees reported in favour of the U.S.

standpoint of population genetics. If they were conducting more research on birth-control

to look at it from an evolutionary standpoint, methods and even of giving advice on the subject

their difficulties would evaporate, and they if requested by other nations. And to-day one

would see that their objections could not be can hardly open a copy of the most respectable

maintained.

newspapers without finding at least one refer-

Two further objections are often made to ence to the grievous effects ofpopulation increase

positive eugenics. One is by way of a question- and population density on one or another aspect

who is to decide which type to select for? The of human life in one or another country of the

other, which is by way of an answer to the first, globe, including our own. Meanwhile, six

is to assert that effective selection needs nations have started official policies of family

authoritarian methods and can only be put into planning and population control, and many

operation by some form of dogmatic tyranny, others are unofficially encouraging them.

usually stigmatized as intolerable or odious.

Birth-control, in fact, has broken through-

138

EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

and in so doing it has changed its character and ridden A.I.D. by an open-eyed and proudly

its methods. It began as a humanitarian cam- accepted E.I.D. where the E stands for

paign for the relief of suffering human woman- Eugenic.

hood, conducted by a handful of heroic figures, The pioneers of E.I.D., whether its publicists

mostly women. It has now become an important or its practitioners, will undoubtedly suffer all

social, economic and political campaign, led by kinds of abusive prejudice-they will be accused

powerful private associations, and sometimes of mortal sin, of theological impropriety, of

the official or semi-official concern of national immoral and unnatural practices. But they can

governments. Truth, in fact, prevails-though take heart from what has happened in the field of

its prevailing demands time, public opprobrium birth-control, and can be confident that the

of the self-sacrificing pioneers at the outset, and rational control of reproduction aimed at the

public discussion, backed by massive dissemina- prevention of human suffering and frustration

tion of facts and ideas, to follow.

and the promotion of human well-being and

We can safely envisage the same sort of fulfilment will in the not too distant future come

sequence for evolutionary eugenics, operating to be recognized as a moral imperative.

by what may be called Euselection, though The answers to the questions I mentioned at

doubtless with much difference in detail. Thus the beginning of this section are now, I hope,

the time to achieve public breakthrough might clear. There will be no single type to be selected

be longer because the idea of Euselection by for, but a range of preferred types; and this will

delegated paternity runs counter to a deep-rooted not be chosen by any single individual or com-

sense of proprietary parenthood. On the other mittee. The choice will be a collective choice

hand it might be shorter, since there is such a representing the varied preferences and ideals of

rapid increase in the popular understanding of all the couples practising euselection by E.I.D.,

science and in the agencies of mass communica- and it will not be dogmatically imposed by any

tion and information, and above all because of authoritarian agency, though as general accep-

the profound dissatisfaction with traditional tance of the method grows, it will be reinforced

ideas and social systems, which portends the by public opinion and official leadership. The

drastic recasting of thought and attitude that I way is open for the most significant step in the

call the Humanist Revolution.

progress of mankind-the deliberate improve-

Some things, at least, are clear. First, we need ment of the species by scientific and democratic

to establish the legality, the respectability, and methods.

indeed the morality of A.I.D. It must be cleared All the objections of principle to a policy of

of the stigma of sin ascribed to it by Church positive eugenics fall to the ground when the

dignitaries like Lord Fisher when Archbishop of subject is looked at in the embracing perspective

Canterbury, and from the legal difficulties to its of evolution, instead of in the limited perspec-

practice raised by the lawyers and administrators. tive of population genetics or the short-term

Most importantly, the notion of donor secrecy perspective of existing socio-political organiza-

must be abolished. Parents desiring A.I.D. tion. Meanwhile the obvious practical difficulties

should have not only the right but the duty of in the way of its execution are being surmounted,

choice. For the time being, it may possibly be or at least rendered surmountable, by scientific

best that the name and personal identity of a discovery and technical advance.

donor should not be known to the acceptors, In evolutionary perspective, eugenics-the pro-

but there should certainly be a register of gressive genetic improvement of the human

certified donors kept by medical men (and I species-inevitably takes its place among the

would hope by the National Health Service) major aims of evolving man. What should we

which would give particulars of their family eugenists do in the short term to promote this

histories. This would enable acceptors to exert long-term aim? We must of course continue to

a degree of conscious selection in choosing the do and to encourage research on human genetics

father of the child they desire, and so pave the and reproduction, including methods of con-

way for the supersession of blind and secrecy- ception-control and sterilization. The establish-

'39

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ment of the Darwin Research Fellowships is an important milestone in this field: I hope that we shall be able to enlarge our research activities in the future.
We must continue to support negative eugenic measures, especially perhaps in respect of the so-called Social Problem group. We should assuredly continue to be concerned about population increase, and to support all agencies and organizations aiming at sane and scientific policies of population-control. We must equally support all agencies giving eugenic advice and marriage guidance. Since significant eugenic improvement depends on donor insemination, we must do all we can to win public support for A.I.D., and to improve current practices in the subject.
In general, we must bring home to the general public the possibility of real genetic improvement, the burden it could lift off human shoulders, the hope it could kindle in human hearts. We must make people understand that social and cultural amelioration are not enough. If they are not to turn into temporary palliatives or degenerate into mere environmental tinkering, they must be combined with genetic amelioration, or at least with the hope of it in the future.
To ensure this, not only must the eugenics
movement help to educate the public and especially the members of the professions-medical, educational, scientific, administrative, and others
-in respect of eugenics, but it must make every
effort to get the educational system improved at all levels, so as to provide everyone with the necessary minimum of biological understanding -an understanding of reproduction and popula-
tion, genetics and selection, ecology and con-
servation, and above all of the process of
evolution in its awe-inspiring sweep and ofman's specific significance and responsibility in that comprehensive process.
If, as I firmly believe, man's role is to do the
best he can to manage the evolutionary process
on this planet and to guide its future course in a desirable direction, fuller realization of genetic possibilities becomes a major motivation for
man's efforts, and eugenics is revealed as one of the basic human sciences.

REFERENCES Baker, P. T. 1960. Climate, Culture and Evolution.
Humnan Biol., 32, 3. (Race, environment and culture.) Blacker, C. P. 1952. Eugenics: Galton and After. Duck-
worth. London. (Galton's work and views. Modern developments in eugenics.) Boyd, W. C. 1950. Genetics and the Races ofMan. Little, Brown. Boston (Race and evolution.) Brewer, H. 1935. Eutelegenesis: Eugen. Rev., 27, 121.
1939. Eutelegenesis. Lancet. 1939. 1, 265. 1961. Ethical Parenthood and Contraception. Balanced Living. Brookville, Ohio. (17) 3, p. 69. Burt, C. 1958. The Inheritance of Mental Ability. Amer. Psychol. 13, 1. (Eugenics and intelligence.) - 1959,1961. Class Differences in General Intelligence. Brit. J. statist. Psychol, 12, 15 - Intelligence and social mobility. Ibid., 14, 3. (Distribution of intelligence.) -1962. The Gifted Child. Yearbook ofEducation, 1962. p. 1. (Genetic intelligence.) Carter, C. F. 1961. The Economic Use of Brains. Advanc. Sci., Lond., 18, 222. (Shortage of individuals of high ability.) Coale, A. J. and Hoover, E. M. 1959. Population Growth and Economic Development in Low Income Countries. (O.U.P., Bombay.) Count, E. W. 1950. This is Race. Schuman. New York. (History of racial concepts.) Darlington, C. D. 1960. (Review of P. B. Medawar's The Future of Man.) Heredity, 15, 44. Dobzhansky, Th. 1962. Mankind Evolving. Yale Univ. Press. New Haven and London. D.N.A. (Population genetics, race, polymorphism, fitness, eugenics, cultural evolution, genotype and phenotype.) Fisher, R. A., Ford, E. B. and Huxley, J. S. 1939. Tastetesting the anthropoid apes. Nature, 144,750. (Sensory morphisms, apes and man.) Ford, E. B., 1949. Polymorphism. Biol. Rev., 20, 73. (Morphism, blood groups and disease.) - 1956. Genetics for Medical Students. Methuen. London (Human genetics; morphism.) Hulse, F. S. 1960. Adaptation, Selection and Plasticity in Ongoing Human Evolution. Hwnan Biol., 32, 63. (Genetic plasticity and environment.) Huxley, J. S. 1953. Evolution in Action. London and New York. Chatto and Windus (Natural selection and biological improvement.) - 1955. Morphism and Evolution, Heredity, 9, 1. Huxley, J. S. (Ed.). 1961. The Humanist Frame. Allen and Unwin and Harpers. London and New York. (Introductory Chapter. General evolutionary theory.) Kalmus, H. 1959. Genetical Variation and Sense-Perception. Ciba Found. Symp., Biochem. Human Genetics, 60. (Sensory defects and morphisms.) Livingstone, F. B. 1960. Natural Selection, Disease and Ongoing Human Evolution. Human Biol., 32, 17. Mather, K. 1953. Genetical Control of Stability in Development. Heredity, 7, 297. (Balanced polymorphism, stability, release of variance.) - 1956. Polygenic Mutation and Variation in Populations. Proc. roy. Soc. (B), 145, 292 (as for op. cit.) McConnell, R. A. 1961. The Absolute Weapon. Amer. Inst. biol. Sci. Bull., 11, 14. (Eutelegenesis; importance of
individials of high ability.) Medawar, P. B. 1960. The Future of Man: The Reith
Lectures. Methuen. London. Montague, A. 1957. Anthropology and Human Nature.
Sargent. Boston. (Environmentalist views on race.)

140

EUGENICS IN EVOLUTIONARY PERSPECTIVE

Motusky, A. G. 1960. Metabolic Polymorphisms and the Role of Ifectious Dies in Human Evolution. HumanBiol. 32,29. (Morphisms and dises-resistance.)
Muller, H. J. 1929. The Method of Evolution. Scf. Monthly, Dec. 1929, 481. (Naturl selection and directional evolution.) 1936. Out ofthe Night. Gollancz. London. (Eugenics and eutelegenesis.) 1949. The Darwinian and Modem Conceptions of Natural Selection. Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., 93, 459. (Natural selection; fitness.) 1950a. Our Load of Mutations. Amer. J. hum. Genet. 2, 111. (Genetic load.) 1950b. Radiation damage to the Genetic Material. nAmer. Scientist, 38, 3. (Effects of X rays, fall-out, etc.) 1959. The Guidance of Human Evolution. Persp. Biol. Med., 3, 1. (Eutelegenesis, deep-frozen sperm.)
-1961a. (Review of P. B. Medawar's The Future of Man.) Persp. Biol. Med., 4, 377. 1961b. Human Evolution by Voluntary Choice of Germ-plasm. Science, 134, 643. (Eutelegenesis, agapogeny.) 1961c. The Human Future: The Humanist Frame, ed. J. S. Huxley. London and New York. (Cultural and
genetic evolution.)

Pettenkofer, H. J. et. al. 1962. Nature, 193, 445. (Blood-
group morphisms and disease-resistance.) Roberts, J. A. Fraser. 1959. An Introduction to Medicl
Genetics, 2nd Ed. O.U.P. Oxford. Sauvy, A. 1961. Fertility and Surwvival. Chatto and
Windus. London. (Over-population and economic development.) Sheldon, W. H. 1940. The Varieties of Human Physique. Harpers. New York. Sheppard, P. M. 1958. Natural Selection and Heredity. Hutchinson. London. (Natural selection.) Tax, S. (Ed.). 1960. Articles by Kroeber, Washburn and Howell, Adams, Steward, et. al. in The Evolution of Man, Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago. (Evolution and culture.) Thoday, J. M. 1953. Components of Fitness. Symp. Soc. exp. Biol. (Evolution) 96. (Fitness, stability, selection.) Waddington, C. H. 1957. The Strategy of the Genes. Allen and Unwin. London. (Genetic imation; genetics and development.) Williams, R. 1960. Why Human Genetics? J. Hered, 51, 91. (Human genetic variance and environment.)

141
xR-B

