NOTES AND MEMORANDA

Members' Meetings
THURSDAY, January 25th, I940, at 3 p.m.:
" The Health of Working Women and its Significance in War-Time." Speaker: Mrs. Margery Spring Rice, M.A. (Author of Work-
ing Class Wives). Tuesday, March igth, I940: " Abortion
-Right or Wrong? " Speaker: Mrs. Thurtle (Author of the Minority Statement in the Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Abortion).
Friday, April igth, I940: Arrangements
to be announced later.
Propaganda Department
IT has not been possible to do much in the Propaganda Department during the last three months. Owing to the evacuation and consequent dislocation of all existing health services, the local authorities have discontinued much of their health publicity work. But now, the National Council for Maternity and Child Welfare and the Central Council for Health Education-two Societies to which this Society is affiliatedare trying to arrange for health educational work in the now crowded reception areas, and it may be possible for the Propaganda Department to co-operate.
Mrs. Tamplin went to South Wales at the beginning of the war and was asked to speak on Heredity at meetings of the local Left Book Club and of the Rotary Club. From this small beginning, there is a growing demand for her to speak at other Clubs and Societies, but the difficulties are the commandeering of local halls and meeting places by the authorities, and the black-out. But as the days get lighter, it will be possible to increa:se the work both in London and other parts of the country.
A few colleges and schools have shown the film and the headmaster of one writes: " The films were shown to a group of VIth Form Medical Students, one of the Doctors working here for the Ministry of Health, myself and a colleague. The films excited much interest but there was no open

discussion, since these matters have been mentioned and discussed many times during this term's work on genetics. The adult members of the audience feel that it is most valuable to make senior boys realize the existence of grave social problems and how Science helps to seek the causes and remedy them. There was a general and obviously sincere appreciation of the films."
I spoke at a meeting of a Women's Institute in a small village in the home counties at which the Vicar's wife was present. Shortly after, the Vicar called at these offices, bought three dozen copies of Sex Education for Children and took away with him Mating and the Birth of Children and full particulars of the Society. He said that these pamphlets are the best that he has come across and will be invaluable to him in dealing with the young people in his parish.
HILDA POCOCK.
Family Plannng Association
ALTHOUGH the inevitable limitations caused by the first few months of war have necessarily cancelled the plans made for further development of the work in many directions (and these include the usual autumn special effort to raise a substantial sum of money) it has, in spite of fears, been found possible to keep the Headquarters of the Association in being at 69 Eccleston Square, although with only a very small staff. It is, among other activities, fulfilling constantly the functions of a central bureau for enquiries from the medical profession and from others interested in the objects of the Association, such as chemists, nurses, parents, and prospective parents. The latter include the physically unfit, the very poor, and those with a somewhat higher standard of living who are anxious to plan their families. Enquirers of this type who form a large proportion are almost unanimous in stating their desire to rear a family but also to plan it intelligently.

21I

2I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A welcome extension of work this winter is the possibility, through the co-operation of the Queen's Institute of District Nursing, of providing County Superintendents, and through them district nurses, with information as to clinics where patients may attend for contraceptive advice. When the F.P.A. can attain its object of enlarging the number of gynaecological clinics available this information to nurses should be of increasing value.
Although at the outbreak of war a number of clinics suspended their work the tendency now is for these to re-open. It is hoped that before very long only a few of the newer clinics will remain closed.
One extension of the work which is being in no way curtailed at present is organization and propaganda in India. Mrs. Datta, the F.P.A. organizer, airns at concentrating at present on one area in order to experiment and to develop something which may prove a demonstration and an example as to the type of contraceptive service which may be possible in India, and on which other such efforts may model themselves according to their local conditions if it is successful.
The continuance of this work will, however, entirely depend on the provision of funds. Only the generosity of subscribers who have maintained their subscriptions, a substantial donation from the Chairman, Lady Denman, and a grant of £50 from the Eugenics Society have made it possible to continue the work of the Association at all.
W. HOLLAND.
News from Canada
THE Dominion Bureau of Statistics has issued a preliminary annual report on the Vital Statistics of Canada for I938. The population of Canada is given as II,95,000. The birth-rate is 20 - 5 per I,OOO of population. For many years this rate has been falling. For the period I926-30 the rate was 24-I. For the period I93I-5 it was 21.4. In
I936 it fell to 200o and in I937 there was a further drop to I9-8. The rate for I938,
20 5, marks a halt to the long period of decline. Whether that halt be permanent or temporary, only the future can tell.

A feature of the returns is the position of
Quebec in second place to New Brunswick for the first time in history. In both provinces the rate increased, but in New Bruns-
wick to an extent which gave her the highest rate in the Dominion. The following table compares the rates in these two provinces, in Ontario, and in Canada as a whole:

BIRTHS PER THOUSAND OF POPULATION

New Brunswick Quebec Ontario Canada

1926-30 25 *8

30°5

2I1*

24.I

193I-5

24-9

26-6

i8.3

214

I936

24.2

24.3

i6*9

200

1937
I938

24.0
25-7

24.1
24.6

i6*6
I7.6

I9-8
205

The three provinces with lowest birthrates in I938 were: Manitoba i8 - 7;
Ontario I7 - 6; and British Columbia i6 * 3. But if Ontario is far behind in the matter of births, it makes a satisfactory showing in marriages. The Province's marriage rate has increased from 6 8 in I93I-5 to 8 i in both I937 and I938. In Quebec the I938 marriage
rate was7 9.
Illegitimate births have, unfortunately, increased in Canada from an average of 3-0I per hundred births in I926-30 to 4*0I in I938. Nova Scotia was highest in I938 with 6-4 per cent illegitimate births; Ontario next with 4 7, Quebec lowest with 3-2.

***

As soon as the war is over, there will be need in Canada for hospital accommodation for at least IO,OOO more mental patients. This was the statement of Dr. C. M. Hincks, General Director of the National Committee for Mental Hygiene, before the Women's Division of the Health League of Canada. In I93I the number of beds in mental institutions was 30,379. On December 3ISt, I938, the number was 39,833. The present total Canadian capital investment in mental
hospitals is around $65,000,000.
W. L. HUTTON.

Welfare of Adolescents
THE Board of Education has called attention to a serious deficiency in our social services in a circular issued to local education authorities for higher education in England and Wales, and a similar circular has been

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

213

issued by the Secretary of State for Scotland. leaders and towards the upkeep and main-

These authorities are asked to set up local tenance of premises and equipment. They

Youth Committees in their areas, and can also provide instructors in such subjects

voluntary organizations and education as physical recreation and craft work for

authorities are called upon to join forces in classes in clubs and other centres. Such

making a reality of the provision for youth approved expenditure by local authorities

in all parts of the country.

will rank for grant at the rate of 50 per cent.

The circular deals with the provision for the

social and physical development of boys and Professor William Washington Graves

girls between the ages of I4 and 20 who have AT a meeting of the St. Louis Medical

ceased full-time attendance at school. This Society on October 24th, I939, Dr. William

has long been neglected in this country and, Washington Graves, Professor of Neuro-

notwithstanding the efforts of local authori- psychiatry, St. Louis University School of

ties and voluntary organizations, less than Medicine, was awarded a certificate of merit

half the boys and girls concerned belong to and a gold medal for scientific accomplish-

any organization which can cater for their ment for his classification of scapulae and

needs. The Board points out that the condi- other inherited characters, and for his

tions produced by war, the blackout, and the discovery of "The Age-Incidence Principle

strain and disorganization of family life of Investigation. " This certificate of merit for

constitute a serious menace to youth. " The scientific accomplishment having been given

Government," it states, " are determined to on only two previous occasions, the award

prevent the recurrence during this war of to Dr. Graves was an outstanding event in

the social problems which arose in the last." the St. Louis Medical Society.

The Board of Education has now under- The certificate reads as follows: This

taken a direct responsibility for youth Certificate of Merit presented by the St.

welfare. National Youth Committees have Louis Medical Society to William Washing-

been appointed to advise it and a special ton Graves, M.D., in consideration of the

branch has been organized to deal with grants and other administrative duties.

usefulness of his classification of scapula and other inherited characters, and of his dis-

The new Committees will place provision covery of " The Age-Incidence Principle of

for the welfare of young people on an equal Investigation," both of which resulted in

basis with the rest of education. It will be new approaches to the qualitative evaluation

their task to work out an ordered policy of inherited variations in relation to the

which will provide for immediate needs and inherited qualities of human constitution,

indicate the lines upon which a real advance expressed in inherited predisposition to

may be made under more favourable condi- health or disease, and in inherited capacity

tions. They will have to plan future develop- for education, for adaptability, and for

ment and decide where the responsibility for longevity.

any new facilities will lie; and in doing this

they are reminded by the Board that social and economic questions cannot be ignored

National Baby Welfare Council

and that when young people are living under THE Executive Committee of the National

unsatisfactory conditions and are employed Baby Week Council announces that the name

for unduly long hours, often on work of a of the Council has been changed to NATIONAL

dull and arduous character, they cannot be BABY WELFARE COUNCIL.

expected to take full advantage of any The National Baby Week Council came

facilities offered for the use of such leisure as into being during the last war, claiming the

is left to them.

nation's better attention to its babies and

The local education authorities can assist little children. In I9I7 the first National

financially by making grants towards the Baby Week was held, and I9I8 saw the first

rent of buildings and salaries of full-time great triumph in the passing of the Maternity

2I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and Child Welfare Act. Since that time the Council has continuously pursued its labours -keeping the welfare of mothers and children before the public. Under its broader title the National Baby Welfare Council will expand its propaganda work and develop its service to the nation. The Council's address is 29 Gordon Square, London, W.C.i.
Galton Anniversary Luncheon, 1940
OWING to the war, the usual Galton Dinner will not take place this year, and the Galton Lecture has been deferred.

A luncheon will be held at St. Ermins Restaurant (entrance in Broadway, St. James's Park, S.W.i), on February 17th, at I.I5 p.m. (for I.30). Guests will be welcomed by Lord Horder, who will say a few words about the activities of the Society in war-time.
Tickets, price 4s. 6d., may be obtained from
the Business Secretary, The Eugenics Society, 69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.i, and should be purchased as early as possible as it may not be easy to increase the numbers
arranged for at the last moment.. Fellows and Members are invited to bring guests.

JOURNAL OF THE
ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY
First Issued in 1838
The annual volume consists at present of four parts, each of which contains two papers read at Meetings of the Society, with full reports of the discussions thereon; also Miscellaneous statistical articles, Reviews of statistical and economic books, and.Notes on matters of
current interest to statisticians.
Principal Contents of Part IV, 1939
THE CAPITAL MARKET OF TO-DAY: A Discussion, opened by
A. P. L. GORDON.
SOME ASPECTS OF THE TEACHING OF STATISTICS
By JOHN WISHART (With Discussion.)
STATISTICS RELATING TO THE DETERRENT ELEMENT IN FLOGGING
By E. LEWIS-FANING, Ph.D.

1PRICE

1

Each Part . .l

Annual Subscription
(Post free to anypart of the World)

41 /

The JouRNAL and SuPPLEMFNT will be issued as usual during 1940

Obtainabk through any Bookseller or directfrom

THE ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY

4 PORTUGAL STREET, LONDON, W.C.2

