ON PRACTICAL EXPERIENCE OF STERILIZATION IN SWITZERLAND

By PROFESSOR DR. HANS MAIER
(Director of the Psychiatric Clinic of the University of Zurich)

IT is an honour and a pleasure for me to normal the following types should be differ-

report in the land where Francis Galton entiated: there are patients who during

in I883 laid the foundation of modem periods of convalescence have sufficient in-

eugenics, the modest findings which we have sight and strength of will to abstain com-

been able to collect in Switzerland. Out of pletely from sexual intercourse, or in whom

my field of work arises a special interest in the psychosis has caused such a degree of

the question of the prevention of psychiatric autism* that no danger exists in this direc-

disorders. In our psychiatric clinic, Burg- tion. It is just in the case of psychically ab-

h6lzli, in Zurich, with 400-500 patients, in normal married and unmarried people that

which I have worked for twenty-eight years, birth control, which among normal people

and have directed during the past six years, usually suffices to limit issue, often fails, be-

the interest of society in the fate of the cause they do not carry out the precautions

mentally ill and in the prevention of mental properly, or completely forget them at the

disorders was already particularly keen under critical moment. The patients who have to

the directorship of my predecessors, August be interned in an institution for a consider-

Forel (I879-98) and Eugen Bleuler (I898- able period of time are naturally protected

I927), so that I can report to you experiences during this time. But, as you know, modem

reaching back over nearly fifty years. A psychiatry believes in making the patient

little country like ours, in which there is a so much better during his stay in the institu-

relatively high degree of general education, tion that he can be discharged again as soon

is particularly suitable for the personal con- as possible. Precisely with the greater num-

tact between the clinic and the practising ber of schizophrenics this considerable ad-

physician, and again between these and the vance in medicine also relieves the institu-

courts and various administrative boards, so tions and reduces expenses. The principle of

we have been able to make various practical discharging patients as soon as possible,

experiments which could either not have been which we have practised with good results

made in other places, or else with a great deal for several decades, brings about the fact

more difficulty.

that many a patient who would formerly

I should like to review the entire field of have degenerated in the asylum attains a

psychiatric experience with sterilization good degree of recovery. The advance in

measures, with the exception of castration of occupational therapy and psychotherapy

sexual delinquents. It is obvious that this is in institutions, which we supplement by

a question not only of purely eugenic concern special measures, such as the sleep cure for

but also, in many cases, of the individual the schizophrenics, has, however, as regards

care of the patient. Both factors are gener- eugenics, the drawback that the patient,

ally present, as for example in the case of a despite his illness, is the sooner in a position

schizophrenic woman in whom each preg- to reproduce. The only sure method of

nancy aggravated her psychosis and in whose hindering this is to prevent conception, or

case, therefore, sterilization afforded a thera- the ejaculation of sperm, either through liga-

peutic as well as a prophylactic measure.

If we first consider the possibilities for the prevention of issue in the psychically ab-

* A tendency to turn away from the outside world
and become completely self-centred.

I9

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tion of the tubes or the vas deferens, or by exists on account of individual or racial

means of castration, or X-ray irradiation. hygiene, our judges have taken the sensible

Irradiation is, in our experience, not to be point of view that it is a matter of healing

relied upon for permanence, and it brings and, therefore, a legal prophylactic measure.

with it the danger that a true differentiation Usually sterilization carries an advantage

between mere sterilization and the destruc- for the patient himself. The law should pro-

tion of the gonads, that is castration, is not tect society and, therefore, it is evident that

possible. For this reason we seldom use it, it may not act as a hindrance to racial

and then only in the case of women upon hygienic prophylaxis. A doctor who, after

whom for other reasons an operation cannot careful consideration and examination,

be performed. It is our duty as physicians to comes to the conclusion that sterilization

prevent conception in the way least harmful is necessary is, therefore, in our country

to the patient, and this is the ligation of the not liable to punishment. As it is always a

tubes or vasa deferentia, which we herein- question of the resulting complications and

after call sterilization. Castration, on the an irreparable operation we hold the point

other hand, is a mutilation, which so far as of view that the surgeon alone should not

we are concerned comes only into considera- decide, but that he should professionally

tion in infrequent cases of male sexual consult with a psychiatrist, whose findings are

delinquents, where the primary object is to to be given in writing so that they can be

eliminate the physical portion of the libido. verified at any time. One of the difficulties

According to our experience no general is that generally the operation can only be

rule can be formulated as to which particu- performed with the patient's consent. In the

lar psychiatric disease calls for the applica- case of the mentally sick, this consent cannot

tion of a certain one of the methods here always be had, and when this is the case it

enumerated for the prevention of issue. must be decided whether the person in ques-

Especially in psychiatry the important thing tion is, despite his illness, capable of deciding

in all our methods is not the nature of the the question. If this is doubtful, we regu-

disease in question, but its course (which larly put the facts before the Guardians'

varies from individual to individual), and Council,* which, after considering the case,

the external circumstances, and above all the usually gives its approval. When a patient

individual disposition (that is, the unaffected still has some capacity of judgment, it is

portion of the personality) ; it is, therefore, usually possible to convince him of the neces-

the first principle in this field to judge each sity of the operation and also to get his con-

case on its own merits and vary our procedure sent. If this plan does not succeed, we give

accordingly.

up the operation, but in such cases the

We must now examine if and how we have authorities often use other methods so that

the right as physicians to carry out such the patient finally acquiesces. For example,

operations. The law varies in different a woman who, during an attack of schizo-

countries, and I can only give you here a phrenia, killed her child and was committed

picture of our conditions. Law is also, how- to an asylum, may only be discharged from

ever, subject to development and change the asylum with the Court's permission. If

and, therefore, the experience and concepts the danger exists that the woman might kill

of one country can be of value to another. another child after another pregnancy, the

Every injury to a person's bodily integrity is authorities decide that the patient may only

punishable in most countries-and also in be discharged if she is first sterilized. The

ours-as " bodily injury," except when it is same procedure is carried out, for example,

applied by a physician in the healing of in the case of a weak-minded girl who, after

disease. When it comes to judging the oper- discharge from the institution, runs the

ation of sterilization it depends what one

means by the term healing. When a doctor declares that the necessity for sterilization

* Not Poor-law Guardians, but those responsible for minors," that is " Court of Wards."

STERILIZATION IN SWITZERLAND

2I

danger of again having illegitimate children. there is no prospect, or very little, of an

In our experience most cases can, when improvement in their external circumstances.

necessary, be operated upon by these means, In these cases there must always be the

even in the absence of special laws regulating certainty that the woman's constitution

sterlization. If two doctors perform the cannot bear the further burden without great

operation and write out their findings, there injury to her health, and that the usual

is no danger of the procedure being abused. means of contraception will fail. In these

The marriage laws in Switzerland consti- cases we usually require the written consent

tute a further aid in this field. The law reads of both the woman and her husband and

that the mentally sick, and persons incapable then, upon our recommendation, the gynae-

of judgment, may not marry, and that cologist is enabled to perform the operation.

marriages which are, nevertheless, contracted Sometimes, indeed, in such cases we come to

between such people are to be annulled. In the conclusion that the more defective, per-

our country the judge takes the point of haps the less healthy member of the partner-

view that above all the propagation of the ship, is not the woman but the man, and then

insane should be avoided in the interests of we require that the operation be performed

racial hygiene. From this we can see that we upon him-which is a much simpler pro-

also have the right to prevent the illegiti- cedure and one entailing no disturbance of

mate production of such patients. It even the potentia coeundi. Because of men's

occurs in border-line cases, where it is a egoism in this matter, it is frequently difficult

question whether a psychic defective may to obtain their consent, but we succeed,

marry or not, that the judge only permits nevertheless, in not a few instances. This is

the marriage if one of the two partners be particularly the case when it is a question of

previously sterilized. Naturally, these are interrupting an already existing pregnancy.

only exceptions, for, in principle, the bear- Then we explain, if grounds for interrupting

ing of children should be the corner-stone of the present pregnancy are sufficient, that we

marriage.

can only interrupt the pregnancy if the

Just as we prescribe and permit steriliza- man is first sterilized, so that another preg-

tion in cases where it is necessary, so we nancy will not occur. The question of inter-

oppose it wherever it is not indicated. Some- rupting a pregnancy in the case of psychic

times the authorities try to force girls, who defectives is frequently combined with the

have had the misfortune to bear one or two necessity of sterilization. In accordance with

illegitimate children, to be sterilized in order our policy, we hold that, in general, the

that they may not cause further expense eugenic consideration is not, or is not in

through subsequent pregnancies. If no itself, sufficient reason to interupt preg-

psychic or physical defect is present to nancy, because it is here a question of the

justify this we always refuse to comply with destruction of a living being. The inter-

these wishes. We take the same point of ruption of pregnancy should only be per-

view with regard to people who desire oper- formed when by its means one can prevent

ative sterilization as a luxury or an easy way serious damage to a patient's health or life.

out. In this case the doctor is not justified, With the social conditions that exist to-day

since no medical reasons exist. Quite other- we are certainly of the opinion that the social

wise are the circumstances in the case of grounds alone cannot be the determining

married women in miserable economic condi- factor, but it is a factor that the physician

tions who have several children and who are must also take into consideration.

simply not in a position to bring more chil- On the physical side this is certainly true:

dren into the world and to bring them up. a rich woman with mild tuberculosis can

Here it is, as a rule, not a question of patients afford the best care, and therefore runs far

in our institution, but of polyclinic patients, less risk in pregnancy than a poor woman

whose weak psychic and physical dispositions with the same affliction. In deciding whether

are exhausted through poverty, and where there is to be an interruption of pregnancy

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

we let ourselves be guided by a consideration But we can the better maintain this protec-

of the whole physical and psychic condi- tion if we see to it that pregnancies, which

tion of the pregnant woman, and also take in view of the circumstances cannot go to

into account the social and eugenic aspects. term without grave injury, may be inter-

Equally in such cases, the findings of two rupted by recognized procedure in hospital.

physicians must be stated, and in psychiatric Let us now return to the sterilization of

cases those of a psychiatrist as well, and a institutional patients with more serious

protocol must be drawn up. If there is the mental disease. These are above all feeble-

likelihood that future pregnancies will cause minded girls who usually, without being

similar complications, and especially if themselves particularly active sexually, are

eugenic reasons exist, we perform the inter- not capable of defending themselves against

ruption on condition that sterilization also sexual approaches, and for that reason,

be carried out, and in such cases permission although unmarried, become repeatedly preg-

for the latter is usually granted. Usually our nant. Many of these girls could remain with

surgeons only perform this operation after their family or otherwise at liberty and could

an official psychiatrist has re-examined the earn their living if this danger did not exist.

case and has written a report. Sometimes Many of these have to be interned because

specific inquiries are also made through the in their weak-minded helplessness they kill

social service workers and documentary a child. Others come to the psychiatrist for

evidence concerning the social and family the most diverse reasons. Very often eugenic

conditions, so that there be no danger of as well as individual grounds lead to the

being deceived by the people in the case. decision for sterilization. One is faced with

Besides, the physicians are, of course, aware the alternative of having to intern such an

of the fact that sterilization, while a more abnormal person as long as she is capable of

serious operation and one with more serious bearing children, or else of sterilizing her and

consequences than interruption of preg- giving her her freedom. The latter is the

nancy, is, nevertheless, one that carries with lesser of two evils for the patient, and at the

it less danger of bringing them into conflict same time a great advantage for society.

with the law.

It is well known that not all cases of feeble-

In the past four years an average of 500 mindedness can be inherited, but neverthe-

pregnant women, with more or less serious less many can. What is more, these un-

psychic disturbances and depressions, have married mothers are not capable of bringing

been reported on each year in our Polyclinic. up their children. Naturally, we do not con-

In half the cases we affirmed the need of sider every little mental defect as reason for

interruption; in two-thirds of them we found sterilization, but require that the feeble-

that they ought to be sterilized; and in six- mindedness be at least of such a degree that

tenths of the cases we expressed our opinion the possibility of marriage is out of the

that the operation should be carried out question.* As there are many people whose

upon the husband. We believe that such a intellectual development is only retarded, we

careful examination, taking into account all never undertake such sterilizations until the

the circumstances leading to a decision in twentieth up to the twenty-fifth year, and

favour of interruption, is the best method of before so doing still attempt education in an

combating criminal interruption with all its institution for the feeble-minded. The same

evil consequences, both physical and moral. rule applies to feeble-minded men, although

If at the same time we decide to carry out a the question here is less frequently a practical

sterilization, we are applying the best method one. We have, however, a few such young

of decreasing the number of unfortunate men every year upon whom we carry out the

pregnancies in the future. From a medical operation on these grounds. We are even

standpoint we also believe that, in the inter- more careful in the case of people with

ests of women and society, the continuation

of legal protection of pregnancy is necessary.

* According to Swiss law.

STERILIZATION IN SWITZERLAND

23

psychopathic tendencies. Amongst these we
often find people who, as they grow older,
can still fit into society and can even found a family. As a general rule, sterilization is
performed only in those cases where a grave moral defect, sometimes combined with the
psychopathy, and an incurable lack of social
principles, indicate the operation. These
cases are very infrequent, but just the moral
defect, which is capable of reaching an ac-
tively criminal degree, is in our opinion also very much to be feared eugenically, as it is
often directly inherited in a most alarming
manner. In the two groups of endogenic
psychoses again the circumstances are different. In the cases of actual manic-depressive
psychoses, which are really few, we hardly have occasion to consider the indications for sterilization. Most of these are in institutions during the period 9f illness, and during the convalescent periods are able to control themselves sexually. The group of schizo-
phrenias are quite the opposite. Here we fear, above all, inheritance, and the unreli-
ability of the patient in his sexual relations. A hard-and-fast rule for schizophrenics can-
not, in our experience, be formulated. Most of those who are interned have periods of
improvement, and are at liberty part of the time. Many of them are so autistic, that
they are no sexual risk. In others, especially
married schizophrenics, or in hebephrenic girls, on the other hand, this is very decidedly not the case. The inheritance of the schizophrenias is similar to that of recessives; it is, however, not yet completely worked out. It is certainly desirable that carriers of inheritable schizophrenia should be sterilized.
We must see clearly, however, that not only the schizophrenic himself, but many people with schizophrenic relatives, who themselves remain well, are transmitters of schizophrenia. Further, not infrequently people fall ill with schizophrenia after they have already produced children and these children are naturally as seriously hereditarily tainted as if they were born after the outbreak of the disease. It is our experience in general that patients who have once been committed to an institution because of schizophrenia do not bring many more chil-

dren into the world, with the exception of girls who are afterwards married off by their families. Among the great mass of schizophrenic patients in institutions, there is a certain limited number where we convince the patient and his family that sterlization is indicated, and carry out the procedure. Here, however, we must judge every case absolutely on its own merits. With many patients the operation has no practical value, and if regularly prescribed might carry a certain psychic trauma that would influence the course of the psychosis unfavourably.* In epilepsy we exercise the same regard for the individual case. We know to-day that this is a group of diseases of which only a small percentage is inheritable. In this group procreation should certainly be prevented, but this can be done in many cases without an operation, simply by placing the epileptic under proper supervision. With female epileptics pregnancy frequently aggravates the condition, and in such cases there is an individual ground for sterilization as in the case of many schizophrenics.
The bad influence of alcoholism was formerly certainly exaggerated, but there is, nevertheless, a group of completely degenerate alcoholics, who can no longer bring any normal children into the world, and who are in no position to bring up children. In those cases in which we do not succeed in placing the patient permanently in an institution, which is usually the best course, we frequently recommend sterlization. The morphine and cocaine habit in both men and women is still more harmful to posterity than alcoholism. When it is a question of incurables, conditions usually are already so bad that no children are conceived. Those infrequent cases that we do sterilize in the main are individuals who from childhood on were gravely psychopathic and hereditarily tainted.
Of the instances that I have mentioned, it seems to me that the timely sterilization of
* A single woman of exemplary life and nearing the menopause might feel " hurt " if it were considered that she could not be trusted to refrain from marriage and parenthood knowing that she risked having tainted offspring.

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the congenitally feeble-minded is the most The decision for the advisability of the

important for society. Eugenically, this is all operation is, be it noted, not dependent on a

the more important because such defectives court of law, but only on a court of hygiene.

frequently marry one another and the chil- It is not compulsory for all patients with

dren produced by them have a still less certain diseases, but only for individual cases.

promising inheritance. In the other psychic Such a law can be good for obstinate and

disturbances one must consider each case especially criminal mental defectives.

absolutely individually, and frequently good In consequence of this opinion the Canton

can be achieved and misfortune prevented. Vaud has allowed in its new penal law from

One might here raise the objection that I93I the interruption of pregnancy for

sterilization would upset the moral behaviour eugenic reasons. This paragraph is as fol-

in certain psychic defectives and allow them lows:

to lose still further their sexual repressions. Our experience has shown us, however, that this is not the case. It is possible to supervise a psychic defective outside of an insti-
tution and to prevent his coming into bad society and neglect. It is, however, impossible to prevent his occasionally having sexual intercourse, and it is fortunate, personally

Art. I30. L'avortement n'est pas punissable, lorsqu'il est pratique sur une per-
sonne atteinte de maladie mentale ou d'une infirmite mentale, dont la descendance selon toutes previsions ne peut etre
que taree. Toutefois il ne peut etre opere qu'avec l'autorisation du Conseil de sante.

and socially, if one can prevent the preg- So far as I know, the administration and

nancies that might ensue. The repression the results in these countries were about the

which normal people have through fear of same as ours in Zurich, although we possess

pregnancy is generally absent in psychic de- no actual sterilization law.

fectives. Therefore sterilization does not Personally, I am of the opinion that steril-

carry with it an added danger of sexual ization is a matter which makes so profound

promiscuity for such individuals.

an inroad on the integrity of the individual,

As you know, special laws have been issued that it should only be performed under

in many countries concerning sterilization. medical direction and with great understand-

At first this was so in several states in ing of the individual case. We must recog-

North America, where, however, the laws nize the fact that through orders of a court

were very incompletely carried out. Then a great number of the carriers of psychic

Scandinavian countries, and three years ago defects, who are themselves often normal,

a Swiss canton, Vaud, also issued such a will escape, and that therefore the good

law. The law of I930 of the Swiss Canton results will not be so great as the layman

Vaud is as follows:

imagines.

Art. 28 bis. Une personne atteinte de maladie mentale ou d'une infirmite mentale peut etre l'objet de mesures d'ordre medical pour empecher la survenance d'enfants, si elle est reconnue incurable et si, selon toutes pr6visions, elle ne peut avoir qu'une descendance taree.
L'intervention m6dicale n'a lieu que sur autorisation du Conseil de sante.
Le Conseil de sante lui-meme ne donne cette autorisation qu'apres enquete et sur preavis conforme de deux medecins d& sign6s par lui.

Moreover, the innovation of a tribunal for sterilization runs the risk of officially branding people as defective who are already un-
happy enough, and by whom even without
the operation there is no danger of reproduction. If our institutional directors are to be forced to parade all their patients before the
court in conformity with a sterilization law, fear and prejudice against the institutions will arise, not only among the patients,
but amongst their relatives as well, such as we have had to fight for decades, and are gradually overcoming. It is to be feared that such a law would make it very difficult for us

Il d6cide de l'attribution des frais.

to get correct information from the patients

STERILIZATION IN SWITZERLAND

25

and their relatives concerning the heredity say that we in our circumstances usually

in the family.

achieve this by threatening these people with

I have shown you how we, in Switzerland, commitment to an institution, or work-

through enlightenment of the people and house, if they will not consent to the oper-

through purely medical decision in each case, ation. On the other hand, in the case of

have been able to make considerable progress, patients who are not criminal, the decision

which can indeed be still further advanced. ought to rest with the physician, and the

To me it seems a good method whereby we co-operation of a court should not be neces-

combine the care of the sick individual entrusted to us with the prophylactic care for
society, without unnecessarily hurting the one at the expense of the other. To be sure, there are occasionally refractory psychopathics in whom the prevention of propagation is urgent and who will not give their

sary, and would only be disturbing for the patient and his family. In view of the moral standard of the medical profession in civilized countries, a great abuse of this right by the physicians is not to be feared. Through the correct application of sterilization we can avoid injuring the psychic defective for
whom it is a necessity and, nevertheless, at

consent: in most cases these are definitely antisocial or even criminal individuals. I

the same time do society a great service by eugenic-prophylactic methods. In this way

consider it indicated in particular cases that are we in no wise disloyal to the humane

laws be made to apply in the exceptional care for the mentally sick; likewise, also, in

cases in order to force them to undergo such this eugenic duty we follow our old medical

a prophylactic operation. I must, however, principle: Aegroti salus suprema lex.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 1

