REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

365

power to walk, and the power to procreate. Retardation or precocity in

the emergence of these functions may be of profound significance in esti-

mating a child's congenital endowment. Secondly, however, the suc-

cessive appearance of certain powers may merely indicate that society

finds it convenient to instil certain items of knowledge or certain dexteri-

ties only after other more simpler ones have been acquired. The fact that

most children can recite the days of the week at the age of nine, while

but few can recite the months of the year till the age of ten, may simply

mean that, directly or indirectly, we teach the former list first. A dis-

placement in the relative or absolute time at which these mechanical

memories appear is, more often than not, quite insignificant for the

diagnosis of intelligence. In his later revision of the scale (i9ii), Binet

proposed to omit all tests depending upon knowledge acquired in school.

Dr. Wallin, however, strongly advocates the retention of the earlier (I908)

scheme. So far as the importance of retaining tests of scholastic know-

ledge is concerned, he seems obviously right. But, if retained, they should

be sharply separated from tests measuring capacity for the most

part inborn and should constitute a distinct system of pedagogical tests,

complete in themselves.

In this country psychologists have paid attention chiefly to experi-

mental tests measuring general intelligence in units of their own. Only

recently has attention turned to use of everyday questions with everyday

units. The former method still seems to hold its own. At the recent

meeting of the British Association in Birmingham results from both

methods were reported in new subsection of psychology. The correla-

tions of Binet tests with empirical estimates of intelligence ranged from

about '4 to *6; those of the more rapid but more technical experi-

mental tests rose to between '7 and '9. In view of the pro-

visions of the recent Mental Deficiency Act, the relative value of these

methods of diagnosis is of utmost importance; and further investigations

along the lines of Dr. Wallin's-using both methods side by side-are

most urgently needed.

CYRIL BURT.

Heron,, DAVID, D. Sc. Mendelism and the Problem of Mental Defect. I.: A Criticism of Recent American Work. Questions of the Day and of the Fray. No. vii. London. Dulau and Co.; 1913; price 2s. net; pp. 62, with 4 diagrams.
A GOOD deal of attention has been attracted by the assertion, based upon results obtained bv workers associated with the American Eugenics Record Office, that some forms of mental defect behave in respect of hereditary transmission like simple Mendelian characters. The importance of the conclusion, if correct, justifies a searching examination of the methods by which it has been reached. The publication under notice provides such a criticism and certain aspects of it appear to us to call for more detailed attention than we are accustomed to devote to a pamphlet of 62 pages. We shall divide our remarks into two sections, the first dealing with the substance of Dr. Heron's criticisms; the second with their form.
At the beginning of the paper, attention is directed to a statement of Dr. Davenport's, which appears to sanction the belief that a mating of the " weak " with the " strong " is eugenically justifiable. If, as Dr. Heron supposes, this advice be tendered without qualification we agree with with him in regarding it as thoroughly unsound, but the passage cited on
page 7 of Dr. Heron's paper suggests to us that Dr. Davenport may merely have meant that such a course was the lesser of two evils. Prima facie, however, Dr. Davenport's utterance appears to have been rash.
Passing now to the papers directly criticised by Dr. Heron, we may remark that a scientifically valid comparison between theory and expectation in a case of supposed Mendelian inheritance involves (a) a uniform system of classification, (b) a correct statistical method. With regard to the former, Dr. Heron argues in detail that the categories used are vague,

366 EUGENICS REVIEW.
and that in several instances two or more statements made respecting the same data are discrepant. While some of these divergencies may be due to printer's errors, such an explanation cannot, we think, cover many of the examples cited by Dr. Heron, and the onus is upon the American authors to justify their statements. We may remark that, over and aborve proof errors, a few divergencies between different parts of the same paper may conceivably be due to fresh information coming to hand when the authors were actually writing up their results.
Turning to (b), we think it proved that in comparing actual with predicted numbers, the American authors have occasionally overlooked the complication introduced into the calculation when fraternities are restricted to those containing at least one affected member. It is curious that they should have failed to notice this point to which special attention has been directed by, among others, Weinberg, who has suggested a method of overcoming the difficulty subsequently employed by Lundborg in his monograph. Leaving these specific points, with respect to which our conclusion is in substantial agreement with Dr. Heron's, we come to a series of general criticisms of a miscellaneous character. Dr. Heron attacks the loose nature of terms employed in classification, and objects that they have not been consistently used. We are in general agreement with him here also, but some reservations must be made. Dr. Heron himself, in his well-known paper on the " Inheritance of Insanity " (a paper quite unjustifiably aspersed by Lundborg in his generally valuable monograph on the ground that the method employed was inappropriate), has made the broad classification of his data into insane and not insane, and has assumed that mental state is a continuous variable. We accept this as a reasonable working hypothesis, but it is open to anyone to adopt any other classification he pleases, provided the same be used consistently; the utmost a critic can justifiably say is that the categories do not appeal to him as corresponding to any phenomena observed in real life, or that they involve some contradiction in terms. To illustrate our point of view we note on page 58 that Dr. Heron " can only marvel at the classification of a three-year-old boy as ' cross, stubborn, and shy,' or a four-year-old boy as ' irritable,'" and asks derisively with respect to the latter, " Was he cutting teeth ? " With regard to the last point, we may, pending a reply from the Eugenics Record Office, allay Dr. Heron's anxiety by expressing our firm conviction that, since the last milk tooth erupts at or about the twenty-fourth month and the first permanent tooth
does not appear until about the age of 61 years, the boy of four was not
teething. As to the main issue, we do not see anything impracticable in a definition of irritability which could be consistently applied to children of four, and we suspect that most teachers and many mothers would share our opinion. We introduced these remarks for the purpose of showing that the definition and choice of categories is largely a personal matter, and while many of the American classifications seem to us bad, we deprecate Dr. Heron's habit of stigmatising the use of terms he dislikes as evidence of bias. The last point of substance which we shall notice is the method of tabulating pedigrees. We believe that the methods of pedigree reproduction adopted in the Treasury of Human Inheritance are the closest approximation to the ideal we are ever likely to see, but we do not consider the pedigree reproduced from Davenport and Weeks's paper, accompanied by derisive comments and a pictorial illustration of how it should have been done, either extraordinary or unintelligible.
This brings us to the parting of the ways, and we may sum up our conclusions respecting the scientific validity of Dr. Heron's paper. We think he has put his finger upon certain serious imperfections in the work of the American authors. Some of these defects are possibly capable of satisfactory explanation, but others can hardly be so. Making the largest allowances and always remembering that we have not heard

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

367

the other side, we think the verdict must be that the alleged Mendelian

transmission of the defects considered is unproven, and that various

popular writers have been much too hasty in the statements they have made

on this point.

We now turn to the form in which Dr. Heron's criticisms

are cast. Dr. Heron and his colleagues have frequently expressed their

distaste for controversy, but they have never allowed this reluctance to

deter them from expressing their opinions with the utmost frankness.

Our criticism ought not to fall below this standard of controversial

honesty, and we therefore record our deliberate conviction that the manner

in which Dr. Heron's paper is written is unworthy of his scientific reputa-

tion, and our hope that he will live to regret some of the sentences he has

penned. The extraordinary acrimony which characterises the controversial

and semi-controversial papers emanating from the Galton Laboratory has

long been a matter of comment. In the case of the illustrious head of that

laboratory, when we remember the torrent of ignorant abuse and mis-

representation to which he has been almost continuously exposed for

more than ten years, we may regret that he has not displayed the

magnanimity which characterised Charles Darwin and Francis Galton,

with whom in other respects he might so fitly be ranked, but we cannot

pretend to be surprised. Dr. Heron, however, can plead no such excuse;

he is a comparatively young man discussing questions respecting which

much hopest difference of opinion is possible. One would therefore

expect him to formulate his conclusions in studiously moderate terms.

On the contrary, he permits himself to employ childish buffoonery, such

as the following, " Mendel defectiveness seems for these American inves-

tigators to be a far more serious problem than mental defectiveness," and

personal insolence, such as " we are not prepared to dissent from the

view that the citation of a pedigree by Dr. Davenport is a disqualification

for its further use." Dr. Heron says that " a very grave responsibility

rests at present upon those who have at heart the best interests of

Eugenics." It does, indeed, and we only wish that a sense of that respon-

sibility had restrained his pen. We shall, perhaps, be told that many

others have written almost abusively as Dr. Heron about those with

whom they disagree. The statement is only too true, but it is no excuse.

Dr. Heron has done distinguished scientific work, and anything which

hurts his reputation pro tanto hurts the common cause. We have no

sort of doubt that if some skilled literary champion of the anti-eugenists

bearing a name likely to attract readers singled out Dr. Heron's paper

and served up extracts, with appropriate comments, under the title " An

eminent eugenist upon other eminent eugenists," considerably more

harm would be done than by all the mistakes of all the Americans who

ever existed. As Dr. Heron says, the public has some common sense and

adopts the principle that abuse is not argument. The abusive parts of

Dr. Heron's criticism are intelligible to all; the operative portions only

appeal to a few.

These apprehensions have tempted us to refer at length to this latest

example of a method sure to injure gravely the cause of eugenics. The

Warburtonian
year I9I3.

style

of

controversy

ought

to

find M.

no imitators
GREENWOOD,

in the
JUN.

Buttel-Reepen, H. von. Man and his Forerunners. London. Long-
mans, Green and Co.; 1913; price 2S. 6d.; pp. 96.
SEVERAL small books have been written recently by Englishmen on prehistoric man, and the appearance of a new book is a sign that publishers recognise that the subject is one that appeals to the public. Under the circumstances it is a gain that we are offered a translation of a German work, as it gives the point of view of a foreign savant. The book is written brightly in non-technical language, and has been admirably translated by Mr. A. G. Thacker. In human palaeontology and

