THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Chromatin" by John H. Frenster. Much of the fascinating work outlined by Dr. Frenster is still not widely known. The summary to his paper deserves to be quoted in full:
Although each diploid cell within an individual probably contains a full and identical complement of all the DNA species characterizing that individual, not all of these DNA species are transcribed to RNA within any one cell or tissue. Stable epigenetic mechanisms select specific portions of the DNA genome for transcription. Such selective mechanisms are seen to employ a nonspecific generalized repression of all DNA within a cell by means of complex formations with polycationic histone repressors. Nuclear polyanionic de-repressors antagonize the interaction between DNA and histones, and- effect a partial displacement of repressor histones from localized portions of the DNA genome. Such histone displacement allows these DNA segments to undergo an intermittent separation of the strands of the DNA double helix. A species of nuclear RNA appears to function as a highly selective agent in de-repression by hybridizing with a single DNA strand, freeing the complementary DNA strand for continuous specific messenger RNA synthesis. C. E. BLANK
Srb, Adrian M., Owen, Ray D., and Edgar, Robert S. General Genetics. San Francisco, 1965. W. H. Freeman. (London, Bailey Bros. and Swinfen.) Pp. x + 557. Price 50s.
THE ORIGINAL AUTHORS are joined by Dr. Robert Edgar in presenting this second edition of their book, first published in 1952. The task of pruning the original text and incorporating new material without appreciably lengthening the book must have been formidable for, during the intervening years, this science has advanced with the impetus of a tidal wave. It is to the authors' credit that they have retained much that is "classical" while still producing an up-to-date account of the subject. Their new opening chapter, acknowledging Mendel's work should particularly please critics of the first edition who, like Dr. Gordon Haskell in his review for TH E E U G E N I C S RE VI EW (44, 229), regretted the lack of historical approach. That there is still no mention of such British pioneers as Galton (except briefly in one of the set problems) and Bateson may be a source of regret for some. In the newer sections, also, it is sometimes not clear where a particular idea originated. For example, in the discussion on the coding theory of the gene in Chapter 10 one looks in vain for a straightforward answer to the question, "who first put forward the brilliant suggestion that this was a triplet code ?" Again, when referring to the hypothesis of X-inactivation in "Genetics and Man", Chapter 15, no mention is made of Mary Lyon. At such times one senses something of Dr. Haskell's irritation with the earlier edition, although elaborate historical treatment would obviously have been impracticable.
The first four chapters deal with the principles underlying reproduction. With the thoroughness of good teachers, the authors include representative life-cycles, for instance of corn, neurospora, bacteriophage, because "Geneticists must be familiar with the details of the life cycles and reproductive processes of organisms with which they work". New work on the chemical basis of heredity comes in the middle section and here there might perhaps have been a better order of presentation. For example, after reading about DNA and chromosome replication, one would have liked to have stayed at the molecular level to consider genes and their mode of action: it seems a pity to break the train of thought by switching to linkage and chromosome mapping. Chapters on mutation and gene structure highlight the significant contribution of Drosophila and bacterial studies. It was useful to give the differing concept of the gene according to the organism studied, e.g. "classical gene", "phage gene", "neurospora gene", in illustrating the divisibility of the functional unit. Turning to gene function, it is shown how basic problems underlying control of metabolism in man, exemplified in the stepwise breakdown of phenylalanine, can be solved
120

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

using special laboratory methods. For example, extensive studies of variants of bacteria, Neurospora and other organisms which are characterized by their special growth requirements, have produced a mass of evidence for the genic control of cell metabolism. Both
the mechanism of protein manufacture, illustrated by the haemoglobinopathies in man and
tryptophan synthetase in E. coli, and the regulation and modulation of cell chemistry-
the "switch-on, switch-off" mechanism-are considered. The third section of the book includes discussion of some of the problems relating
to extra-chromosomal inheritance, genes in development, and genes in populations. Here,
as elsewhere, the authors draw on a wide variety of animate sources for their examples. The particulate matter, kappa, which helps to make a "killer" paramecium and which is transmitted through the cytoplasmic line was one curiosity new to the reviewer; and the
effects of a semidominant lethal "Danforth's short-tail" (Sd) in mice, which gives a range of renal tract anomalies was of particular interest in view of possible comparable effects in humans. Quantitative inheritance and the effects of inbreeding are adequately presented in
Chapter 14 and the final chapter deals very briefly with some of the features special to man. Illuistrations are good and the print is clear and free from errors. Throughout the text
the reader is addressed by the writers, "As you proceed in this book you will find . . .",a style which grows more acceptable with usage. Biology students particularly will derive benefit from the problems following each chapter.
In conclusion, this comprehensive account of the subject is designed primarily as a teaching aid and as such can be thoroughly recommended for any course in introductory genetics. Apparently the scientifically-inclined lay public also find it stimulating since the book has found its way on to the shelves of more than one municipal library in this country.

ZOOLOGY

H. B.

The UFA W Handbook on the Care and Management of Laboratory Animals. Edited by The Staff of UFAW. Third Edition. Edinburgh, 1967. Livingstone. Pp. xvi+ 1015. Price £6.

THIS THIRD EDITION of a standard work has a remarkable scope. It begins with chapters on the law and laboratory animals and on the Laboratory Animals Centre; there are substantial sections on animal houses, their equipment and the methods of managing, handling and transporting animals. A notably good chapter is on genetics. Up-to-date information is given on germ-free animals and on stocks kept free of specific pathogens; these cover new developments whose importance for research in several fields is quickly
increasing. The species discussed are each given a chapter. They go far beyond the familiar labora-
tory animals. Among the mammals are bats, and a genus of marsupial mice; several species of monkey are dealt with; but not yet, unfortunately, armadillos of the genus, Tatusia. Four species of birds are covered, and there is a separate chapter on the chick embryo. There are four chapters on heterothermous vertebrates; one on marine aquaria; and a number on invertebrates, including the giant American cockroach, locusts, some molluscs
and, finally, earthworms. The editors must have had a grim task. They describe how they were badly held up by
laggard contributors. Though lamentable, this is not surprising in a book with nearly seventy authors. It probably accounts for some deficiencies, for instance in the index. An example is that nembutal, which is referred to under that name in the text, does not appear in the index. There are quite a number of minor deficiencies of this sort.
A more serious criticism concerns production. The book weighs about 2-3 kg. It could certainly have been lighter. The type area is 135 mm. wide, which is excessive. Printed

ER-I

121

