LAWS ON HEALTH AND MARRIAGE

By C. P. BLACKER, M.C., M.D., M.R.C.P.

T HE Council of the Society has period the medical authorities involved are

appointed a committee to draw up a bound to inform the betrothed couple of

pre-nuptial health schedule which can the danger of the illness and the inconve-

be voluntarily exchanged by persons con- niences of marriage.

templating marriage. This will probably be

issued before the end of the year and may be ready for publication in the January issue of the REVIEW. A summary of the literature

RULES FOR PRE-NUPTIAL MEDICAL EXAMINATION

upon health certificates before marriage, Article i. The pre-nuptial medical exami-

which I prepared for the committee, was nation is free in all offices and sanitary

published under the title of " Fitness for establishments of the State. Official doctors

Marriage " (April I935, P. 33). In this article I propose to deal with the laws which have

are bound to conduct the pre-nuptial examination without a fee only in the above-

been passed in other countries bearing upon mentioned offices and establishments.

health and marriage. Legislation on this Article 2. Certificates of health, delivered

subject exists in Turkey, Germany and the by private and official doctors, other than

Scandinavian countries.

those in the service of the Government, will

not be valid unless they are legalised by

TURKEY

these last. Before legalising the above-

It is perhaps a surprising fact that the mentioned certificates, the Government doc-

most comprehensive law is that which tors will make a search through the official

operates in Turkey. This was framed in the registers to ascertain whether the candidates

light of articles I23 and I24 of the Turkish for marriage are or are not afflicted with any " Law on Public Hygiene." I am much of the diseases which, according to articles

indebted to Professor Refik Saydam for a I23 and I24 on the law on public hygiene, French translation of these articles and of are specified as prohibiting marriage. The

the official Turkish Memorandum on the certificates of health which do not carry

pre-nuptial medical examination. These the official seal of the Bureau of the Govern-

documents run as follows:

ment Doctor, as well as his signature, will

Law on Public Health: Article I23. The not be valid.

marriage is forbidden of persons afflicted Article 3. The pre-nuptial medical exami-

with syphilis, gonorrhoea, soft chancre, nation is to be carried out in the manner

leprosy or mental disease. The marriage of mentioned below: The doctor will examine,

such persons can only be celebrated after it before everything else, the general condition

has been proved by a medical certificate and exterior habitus of the candidate for

that the danger of contamination has been marriage; and, in the event of his not having

removed or that a definite cure has been noticed symptoms or signs which justify

established as a result of treatment duly suspicion of the existence of one of the

applied.

diseases mentioned in articles 123 and I24 of

Article I24. The marriage of persons the law on public hygiene, the examination

afflicted with advanced and transmissible of men will be conducted differently from

tuberculosis is to be delayed by six months. that of women.

If during this period improvement is not Article 4. Examination of Men:

established, the marriage must again be I. In the mouth: mucous membrane of

delayed for six months. At the end of this cheeks and lips. The tongue and its lower

I9I

I92

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

surface. The vault of the palate and the the doctor will be informed by a confidential

pharynx.

report of the results of the examination.

2. The skin of the thorax, the abdomen In the event of the doctor who has examined

and back. (These regions will be examined a candidate for marriage forming the im-

in the naked state.)

pression, either by the results of his own

3. The lymph glands of the axilla, the examination or by those submitted to him

groin and the elbow.

by the State laboratories or medical special-

4. The sex organ: presence or otherwise ists, that the candidate is afflicted with one

of secretion following pressure of the urethra. of the diseases mentioned in articles I23 and

5. The knee jerks will be examined with I24, he will not deliver the certificate of

attention.

health. He will retain in his file the various

documents and notify the case to the Govern-

Article 5. The examination of the mouth ment doctor of the locality.

of women will be identical with that of men. Article 8. The marriage will not be author-

In the case of virgins, besides the examina- ised of persons who have the bacillus of Koch

tion of the mouth, the doctor will limit in their sputum, or who have tuberculous

himself to the examination of the lymph laryngitis or clinical signs of advanced

glands of the elbow.

tuberculosis of a contagious character. To

Article 6. If, in the course of the examina- such candidates for marriage will be applied

tions mentioned in articles 4 and 5, above, the dispositions of article I24 of the law on

there are found indications or reasons public hygiene.

justifying the suspicion that the candidates Article 9. Pre-marital examinations will

for marriage are afflicted with one of the be considered among matters of urgency.

diseases preventing marriage; or if the The official doctors will, in conducting their

above-named examinations do not prove examinations, give special precedence to

satisfactory, the medical examination will candidates and pathological material which

be furthered in the following manner: If are sent to them with a view to establishing

tuberculosis is suspected, the thorax will be a definite diagnosis.

percussed and auscultated and sputum will Article io. In the State offices, the pre-

be collected in the presence of the doctor. marital medical examination will be confi-

In the event of syphilis being suspected, a dentially performed in a special room. A

specimen of blood will be taken in the member of the family may be present during

manner indicated in the special chapter of the examination of women. The doctors are

instructions bearing upon the treatment of bound to treat as secret the results of their

syphilis; in the event of gonorrhoea being examinations.

suspected, the secretion of the urethra will Article ii. Candidates who present them-

be collected. Blood and urethral secretion selves for pre-marital medical examination

will be sent to a laboratory to be examined. are bound to furnish official documents such

In the event of leprosy or mental diseases as a birth certificate, a passport and an

being suspected, the doctor will pursue his identity card. In the event of doubt being

investigations along the usual lines conform- entertained about the authenticity of these

ing with scientific procedure; to reach a documents, the candidate will not be ex-

decision he can, if necessary, send the amined before he has established his identity.

candidate to a specialist. In those localities Article I2. Private doctors will perform

where laboratory examinations are not made, the pre-nuptial examinations in a manner

the doctor will mention the fact in his report. which conforms with the dispositions of the

Article 7. The materials for analysis are above regulations. They are forbidden to

sent, under seal, to the relevant establish- deliver certificates of health without having

ments, with a confidential report, and by a established the identity and without having

method over which the candidate under examined the candidate.

examination has no control. In like manner Article I3. Private and official doctors

LAWS ON HEALTH AND MARRIAGE

who do not conform with the obligations of importance to questions of public health that

the present ruling will be punished in a it is willing to establish facilities for pre-

manner which conforms with the dispositions nuptial medical examination free of charge,

of article 282 of the law on public hygiene. and that such examinations are to be re-

In the event of acts being committed which garded by Medical Officers of Health as

demand punishments relevant to the Turkish having priority over their other duties.

penal code, the dispositions of the Turkish penal code will be applied.

GERMANY

Article I4. This ruling, drawn up by the Reports have recently appeared in the

Council of State, will enter into effect on the Press to the effect that certificates of health

date of its publication.

before marriage are shortly to be made

Article I5. The Executive Council of compulsory throughout Germany. At the

ministers is charged with the administration present time, however, they are only com-

of the present ruling.

pulsory for persons who apply for marriage

loans. Applicants for these are furnished

As viewed from the standpoint of this with a leaflet issued by the Ministry of

Society, the most noteworthy feature of the Public Health for the Reich, which stresses

examinations conducted in Turkey is that the importance of personal health and of

eugenic considerations are completely racial hygiene, and are expected to fill in a

omitted. The law specifies that marriage schedule. This consists of four parts:

must not take place if either partner is i. A statutory declaration made by the

afflicted with syphilis, gonorrhaea, soft applicant in the presence of a municipal

chancre, leprosy, mental disease and trans- authority, who refers him to an approved

missible tuberculosis. The candidate for examining doctor.

marriage is not asked to furnish any par- 2. A medical history, to be filled in and

ticulars about his ancestry or about his signed by the applicant in the presence of

previous medical history. The certificates of the examining doctor. The latter is charged

fitness are issued solely on the basis of the with the responsibility of confirming that

results of a medical examination.

the applicant's signature corresponds with

In this connection, it is perhaps worthy that on Part I, the statutory declaration

of remark that a compulsory exchange of made in the presence of the municipal

health certificate can only be satisfactorily authority.

carried out under such conditions as these. If the examinations are compulsory, it can

3. The medical findings: to be filled in and signed by the examining doctor.

be taken as certain that there will be many refractory candidates who will be anxious

4. The opinion of the examining doctor as to whether the marriage should or should

to conceal particulars about their ancestors not take place, or should be postponed.

or past lives. Hence the precaution that the The following is a translation of the sputum has to be collected in the presence schedule:

of a doctor, and the rule that the materials These sheets are to be collected and sent

for laboratory examination have to be on the first of each month by the attesting

conveyed to the laboratory otherwise than doctor to the Reichsgesundheitsamt, Berlin,

by the person from whom they have been Klopstockstr. i8.

obtained. In such circumstances little reliance can be placed on statements made by the applicants themselves. Only the objective results of a medical examination, conducted by a disinterested person, will

Administrative District ..................... Province, district, etc.) Nr................
I. PERSONAL SHEET FOR CANDIDATES FOR MARRIAGE LOANS

provide reliable guidance in issuing certifi- To be filled in by the candidate and given

cates of fitness. It is pleasing to observe that to the examining doctor, after the official

the Turkish Government attaches such testimonial has been given.

I94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Surname & christian name..................... (a) in grandparents .............................

Born in ...........

On.

(b) ,, parents ....................................

Residence.................................

(c) ,, brothers and sisters of parents and

(also Administrative District)

their children..........................

Street and Number of house..................... (d) ,, brothers and sisters of person

Status or vocation......... Religion*.

examined ...........................

Nature of school attended........................ In which class on leaving........................

2. Chronic infectious or constitutional illnesses (including vocational illnesses), ad-

I have made the above declarations to the dictions or defects, from which the applicant

best of my knowledge. I further confirm that has him/herself suffered...........................

I will not knowingly make any false declara- 3. By female applicant - Number of

tions to the examining doctor. At the same pregnancies .......... Live-births.

time, I release this doctor or any other Still-births .......... Abortions. doctors called in from their obligation to

silence towards the official authorities who

(Personal signature of applicant)

are responsible for decisions connected with the loan.
............... the.9
(personal signature) t

The signature must be made in the presence of the examining doctor and compared with the signature of the applicant given on page
I.

The above personal signature of the

applicant(s) is hereby officially witnessed.

III. FINDINGS*

The applicant is referred to Dr................ i. (a) general condition

for medical examination.

(b) skin and visible mucous membranes

Stamp.signature of municipal authority.

(c) cardiovascular system (d) abdominal organs

Space for remarks by municipal authority
and examining doctor.

2. State of lungs (if necessary Radiological findings).
3. Urine...... Albumen..... Sugar.

SCHEDULE FOR INVESTIGATION OF MARRIAGE 4. Signs of venereal disease (if necessary

FITNESS

by serological test of blood) Wassermann

Surname and christian name of person reaction..................

examined ............................................. 5. Signs of weak-mindedness, epilepsy,

Residence.....................

mental disease, alcoholism, and drug-addic-

Street and number of house..................... tion.

6. Traces of acute infectious disease.

II. PREVIOUS HISTORY

7. Traces of other grave infectious disease.

i. Established or supposed cases of weakmindedness, epilepsy, mental diseases, convulsions, malformations, defects (i.e.

8. Are there any good grounds for supposing the applicant incapable of procreation or
child-bearing ?

inherited blindness, deafness and dumbness,
etc.), skeletal deformities, diseases of metabolism, tuberculosis, alcoholism, drugaddiction, suicide, constitutional illnesses, confinement in houses for lunatics, mental
defectives or epileptics:

IV. OPINION
I. The person examined is fit......not fit
......for marriage. 2. Unfitness for marriage is likely to be
temporary permanent Joon account of.

* In case of change of religion, the original religion * Marriages between persons suffering from hereditary

must be declared.

mental or physical diseases, infectious illnesses, or from

t The personal signature must only be made in the any other illnesses that threaten life, are not in the

presence of a municipal authority.

interests of national health.

LAWS ON HEALTH AND MARRIAGE

I95

3. Although the state of unfitness for marriage cannot be established for certain, the person examined should be advised against the intended marriage on account of*.......................................
4. Observations.....................
. the. 193... (place)
Signature and qualifications of examining doctor.
* Here are to be taken into account present transitory or chronic conditions, and also the unfavourable combination of particular symptoms of disease in the intended marriage.
It will be observed that the German
certificate differs in several important respects from the Turkish. In the Turkish certificate, the applicant is not asked to answer written questions about himself; in the German, such particulars are asked of the applicant. In the Turkish certificate no account is taken of the applicant's family history or of the occurrence among his ancestors or collateral relatives of hereditary diseases or defects; in the German, a comprehensive question is asked upon this subject.
Information from Germany as to the accuracy of the replies submitted by applicants to questions about their family history and medical history is not yet available and it is not clear how German health authorities succeed in checking mis-statements. That the possibility of such mis-statements is anticipated is shown by the footnote to the effect that the signature of the statutory declaration must be examined by the examining doctor and compared with the signature to that part of the questionnaire which relates to the applicant's previous history, which has to be signed in his presence. This precaution is obviously designed to prevent the impersonation of an applicant with bad prospects of satisfying the requirements by a person with good prospects. At the same time, it should be borne in mind that at present these schedules are filled in only by persons applying for marriage loans and it is probable that difficulties arising

from mis-statements would not, in these circumstances, be as frequent as they would if the same questions were asked as a routine in all marriages as a preliminary to allowing the marriage to take place.
From the eugenic point of view the most noteworthy feature of the questionnaire is paragraph 3 of Part III (the doctor's opinion), and the footnote which belongs to it. These, in the original German, read as follows:
"3. Obgleich die Befunde eine Eheuntauglichkeit nicht sicher bedingen,
ist dderm Untersuchten von der
Eingehung der beabsichtigten Ehe abgeraten worden wegen.* . . .
* Hier sind voriibergehend oder staindig
vorhandene Umstande und auch das in der beabsichtigten Ehe etwa ungiinstige Zusammentreffen bestimmter Krankheitserscheinungen zu beriicksichtigen."
It places considerable responsibility on the doctor to have to advise against a marriage by reason of a state of unfitness which cannot be established for certain. The vague word " Umstande " presumably covers genetic considerations; and in view of the attitude of the German Government towards marriage between so-called Aryans and Jews, it might also be held to refer to the applicant's race.
NORWAY
A law, passed on May 3ISt, I9I8, prohibits marriage in cases in which one of the parties has syphilis in a contagious form. In the
case of other infectious venereal diseases or epilepsy or leprosy the other party must be informed and both parties must be warned
of the dangers of the diseases by a physician. A form is issued which has to be signed by both the betrothed persons. No doctor's certificate appears to be required. Nothing is asked about hereditary diseases occurring in the ancestry.
The following is a translation of the questions asked in the schedule employed in Norway:

B

i96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

CERTIFICATE FROM THE BRIDAL COUPLE IN CONNECTION WITH THE BANNS
Before banns can take place, the bridal pair, separately, have to reply-in writingto the following questions:
I. Are you closely related, or allied by marriage, to your fianc6e as mentioned in the marriage law, parts 7
and 8'. Part 7. Marriage must not take place between relatives in straight up- or downwards line (your mother or daughter) or between sister and brother. Part 8. Marriage must not take place between relatives, one of whom has previously been married to the other's relatives in straight line up- or downwards (e.g. not marry your first wife's mother or daughter). 2. Have you previously been married and if so to whom? 3. Have you illegitimate children and if so how many? 4. Are you suffering from a. Syphilis which is still infectious? b. Other venereal disease which is in-
fectious, from epilepsy or leprosy ?
The correctness of my statement is certified
by honour,

Bundesministerium fur soziale Verwaltung. ZI. II7.852-Abt.8/I934.
To the Eugettics Society, 69, Eccleston Square, London, S.W.I.
In the territory of the State of Austria, there was established, in the year I922, in and for Vienna, a State Marriage Advice Centre. This was 'under the part-time direction of a specialist doctor and was open to all. This Advice Centre has outgrown its original function of an Advice Centre for persons about to be married and finally established itself as a Marriage and Sexual Advice Centre which dispensed information on all questions relating to the sexual life. This Advice Centre did not furnish certificates or references. It confined itself to advising by word of mouth.
The Advice Centre was closed on the I3th February, I934, and hitherto has not yet opened again. Whether an Advice Centre for persons about to be married will again be established, cannot yet be prophesied. 28 December I934.
For the " Bundesminister"
MULLER.

Date and signature.
Wrong statement may lead to penalties up to 2 years imprisonment according to the Criminal Law, part i66.
HOLLAND It has been stated in various quarters that
legislation with regard to marriage exists in Holland and in Austria. I received a communication from the secretary general of the Minister for Social Affairs at the Hague informing me that certificates relating to marriage and health are not used in Holland.
AUSTRIA The following is a translation of a letter
I have received from a representative of the Bundesminister in Vienna.

Birth S/Control
By To-day
Marie Stopes
Illustrted u pocket size.
SALD A DANIDLSSOX, W.L
Eugenics Review, Vol. XxVI , No. 3.

