THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stage is properly set for a rational approach to volume) to confute the somewhat crude attempts

the understanding and interpretation of pro- to interpret social development as having a basis

jections. For example, the single page devoted to in biological evolution, which were current at the'

the choice of a time-span explains how for some beginning of this century. In this he was fully

purposes it is advantageous to look far ahead justified, but from some of his work he gives the

while for others only the next few years need be impression that he underrated the importance of

contemplated. Similarly the value of a set of the genetic endowment of individuals; in any

alternative projections and the best concepts for case he did not concern himself with those

a range of such a set are expounded succinctly problems which are of special interest to students

and clearly.

P. R. C. of eugenics.

Of the essays in this volume, that on sociology

is the one which will probably be of greatest

SOCIOLOGY
Hobhouse, L. T. Sociology and Philosophy: A Centenary Collection of Essays and Articles. Preface by Sydney Caine. Introduced by Morris Ginsberg. London, 1966. G. Bell for the London School of Economics. Pp. xxvii +340. Price 45s.

interest to readers of THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
This essay, which originally appeared in the Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics in 1920, sets out the task of sociology as Hobhouse saw it, and can be read with profit by those who work in any of the special social sciences, demography, for instance. His view is summed up in a

THIS VOLUME CONTAINS twelve essays and quotation which Professor Ginsberg extracts

articles reprinted from various sources and an from another article, not reprinted here, which

interesting introduction by Professor Ginsberg. appeared in 1908: "General Sociology", he

This reprinting is very welcome; all the papers in wrote, "is neither a separate science complete in

the volume are written with the clarity and itself before specialism begins, nor is it a mere

vigour so characteristic of Hobhouse and can be synthesis of the social sciences consisting in a

read with profit to-day. It is a great service to mechanical juxtaposition of their results. It is

have rescued these writings from the semi- rather a vitalizing principle that runs through all

oblivion of encyclopaedias and learned journals social investigations nourishing and nourished

and to have made them easily accessible to a wide by it in turn, stimulating inquiry, correlating

public. Hobhouse, who died in 1928, was the results, exhibiting the life of the whole in the

most outstanding English sociologist during the parts and returning from the study of the parts

first quarter of the present century. His work to a fuller comprehension of the whole".

covered a very wide range; he was a scholar in more than one field and he also made notable

A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS

contributions to the discussion of the social and

political problems of his day.

ECONOMICS

The topic which inspired his main work was that of social development, a topic which, as Professor Ginsberg says, is again attracting

Meade, J. E. The Stationary Economy. London,
1965. Allen and Unwin. Pp. 238. Price 35s.

attention after having been out of favour for a ALMOST EXACTLY THIRTY years ago Mr. (as

time. Hobhouse was careful not to equate social he then was) James Meade published his

development with progress; for him social successful textbook An Introduction to Economic

development was a process of mental learning Analysis andPolicy in which he expounded, at an

through experience the course of which had to be introductory level, the then new ideas about

traced by establishing the facts while judgement employment and income, and about imperfect

of facts had to be kept distinct from judgement competition. He was concerned to stress espec-

of values. When expounding his view of social ially their implications for policy problems,

development, which can hardly be contested, and he actually used some of the new technical

Hobhouse was concerned in some of his writings concepts in advocating particular economic

(though in none which are included in this policies. This latest volume from Professor

102

