THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
STATEMENT OF AIMS *

T HE Society was organized and founded Society works out the detail of its studies

in I907-8. At first it was entitled the and policies. This is partly done by taking

Eugenics Education Society, but the note of the activities of other societies and

present title was adopted in I926.

workers, some of whose aims are cognate

The General Aims of the Society put briefly with eugenics, and by co-operating with

are: them.

To study the influences that may modify

inborn human qualities; to formulate and THE MEANING OF EUGENICS

support policies for developing these qualities

Man is gifted with pity and other kindly

to the utmost advantage; to promote re- feelings; he has also the power of preventing

search on eugenic problems; to. foster a many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall well

responsible attitude to parenthood; to guide public opinion in these matters.
These aims fall into three parts: the study

within his province to replace Natural Selection by other processes that are more merciful and not less effective. This is precisely the aim of eugenics.

of the scientific aspects of the subject, the education of the public, and the consideration of practical policies by which good effects may be produced. More detailed accounts of these studies and policies will be found below.
The Society every year holds about six meetings open to the public, each of which is devoted to a lecture or a discussion on some pertinent question.
Once a year the Galton Lecture is delivered
to the Society by some distinguished person dealing with an aspect of the subject in which he is an expert.
The Society publishes THE EUGENICS REVIEW as a quarterly journal.
It publishes Occasional Papers, of which a list will be found on page 2.
The specialist library of the Society is available to Fellows and Members.
The Society's financial position is favour-
able compared with that of many other such voluntary organizations. A legacy from an Australian pastoralist in I929, Mr. Henry Twitchin, has provided capital assets and income which have enabled the Society to assist other societies with cognate aims.
Mainly through its council-elected each year at the annual general meeting-the

This quotation is from Memories of My Life (I908, pp. 322-3) by Sir Francis Galton, F.R.S., O.M. (I822-I9II), the founder of
the subject of eugenics.
Galton grew up under the profound influence of the writings of his first-cousin Charles Darwin, and he devoted most of his
long life to the study of how the principles
of evolution might affect humanity. In this
he drew lessons from the animal kingdom, where the process of Natural Selection usually controls animal populations by the brutal process of causing each generation to produce
too many offspring and then killing off the less fit among them in the course of the Struggle for Life. It was recognized that the same rule used to apply to nankind in the past, but during the last century or so, with the great developments in the fields of science and technology, it seemed to have ceased to operate at any rate in western countries. It is true that the old system with " nature red in tooth and claw,' was ruthless, but still it did ensure the Survival of the Fittest. In the quotation cited above, Galton expressed the hope that this process might be replaced by something more in conformity with man's
moral sense. He asked whether by the exercise of his intelligence, man might not

*See p. 6.

be able to discover a way which would replace

23
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April I958, S0, I

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nature's brutal m'ethods by' something more merciful and not less effective. He recognized that this change will not occur of itself, and he therefore set to work to study the subject of eugenics, whereby man might hope to accomplish this tremendous change.
It was 'Galton who invented the name Eugenics. It is intended to signify the study of the problems of increasing the good inborn qualities and decreasing the bad in the successive generations of a people. The term might have been used for the improvement of any race of animals, but in fact it has always been applied only to mankind.
The question then arises as to what would constitute an improvement in the inborn qualities of the race. Galton gave a considerable list of qualities relating to physique, health, ability and character. No doubt some would emphasize one among the qualities that he named more than the rest, and some would add further ones to the list, but there would surely be a broad consensus of opinion on the subject. The aim then of the eugenist is to study what is happening to the successive generatio'ns of the human race, and to see whether policies can be found which will improve their inborn qualities. To quote from Galton again:
Let us for a moment suppose that the practice of eugenics should hereafter raise the average quality of our nation to that of its better moiety at the present day and consider the gain. The general tone of domestic, social and political life would be higher. The race as a whole would be less foolish, less frivolous, less excitable and politically more provident than now. (Eugenics:
Its Definition, Scope and Aims. I904.)
It is not, of course, enough merely to set up an ideal, but the practical question arises how this ideal is to be achieved. It would be a formidable enough question anyhow, but it has to be recognized that at the present time many causes are operating which trend in 'the precisely opposite direction. The weight of taxation, the cost of housing, the cost of further education, make it difficult for many parents who undoubtedly have valuable inborn qualities to have as many children as they would like. On the other hand there is a fraction of the population

with undoubtedly inferior qualities, producing large families which all too often develop the same characteristics as their parents. There is a serious danger that this fraction may be increasing in numbers relative to the other. The eugenist is acutely conscious of such dangers as this, and it is largely in the hope of overcoming them that he explores the various problems that are described below.
EUGENIC SCIENCE
Heredity
The science of genetics, that is to say the study of the inheritance of various qualities in successive generations of an animal, has made enormous advances during the past sixty years. This has been mainly accomplished through the study of various quickbreeding animals (in particular certain flies which go through a generation in a month, and mice which do so four times a year) so that a great number of successive generations can be observed. The study of the genetics of slow-breeding man is much more difficult, and for the most part it has only been achieved in countries which have good medical services, so that pedigrees could be traced of those suffering from various complaints. In this way many human diseases and abnormalities have been recognized as behaving according to genetic principles; indeed much more is known about the inheritance of diseases and defects than about the inheritance of any of the valuable qualities. But at best this study could only involve a few of the past generations of mankind, and it must take many generations -which at best means several centuriesbefore as much can be known of the genetic
constitution of man as is already known for some of the quick-breeding animals.
Without this detail of genetic knowledge, however, it is still possible to do a great deal. Animal breeders have in the past produced enormous changes in the characteristics of our domestic animals with the much simpler guide that like produces like, and the same principle can be applied to man. There is of course no certainty about it, but we know

STATEMENT OF AIMS

that the child will usually inherit a great many of its parents' characteristics. This should be quite enough to make eugenic policies very profitable to the human race.
It is hardly necessary to say there is no proposal to take the parallel of the animal breeder closely, involving as it does the complete control of his animals. Such a policy would be clearly intolerable to human beings, even if it were possible. Furthermore, the parallel fails because of the complexity of human characteristics compared with the rather few features which alone interest the breeders of animals. Nevertheless much could be done on a purely voluntary basis to encourage those in the human population who are evidently valuable to have more children, and those who are judged inferior to have less.
Nature and Nurture
Man is always under the influence both of his inborn qualities and of his environment, and it would be most desirable to be able to assess the relative importance of these rival influences. There seem to be only two ways in which this can be even attempted. The first is the study of " identical twins," who certainly possess the same inborn characteristics; the interesting cases are those where the two twins have been exposed to very different conditions of life, but the number of known examples is not very great. The second is the study of children possessing usually quite different inborn characters, who have been reared together in the same environment, for example in an orphanage. Both these groups very much repay study, but it must be recognized that they are only a small fraction of the population, and there will always be an immensely larger number in whom it is almost impossible to distinguish the influences of the inborn qualities from those of the environment.
The Family
It is necessary for the most part then, in deciding on eugenic policies, to accept the fact that the environment must be considered as well as the inborn characteristics. With

this in mind the Society regards the family as the centre of its interest, and this has been the guiding principle of most of its studies. If, as suggested by Galton, man is to succeed in replacing the ruthless method of Natural Selection by something more merciful, this necessarily implies some limitation of population. Through the wonderful developments of medical science the average length of human life has been enormously prolonged, and some factor must be found to balance this great success in death control. Consequently the Society is deeply interested in all the various methods of birth control. It regards the adoption of planned conceptions as one of the chief aims of the eugenist. So a main object of eugenic policy is the encouragement of appropriate couples to produce healthy, energetic and intelligent families by design, that is by planned parenthood involving suitably spaced births. Conversely, couples suffering from inborn physical and mental disabilities can be saved from giving birth to children who are likely to inherit the same handicaps.
EUGENIC STUDIES
In view of these considerations a list may be given of the main subjects in which the Society has been and is concerned.
Human Heredity
As described above, this study only progresses slowly. Its results are watched by the Society, but the work is for the most part done by professional biologists in universities or research laboratories.
Measurement of Qualities
Qualities such as height, weight or longevity are easily measured, but more important ones such as health, intelligence or character less easily so. The Society is deeply interested in all developments by which human qualities can be measured, because it may be hoped that such measurements, when perfected, will help towards making easier a classification of people in regard to their eugenic value.

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Family Records

reliability, energy and general ability of the

To enable studies of human heredity to
continue over long periods family records are valuable. They should record details such as health, physique, longevity, intelligence, and also the attainments in life, of all the known near relatives on both male and
female sides of a family. Far too few records of this kind exist at present. The Society can supply on demand a schedule adapted to the purpose.

kinds which will later make valuable citizens.
The Society has initiated an inquiry along these lines. Its aim is that steps should be taken to encourage such Promising Families to have more children. It should be noted that the project is not intended to include
the discovery of the rare genius (who anyhow will be self-revealing); it is the more difficult problem of discovering the next level, that of the much greater number of families that will produce the generally valuable citizens

Problem Families
Individuals suffering from such severe mental handicaps that they are incapable of managing their own affairs are now largely cared for in institutions. The Problem

referred to in the second quotation given above from the writings of Galton. Promising Families call for much further investigation, and the Society regards this matter as one of the most useful things which it is doing.

Family is the next higher level. These are Population Problems

families where the parents, because of sub-
normal intelligence or unstable character,
do not provide minimum standards of care for their often numerous children. The parents are usually difficult to reclaim, and the children all too often inherit the same qualities, and in addition they are handi-
capped by growing up in such bad conditions. Apart from other considerations, such families are a great expense to the country, both by creating slums, in the necessity for special schools, and in actions in the criminal
courts.
A study has been made by the Society of such families. It explores the best ways of identifying them and it considers how afterwards they can best be treated. This type of study is conveniently called Negative Eugenics.

The present rapid increases in world population constitute one of the central features of world development. Whatever view may be taken of these increases and of the possibilities or expectations of feeding further thousands of millions of people, ultimate limitation is quite inevitable. Thus, whether the mode of limitation is to be starvation, warfare or deliberate contracep-
tion, the eugenist cannot fail to be concerned with the subject of population numbers.
Demographers study the numbers of births, deaths, marriages and migrations in the various countries, and as far as they can they make estimates of the qualities of the individuals concerned. All this is of immense
importance to the eugenist. In particular he wants to know the relation between
fertility and survival on the one hand, and

Promising Families

such qualities as intelligence and character on the other. It is important to him to know;

There is the opposite question, Positive what proportion of conceptions is deliberately

Eugenics: the identification of families which planned by the parents, and whether com-

are likely to be exceptionally valuable to the munities which extensively practice birth

community. This is much harder than the control are maintaining their numbers. On

identification of the Problem Families, and the principle quoted from Galton, that the

the best starting point would seem to be with ruthless method of Natural Selection for

the schools. Every schoolmaster is aware of controlling populations might be replaced by

children in his class who are notable for their something more merciful, it is of the very

valuable qualities; they are by no means greatest importance to the eugenist to know

always to be found at the top of the class, but how far such methods as birth control are

they are the type who hold the promise of proving effective in maintaining population

STATEMENT OF AIMS

27

as against uncontrolled conceptions, and in

EUGENIC POLICIES

particular he wants to know the effect of. birth control in altering the relative fertility
of groups of differing genetic constitution. All this information is clearly very hard
to gain, and difficult to analyse, but the eugenist makes every effort to encourage the
demographer in his study of such matters.

The studies enumerated above show the subjects which interest the Society, and on
them they wish to get as much information as possible. But the purpose of information is to lead to action, and, since there is little reliable information on some of these subjects,
policies determining action will be liable to'

modification as new knowledge accumulates.

Race Mixture
This a subject of profound importance to the world, and with ever-increasing ease of travel it is fairly certain that mixed marriages will increase in frequency. The subject excites violent passions in both directions, so that it is hardly possible at the present time to get it considered without arouCsing deep prejudices. It is certainly of great interest to eugenists, but it is difficult to collect impartial evidence on the subject. It is to be hoped nevertheless that information will be gradually accumulated on this most important matter.

Consequently it is natur'al that the Society's immediate interests should be changing from
time to time.
Many of the subjects considered are being studied by other bodies, each with its own special interests, and, to save duplication of work, the general policy of the Society has been to give assistance and co-operation to such bodies in so far as they are connected with the Society's own interests.
As has been said the central interest of the Society is the family, and its policies have mainly been adopted in this connection. People usually enjoy what they do well, so that there is a normal and natural tendency

for good parents to have larger families than

Migration

bad, though in the past the tendency was

Ease of travel is also increasing migrations from one country to another. This has a national interest to us, because at the
present time it is occurring both ways not only in Britain, but throughout the Commonwealth. It is of the greatest importance to know how far the balance of eugenic qualities
is being disturbed by these migrations, and it is a question to which the Society is giving its attention.

often upset by the occurrence of unwanted pregnancies among those who did not make good parents. With the use of any of the methods of birth control now available, there is no need to leave the matter to chance in this way any longer, and the couples who
make bad parents can be shown how to
avoid having a large family. In the case of the good parents similar advice may be useful, though, of course, here with the

opposite intention, but for them even more

Economic and Social Problems

important is the matter of overcoming the economic penalties that are apt to attach to

The list given here is of subjects in the a large family. All these matters are very

public eye which are obviously connected much the concern of the Society, and they

with eugenic matters. Some have been seem a particularly profitable line to follow,

considered by Royal Commissions and other because both for good and for bad parents bodies. They are for the most part related they are likely to be co-operating with the to the question of the family and its size: natural instincts of the individuals. In

general the Society would like to see eugenic-

HOUSING POLICIES

AGE OF MARRIAGE

ally inferior couples content to aim at one

FAMILY ALLOWANCES AGE OF RETIREMENT or two children. Conversely, they would like

EDUCATIONAL REFORM SERVICES FOR THE OLD to see eugenically superior couples aim at

SOCIAL MOBILITY

DEATH DUTIES

four or more children.

5-En

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Birth Control
For planned parenthood birth control is practicaUy indispensable, and it has to be recognized- that one of the most formidable difficulties is that some of the methods, in particular those connected with the use of appliances, are forbidden to some people by religious doctrines. There is very great need for the extension of researches on the general subject of methods of birth control. It is of importance to the whole world, in particular to the over-populated countries of Asia and elsewhere, that cheap and easy methods of birth control should be developed. The Society strongly supports these activities; in particular it welcomes researches into methods which would be effective, acceptable on economic grounds, simple to use, and not contrary to the doctrines referred to above.
Health Services
The Society associates itself with PEP (Political and Economic Planning, 1948 Population Policy in Great Britain) in supporting the proposal to establish Parenthood Centres as part of the Health Services. Such centres would deal with many aspects of parenthood which are important eugenically. Among these the following may be singled out especially.
Marriage Guidance. This includes sexinstruction to adolescents and young adults, more specialized instruction to those about to marry, and help and advice in the case of marriages which are in danger of foundering.
Eugenic Prognoses. Guidance on genetic problems is sometimes sought by those who fear they may be affected by a hereditary taint which they might pass on to their children. Facilities should be provided within the Health Service to give them information about such dangers in so far as it is available.
Pre-Marital Health Examinations. Such examinations have been made compulsory in certain countries, but there is reason to

believe that the intentions of- this are often evaded. The Society advocates a voluntary system for Great Britain.
Irrespective of any visible signs of illhealth, physical examinations are already carried out at various stages of life, such as at schools and before engagement in certain professions. There is no stage when such an examination is more appropriate than before marriage. Not only might the examination detect threats to the success of the marriage such as venereal disease or the early stages of tuberculosis, but it would also give opportunity for advice about intimate problems that may be causing anxiety to either party. Such matters could also be discussed as the spacing of child births and how it should be related to the ages of the parents.
Advice on Birth Control. The Society supports the Royal Commission on Population* which recommended that, whereas the local authorities are at present only empowered to give advice on birth control for reasons of health, this restriction should be removed. The advice should be such as would conform to the couple's religious beliefs.
Infecundity. It is estimated that some-
thing like IO per cent of married couples are involuntarily sterile; they want children but do not succeed in having them. Such conditions, whether in the male or the female, are mainly not congenital nor hereditary. They can often be diagnosed and cured, as can be cases of sub-fecundity where children have been born, but more have been wanted in vain. The Society supports the Royal Commission on Population in advocating further developments of this service.
Artificial Insemination. Closely connected with infecundity is the question of artificial insemination, which may arise when it is the man who is at fault, either through being naturally sterile, or through carrying some hereditary taint which he fears to pass on to the next generation. Artificial insemination
*.Royal Commission on Population Report, 1949.
H.M. Stationery Office, Cmd. 7695.

STATEMENT OF AIMS

29

has been a subject of acute controversy on and ethical issues which demand informed

moral grounds, and obvious legal questions and impartial study.

might arise from it in connection with the The Society supports recommendations

inheritance of property. The Society holds made by the Royal Commission on Popula-

that the practice should not be prohibited, tion on many subjects connected with the

though it recognizes that attention must be welfare of the family. These include con--

given to these moral and legal aspects, and siderations of housing schemes, etc., suitable

to prevailing sentiments on the subject.

for families of varying sizes and ages;

home-helps and nursery schools, etc.

Voluntary Sterilization. The introduction Another recommendation that was made

of compulsory sterilization in Germany was in connection with taxation. The

during the war brought this subject into Commission recommended that the existing

discredit. The valuable possibilities of a flat-rate of child allowances should be

controlled voluntary measure have been for- replaced by a graded system adjusted to the

gotten, and yet the process has been legalized size of the income and to the number of the

in Scandinavian countries on a voluntary children. With its interest in the Promising

basis and it appears to work well there.

Families, the Society strongly endorses these

Over twenty years ago a Departmental recommendations.

Committee (Brock Committee, I934, Cmd.

Eugenics is the science which deals with all

4485) unanimously approved the principle influences that improve the inborn qu-alities of a

that where a person suffering from a hereditary race; also with those that develop them to the infirmity applies, it should be admissible to utmost advantage.-SIR FRANCIS GALTON, 1904.

have a sterilizing operation performed.

There have been legal uncertainties which PAST ACTIVITIES OF THE EUGENICS

have deterred doctors from taking action on

SOCIETY

such grounds, and the Committee recommended that, subject to safeguards, the process should be legalized. No action, however, was taken, and not long afterwards
the idea appears to have been dropped, partly no doubt on account of the dangerous parallel of the compulsory sterilization

Publications
(I) THE EUGENICS REVIEW. This quarterly learned journal has been issued since I909.
(2) Occasional Papers. These special studies have been published from time to time since I945.

practised in Germany.
In view of its concern for the welfare of Mental Deficiency Act 1912

the family as a whole, the Society holds that This Act, authorizing the segregation of

voluntary sterilization should be legalized. mental defectives, resulted from the success-

ful advocacy of the Society and other bodies.

Termination of Pregnancy. The Society holds that doctors should be permitted by law to terminate a pregnancy at the request of the parents and under suitable safeguards. This would arise if there was good reason to expect that the child would later suffer from conditions like those regarded by the Brock Committee as justifying the sterilization of a parent.
General
The Society recognizes that many of its questions of policy involve important moral

Children's Allowances
The Society's plea for Children's Allowances for income-tax payers was largely met by the Finance Act I928.
Voluntary Sterilization The Society's proposals (I927-32) for the
legalizing of voluntary sterilization were largely adopted by the Departmental Committee on Sterilization (Brock Committee, I934). This Committee's recommendations have not yet been implemented by Parliament.

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Social Problem Group
The Society sponsored Mr. E. J. Lidbetter's now classical researches on the " Social Problem Group" (Heredity and the Social
Problem Group: Arnold, I933). It has since
published a symposium on the same subject (A Social Problem Group? Oxford University Press, I937), and a volume of recent studies (Problem Families: Five Inquiries. Eugenics Society, I952).
Birth Control
The Society encouraged research on methods of birth control (I930-6) and it assisted the discovery of the " Volpar " group of spermicides, the first complete reports of which were published in THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
Morbid Inheritance
The Society produced a symposium by medical specialists (The Chances of Morbid Inheritance. H. K. Lewis. I934) whose object is to guide the medical profession in advising persons with abnormal family histories as to problems of marriage and parenthood. A pre-marital health schedule was prepared (I933) for use by doctors who are asked to advise on fitness for marriage.

Annals of Eugenics
Between I934 and I940 the Society financially assisted the Galton Laboratory of the University of London in the publication of this Journal.
Population Policy in Great Britain
The Society, jointly with PEP (Political and Economic Planning) established in 1936 the Population Policies Committee which produced in I948 the report entitled Population Policy in Great Britain.
Population Investigation Committee
The Society called together (1936) and helped to subsidize this Committee, which has been responsible, directly and indirectly, for inquiries of eugenic importance and has itself become important. Among these studies have been the relation between intelligence and fertility (promoted by the Scottish Council for Research in Education), and the proportion of pregnancies which are planned. These inquiries led to the more comprehensive investigation promoted by the Royal Commission on Population and sponsored by the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. (See Family
Limitation and Its Influence on Human
Fertility in the Past Fifty Years, by E. Lewis-Faning. Papers of the Royal Commission on Population. Vol. i. I949.)

Family Records
A volume has been made available (I934), wherein people can enter full records of genetic and other features of their families and ancestries, and which can be handed on and kept up to date from generation to generation.
Research Fellowships
Through its Darwin Research Fellowships (I932-9) the Society has promoted and subsidized research into the inheritance of intelligence, the factors determining occupational selection and success, race crossing, social and economic factors impeding early marriage, twins, etc.

World Population and Resources
The Society participated with PEP (Political and Economic Planning) in the production of two broadsheets and a volume World Population and Resources (P E P.
I956).
Infant Sickness and Mortality
The Society financed and published a report on this topic, following an inquiry by the Medical Officers of Health in fifteen special survey areas. (Morbidity and Mortality in the First Year of Life. Grundy and Lewis-Faning. I957.)
Promising Families
An inquiry is in progress (1957).

