THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
STERILIZATION OF DEGENERATES AND CRIMINALS CONSIDERED FROM THE
STANDPOINT OF GENETICS.'
By RAYMOND PEARL.
SOME years ago eugenists became very much interested in possibilitties of eugenic improvement of the race through the method of preventing reproduction of th,e unfit by the process of sterilization. At that time l.aws were 'p.assed iin certain p-arts of the United States permitting, within rather narrow limits, operations to this end upon the criminal ow otherwise degenerate classes. Latterly, in the presence of more absorbinig inteirests engendiered by war, little has been heard about this subject. Inasmuch, however, as it is sure to. be brought to the, fore aga.in, it seems worth while to' con-sider with some care the whole probilem of wha,t may be expeoted from amny s,terilization programme, in the light of present-day knowledge of genetics.
To the geneticist the compulsory sterilization of certa.in classes of degenerates and criminals appeals at first thQught as a scientifically sound and desirable procedure. Whether or 'not, or withiin what lmiits, such compulsory sterilization wou.ld be a, wise socia.l policy to inaugurate at the present time, having regard to the existing degree of enilightenment of puiblic opinion on suoh fundamentall questions, is ai probalem which 'falls outside the field of genetic.s and therefore will no,t be discusserd here.
The investigations of Pea-rson ,aind his co-workers in England, and of Davenport and the staff of the Eugenics Rec.ord Office in. the United
Sta,tes, leave no, ro-om for dobubt that a very 'considerable numbe-r of
criminals, p.aupers, feeble-minded, epileptic and insane persons who come under ins;titutional care owe' their defective condition in, greateir or
less 'degree to heredity. The pedigrees of su'ch persons usually show plainlythat 'they are defective in innate, hereditary constitution. They are
the bearers of a germ-plasm whicl carriets definite determiners fo,r abnormal or defective somatic characters. If such persons producei offspring, even though iun so doing they axe -mated to persons of normal, sound hereditarv constitutions, it is to. be expected from our present knowledge of the principles of inheritance (and experience bears out expectation) that a certain definite'proportion of the offspring will not only be defective somatically,
1 Papers from the Department of Biometry and Vital Statistics, School of Hygiene and Public Health, John Hopkins University, No. 2.

2 EUGENICS REVIEW.
as were their parents, but will in turn pass on to their progeny, in some
proportion, the defective gersm-plasm. Furthermore, the study of these cases from the standpoint of genetics suggests the still more important fact tha.t the somatically normal offspring in such a degenerate or defective line of descent, in spiite of their superficial normality, may, amd undoobtedly in most cases will, bear uncha!nged the defective germ-plasm.
When such individuals are mated wi.th normal persons the degeneracy, which is innate in the strain, will again appear in a portion, at least, o-f
the descendants.
All thait is known of the laws of inheritance, t.aken with the
experience of -the world through all history with cr.minals amd degenerates of -the type under discussion, shows that there is only otne sure method by which a permanent 'reduction in the absolute and relative numbers of such unfortunates may be brought about. This method is to
prevenit, absolutely anid umfailingly, the reproduction of all individuals
bearing germnplasm tainted i.n these ways. Steriilization appeals to many
as -the safest and most sure way to accomplish this end which has yet been suggested. But the case is not as simple as it appears theoretically to be. Looking at the matiter in, a practical way, there are difficulties which makce it seem, at least, rather doubtful whether anythi,ng like the
theoretically expected good can possibly result from any sterilization
programme. This will be evident as we proceed.
The question has been asked whether sterilization of criminals and degenerates wilil " raise -the average of the race. " Theoretically, of course, it miust, but the logically correct a;nswer to this question turns on what is meant by " raiisitng the average." The poinit can! be made clear by an illustration. Suppose a fairmer had a flock of sheep of which one-
fourth wer-e black and three-fourths white. He wishes all his flock to be
white. Now i.f he prevents all black sheep from reproducing, he will in a very few generations, in-deed in one generation, greatly reduce the
proportion of black sheep in the flock. If then he ke-eps individual pedigrees (,that is, takes steps to know exactly what offspring come from each pair of paren.ts) and then prevents from further reproducing any white sheep that ever have thrown even a single black offspring, he will
in a few more generations get a flock in which black sheep will never thereafter appear, so far as is now known. But in all this nothing will have been done which will make the white sheep any mo-re whi.te than they were at the beginning. The average degree of whiteness of the
whites, in, other words, will niot have been raised. But the Aro_portion
of whites in the flock as a wholle will have been materially raised. So we have every reason to suppose it would be with human
degenerates. If by sterilizatioin, or other means, such -persons can be absolutely prevented from reproduction the proportion of t.hem in the race will 'surely be in time reduced. ConcuTrently, of course, the paoportion of non.degenerates o rnormals will be increased. But ithe
'faverage of the normals " in respect to degree of intelligence will not
have been raised in the process.
As -to the criteria by which it shall be determined wheth,er, in a
given instance, degeneracy of whatever kind is hereditary (due to

STERILIZATION OF DEGENERATES, ETC.

3

defective innate constitution) or merely acquired (som;atic in the technical
sense) it vould appear that the surest test is that of progeny performance. Next in, probative value is the family history or pedigree.L Practically
in studies of human heredity we are restricted to the family history, for obvious reasoins. If such a history exte-nds over three generations in, the
direct line, and more .than one other person defective in the same or some other w.a.y besides the individual appears in it, the conclusion may be drawn with -a considerable degree of probability that the germ-plasm
in this iline of descent is in some degree defective. Such a coin.clusion, is indicated nrot only by studies of human pedigrees, but by the exte:nsive stud-ies which have been madoe in recent years on inheritance in animmals.
There can be no doub.t thait the superlatively effective procedure in freeinig the xrace of defective hereditary characteristics would be to sterilize (or otherwise keep from reproduction) all individuals in, all pedigree lines, direct and collateral, in which any degeneirates -have appeared. Practically, h-owever, it is scarcely 'to be expected that s.ociety will ever sanction any such wholesale compulsory sterilization, as this would demand, of somatically normal 'persons, even though tihere is some reason to suppose that they carry in their germ-cells the determinAnts of defective characteristicsi As a matter of fact, the present state of knowledge in the field of genetics furnishes no practical warrant for a wholesale and indiscriminate sterilization' of all individuals belonging to 'tainted strains or pedigree lines. While, as has been said, such a pro'cess would no doubt be the most effective method which could be devised to rid the race of defective hereditary characteristics, it would be altagether too wasteful of perfectly good and desirable hereditary material. It is certa.inily made very probable, if not demonstrated, by the studies of Davenport, Rosanoff, Goddard, Nettleship, Bateson,
Hurst, Punnett, Baur, and others, that many of these defective ch;aracteristics -are inher.ited in accordance with Mendeliant principles. This means that out of tainted stock individuals may be expected to segregate who will be truly n,ormal-that is, who will nolt bear in their germ-cells the
determinants of defective -traits. To bar such individuals from mating
with other normial persons and reproducing themselves would be an unnecessary and essentially anti-social procedure.
Practically anything now known regarding -the laws of inheritance would appear to' give sianction for the compulsory sterilization of but two classes oif persons, viz. :-
(a) Those, o,f both sexes, ac,tually and obviously degenerate, us,ing
this word i'n a broad sense to include criminality.
(b) Such persons, of both sexes, themselves not obviously degenerate (i. e., somatically abnormal), as have one or more children which are actually aind obviously degenerlate, since the production of such offspring may be taken as proof positive that the producing individuals bear the hereditary determinants of defective characteristics.

1 For a discussion of the relative merits of different plans for arriving at a knowledge of the composition of germ-plasm, see the author's " Modes of Research in Genetics," New York, 1915.

4 EUGENICS REVIEW.
So moderate a programme as this, could it be put into general
operation, could not possibly be expected to bring about, in anything
short of 25 to 30 years, a. statistically noticeable reduction in, the pro.-
portion of degenerates and defectives in the race. It must be emphasised
in the strongest terms that no startling immedia,te result is to be expected
from the in,auguration of a sterilization programme. Such a result would
be statistically impossible. It is quite safe to say that any eugenic result
whi-ch is real and perman,ent will only be attained after many yeairs.
The reason, of course, is that in genetic matters the significant time unit 'of measurement is the generation. M,an is a slow-growing creature; one
generation means 20 to 30 or more yeairs. And the length of a human generation is, in the highest civilisation, all the time growing longer, owing to economic and social influences.
In, view of these considerations the importance of including i,ndividuals of cl.ass (b) (above) in the operations of any sterilization programme becomes obviious. Wh,ille there are as yet no comprehensive
and exact statistics to show what prqportion of the socially unfit are produced by class (a) individuals as compared with class (b) indiviidua;ls, it is fair to assume that the latter class produce quite *as many as the former, and probably a grea,t many more. Granting that som,atically normal anid nearly normal individuals produce a larger proportion of the totail degenerate population than do degenerates themse-lves, it would be many years-certainly far beyolnd the lifetime of -any person, now living-before the proportion of actual degenerates would be reduced to even one-hialf whtat itt n-ow is, supposing a nation-wide policy of sterilization -to be.put into execution at on,ce, and assuming that no other agency acted in the meantime to reduce the number of degenerates.
T,h,ese considerations have, it seems to me, a pertinen,t bearing on the question, of soicial policy involved in any sterilization propag.anda.
Granting that sterilization lasws can be put oin the statute books, does the past history of law-making and enforcement i,n most nationis, certamnly in the United States, give any warrant for supposing that such laws will be kep-t alive and actively enforced for a sufficiently long time, in the necessary absence, of immediate and striking results, to bring about any permanent and marked result ? Certainly this could only be expected if a oontinued and active campaign of genera.l eugenic eidu,cation were maintained, and even then the case is not so hopeful as one could wish. All this is here emrlhasised, not to discourage thei eugenisit from in.augura,ting sterilization programmes, but simply to try to bring home to, him a more adequate realization th'an I think he generally has, of the stupendous magnitude of the task, bo,th in 'time and space, which 'is involved in any effective changing of the germ-plasm of a race of human beings, -as a result of legislative procedure. Looking at the mratter from detached and hard-headed viewpoint of the genetici.st, it would seem as tihough the onily legal foundation which could possibly be adequate would be an incorporation of a sterilization enactment into the fundamental constitutional law of the land. Only in this way wvoulid there be hope of the policy carrying along unchanged for a' sufficient number of generations to produce definite and tangible results.

STERILIZATION OF DEGENERATES, ETC.

5

Another matter in this same connection is of grave importance from
the satandpoint of genetics. Whatever plan of preventing the reproduction of degenerate stocks is adopted it must be absolutely and surely
permanenet,_ so far as concerns the individual, and must include both sexes. Here lies the opening for criticism of the mbost widely appiroved
plan of sterilization-namely, thait through vasectomy. It is admittedly possible to repair, by surgical means, a transected vas deferens so as to ma,ke it oince more functionally perfect. It may be argued that this
possibility is not likely to be taken advaintage of by vasectomized'
criminals and degenerates. Possibly not, but so long as -the possibility remains the-re is a weak spot in the eugeniic dam whitch is supposed to hdld hback the flow of socially unfit. From the standploint oif genetics
the only justifiable sterilization procedure is -an operation, which cannot by any practical possibil4ity be surgically repaired. Such an operation
admittedly might be more serious and immediately painful than " pin-
prick" vasectom.y.1
Along this line also lies the genetic objection to such suggested substitutes for sterilization as life segregation, cointroll of marriage selec-
tion (this plan wvould appear to' be practically inappli,cable in social and intellectual strata of the sort here under discussioin). If it is desirable to prevent the reprodiuction of the socially unfit at all, 'this prevention, should
obviously be absolute an.d irrevocable. The effective sterillization of the fem.ale presents still greater diffi-
culities -than that of the male. Any sterilization by surgical means
deman,ds in the female a much more s,evere type of operation.than that
necessary to attain the equivalent resu.lt in the ma-le. In fact, it may be
said that there is no entirely satisfactory surgical method of permanently sterilizing the female which does not involve castration. Bucura's2 method of sterilization is on the whole probably the best, but it is not permanent, that is, a further operation may restore fertility. Possilbly, as has been suggested in certain quarters, the X-ray may offer a feasible method of ster;ilizing the female, but the experimental basis herie is
largely wanting. Certainly there is not such a definite and organised body oif knowledge on the subject as wvould be necessary before! one could
hope 'to get legal authorisation for sterilizati-on by the X-xay.
Altogeither, the difficulties which beset the organisation o'f any
thorough-going campaign of steriliz.ation' are very grave. First, we have
the general opposition of public opi.nion to the piassage and en,forcement of laws which interfere with the most intimate item of personail physiology. But it is dlear that unless a sterilization programme is thoroughly comp.rehensive in its scope and carried out rigorously and unremittingly for a, period of probably at least a hundred years, no significant, eugenic results will come from it. In the present state of social enlightenment of the greater portioin of the general population one can'not but feel that the
1 It should not be understood from this that castration is recommended. Leaving aside the social repugnance to this operation which rules it out of court at once, the biological consequence would be anything but desirable. A thoroughgoing vasotomy would seem to meet all the requirements of the case.
2 Bucura, C. J. "Temporiire Sterilisierung der Frau." Wiener Klin, Wchnschr. Bd. xxiii., No. 46. I9IO.

6 EUGENICS REVIEW. general ou-tlook for ,the solution of our difficulties by this method is not particularly bright. One is inclined to agree with the oautious statement of GoddardL in discussing the problem of the feeble-minded': "At best, sterilization is not likely to be .a final solution of this problem. We may, and indeed I believe must, use it as a help, as something thait will contribute toward the solution, until we can get segregation thbroughly
established. But, in using it, we must realise that the first necessity is the careful study of the w.hole subject, to the end that we may know more both about the laws of inheritance and the ultimalte effect of the operation."
By way of summary it may be said, from the standpoint of the science of genetics, that, while compulsory sterilization is the only adequate means yet suggested for the prevention of the reproduction of the socially unfit, striking immediate resrults in the reduction of the number of degenerates and defectives are not to be expected to follow the inauguration of such a system. Many years must elapse before the proportion of hereditary degeneracy in the race could be substantially reduced. Known genetic principles demaind that, ab initio, not only actual defectives, but the parents of actual defectives, should be prevented from further reproduction. Further, the means of sterilization employed should be such as to ensure a permanent result. The difficulties, both sociall and genetic, which beset sterilization as a remedial eugenic measure are so considerable as to make one doubtful of its accomplishing much.
iI5-rI6.I Goddard, H. H. "The Kallikak Family," New York, 1912, pp.

