THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT & EUGENICS*
By RICHARD M. TITMUSS

IT was, I think, Professor Carr Saunders environment ? The certainties of one age

who, in delivering a Galton Lecture some become the problems of the next. That,

years ago, speculated on the problems broadly, is the theme of my paper within

that would confront an historian intent on the context of eugenics and the social

tracing the development of the eugenics environment.

movement. The materials and the problems Now the Victorian age was conspicuously

he would have to face are indeed vast; they an age of uncompromising judgments.

stretch far back in the social history of Philosophies concerning the nature of man,

England and they are studded with some of and discoveries, for instance, in the field of

the greatest and most vigorous polemics of human biology, were converted into immut-

the past 200 years. But our historian would able laws. There were the principles of

be most sorely tried in his task of evaluating individualism and of self-help. There was

the respective contributions of some of the the blind, unqualified acceptance of the

chief actors in this history-giants of the " struggle for existence "-a dogma which

stature of Darwin, Huxley, Galton, Lamarck, Darwin himself certainly did not hold. State

Malthus, Spencer, Karl Pearson, and others. education, sanitation and health services were

I do not intend in this paper to offer any vigorously opposed on the grounds that they

historical reflections on the work of these would undermine responsibility. The Times

great men. But what I have to say will, I asserted with confidence that the English

hope, suggest to some future historian- people would rather run the risk of cholera

earnestly browsing in the Society's library- than be bullied into health. The introduction

certain currents of thought, empirical per- of a school medical service was fought because

haps, but worthy of pursuit.

it was feared that it would pauperise both

children and parents. In I874, the President

The Victorian Climate

of the Society of Medical Officers, alarmed by-

From time to time it is wise to remind the growing use of drains and water-closets,

ourselves that we tend to romanticise the argued against this development by saying

past. And eugenists are by no means immune that " an increase in the rate of mortality is

from this amiable weakness. Perhaps we often a sign of prosperity; for a high death-

surrender to the past too easily because we rate means a high. birth-rate, and a high

dislike the present. But whatever the reasons, birth-rate is the invariable concomitant of

and we can be sure that they are many, the prosperity." The implication was that as

result is often a distorted view of history and water-closets and drains increased, prosperity

of the leading personalities of the day. would decrease. These sturdy expressions of

Judgments on men and social movements individualism may amuse us to-day, but we

are continually being revised, especially when should remember that they were an integral

the period of survey is so close to us as the part of the Victorian outlook on the affair.

Victorian age-the age of the great contro- of man. As such they must be studied in their

versy: nature and nurture. If there can be context; that is to say, if we wish to under-

as yet no finality in our historical assess- stand their value and significance we must

ments in the field of, say, politics and read them against the social, economic and

economics in the nineteenth century, may political background of the age. In a similar

this not be equally true of heredity and way we should attempt to evaluate the con-

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on November i6th, I943.

troversy over heredity and environment against the Victorian background.

53

54 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Galton's Eugenics

at all, beyond giving instruction and pro-

Francis Galton and Gregor Mendel were, fessional training. There is no escape from

curiously enough, both born in the year the conclusion that nature prevails enor-

I822. But heredity was a live issue long mously over nurture when the differences of

before any sound knowledge of Mendel's nurture do not exceed what is commonly to

discoveries on the mechanism of inheritance be found among persons of the same rank of

became generally available at the beginning society and in the same country." Judged

of the twentieth century. Right down the by the caution of modern science, Galton was

ages heredity has been held to be of immense certainly sweeping in his verdict, but never-

importance in human affairs. The emphasis theless he may be considered temperate in

given to hereditary factors in the Old Testa- comparison with some of his contemporaries

ment can be traced in all types of ethnic and successors. I will give two quotations

groups, from the Bantu to the Nordic. And, which broadly summarise the views of the

indeed, it was natural that they should school of heredity in the nineteenth century.

receive such prominence when little was That great statistician, Karl Pearson, said,

known about environmental influences. The " We have two groups in the community-

belief in the importance of heredity can also one parasitic on the other. The latter thinks

be traced to parental " wishful thinking," of to-morrow and is childless, the former

and to such historical developments as king- takes no thought and multiplies." Leonard

ship and inherited leadership. These em- Darwin, past President of the Society and

pirical views were strengthened and given one of the outstanding eugenists of this

some scientific basis when Charles Darwin century, stated, " The nation as a whole is

began to write of heredity in relation to slowly and steadily deteriorating as regards

evolution, and when his cousin, Francis its average inborn qualities," and proceeded

Galton, from a study of fifty-five pairs of to prophesy that we should be unable to fight

twins, coined the term " eugenics." In his a major war. At the end of the nineteenth

book, Inquiries into Human Faculty, he century the dominant note concerning the

studied what he thought were thirty-five biological outlook was one of inspissated

identical and twenty fraternal twins. For gloom. What John Cotter Morison called

reports on these twins-the influences of "the devastating torrent of children"

environment, education, and so on-he relied would bring ruin and decay in its wake.

on anecdotal evidence from friends and rela- That rapid breeding from what was thought

tives. An experiment controlled in this man- to be genetically poor stock would eventually

ner to-day would, of course, be rejected by lead to national decline. The views, in those

competent statisticians; but in those days days, of the school of heredity may be

statistical techniques were very rudimentary. summed up in the words of a poet whose

Those who criticize Galton, however, for not name I have not been able to trace:

anticipating the refined statistical methods of to-day, show little sense of history or

"Come, Malthus, and in Ciceronian prose Tell how a rutting population grows

awareness of how far Galton was in advance

Until the produce of the land is spent

of most of his contemporaries. On the basis

And brats expire for lack of aliment."

of this work on twins, Galton was led to the

conclusion: " We may, therefore, broadly Darkest England

conclude that the only circumstance, within I want now to consider why such aston-

the range of those by which persons of similar ishingly gloomy prophecies were being made

conditions of life are affected, that is capable by these early eugenists. What led them to

of producing a marked effect on the character think that national decay was inevitable

of adults is illness or some accident that unless the torrent of children from the poor

causes physical infirmity. The impression was stopped? To answer this question I

that all this leaves on the mind is one of some think we should try and recall the social

wonder whether nurture can do anything conditions of the last quarter of the nine-

THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT AND EUGENICS

55

teenth century. For a few minutes, then, let beg you to come with them." It was estius Unagine that this paper is being read in mated that there were in those days 3,000,000 the winter of I890. In that year General individuals who were paupers, homeless, Booth's In Darkest England was published- starving, casuals, criminals, lunatics' and a book that vividly depicted the contem- prostitutes in the United Kingdom. Every porary social scene as it was experienced by year there were 200,000 arrests for drunkenabout half of the population of the country. ness. It is only fifty-nine years since the Here is one passage describing a slum Sack of the West End and fifty-six years quarter in Woolwich: "The women living since Bloody Sunday. Thousands of children and following their dreadful business in this then slept in empty boxes and boilers neighbourhood are so degraded that even covered with tarpaulins and old sacks in the abandoned men will refuse to- accompany Adelphi Arches, on barges, on the steps of them home. Soldiers are forbidden to enter London Bridge, and in similar places in the the place, or to go down the street, on pain slums of other cities. Many of the School of 25 days' imprisonment; pickets are Attendance Officers had to be accompanied stationed at either end to prevent this. The by the police when they entered the poorer streets are much cleaner than many of the quarters of the towns. Seventy per cent of rooms we have seen. A policeman never the elementary school children had nits in goes down this street alone at night-one their head and 8o per cent were assessed as having died not long ago from injuries re- dirty. About 20 per cent of adults getting ceived there. The lowest class of all is the married were illiterate and signed their .girls who stand at the pier-head-these sell names by mark. When the school medical themselves literally for a bare crust of bread service was introduced-only thirty-five and sleep in the streets." The Russian writer, years ago-one-quarter of the children had Dostoevsky, when he visited London, left defective eyesight, four-fifths exhibited us this impression: .... on Saturday night dental decay, while about one-quarter of the half a million working men and women with children suffered in various degrees from their children spread like a flood over the discharging ears, ringworm, rickets, malnuwhole town, for the most part gathering in trition, nose and throat diseases and heart certain districts. All night, it is said, up to and lung diseases. Lowndes, in his valuable five o'clock in the morning, they celebrate study, The Silent Social Revolution, quotes their holiday, that is, they fill themselves one medical M.P. who told the House of like cattle with food and drink and so make Commons: " Day after day in East Bristol up for the whole week past. The beer- I used literally to shudder in contemplation houses are decorated like palaces. Drunken- of the fact that it was upon these rickety ness is everywhere, but it is joyless, sad, and shoulders that the burden of the Empire in gloomy; a strange silence seems always to time to come would have to rest." Little did prevail. Only now and then do abuse and the school doctors dream that these very brutal fights disturb this weary silence which children would, as adults, have to face nine weighs upon you so heavily. The women are years of war and five years of economic in no way behind, and get drunk along with depression before they reached the age of 50. their husbands while the children crawl and It was only forty years ago that the broad run about among them. Many of these civilising influence of universal educationhusbands thrash their wives dreadfully. one of the most potent factors in the social The children of these people, almost before environment-really began to make decisive they are grown up, go as a rule on the streets, strides. I doubt whether, with all our mingle with the crowd, and often do not wisdom, we have as yet fully valued the allreturn to their parents. At the Haymarket pervading, subtle and progressive effects of I-observed mothers who brought their young education, mental discipline and school life, daughters to trade with. Little girls, about on the character and biological make-up of twelve years old, catch you by the hand and successive generations. It is a slow process

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for one generation of parents to pass on to context of Francis Galton's work on heredity.

the next, through the formative influence of It is by modern standards an appalling

family life, a rising standard of health and environment in which perhaps 75 per cent

education. We are only now beginning to of the nation lived, bore children, and died.

penetrate the deeper levels of home and We cannot, whether we be scientist or lay-

family training as our knowledge of psy- man, escape from being influenced con-

chology and physiology expands and sheds sciously or unconsciously by the contem-

its early extravagances. When we return to porary social climate and prevailing moral

our historical perspective we realise how values. Thus it was even with so profound

meagre our knowledge was at the end of the a thinker as Galton, and still more with

last century of these influences, how little others who shared his views on the over-

we understood the mechanisms of health and riding importance of inheritance. At the end

nutrition, how poorly we valued universal of the century the birth-rate was twice as

education. It is a mistake to think that high as it is to-day, and it has been estimated

universal education began to operate when that somewhere between I89I and I9II the

the Act of I870 was passed. Twenty-five fertility of the very poor exceeded that of

years were to elapse before it applied to all the well-to-do by perhaps 8o to IOO per cent.

children, and even then-only fifty years ago It is probable that the class differential in

-the school-leaving age for over 75 per cent. England was then at its maximum range.

of the population was ten. And the teaching The environmentalist is unjustified in con-

was such that it was common for one un- demning, by modem standards, Galton's

certificated teacher to control a class of inquiries without first understanding this

70 to I20 children. Historians have remarked Victorian backcloth. Conversely, those who

on the fact that we were then sixty years hold strongly to-day the Galtonian viewpoint

behind other Western nations in our provi- are equally unjustified because they refuse

sion for secondary and technical education. to evaluate the social history of the last fifty

Only forty years ago the supply of educated years and because they ignore the immense

adults was so inadequate that German clerks advances made by the social sciences. There

were being imported into the City of London. are still, despite Lord Horder's book on

And when some of the teachers attempted to Obscurantism,* too many obscurantists about.

improve the school syllabus they had to face In this attempt to recapture the social

such letters as this one signed " An Indignant realities of fifty years ago we may, I think,

Parent ": " Are we to be taxed in order that conclude that Galton found much to justify

the faith for which Ridley and Latimer his assertions. But Galton did not anticipate

suffered may be crushed? Let us expel this that the great technological advances regis-

cockatrice from our midst, Sir, and let the tered during the nineteenth century were

flag of Britain wave unsullied in the breeze. likely, sooner or later, to be paralleled by

Sir, we were informed that our poor children similar progress in the study and diagnosis of

were to be taught reading, writing and arith- man. As I have already said, the certainties

metic only. Now this schoolmaster teaches of the nineteenth century, in economics,

them the contents of their own insides and medicine, biology and codes of behaviour,

thus adds to the rudeness which is innate in were destined to become the problems of the

the lower orders. If the Author of the twentieth century. If it be held that Galton

Universe had meant us to know what our was justified, then have the predictions that

livers are like, he would not have hidden he and others made been verified by time?

them away in security."

Has the quality of the nation been steadily

deteriorating since the I890's ? Are we

The Changing Social Scene

poorer to-day in intelligence, health and

This brief descriptive picture of health, capacity for citizenship than we were fifty

education and social conditions in the i88o's years ago ? Has the existence during this

and the I890's throws some light on the

* Watts, I938.

THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT AND EUGENICS

57

period of marked differences in the fertility nurtured in the conditions I have described.

of rich and poor led to a decay in the inborn They have had a lot to put up with; nine

endowment of the nation ? Is it a fact that years of war and five years of unparalleled

the immense growth in State provision for depression, yet I do not discern any deteriora-

health, education, welfare, pensions and so tion in comparing them with their grand-

on has undermined responsibility and pau- mothers. I do not share the gloom of those

perized the nation? I submit that these who look with fear on the fertility differential

questions are important and relevant to-day, to-day. Cattell, for instance, asserted in

first in order to understand the past, and, I937 that in 300 years half the population

secondly, so that we may march, with cour- would be mentally defective. We do not

age, into the future.

know for certain that the differential exists

Do not let us, in considering our answers to-day to any considerable extent, but it is

to these questions, make the same mistake certainly smaller than it was fifty years ago.

as many of the Victorians in thinking that But I am disturbed when I view the mortality

we have reached finality in these matters. differential, because the social environment

The sciences of nutrition, of psychology and is, or should be, under man's control and,

of genetics, are still young; we are only now therefore, stands first in priority. In my

beginning to grasp first principles. What do recent book, Birth, Poverty and Wealth, I

we know, for instance, of the significance of showed that despite an all-round improve-

the uterine environment and the period of ment in infant mortality among all social

social training before intelligence tests can groups, the relative differences between, on

be applied ? What do we know as yet of the the one hand, the well-to-do and, on the

inheritance of intelligence; of the transmis- other, the skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled

sion of the good genes ?

workers, increased between I9II and I931.

We know enough about the transmission These greater differences were not discernible

of certain bad genes to support a policy of in the first month of life when, as Sir Arthur

voluntary sterilization, under suitable safe- McNalty has pointed out, the effects of

guards, such as was proposed in the Brock defective stamina vitae would be most influ-

Report. We know that mental defectives, ential. When, however, environmental

whether their condition is genetical or the diseases are considered, the gulf between the

result of acquired disease, cannot be desirable poor and the well-to-do rose from about

parents; and we believe that they, as well 300 per cent in I9II to, roughly, 500 per

as persons suffering from a few serious and cent in I93I. These deaths were, and are,

fortunately rare hereditary diseases, should preventable; this inequality is unnecessary.

be relieved of the burden of their fertility. They were the product of an evil environ-

But what can we know, in the vastly unequal ment. If the lessons of the progress we have

opportunities offered by a highly stratified made since I890 are not wholly bad, then

society, of the biological endowment and we must not commit the mistakes that our

potentialities of the great masses of our fathers made. If we wish to reap a richer

fellow men ?

harvest-in terms of quality-in the future,

It has been said that " evil has many when the quantity of our population will be

descendants"; this is equally true of good. declining, then it is for us not to be content

Have we not still to harvest the biological only with weeding out the demonstrably

fruits of a slowly improving environment ? unfit; we must look equally to the improve-

How long does it take a rising standard of ment of the social environment. " Can it be

health and education to leave its mark on a denied," wrote Matthew Arnold, " that to

new generation ? In short, how powerful are live in a society of equals tends in general to

the selective forces of a good environment ? make a man's spirits expand and his faculties

Ten days ago the Ministry of Labour regis- work easily and actively; while, to live in a

tered for service women aged 50-many, if society of superiors, although it may occa-

not the majority, will have been born and sionally be a very good discipline, yet in

58 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
general tends to tame the spirits and to make overshadowed, to be profoundly insignificant, the play of the faculties less secure and has on the whole a depressing and benumbing active ? ,Can it be denied, that to be heavily effect on the character ? '

EUGENICS SOCIETY
Annual Meeting and Election of Officers and Council

T HE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING The adoption of the Accounts and Balance

was held at the Rooms of the Royal Sheet, proposed by Mr. Chance and seconded

Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly, by Mr. Martin, was carried unanimously.

W.i, on Tuesday, May 23rd, I944, at 4.30 HONORARY OFFICERS AND COUNCIL FOR

p.m., with the President, Lord Horder, in THE YEAR I944-5. The Honorary Secretary

the Chair. The Honorary Secretary read reported that no replies had b-een received to

the notice convening the Meeting.

the notice inserted in the October-January

MINUTES. The Minutes of the Annual issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW, inviting

General Meeting, held on July I3th, I943, additional names for nomination to the

which were contained in the Annual Report, Council.

copies of which had been circulated to Presidency. The Honorary Secretary said

Fellows and Members before the Meeting, that he regretted to inform the Fellows and

were taken as read and signed as correct. Members that Lord Horder's tenure of office

ANNUAL REPORT. The Chairman presented as President had, under Article 27, now

the Annual Report, and moved its adoption. expired, and he paid a cordial tribute to the

This was carried unanimously.

invaluable services to the Society of the

STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE retiring President. He was glad to say, how-

SHEET. These were presented by the ever, that Lord Horder had consented to

Honorary Treasurer.

become an Honorary President of theSociey.

Mr. J. P. Brander raised the question of A new President had not yet been appointed.

the legality, under Section 3 (9) of the Retirements. UnderArticle 28, thefollowing

Society's Memorandum, of the Grant of £250, were due to retire: Vice-presidents: -Dr.
made in I943, to the Family Endowment Julian Huxley and Lord Keynes. Council:

Society; and he further proposed the Under Article 30, the following were due to

following Resolution: THAT in view of the retire: Lady Denman, Mr. Graham Hutton,

doubt felt by certain Fellows and Members Mr. Lloyd and Mrs. Potton.

as to whether the policy of the Family En- Honorary Officers, and Council for the year

dowment Society in promoting the granting I944-5 were appointed as follows:

by the State of universal children's allowances is eugenic, it is recommended that no
future grants be made to the Family Endowment Society.
The matter was discussed at some length, and the Resolution was put to the meeting;

President: Post not yet filled. Chairman of Council: B. S. Bramwell, M.A., LL.B., F.R.S.E. Hon. Treasurer: C. F. Chance, M.A.
Hon. Librarian: Miss E. Corry.

but no seconder being forthcoming, a vote Hon. Secretary: C. P. Blacker, M.A.,

was not taken. The President undertook M.D.

that the legality of the grant already made Vice-Presidents: Sir Charles- Darwin,

would be examined.

K.B.E., M.C., M.A., Sc.D., F.R.S.,

