DR. MAURICE NEWFIELD

THE
EUGENICS REVIEW

Editorial Oflices: The Eugenics Society, 69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1. (Telephone-Victoria 2091.)
"EuAenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of a race; also with those that develop them to the utmost advantaAe."
Sir Francis Galton, 1904.

MAURICE NEWFIELD

1893-1949

IT IS WITH DEEP REGRET THAT WE RECORD THE DEATH OF DR. MAURICE NEWFIELD, EDITOR OF THE EUGENICS REVIEW
SINCE 1933.

M AURICE NEWFIELD was born in assistant editor of the British Medical

I893 and educated at the City of Journal, and later, from his home in the

London School. He volunteered for country, was for some time medical adviser

active service at the outbreak of war in I9I4, joining the Public Schools and Universities
Battalion, and was commissioned in I9I5 to the 3rd Btn. of the Bedfordshire Regiment. After a year in Mesopotamia, where he
contracted sandfly fever, he was invalided
to India in I9I6. Here, after transferring to the Sappers and Miners, Indian Army, he acted as Commandant of the Nasirabad School of Army Signals and was temporary A.D.C. to Lord Chelmsford during his

on publicity to the Glaxo Laboratories. In I936 he joined the staff of Butterworths to assist Sir Humphry Rolleston in editing the British Encyclopedia of Medical Practice,
and in I938 inaugurated the new Medical Department of Hamish Hamilton, which he
built up almost single-handed until it was
taken over by Cassell's in I949. Maurice Newfield never allowed illness or
ill-health to interfere with his work; in addition to his editorial duties he wrote,

Rajputana tour in I9I7. He rose to the rank of major and left India in May I919, though by remaining another six months he could have qualified for a disability pension,
having suffered from cholera and malaria

under the pseudonym " Michael Fielding," Parenthood, Design or Accident,* the fifth
edition of which appeared in I946; he also wrote the Health section in Pears' Cyclopaedia and " First Aid in Divers Crises " in

during his service in the East. Eager to start work, but feeling a misfit in England, he

the Weekend Book.t He married in I929 and his only son was

studied for a short time at the Sorbonne and born in I930.

at Freiburg before going to King's College and Charing Cross Hospital; having qualified
in record time, he practised in Bloomsbury, sharing the house of Francis and Vera Meynell. One of his patients was H. G. Wells, with whom he spent a winter in Portugal as his private physician. At the time when his

LORD HORDER writes: One of the first things I read on returning from the U.S.A. recently were the paragraphs in the REVIEW in which Maurice Newfield spoke very generously of my own participation, as President of the Society over two periods, in

health first broke down, in I930, he was * Williams aLnd Norgate- 1028. + Nonesuch Press. T92A.

I03

I04

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the work done by the eugenics group in this' troubled. Differences existed within the

country. Alas! Newfield died on the day I Council upon various topics, among them

wrote my letter. His resum6 of my associa- birth control. The assumption of editorial

tion with the Society, written as it must have responsibility by someone who at that time

been during hours of great suffering, was was so closely identified with the birth

characteristic of the man: lucid, well control movement was viewed with mixed

phrased, accurate.

feelings by the Council; its mood was then

Details of Newfield's life and work will such that no appointment would have been

doubtless appear in the REVIEW over the unreservedlywelcomed. Aspeciallyappointed

name of his devoted friend Blacker, to whom REVIEW sub-committee was designated to

we owe so much, in that he enabled Newfield, scrutinise and approve the " Notes of the

by his encouragement and patience, to Quarter." But it was not long before a sense

produce so much fine critical writing over so of reassurance was noticeable. The REVIEW

long a period. These brief notes of mine are sub-committee gradually came to take its

personal and general.

duties less seriously, and it finally lapsed

It may be truly said of most men that " the altogether, being prepared to leave it to the

blood is the life." Of Newfield it was more discretion of the editor to consult whom he

correct to say that the spirit was the life. liked when he was in doubt. Finally

For twenty years his work was done not only Maurice used to send advance copies of his

under the shadow of illness but whilst illness " Notes of the Quarter " to the chairman of

was actively upon him. Add to the physical the Council and to me; and it was but

suffering and disablement the series of rarely that either of us offered suggestions.

tiresome treatments necessitated by his There began for me in October I933 a

disease and most men might have reasonably period of happy co-operation which, till its

excused themselves mental effort. Not so end in August I949, was unblemished by the

Newfield; this long period, showing only slightest breath or trace of disharmony.

brief remissions, and even so of very in- Indeed our relations, at first somewhat

different health, saw the production of an formal, developed into a warm friendship

almost continuous series of literary tasks. compounded, so far as I was concerned, of

Not only was the output large, the quality deepening affection and admiration. Our

was nearly always uniformly good. I believe views on the principles of eugenics accorded

it will emerge that, in his editorship of the as perfectly as did our thoughts on issues of

REVIEW, Newfield's critical notes will stand policy. Before Maurice's illness confined him

out as some of his best work. They reveal to his home we used to meet at least weekly;

the breadth of his conception of eugenics, and from our many talks I derived consistent

the wide scope of his knowledge and the profit and, whenever it was needed, help.

fineness of his critical faculty.

After he became disabled I continued to

In Newfield's death eugenics has lost one draw similar comforts from an almost daily

of its stalwarts and those who were his correspondence or telephone conversation

intimates have lost a most loyal and lovable and by occasional visits to Great Bardfield.

friend.

Indeed, I came to rely so much on his tact,

his discretion, and his excellent judgment,

Dr. C. P. BLACKERwrites: It was in I933 that I now look forward to a future without

that the editorship of the REVIEW passed him with something akin to dismay.

from the capable hands of Mr. Eldon Moore Eugenics is a difficult subject to expound;

to those of Maurice Newfield. The first the pitfalls are such that disruptive con-

number produced under Maurice's control troversies can only be avoided by a firm

was that of October I933. Hence in October touch and delicate balance. These Maurice

last year he completed fifteen years of possessed in supreme degree. Among the

editorship.

qualities which combined to make him such

The years before 1933 had not been un- a rare character and also such a valued

MAURICE NEWFIELD: I893-I949

I05

friend were his shining vitality and his almost distribution has been made to the Australian

uncanny awareness of the trends of feeling Eugenics Society; from South Africa; from

around him. His vitality, his gaiety, his India; from several European countries such

buoyancy, the delectation which he found as Denmark, Sweden and France. During

in merely being alive, seemed to increase as the fifteen years of his editorship his touch

his physical illness developed. I can see him was unfaltering: not once did he take a false

now as I saw him one evening two years ago step. There was never a complaint, a rebuke,

at a friend's house in Gordon Square. He was a recrimination; never once did a member

recovering from a prolonged bout of sickness of the Council raise objection to a feature of

which had prevented his eating any solid the REVIEW. Indeed, the only references,

food for several weeks. I found him lying on other than those of a business character,

a sofa in a condition of extreme emaciation. made to it at Council meetings, were ex-

He looked so delicate and frail that one pressions of praise and appreciation. If the

felt he could be picked up like a child. After winds of opinion, which have been contrary

he had briefly described his symptoms as for many years, are now veering in our

tiresome but interesting tribulations, not favour, one of the causes of the change is that

without amusing features, we talked for eugenics has found as gifted and sensitive an

about three quarters of an hour about the exponent as Maurice Newfield.

Society's affairs. Despite a degree of weak- Our sympathy goes to his devoted wife and

ness which at times rendered his voice son.

inaudible and which made the slightest

change of position on the sofa an effort, his THE HON. MRS. GRANT DUFF writes:

conversation sparkled with wit and humour. Maurice Newfield is a very great loss to the

There emanated from his wasted figure, from Eugenics Society. Of his outstanding quali-

his taut but smiling face, a vitality of spirit ties as Editor of the REVIEW others are better

which seemed somehow luminous, so that qualified to speak, but every contributor

(absurd though it may appear) I seemed to knows how individually helpful he was.

see him in the waning light surrounded by a Indeed his appreciation of others was one

halo. He well knew, I think, that his days of his most endearing characteristics. His

were numbered, and on one occasion said as loyalty, his tact, and his unfailing command

much to me in confidence. Yet I never heard of the right word would have been remark-

him utter a word of complaint except against able even if he had been a man of robust

the limitations imposed on his powers of health; but, in the face of continual physical

work. During the last year of his life, he had weakness, his mental energy and his great

responsibilities and cares unconnected with courage were an astounding evidence of the

the Society which weighed on him. He power of spirit over matter.

looked forward to the time when these could Although we knew that he would have

be transferred to other shoulders and he died years ago but for the very exceptional

could devote himself more single-heartedly care and devotion of his wife, his death has

to the affairs of the Society.

come as a shock. We shall miss him more

Of his literary abilities, of his editorial tact than words can say. I personally have lost

and skill, all contributors to the REVIEW a real friend.

-and indeed all its readers-will know. He

was entirely responsible for writing the MRS. JANET CHANCE writes: What a

current version of our Aims and Objects. friend Maurice Newfield was-humorous,

Appreciation of his outstanding merits as an kindly, mischievous, entertaining, thought-

editor have reached me from every continent provoking; and what a counsellor-sane,

-from America where, before and during sensitive, and widely informed in his special

the war, the REVIEW was widely distributed spheres.

to members of the American Eugenics I had reason, in this sex-tortured country,

Society; from Australia where a similar to value keenly his unheated and humane

Io6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

handling of the problems of sexual experi- great number of subjects, there was no dis-

ence, when, at the Sex Education Centre, cussion into which he did not inject his own

between I929-39, I had, at times, to search warm and rich individuality. While on the

for a doctor to whom to send those who one hand he was far from uncritical, yet he

needed medical help, more experienced and had a wide tolerance and a most sincere and

more expert guidance than we could supply. engaging personal humility. In the course

How often I looked down the list of the of a single meeting I felt he had made me

doctors I knew, this one excelling in birth- his friend.

control technique, and that famed for These last months of his life were darkened

gynaecological skill, and wondered if they by the shadow of serious illness. For most

would meet the need for something a little people this has a laming effect on the person-

further off the beaten track, some not so ality, and leads all too easily to a querulous

easily mentioned trouble needing quick egocentricity. Under the acid test Newfield's

sympathy, expressive understanding and character was shown in its true quality.

above all an adult, easy attitude to the He was delighted at each little improvement

emotional tangles so often met with in that in his health, without losing his sense of

branch of education.

proportion, and refused to be dismayed by a

And how often the search ended with set-back or to complain over symptoms

Maurice, and how often he gave, without which must often have been distressing.

stint, with charm and sympathy, the healing Visiting him in his delightful home in the

benefit of his civilized personality, backed country I would find him sitting up in bed,

by his expert knowledge.

surrounded by books and papers, taking an

And as a friend, what fun he was. How eager interest in my work and his, and in

he loved good conversation, and what an all the intellectual interests which a man

artist he was in handling it. Who, that ever in full enjoyment of health and vigour might

made an irrelevant remark, could forget his find more than enough. I remember parti-

winning turn of the head, his courteous smile, cularly his talking about his association with

and his " Yes, my dear, that is the inter- H. G. Wells, the character of that extra-

esting question of something else," and his ordinary man, and of what Wells might have

return with zest and concentration to the become as a writer if he had not felt it his

argument in hand. Maurice, we shall miss mission to reform the world. The fresh air

you. blew through the window, and outside the

sun shone on the walls of the old houses in

DR. ELIOT SLATER writes: I only came to the quiet street. Inside there was no sick-

know Newfield at all well during the last bed atmosphere, but the same light and

two years of his life. We then had a number freshness.

of meetings, in which he was the publisher Writing of Newfield in his last days, it

and I the author. This is a relation which is would be impossible not to mention the love

notoriously difficult, but with Newfield it and uncomplaining devotion that was given

was not difficult at all. He took the most him by his wife. She had no less than three

warm and personal interest in the subject full-time jobs to do, those of nurse, secretary

matter and in all the problems of authorship, and housekeeper; and somehow or other she

and was full of original and penetrating managed to get the business done, her

ideas. It was a pleasure to receive his husband cared for and supported, and the

criticism, as it was so clearly sensible and fine old house with its beautiful furniture

objective, and made with the interests of kept in perfect condition. Her singleminded

the book at heart. He took an enormous selflessness must have given him all that was

interest in a good bit of book-making, in all possible of peace and restoration.

its aspects, from the subject and the style

down to the printing, the paper, the binding DR. S. VERE PEARSON writes: I have

and layout. Enormously well-read on a known a good many clever people in my life-

MAURICE NEWFIELD: I893-I949

I07

time, but I have always placed Maurice Newfield as one of the cleverest, though I have not seen him in recent years. He was an extremely versatile person, a good writer and editor. But when I first met him that was a minor activity which he only later developed so widely and so ably in various
quarters. I shall never forget his meeting a young
Cambridge undergraduate who was studying Moral Science, a subject which had few students. It was a curious subject in those days which required the study of difficult and erudite text books. Now when Maurice Newfield got into conversation with this young man I discovered he knew far more about the subject than the student who had been studying it for many months and had a great deal wider vision regarding it than the writers of the text books which the undergraduate was studying. It was in the years subsequent to this date that Maurice Newfield developed his brilliant talents as a journalist, editor and writer. He also developed the knowledge he had already acquired on psychology and other then somewhat out-of-the-way medical subjects.
MR. ROBERT GRAVES writes: I cannot claim to have been one of Maurice Newfield's oldest friends: only to have been extremely fond of him, and there was nothing remarkable about that-I never met anyone who had a bad word to say of him. It is true that when we first met ten years ago at his house in Great Bardfield, Essex, his intense curiosity made me feel a little suspicious of him; but I soon satisfied myself that his search for information was a long-established clinical habit and that he put it only to the best diagnostic use. Later, he and his wife Sigrid came to stay with me in Devonshire in the early, more dangerous part of the war, for three weeks or so. He was a sick man then, but did his best to disguise this and always screwed the last possible ounce of strength out of himself for sociability's sake; I was touched by his exhilaration after a short, steepish climb up the slope of Berry Pomeroy Castle, his finest athletic feat for some years. Conversation

in our cottage always went on far into the night-he and I each trying to extract
information from the other, my curiosity being, I confess, as deep-seated as his.
Once my neighbour Agatha Christie came to
supper and I sat back happily while he put her through a highly technical cross-exami-
nation (from which she emerged with high
marks) on the subject of drugs suitable for
undetected murder.
The only thing that he allowed to worry
him struck me as strangely unrelated to the
immediate perils of I942, or his own pre-
carious health, namely the slow decline of the birth-rate in Great Britain. This
developed into a family joke, because I already had several children, including girls -and belonged to what he called " the notoriously unfertile group of professional writers "-while he had only one, a boy. For him girls were far more important (in theory) than boys because they would continue to breed the race; but he could not persuade me that it would be a bad thing for the population to sink to what it had been in Tudor times. What virtue was there in mere numbers, I'd protest. There would not be more than one Maurice Newfield whether the population were four million, forty million, or four hundred million. The argument then got involved and usually ended by his singing, at my request, his famous Indian marching song, learned from the 88th Carnatics, in nasal Indian tones" Cooch parwani, good time coming, Queen Victoria very good man... ." And I wrote him a satiric poem on miscegenation which he was noble enough to print in this REVIEW
without editorial comment. The war ended, the birth-rate recovered,
and my family and I returned here to the Balearic Islands. Maurice saw us off and promised to come out when transport improved and he was less busy. This year we came back for our usual summer holiday, and hoped to see him as usual, but heard that he was very ill again and entertaining no visitors. However, we visited Great Bardfield and rang up Sigrid who said that, on the contrary, he was most anxious to see us. " Perhaps for ten minutes," she suggested.

io8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

We tiptoed into his sickroom and found and fearless defender of their theories and

him in bed surrounded by books. I told objectives. Despite his physical frailty, his

Sigrid: " Chuck us out when we've been ever-willing spirit never once refused to

here long enough." But she had not the respond and those of us who knew him and

heart to do that, because Maurice was put- loved him looked to him always for guidance

ting on the most remarkable act of his life. because of his courageous, liberal views.

" I've got completely cured of my old Maurice Newfield was a man of wisdom,

trouble," he said casually, "but in the humanity, tolerance and understanding, and

process I've had to starve and contracted his entire life was devoted to truth and social

the usual deficiency diseases. Now, it's justice. To those of us who knew and loved

merely a question of feeding up."

him, there remains only the consolation that

" That's fine," I said, allowing myself to Maurice Newfield lived the good life to its

be deceived. " You certainly have a regular fullest spiritual capacity and the influence of

Belsen look at the moment." He laughed such a life carries on. I shall miss him, as will

happily. His skin was tight to his skull and all his many American friends.

his wrists were like cabbage-stalks, but his

voice was strong and his mind as clear and PROFESSOR J. M. MACKINTOSH writes:

witty as ever. He told us that he was The dry bones of Maurice Newfield's life and

extremely busy, but this winter he would public activities have been recorded else-

perhaps take a real holiday and come out where. He himself was a shining personality,

to us in Majorca; " By sea, of course; that loved by more friends than he could count.

would be half the fun." He wanted to hear He was young when he died, although his

what books I had been working at lately, physical activities had long been cramped

and especially questioned me on a historical by ill health. Yet it would be wrong to say

novel about the Spanish colonization of the that he struggled against sickness: he

Solomon Islands in I595. " I'll give you a adapted himself to it with perfect grace.

copy in November when it's published," I This almost disinterested attitude to his own

promised. " No, no," he protested, " I'd increasing infliction enabled him to look

like page-proofs. Can't you persuade your outward and to take a constant, lively

publishers to send them ? "

interest in men and books. His friends never

So we agreed to meet in Majorca in the felt that there was in him a sense of yearn-

New Year, and parted gaily enough. It was ing for a world not realized or that he clung

only when I returned to the house where we to them for support. On the contrary, they

were staying that it was borne on me that came to him to be refreshed by his courage

he wanted the proofs in an even greater and gaiety of heart; and they knew the

hurry than he said; so I sent him my only quick stir of wonder at his wit and insight.

set-because it was Maurice who asked for He understood character and was quick to

them, and because if I had failed to satisfy detect a false note: he could be humanely

his legitimate curiosity about this byway malign when the occasion demanded but he

of history I should always have had a guilty never chilled the heart.

conscience towards him. He cannot have If Maurice Newfield had to be remem-

got very far with the reading, though, bered for his personality alone, his memory

because on our return here a week later we would be gratefully cherished; but he was

saw the obituary announcement in The much more than that. As an editor he was

Times.

highly competent, and his own fine standards

were reflected in a keen literary criticism.

DR. MARGARET SANGER telegraphs: In Writing was to him a great art. He would

the death of Doctor Maurice Newfield, on tolerate no makeshifts of composition even

August 13th, I949, the Eugenics Society and in the presentation of dry scientific material.

the birth control movement have lost a dis- It was his custom to go straight to a point

tinguished leader and an uncompromising of criticism, and he disarmed resentment by

MAURICE NEWFIELD: I893-I949

I09

his clear sincerity rather than by any oblique methods sometimes mistaken for tact. An article or a book which came into his hands as an editor was always purified in the fire of his understanding.
DR. EMANUEL MILLER writes: I knew Maurice Newfield since his school days, when he stood out in two ways. His physical frailty was obvious to any observer, but it was associated with the febrile quality that so frequently goes with physical frailty and, as we subsequently knew, the development of tuberculosis. This febrile quality, combined with extraordinarily high intelligence, made him one of the most striking and unpredictable boys in the school. At the age of fifteen he was already widely read, and his ability to read such works as Ibsen's plays, the Golden Bough, and Freud's recently published Interpretation of Dreams, was only a part of the equipment which rendered his conversation a subject of amazement and consternation amongst even the brightest boys of the sixth form.
After serving in Mesopotamia in the First World War, he was invalided to India. Here he transferred to the Indian Army, and he came home in I9I9 with vivid impressions and very definite views on Indian life. After his return, he embarked on medical studies and qualified in I923. He then settled down in general practice in Bloomsbury and became widely known for his interest in population problems, and
published a volume, Parenthood: Design or Accident, which went into many editions.
He was always interested in psychopathology, and would have taken up psychiatry had opportunities been favourable, but ill health made general practice, and a busy practice, beyond his powers, and he turned very early in his career to medical literary work. This brought him into contact with many branches of medicine, and he carried out his duties as a medical editor for publishers with great acumen and with a flair for the right book which was very striking. His life in the Bloomsbury district brought him into intimate contact with the literary coteries of the nineteen-

twenties, and there were very few people in the fields of literature and science whom he did not know personally and with whom he could not speak on equal terms.
He combined intellectual powers with an artistic temperament, and conversation with him was always somewhat in the nature of a display in which aphorisms and wide knowledge competed with one another. To the very end of his life his intellectual powers were undimmed and he may well be remembered as a very striking character.
MR. MICHAEL HESELTINE writes: To
make a new friend late in life is uncommon. To find him during the long waits of a Canadian train from Halifax to New York must be less common still. To feel, when death takes him away within three years, that something is broken which cannot be replaced, means that there was in him a special and inestimable quality. What was the essence of Maurice Newfield that made him precious ?
The small dark man, birdlike in his quickness of glance and movement, like a bird in the incredible fragility of his body, had only to open his mouth to break into talk as enchanting as a song. It began after the cautious British manner with books that might have been heavy. Very soon it turned to other things, or to persons, that might have been dull. He touched nothing that he did not lighten, saw through everything without condemnation, and seemed to know all there was to know without strain or display.
On books, if you were disposed to fancy yourself an expert on a given subject, it was wiser not to attempt competition with his learning, for he was the general practitioner who was also a specialist. In conversation it was clear that he took the pleasure of a master. One evening in his company would have been enough to show that the art was not dead. He practised it with full respect for the rule that conversation is the process of talking with, not at, others, and dominated the talk only because he had so much more than others to give, and abounded in the grace of words.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Nothing but his avoidance of excess in range of his discerning and lively mind. We

eating or drinking, which would probably talked on psychology, art, politics, travel,

have been natural to a man so finely balanced literature, publishing, wine, and friends old

had he been well, was allowed to hint that and new-a fair cross-section of his lifelong

he was, and long had been, menaced by an interests, or at any rate, those interests

early death. No layman can judge what it which I was able to share with him. I left

means for a medical man with full insight him feeling that his spirit had won a victory

into his own condition to turn his back on over his long-borne illness.

the self-examination, self-pity and absorp-

tion in self that sap the invalid's character DR. ANDREW MORLAND writes: Maurice

if he lets them.

Newfield's working life was to a great extent

Newfield would leave his friends warmed conditioned by his illness; when I first met

with amusement, stimulated by the vain him in the middle I920'S he was already

endeavour to live up to his wit and wits, struggling with the problem of adapting

hoping always to see him again, and that himself to a future in which he would not

soon. be in active medical practice. Fortunately

To this gifted and many-sided man three his pen proved a ready support and he was

especial gifts had been given by nature or rapidly making his mark in medical journal-

nurture. The gift of laughter which made ism on the staff of the B.M.J. when he be-

an Atlantic crossing with him a daily delight came seriously ill in I930; recovery was

too soon ended. The gift of charity in all a slow and laborious process, because while

that he said about people or politics: he one could persuade him to rest his body his

had much that was piercing and penetrating mind remained as scintillating as ever.

to say about both; but never, surely, either My nearest approach to success followed a

felt or aroused envy or calumny or hate. serious talk on a Saturday evening; I saw

And the gift of fortitude by which for years him at breakfast time the next day and was

on end he out-soared pain, and, borne up by greeted with a charmingly malicious smile

the loving care which sustained him, was and the news that his mind was already

enabled to do much good work in the world, deeply affected by disuse atrophy as he had

and to spread delight round him, effortless finished his breakfast before his Torquemada.

as the bird which rises, in the sun, into the Following this illness, work on a weekly

immense skies.

journal was changed for the greater freedom

of medical publishing but the amount of

MR. OLIVER SIMON writes: I had the work remained formidable and by the

pleasure and privilege of knowing Maurice beginning of the war he was again confined to

Newfield thirty years. In endeavouring to bed, although still working hard. It was at

recapture past time, I can now see that the this stage that he went through the great

life of this endearing man kept its pattern ordeal of the operation of thoracoplasty.

and its purpose to the very end. Eagerness, Although by nature averse to major

intellectual curiosity, a zest for life, sym- surgical procedures Newfield had immense

pathy, and kindness were his outstanding moral courage and when the necessity of

characteristics. These qualities were exem- the operation was explained to him in terms

plified in both my first and last meeting which satisfied his reason his acceptance was

with him. The first time was at a village immediate. His endurance unfortunately

cricket match (a game he knew little about). brought him only a few more years of free-

but he sat on a sunny afternoon on the dom, but it included a trip to Sweden which

boundary and consoled returning discon- he much enjoyed. Two years ago the final

solate batsmen (and the nervous who had relapse set in but he remained actively at

yet to go in) with his sparkling talk. The work until the end; visiting him even in

last time I saw him, shortly before he died, his last months it was still the invalid who

it was myself who became enlivened by the did the entertaining. Although his mind was

MAURICE NEWFIELD: I893-I949

III

a rich storehouse of readily available facts the re-establishment of a democratic regime

Newfield was no walking encyclopadia-he in Spain he would settle in Catalonia until

was much more concerned with ideas and a complete recovery of his health had been

one always left him feeling that one had effected by the sunshine and temperate

been stimulated.

breezes which come down from the Pyrenees

to the Mediterranean coast. It is sad that

PROFESSOR JOSEP TRUETA writes: I am he has departed without having been able

sure that the passing of Dr. Maurice New- to put his idealistic view of the healing

field is filling his innumerable friends with properties of my native country to the test.

deep sorrow. Several times during the last Those of us who have been acquainted

ten years his health has been a source of with Maurice Newfield's family life realize

anxiety to many of us, but his unfailing the tremendous sense of emptiness which

optimism got the better of the struggle and must be felt by his wife and their only son.

again and again we were comforted in seeing They have been his good companions and it

him renew his activities without any deterio- must be very hard, particularly for his wife

ration in the quality of his work. That is Sigrid, to proceed along the road without

one of the reasons why the recent news of him. We are many who deeply sympathize

his death has struck us all so forcibly.

with her in her loss.

My personal relationship with Maurice

Newfield goes back to the early days of my MR. RAYMOND SWING writes: I saw

arrival in England. During the days of the Maurice Newfield for the last time a year

Spanish Civil War his high ideals and firm ago. I might have known then that I should

belief in the value of human freedom never see him again, for he was not more

brought to Catalonia much-needed medical than a wisp of his former self. But I was

supplies which he had collected in England. so sure that I should find him eagerly alive

He took very much to heart the assisting this year that I did not even put the date

of the first European victims of the air early to be sure of another visit. It was his

attacks-the Basque children-and his sym- very eagerness that deceived me, and which

pathy for the Barcelonians was later ex- was, as I now think of him, one essence of

tended to me when we first met in London his nature. It was an eagerness not born of

early in I939. I owe to him the publication impatience but of understanding life. The

of my first English book on war surgery, to forces at play in the nation and world around

the first edition of which he contributed in him fascinated him. He saw their interplay

adapting it from the original Catalan and knew their power for creation and

language. Later he encouraged me to write destruction. He never was in doubt about

a larger and more comprehensive treatise on the status of the struggle between knowledge

war surgery of the extremities, for the success and ignorance, and he never shirked his part

of which he was largely responsible.

in it.

It was perhaps due to the inconsistency Of all the men I have known intimately

of his health that he applied the best of his Maurice Newfield had, I think, the clearest

qualities to medical literature, both as an mind and the clearest expression of it. This

author and as an editor, but the range of his lucidity seems never to have failed him. In

interests was immense. On many occasions my experience of him he never went off on

I went to see him to obtain the answer to confusing tangents and was forced to retreat

a specific medical question and found myself to reconquer his clarity. He was always

deeply absorbed listening to his views of the steadfast and positive in his discernments.

future not only of medicine but of many Naturally this was a boon for his associates,

other subjects in which we were mutually who could rely on him for a reliable analysis

interested. During these long years he of a complex problem, be it political or

always maintained the hope that if one day personal. Thus he was of immediate and

political and international events permitted sometimes of inestimable aid to his friends

112 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in contributing the insight into their prob- main as a living monument to his mind and

lems they were incapable of providing them- his spirit. His special interests for many

selves. Not that he was a formal teacher of years have been in the field of human ferti-

his friends. He never appeared to be teaching. lity and human genetics. His book Parent-

But if anyone was ready to learn, Maurice hood: Design or Accident, published under

Newfield normally could supply the lesson. the pseudonym of Michael Fielding, with a

Having benefited from his friendship in brave and laudatory foreword by H. G.

this way I naturally am inclined to rate his Wells, was a model of clarity, persuasiveness

other qualities as secondary to this one of and rare judgment. Both in England and

pellucid intelligence. But ahead of it may in our country it has directly and indirectly

rank the remarkable spiritual vigour by helped to mould professional and lay opinion

which he lived. Physical vigour he was on the subject of planned parenthood.

denied in abundance and what little re- Under his able editorship the EUGENICS

mained in the final years of exhausting ill- REVIEW became the most influential and

ness was pitifully inadequate. But he con- authoritative journal in the field of human

tinued to work so normally and persistently eugenics and genetics. Throughout the

that one forgot his body even when he was world the REVIEW has come to be looked

hardly able to whisper his communications. upon as a main source of information and

Somehow his physical limitations did not interpretation in the social and biological

merit the focus of his mental attention, and aspects of human heredity and race culture.

it was set primarily on his work. This was Newfield's interests and scholarship ex-

possible, too, through the unfailing devotion tended, however, into many fields. He was

of his wife, from whom he drew much of the equally at home in art and in science, in

power by which he functioned so usefully ancient and in modern literature, in the

and fully. Whatever the source, it kept in social and political developments of the day

him a healthy and strong mind up to the and in the latest discoveries in medicine.

last flicker of the physical flame.

An avid reader, an eager inquirer, he was

A friend should not omit from an appre- always well informed on the passing scene,

ciation of Maurice Newfield that he was and to listen to his keen observations and

great fun, too. The rollicking sessions of brilliant comments was a stimulating and

play and banter that have dotted the two unforgettable experience.

score years of our association with him are Those who knew him were particularly

not the least precious memories. In a way, touched by the warmth and charm of his

his other gifts would not have been so personality, by his tolerance, understanding,

genuine or acceptable without them.

and his unswerving devotion to truth and to

social justice. Maurice Newfield was a good

DR. ABRAHAM STONE writes: During the man and a great man. For myself, his

course of a lifetime it is given to us to meet friendship was among the rarest of my

but a few people who truly impress us with possessions.

their culture, their scholarship, their wisdom

and humanity. Maurice Newfield was one DR. PORTIA HOLMAN writes: Through all

of the few such men whom it has been my the years that I knew him, Maurice Newfield

good fortune to know. At our first meeting was an invalid and, in the last two, very

some years ago I was immediately struck seriously ill. Although his body was frail,

by his keen mind and personal warmth, and in the last few months painfully emaciated,

since that day my respect, admiration and he did not at any time give the impression

affection for him increased with our every of an ill person. The only reminder one had

meeting and with every letter received from of his illness was the strict rationing of the

him. time one was allowed to spend with him.

Newfield's contributions to the spread of However long one had with him, it was all

knowledge and enlightenment will ever re- too short and, when it was cut down to

MAURICE NEWFIELD: I893-I949

II3-

minutes, one went away frustrated and and discouragement. May memories of that

deprived, but stimulated by the vitality of rare happiness sustain her.

his mind and uplifted, if one may use so

priggish a word.

MR. ERNEST RAYMOND writes: I think I

It is impossible to find words for the can offer no greater tribute to the quality

special quality of his charm. His personality of Maurice Newfield as a human being than

was richly stocked in every way and he loved to say that when, suspecting nothing, I

to share his riches with his visitors. If he opened a letter and read the heavy news of

discussed his illness it was in an objective his death, my immediate feeling was a sudden

spirit, for he had the instincts of a clinician, unforeseen heightening of my belief in (or if

with never a trace of self-pity. He had no belief is too strong a word, my hope of)

illusions about the prognosis, but was him- human immortality. In what this immor-

self sustained by a conviction of personal tality will consist I cannot even guess; for

survival and he had a real desire to shield me the word just connotes that the essence

his friends from distress.

of the human spirit is indestructible. I do

The combination of warmth, humani- not think that this sudden surge of faith,

tarianism and goodness with learning and on reading of Maurice's death, was a mere

clarity of intellect gave him his special movement of the heart, a facile " wish-

value to the world of medicine as to his fulfilment " thought. Such an easy emotion

friends. He was a liberal in every sense of would have been unworthy of Maurice, whose

the word and his one real sorrow was the penetrating vision would have at once dis-

growing indifference of the world to liberal cerned, weighed and discounted it. It was

values. Readers of this journal will re- rather that I suddenly felt it intellectually

member the eloquence of his indignation in almost impossible to believe that the splendid

the Lysenko controversy only a few months intelligence, the keen and eager vision, and

ago. Above all things he hated distortion the large, loving, laughing heart which were

of truth, though he loved to know what other Maurice Newfield could cease to be. To

people thought, however much their views believe that anything so brilliant, so shining

might shock him by their barbarity or their with a glow that surely came from the very

muddle-headedness.

stuff of Reality, could have suddenly

In politics he was a socialist, but because become nothing seemed analagous, in a small

he saw Socialism as an indispensable tech- way, to supposing that the sun is not still

nique which could serve the ends of liber- there because night has intervened. And

alism. Thus the National Health Service this access of faith was increased as I re-

seemed to him essential, but he was a called Maurice's astonishing mental superi-

passionate opponent of its encroachment on ority to grave ill health-to years upon

the freedom of doctors.

years of ever-increasing physical frustra-

He had the gifts, and in the right combina- tions and weakness. This superiority was

tion, to be a great doctor. Ill health debarred not just courage in pain; it was exactly

him from eminence as a clinician and deter- what the word says: superiority to it. He

mined for him a life of indirect achievement was somehow above it. Well above it in his

through his influence on others. Those who spirit, and so much so that we, his friends,

felt that influence-and, fortunately, they would all too often completely forget it in

are many-have had their horizons widened, the gaiety and excitement of his presence.

their penetration deepened and their sym- To remember this truly radiant superiority

pathies enlarged.

is to wonder whether it is not now inde-

Dr. Newfield died young, but after a happy pendent of the greatest weakness of all,

life. It would be wrong to conclude without which is death.

mentioning his wife and her contribution to

that happiness. She had strength for two and MR. A.-L. BACHARACH writes: I first met

to the end triumphed over every difficulty Maurice Newfield in the late teens of this

114 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

century. We came together through poli- There are many people who have been

tical and social common interests, rather affected by Maurice Newfield without ever

than because he was a doctor and I an knowing it. His influence in the fields of

industrial scientist. His periods of illness medical and sociological publication, and

meant that sometimes we did not meet for even in directly political matters, was per-

a considerable period, and his manifold and force exercised through the impact of his

intense activities (and my deficiencies as a own ideas and concepts on other people

letter-writer) meant that we did not corre- more actively engaged, and not by direct

spond very much, yet our friendship was participation. Those who were unaware that

unbroken and could be resumed at any his influence was at work may not miss it.

moment, after however long a gap, with no Buts for those who did know, and more

signs of having been interrupted. That was particularly for those who had the boon of

because Maurice was the kind of man with his personal friendship, he is irreplaceable.

whom one could have that kind of friend-

ship-and probably no other kind. His MRS. DOROTHY MORLAND writes: I first

retentive memory and his wide range of met Maurice Newfield when I was young and

knowledge made it possible for him to newly married and we were both suffering

discuss with one anything in which one was from the same illness. I was impatient and

interested, quite apart from whether he had bored by the sedentary life we were forced

himself ever been directly concerned with to lead, but Maurice's patience and lively

it. His genuine enjoyment of human com- interest in everything were an inspiration

pany, especially of those who could keep up and encouragement to me. In spite of his

with his quick mental processes, must have extremely good and well-stocked brain, and

been what made him willing to remember his wide and varied knowledge, he was

where the last conversation or discussion always ready to talk about anything I

had ended, so that one never needed to wanted: Freud, Plato, D. H. Lawrence-

" recap " with him.

he didn't mind what subject I chose. Since

It is not my purpose here to pay tribute then I have watched him over and over

to Maurice Newfield's specialist knowledge again battling against disease with his frail

and abilities, because others more expert in physique and strong spirit. When I visited

the varied fields will no doubt be doing so. him during his illnesses, although I knew

I will content myself with saying that one what a delight it was to him to see his

never left his company without having been friends, I always came away feeling that I

stimulated not only by his mental acuity was the one to have benefited. He possessed

and catholic tastes, which made it illumi- the rare quality of being able to turn his

nating to discuss with him anything from whole mind and interest on to you-you

Medoc to mitosis, but also because of his felt he appreciated your own particular value

intense and vital interest in everything that and potentialities, and when you left him

was going on. He was not concerned with your mind was buzzing with ideas and pro-

men and their acts and ideas simply as jects. He understood how to live and how

objective phenomena for cold and calcu- to extract the very juice out of living-how

lating survey; he seemed rather to partici- we shall miss him.

pate in every activity that he discussed with

his conversational colleagues, irrespective of Miss K. LANE writes,: In October, I935,

whether he or they had introduced it.

I travelled to Chalfont St. Peter to apply to

Of his fortitude during many years of a Dr. Newfield for a secretarial post in

necessarily handicapping ill health, there London. I was more than half an hour late

should be no need to write. None but a for the appointment, having had to walk

gallant individual could in his circumstances from Chalfont St. Giles owing to the bus

have maintained the interests he did for all conductor's forgetfulness, and, having formed

these years.

a mental picture of a prosperous and un-

MAURICE NEWFIELD: I893-I949

II5

approachable consultant at his country
retreat, was in some trepidation and keyed
up for a frosty and formal interview.
My first impression was of a pair of bright eyes, a shock of dark hair, grey flannels and
a windbreaker jacket; instead of the chilly
interview there was a cheerful and interesting conversation, and before many minutes
had passed I decided that I very much
wanted to work for him. Thus started nearly fourteen years of a very happy association in which I received far more than I gave.
During the first months he was infinitely
patient in training me in the REVIEW work and I soon came to admire his brilliant mind,
to appreciate his considerateness and kindness in times of personal trouble-these can
never be forgotten-and to be warmed by
his intense interest in his fellow men.
No one connected with the Society can realize as I do the difficulties under which
he edited the REVIEw during the last few
years, the immense amount of secretarial
work which Mrs. Newfield undertook, the innumerable letters he wrote from his bed in his own hand, the long telephone conversa-
tions with the Society's office, when, in a voice sometimes so weak as to be almost inaudible, he showed his firm grip on every detail of the REVIEW'S production.
My happiest recollections of Dr. Newfield are the days I used to spend at Chalfont, working with him in his little study overlooking the garden, joining the family for
luncheon, and not interrupting work while
we sipped cups of China tea in the afternoon. Interruptions were provided by a small Gabriel, who might come in to borrow a foolscap envelope " for an experiment," or to make quite sure he would be allowed to view the eclipse that night, dancing round the room saying " clips " until asked to withdraw, or just come in for nothing in particular. Last time I saw Dr. Newfield he remarked that Gabriel was taller than himself, and added " I'm so pleased-I always wanted to have a tall son."
Others are better qualified than I am to speak of his mental and spiritual gifts; I shall always remember his vivid personality, his enthusiasm for the REVIEW which

swamped all sense of time, his kindness and thoughtfulness for others and his heartwarming appreciation of their efforts.
MRS. SIGRID NEWFIELD writes: When George Herbert died, his disconsolate widow, according to Izaak Walton, lamented bitterly that she had not treasured up all his sayings in her heart. When I was told in March that my husband was not likely to live much longer, I remembered Jane Herbert's regrets and since then have kept his sayings not only in my heart but in a notebook. Maurice always hoped, and so did I, that one day he would have the leisure to give up rewriting other people's books and write one of his own. He wanted to put on record his faith as a eugenist, the steps by which he had reached it, and his reasons for believing none other was logical. This process, he would say, had taken him about fifteen
years and he doubted whether most of us could spare as much time for meditation as he had been able to enjoy in bed. Though for himself he always avoided short cuts in reasoning, I think he felt that some of us were so trapped by our illogical habits of thinking that only by slashing cuts could we be released from our thickets. For me, this was certainly true; and I believe, if he had been able to write it, he might have influenced a far larger circle of readers than those of this REVIEW. If he could have had the leisure to start it I feel sure he would have found the strength to finish it; but I am not at all sure that he would have wished to publish it unless he had been actively up and about again. "Spes phthisica, they might call it," he once said, " or, worse still, death-bed repentance! Which would be a pity," he added with a wry sort of grin, " after the lifetime it has taken me to think it out."
I'm sure this would never have entered the head of anyone who knew Maurice, but he wanted to reach a wider public and was well aware that, however careful a publisher may be, anonymity is a secret hard to keep. This horror of his of being misunderstood was bound up with his own personal dislike of self-pity and self-righteousness in others.

ii6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Of all human emotions he detested whining Maurice's editorial pages, for writing his

more than any other and he deplored the Notes was the only work in which he found

growing evidence of it in national and inter- complete satisfaction, intellectual and

national affairs, in the Press and corre- spiritual. I think he could never be entirely

spondence columns and in broadcasting. absorbed in any subject unless it concerned

The only precept he enforced on the up- the future as well as the present-which

bringing of our son was: Never let him made mankind his greatest interest. His

whine; and he faithfully tried to follow his other activities gave him pleasure because

own precept all his days.

of their relation to medicine and, above all,

When I first met Maurice I had not long because they brought him so many happy

since left my Northern moorland stronghold friendships. Happiness was the core of our

where pleasures were simple, and song and home life, and in all his nineteen years of ill

strings our only relaxation. It was terrify- health-six of them spent in bed-I have

ing for a shy silent girl to discover that in never seen him dejected or heard him com-

Bloomsbury people were prepared to spend plain about his condition. He maintained up

a long evening doing nothing but talk. Then to the last days of his life that he was the

one evening I heard Maurice talking about luckiest man in the world. Three days

the early work on immunity-Roux, Erlich before he died it was my birthday. He woke

and Koch all came to life as he spoke-and about 2.30 that morning and called me.

I suddenly thought: I could go on listening I told him, for he never remembered birth-

to him for ever. Perhaps that thought days, that he might as well give me my

became transmitted (as in the following greetings then. After wishing me a happy

twenty years thoughts unquestionably were) birthday he wished me a happier year to

for within a few months we were married
and had gone to Bavaria for the Mozart Festival in Munich, where we also paid homage to Koch, on Maurice's suggestion, by walking down a long street named after him-a curious name to have honoured, we
thought, when, a year later, he became a victim of Koch's bacillus.

come, adding, " And that, I might tell you, is a selfish wish because a happier year for
you means a happier year for me, too." If that was a selfish remark it was the first, last, and only one I ever heard from him. " It is not life but a good life that is to be valued," wrote Sir Thomas More, and I am

When Dr. Blacker invited me to add my very humbly aware of the wealth I still hold

testimony to these others I felt nothing but in my keeping through having shared so

pride that I should have some space in much of Maurice's good life.

HOLD A LARGE STOCK OF BOOKS ON EUGENICS
AND ALLIED SUBJECTS. FOREIGN BOOKS NOT IN STOCK OBTAINED UNDER BOARD OF TRADE LICENCE. CATALOGUES ON REQUEST.
PLEASE STATE PARTICULAR INTEREST.

SECOND-HAND BOOKS:

140 Gower Street, London, W.C.1

A constantly changing large stock of Medical and Scientific Literature on view,

classified under subjects.

Libraries or small colkctions purchased.

LONDON: H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd., 136 Gower St., W.C.1

Telephone: EUSton 4382.

Business hours: 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., Saturdays to I p.m.Q

