THE EUGENICS REVIEW

MEDICINE

unfavourable light with respect to the medical care of the community as a whole.

McKeown, Thomas. Medicine in Modern Society. In Parts 3-6, the author discusses how he

London, 1965. Allen and Unwin. Pp. 234. Price thinks the contemporary medical services should

35s. be organized. Each hospital, both teaching and

non-teaching, ought to provide all major services

DR. THOMAS MCKEOWN, Professor of Social (general medicine and surgery, psychiatry, geri-

Medicine in the University of Birmingham, atrics, obstetrics and paediatrics), but some in

examines in this book the present-day problems addition should include specialized units, e.g.

of the medical services against the background for radiotherapy, and for treatment of the young

of what they have achieved so far, and he chronic sick. McKeown thinks that the present

divides his subject matter into six parts. In the difficulties in staffing are due to treating chronic,

first he inquires into the reasons for the great mental and acute patients in different hospitals,

increase in the population from the eighteenth and this lack of flexibility would be remedied

century onwards and concludes that the prin- by his "balanced hospital community". Though

cipal explanation has been a decline in mortality. this is something of a hobby-horse he knows

The reduced incidence of tuberculosis accounts when to dismount and emphasizes that the most

for nearly half of this, that of typhoid, typhus important point of all is that the future is un-

and continued fever for about a fifth, scarlet certain and the keyword in site planning is un-

fever also for a fifth, cholera, dysentery and predictability. New hospitals should allow for

diarrhoea for nearly a tenth, and smallpox for growth, change of use and replacement of out-

only a twentieth. It is with considerable Shavian dated facilities.

relish that McKeown points out that the effect Outside the hospitals, McKeown thinks there

of therapy on all these conditions was negligible should also be radical changes. The general except in the case of smallpox where it made practitioner as we know him should disappear-

only a trivial contribution. Improvement in all doctors should have a speciality and in a

nutrition, in the control of water and sewage group practice there should be an obstetrician,

disposal and in some cases a favourable trend a paediatrician, a general physician dealing with

in the relationship between infecting organism adult disease, and a geriatrician-such a team

and the human host were the effective agents would obviate unnecessary referrals and would

and the medical profession can take little or no keep us tidily pigeon-holed from the womb to

credit for any of these.

the tomb. As regards the local Public Health

In Part 2 the consequences of this decline in services, which at present overlap with many

mortality are considered. It has resulted in a hospital services, McKeown thinks these ought

change in the age structure of the population to be curtailed and centralized.

(and therefore an increase in degenerative and Much more home care (organized from the

neoplastic diseases), and in the younger age hospitals) he thinks should be available for

groups prenatal influences and congenital defects short-term acute cases as well as for the chronic

have become relatively more important-and sick, the old and the mentally ill-though in the

we have not yet reached the stage of selective reviewer's opinion indoctrination of the public

breeding to try and eliminate these. The prob- to accept long-term responsibility for their

lems confronting medicine have also been relatives may be difficult.

altered by the environment, particularly by the From what has been written it will be obvious

increase in atmospheric pollution, by smoking that there are revolutionary ideas throughout

and by the prevalence of accidents and violence. In McKeown's view all these changes have not resulted in much modification in the medical services and, in a review of the evolution of

this book which command respect and attention and it is high time that the National Health Service was given a spring-clean on the lines McKeown indicates.

these, the teaching hospitals are shown in an

C. A. CLARKE

34

