MARGARET PYKE
Family Planning: An Assessment*

Maithus, Bentham and Place

son, Lord Amberley, was greatly criticized for

T HOMAS MALTHUS HAS been des- taking part in a meeting on "over-population

cribed as the unwitting founder of the and public health" and in 1854 Dr. George

birth control movement in Britain. I think Drysdale wrote The Elements of Science in

he would have regarded this as a disgrace rather which he spoke of sex education, was critical of

than a distinction. Although the thesis of his the institution of marriage and warmly advo-

Essay published in 1796 was that population in- cated the principles of Malthusianism. The book

creases faster than food production, the only went into thirty-five editions (up to 1904) and

remedies he proposed were either complete celi- was translated into ten European languages.

bacy or late marriage. Theseare, indeed, methods

of controlling births and are probably responsible for the present low birth rate in Ireland, but they are certainly not included in what we call birth control methods to-day.
Actually, Jeremy Bentham, in 1797, advocated a sponge method of birth control in order to reduce the poor rate. But the man who did really start the fire was Francis Place, a self-taught workman who became a friend of Thomas Wakley, a medical reformer who founded, and for many years edited, the Lancet. In 1822, Place wrote and distributed handbills which gave definite contraceptive information. These had considerable circulation in London and in the industrial districts of the North and, owing to the

Bradlaugh, Besant and the Maithusian League The event that really launched the ships was the Bradlaugh-Besant trial of 1877-8. Charles Bradlaugh and Mrs. Besant reprinted Dr. Charles Knowlton's pamphlet on birth control called The Fruits ofPhilosophy, and took a copy to the Guildhall with a notice to say when and where they would be selling it next day. They also informed the police, and in due course they were arrested and brought before the Lord Chief Justice on an indictment which accused them
Of unlawfully and wickedly devising, contriving and intending, as much as in them lay, to vitiate and corrupt the morals as well as youth as of divers other subjects of the Queen and to invite and en-

discussion they aroused, they were reprinted in courage the said subjects to indecent, obscene, un-

several radical journals. Place naturally encountered considerable hostility and was described as

natural and immoral practices, and bring them to
a state of wickedness, lewdness and debauchery.

the "master spring that moves the whole infernal Both defendants were found guilty but, on

machine".

appeal, the verdict was set aside because of a

Public interest in this subject seems to have fault in the indictment. It was after this trial and

waned in the 1830s. Perhaps the passage of the the publicity which followed, and propaganda by

Reform Bill and the new Poor Law Bill absorbed the Malthusian League which was set up in 1878,

the energies of the radicals. The social ferment that the birth rate in Great Britain, then stand-

inspired by the French Revolution and economic ing at 35 per thousand, began to fall, and it went

difficulties following the Napoleonic wars died on falling until it reached its lowest peace-time

down, clamour for social reform waned and in- level of 149 in 1933. To-day it is 17d1 and has

terest in birth control declined. But there were risen every year over the last seven years.

isolated incidents. In 1868 Lord John Russell's In a Report on the Declining Birth Rate, written

* The Galton Lecture delivered on February 27th, 1963.

in 1914, Ethel Elderton, Galton Fellow of the University of London, found that the decline

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1963, 55, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was associated with increasing discussion and dissemination of means to prevent conception or destroy its fruits and with further restrictions on the economic exploitation of children. The reduction in the economic value of the child was certainly a big factor-with the passing of the Factory and Education Acts, a child could no longer pay its own way and became an economic liability rather than an asset. Ethel Elderton pointed out that, in the world we live in, a small family can be better fed, clothed and educated than a large one.
Even at that time there were confident persons who adjured the great British people to have more children for the sake of the Empire. On this Ethel Elderton comments

own profession was concerned-but not so. The Secretary of the Leeds Vigilance Association protested to medical societies; Edinburgh passed the buck to the General Medical Council who found him guilty of "having published and publicly caused to be sold a work entitled the Wife's Handbook at so low a price as to bring the work within the reach of the youth of both sexes to the detriment of public morals". The Council found that, secondly, the offence was infamous conduct in a professional respect. Whether this was because Dr. Allbutt had given, in his book, the name of Rendells, and also of the retailer of a Mensinga pessary, or whether because he had written a popular medical treatise, is not clear, but he was duly struck off the register.

Before an honest man devotes himself to the

rearing of a large family the members of which, as The First Birth Control Congress

far as he can see, will all be destined to the same Just a few years before this episode, in 1881,

weary round of toil and the same limited opportunities he himself endured, he must be informed precisely what economic measures will be under-

there was what must have been the very first International Medical Congress on Birth Con-

taken to secure the liberties of the coming race trol in London. It was arranged by the medical

and must receive some guarantees that they will branch of the Malthusian League and Dr. C. V.

be put into operation.

Drysdale was in the Chair. Thirty to forty prac-

One very significant figure in this Report is the titioners attended.

comparison between what had happened to the

birth rates in the richest and the poorest of Marie Stopes

the London boroughs. In Shoreditch the birth The next big step forward was the arrival on the

rate in 1881 was 31-2 per thousand, in 1911 it was scene of that dynamic woman, Marie Stopes.

3016. In Hampstead it was 3001 in 1881, very For some forty years the members of the Mal-

little lower than in Shoreditch, but in 191 1 it had thusian League had worked steadily and quietly,

fallen to 17-5.

without fireworks or excitement. They were

After the Bradlaugh-Besant trial, few attempts rational, serious and devoted-Marie Stopes was

were made to suppress bonafide birth control pro- a passionate pioneer. Fired by her own unhappy

paganda, but there was the case of Dr. Henry marriage, by a powerful urge to help women to

Allbutt. He was a Leeds physician and an achieve sexual fulfilment in their married lives

F.R.C.P. of Edinburgh and, fired apparently by (for which limitation of pregnancy would be a

the best of motives, he published about 1885, a sine qua non) and by that great American pioneer

Wife's Handbook, a decent, popular medical Margaret Sanger, Marie Stopes sailed into battle

treatise, price 6d. It dealt with pre-natal care, the with all guns firing and flags flying. She founded

management of a baby, etc., and had a chapter the first birth control clinic in England, in March

on "how to prevent conception when advised by 1921.

the doctor". He gave particulars of some birth

control methods and wrote that "when a woman Birth Control Clinics and Committees

is advised by her doctor not to conceive on ac- The Malthusian League opened a clinic in Wal-

count of the state of her health, she had better worth in November of the same year. During the

consult him as to which of these methods of pre- next few years five societies were formed-Dr.

vention would be best in her particular case". Stopes's Constructive Birth Control Society, the

One would have thought that Dr. Allbutt had Society for the Provision of Birth Control Clinics,

been sufficiently discreet-at least as far as his withheadquartersatWalworth, theWorkers' Birth

72

FAMILY PLANNING: AN ASSESSMENT

Control Group, in which Mrs. Dora Russell and detrimental to health. And in the following month

Mrs. Frida Laski were active, the Birth Control the National Birth Control Council, now the

International Information Centre (Mrs. Gerda Family Planning Association, was founded to

Guy and Mrs. How Martyn) and the Birth Con- co-ordinate and centralize the work of the five

trol Investigation Committee. The last was organizations which were all represented on the

started in 1926 on the initiative of Mrs. Spring Executive Committee of which Lady Denman

Rice and, later, with the co-operation of Dr. C. was Chairman. The first Executive was very imP. Blacker and the support of the Eugenics pressive, for it included Dr. C. P. Blacker, Mrs.

Society, to investigate methods of birth control Mary Stocks, Mrs. Eva Hubback, Mrs. Hugh

in use and to conduct research into new ones. Dalton and Mrs. Spring Rice; the office and

The Committee was very fortunate to have as its first Honorary Secretary, the Hon. Mrs. (now

staff were not so grand. They consisted of one room and one staff-myself.

the Hon. Lady) Farrer. Its Chairman was Sir We decided that our immediate task was to

Humphry Rolleston and it included such dis- encourage Local Health Authorities to imple-

tinguished persons as Lord Adrian, Lord Brain, ment the Minister's Memorandum and, as a first

Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders, Sir Julian Huxley, step, we issued a leaflet and sent it round to all

Sir Arthur Ellis, Professor Lancelot Hogben and Local Health Authorities. This led to a brush

Professor F. H. A. Marshall. It financed work with the Ministry. Mrs. Hubback and I were

at Oxford by Dr. John Baker and Dr. Carleton summoned to an interview at which our leaflet

with which Sir Howard Flory was also connected was severely criticized and finally the official who

and which resulted in the production of VOLPAR It will not have escaped your notice that this

was scolding us asked why we had presumed to explain what the Memorandum meant, as indeed

group of eleven men (eight of whom are happily still alive) includes one holder of the Order of Merit, two Nobel Prize winners, two Presidents of the Royal Society, one President of the Royal College of Physicians, two Regius Professors of Medicine, two Heads of Oxford and Cambridge

we had, and Mrs. Hubback replied with innocent candour "But of course we had to explain it, it is so absurdly written no one could possibly understand it". The official's pince-nez flashed, the young man sitting at his elbow hurriedly buried his head in his papers and it was borne in

Colleges and four other Fellows of the Royal on me, though not, I think, on Mrs. Hubback,

Society.

that we were talking to the author himself.

This, perhaps, was the first sign that support Perhaps it is not surprising that we had to re-

of birth control might lead to success and write our leaflet.

preferment.

When the Family Planning Association (under

the name of the National Birth Control Council)

The Start of the Family Planning Association started there were less than twenty clinics in the

1930 was the next year of outstanding signifi- whole country. After the Memorandum was

cance. In April a conference on the giving of in- issued it was hoped that Local Health Authori-

formation on birth control by public health ties would meet the need, but it soon became

authorities was held at Central Hall, West- evident that this hope would remain unfulfilled.

minster. It was attended by representatives from Although the health provision could be sympa-

Authorities as well as by delegates of many thetically interpreted, it could also be used in the

voluntary organizations, and it passed a resolu- narrowest possible sense. Councils were timid

tion calling upon the Minister of Health "to and even hostile. A suggested compromise came

recognize the desirability of making available from Dr. A. T. Nankivell, Medical Officer of

medical information on methods of birth control Health of Plymouth. I went to see him about

to married women who need it". In June the implementing the Memorandum and he put a

Minister issued Memorandum 153 MCW which proposal to me-he would lend us the premises

gave permissive authority for the provision of of one of his Maternity and Child Welfare

contraceptive advice to certain classes of married Centres and we would run a clinic. We could

women for whom further pregnancy would be also have the help of one of the doctors on his

73

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

staff who was keen to do this work. So we For organizational purposes branches are

formed a branch of the F.P.A. in Plymouth, grouped into eleven Federations which appoint

Lady Astor gave us £100, the Ministry of Health representatives to the National Executive Com-

saw no objection, and the pattern of the whole mittee and there are also thirteen area organizers.

future development of the F.P.A. was set. To- At Central Office there are several sub-commit-

day, seven out of every eight F.P.A. Clinics are tees, both medical and lay, and there is a Medical

held on the premises of a Local Health Authority Advisory Council composed of leading members

or Hospital, and of these 184 Local Authorities of the profession under the Chairmanship of

and Hospital Boards give grants, or per capita Lord Brain, which guides the Association in its

payments for patients referred; 118 Local Health medical ways. In addition, there are the Oliver

Authorities have clinics of their own.

Bird Trust and the Council for the Investigation

of Fertility Control which are concerned with the

Further Progress

question of research and clinical trials. Over the

Progress to the outbreak of war was steady. More clinics were opened, conferences (both

last few years these two bodies have been particularly concerned with the investigation and

medical and lay) were organized, evidence was clinical trials of oral contraceptives. After pregiven to Royal Commissions, medical schools liminary trials and consideration of all the data,

were urged to give training facilities and money the Medical Advisory Council have approved

raising efforts were organized. The most exciting of these was a Gala Ballet in 1936 for which Sir

the use ofthree oral pills as an alternative method of contraception in F.P.A. branch clinics which

Malcolm Sargent wrote a special ballet and fulfil certain required conditions, including

Dame Ninette de Valois and Dame Marie special training of the doctors. Criteria for selec-

Rambert produced special items.

tion of suitable patients are laid down and no

In 1938 the office, which had now grown in one is advised unless her general practitioner has

size, moved to 69 Eccleston Square where the been informed and his consent asked.

Eugenics Society most generously lent three Although, over the last thirty years, many im-

office rooms. Most branches managed to keep provements have been made in manufactured

open during the war and in 1943 the Branch Conference and Annual General Meeting were

contraceptives, it is notable that oral contraception is the only method of contraception used

revived. The same year an ad hoc subfertility to-day that was not in existence in 1900.

committee was set up under the chairmanship of Among other activities of the F.P.A. are a

Mr. Aleck Bourne and a seminological centre Pregnancy Diagnosis Centre, the publication of was established under the direction of Dr. H. A. an Approved List of manufactured goods which Davidson. At this centre, one of the first of its have passed standard tests devised by the Asso-

kind in the country, over 30,000 patients have been seen.

ciation, a literature and mail order department, and its own quarterly journal, Family Planning.

In recent years the growth of the Association has been rapid. It bought a house in Sloane

Three years ago the F.P.A. set up a Working Party under the Chairmanship of Professor

Street but has already outgrown this and is Fran9ois Lafitte

moving shortly to larger offices in Tottenham to review the aims and objects of the constitution,

Court Road, which will be able to house all its organization and services of the Association, to

thirty-seven staff. It has 383 clinics run by 302 branches and, last year, nearly 300,000 people visited these clinics. The large majority come for

consider how these might be brought further into line with present requirements and to make recommendations to the Executive Committee.

contraceptive advice, but there are also those Last year the Working Party produced the first

who have been unable to have children and part of its Report in the form of a Survey. Pro-

others who want medical help for sex difficulties fessional and salaried staffs in F.P.A. branch

in marriage. Apart from medical officers and clinics include some 450 doctors, 600 nurses and

nurses, the clinics are run mainly by voluntary 60 Red Cross or St. John's nurses as Assistants,

workers.

and 190 part-time and 20 full-time administrative

74

FAMILY PLANNING: AN ASSESSMENT

workers. Besides these salaried staff, there are entirely representative because North Kensing-

3,000 voluntary workers who act as reception- ton is well known as giving special attention to

ists, interviewers, supplies clerks and packers. pre-marital cases, but in the Metropolitan region

On the prevalence of birth control practice in as a whole, pre-marital cases formed 43 per cent

Britain, the Report uses Professor Glass's Mar- of all new patients in 1960-curiously, there

riage Survey which shows that, of couples who seem to be regional differences here for in Scot-

married in 1950 to 1960, 70 per cent practise land this figure was only 24 per cent.

contraception. In an article in the April 1963

issue of Family Planning, Professor Glass states The Change in Public Opinion

that an estimate based upon the data collected Accompanying or following practical achieve-

by the 1959-60 sample survey of the Population ment there has been an astonishing change in

Investigation Committee suggests that by the end public opinion. The official view at the end of the

of their child-bearing years, some 87 per cent of last century, as expressed in the Bradlaugh-

the couples married ten years ago may have used Besant indictment, the Allbutt case and letters

birth control. This assumption is more likely to in the medical press which wrote furiously of

under-state than over-state the probable total "beastly contrivances" and "filthy expedients

incidence.

for prevention of conception" seems to have

On social classification, the population of the changed little for the next fifty years. The Lam-

country is divided into 26-5 per cent non-manual, beth Conference of 1920 condemned the practice

48 per cent skilled manual and 25-5 per cent of of birth control and the Ministry of Health re-

other manual workers. New patients at F.P.A. fused all action. Marie Stopes was abused and

clinics in November 1960 were 41-5 per cent non- attacked, and both she and the founders of Wal-

manual, 47 per cent skilled manual and 11X5 per worth were pelted with rotten eggs and windows

cent other manual. Thus, the non-manual were of clinics were broken. The founders of Man-

over-represented, the skilled manual were in chester clinic were described in the Press in 1926

about the right proportion, and the other-manual as "over-dressed, well fed and badly bred"

were considerably under-represented. The F.P.A flaunting cigarettes between their painted lips

is therefore seeing, proportionately, far more and shoving birth control down the throats of

middle and upper class and far fewer unskilled the unwanted poor.

working class women than there are in the From 1930, when the Lambeth Conference of

general population.

that year set the door very slightly ajar and the

The most frequently used method is the sheath Ministry of Health circulated its cautious and

(35 per cent) then coitus interruptus (27.5 per guarded, but highly significant and important,

cent) followed by a cap and the safe period (each Memorandum, opinion began to change. It was

12-5 per cent).

all very slow, however, and active opposition

As for use made of clinics, the Working Party was replaced by what Lord Simon of Wythen-

calculated that probably 11 per cent (one in nine) shawe aptly described as a "conspiracy of

of women under forty-five getting married, go silence" which is, of course, much more difficult

to a clinic before they have been married a year. to counter than vocal opposition. More than

North Kensington Clinic, which, under the one of our clinics has opened with a flood of

chairmanship of Mrs. Spring Rice, was always patients who had heard of it from meetings

noted for its enterprise had, among its first called to protest at its opening.

thousand patients between 1924 and 1929, 44-5 A most important event was the publication,

per cent who had had four or more children, in 1949, of the Report of the Royal Commission

4'5 per cent who had had no children, and only on Population. This Commission had been ap-

19 per cent who were under twenty-five years of pointed by the Government in 1944 owing to

age. In 1960, out of 2,300 new patients, only 5 fears then current of a fall in population. The

per cent had four or more children, 64 per cent F.P.A. gave both oral and written evidence to

had had no children, and 60 per cent were under the Commission which said in its Report "Public

twenty-five. These figures may have not been policy should assume and seek to encourage the

BRt-C

75

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

spread of voluntary parenthood" (para. 434) known as "the population explosion". Owing to

and also "The giving of advice on contraception the spectacular drop in death rates all over the

to married persons who want it should be ac- world due to the use of new drugs and insecti-

cepted as a duty of the National Health Service cides in massive health programmes, the world

and the existing restrictions on the giving of such rate of population growth has doubled since

advice by public authority clinics should be 1945 and is increasing steadily. It is reckoned

removed" (para. 66).

that by the end of the century our present world

As regards the F.P.A. and public opinion, the population of 3,000 million will double.

real break-through came in 1955. Two or three In addition, there is the steadily increasing

of us met Mr. Iain Macleod, then Minister of recognition that parents have a right and a duty

Health, at luncheon and asked him if he would to plan their families and that health, particu-

visit a clinic. He not only consented, but he also larly maternal and child health, is greatly depen-

came to Headquarters, made us a charming dent on the practice of sound and sensible family

speech on the occasion of our Silver Jubilee, planning. Also everywhere there is the problem

and lunched with us. The result of that was inter- of abortion, so sinister and so tragic. Finally,

views on television and sound radio, a leader in even to-day, from one-third to half the popula-

The Times, and tributes, both in the lay and tion of the world suffers from hunger and mal-

medical Press, to the work of the F.P.A.

nutrition.

The Editor of one of the leading medical According to a very recent report of the Food

journals pointed out that

and Agriculture Organization of the United

The History of the Family Planning Association Nations, it is also reckoned that

as a voluntary organization follows the British pattern-the demonstration of a social or medical need followed by attempts to meet it, growing public favour and expansion of staff and premises leading to the national provision of services.

Should the population grow according to U.N. forecast, the world's total food supplies would have to be doubled by 1980 and trebled by the turn of the century in order to provide a level of nutrition reasonably adequate to the needs of all

Since 1955 visits from Ministers, debates in the the world's peoples. House of Lords, and television programmes, The highest rate of population growth to-day

have become almost commonplace. According is in Latin America, and it is unlikely that rapid

to The Times in 1959:

progress will be made in that Continent. More

By general recognition of the majority of this country, the Family Planning Association has

than half the world's population lives in Asia and it is there that the present problem is felt

taken its place among the respectable and useful most acutely. India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Singapore

adjuncts of the social services.

and other countries have family planning pro-

The change of outlook of the different grammes. Japan has the most thorough and has

Churches has been marked. The Roman achieved the most success. In ten years Japan has

Catholic Church does not condemn birth con- halved her birth rate, which is now little above

trol as such, only certain methods. The Anglican this country's. This has been done to a consider-

Church at Lambeth in 1958, said the use of able extent by the practice of abortion, but at the

family planning "is a right and important factor same time the Government has taken the most

in Christian family life" and the major Free vigorous steps to encourage and teach contra-

Churches have agreed substantially with this ception as a substitute for abortion. In the ten

judgement. The Society of Friends, the Jewish years from 1950 the percentage of contraceptive

Church and Hindu and Muslim leaders have users has doubled. In three Japanese villages and

also made favourable pronouncements.

one urban slum, some physicians gave informa-

tion, discussed family problems sympathetically,

Growth of World Population

gave out contraceptives and visited their patients

This country has been prominent in enthusiasm regularly. Over a three-year period the birth rate

and support of international work for birth con- in the villages dropped from 26-7 to 14-6 per

trol which has leapt into prominence during the thousand and in the slum from 53-9 to 16-5.

last few years because of what is popularly These reductions were accomplished concur-

76

FAMILY PLANNING: AN ASSESSMENT

rently with a drop of about 70 per cent in the
abortion rate in both areas. These figures show
what can be achieved by propaganda and edu-
cation in present methods of birth control.
In India, sterilization is being increasingly
practised and encouraged, particularly for men.
It is very difficult to make any precise assess-
ment of the effects of birth control programmes in under-developed countries. Apart from Japan
there are few figures. In Puerto Rico the birth rate fell 20 per cent in ten years. In Singapore it fell every year from 1957 to 1961 from 42-7 to 35-5 per thousand. In Barbados births fell by over a thousand-(7,833 to 6,754) in 1960-61, and the number of new patients at clinics rose by 733. In Singur, in India, a decrease in the birth
rate from 45'2 in 1956 to 37-6 in 1960 is ascribed to the introduction of an educational and clinical
programme of family planning in the area. The problems of introducing birth control
programmes in the countries where they are most needed are obvious. They can only be solved by widespread education, the inclusion of adequate provision in maternal and child welfare services, the study of what methods are most acceptable to particular groups and, above all, by the discovery of simpler methods through further research.
The International Planned Parenthood Federation to which thirty-three countries belong increased its activities every year and hopes, in time, to enlist the support of the United Nations and its organizations. In December, 1962, the United Nations General Assembly adopted an amended resolution on population growth and economic development. But in the final form the key phrase "that the United Nations give technical assistance, as requested by Governments, for national projects and programmes dealing with the problems of population" was deleted. This clause had been passed by the Economic Committee where voting had been 43 for, 14 against and 42 abstentions. But in the General Assembly the necessary two-thirds majority was not obtained. Meanwhile, more countries join the I.P.P.F., the latest recruit being Egypt. Recent expansion of work has been made possible by very generous financial support from the U.S.A. which has devoted great energy to raising money for international work. The F.P.A. hopes to do

the same before long-names of millionaires will
be gratefully received.
The Oneida Community The use of birth control has obvious relevance to the practice of eugenics. As far as I know, the only practical experiment has been the one by the Oneida Community, of which Robert Dickinson wrote
The Oneida Community experience is, as far as I can judge, the only long continued, deliberate, organized and consistent experiment in birth control by a group of intelligent people using a single method, combined with physical examination to check up the effects of health.
This colony was a communistic one of a voluntary type founded in Oneida, New York State. Members were bound together by religious doctrines known as Perfectionism, and they gave their leader, J. H. Noyes, or a committee, authority to arrange matings. For the first ten years, 1869-1879, piety was the chief basis of selection. Later, health and intelligence were taken into account. All methods of birth control except coitus reservatus were rejected and emphasis was placed on the full sexual satisfaction of the woman partner-remember, this was nearly fifty years ahead of Dr. Stopes.
The Community eventually foundered because as Noyes got older his leadership and magnetic personality were less effective, so that religious fervour waned. In addition, there was hostility from outside the community. Noyes left it and advised the Community to renounce "complex marriage" in deference to public opinion, which they agreed to do. The Colony had been financially successful for thirty-two years. On dissolution the members set up a Joint Stock Company (Oneida Ltd., manufacturers of Community silver plate), the assets were distributed among former members. Support for children was guaranteed up to the age of sixteen in proportion to the earnings of the Company and at sixteen each child was given $200.
There are, unfortunately, few reports of the results of this interesting venture. Of the fifty eight births which took place between 1869 and 1879 there was only one death under one year old. In sixty years there were only twelve deaths. Kopf, statistician of the Life Insurance Company

77

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

said, in 1921, that there were two-thirds fewer stationary at 31 per thousand in the thirty years

deaths in the Oneida Community than ifa typical from 1881 to 1911-but in 1961 it was 16.

rural experience of recent times had prevailed. But, according to the findings of Professor

It was claimed that four-fifths of the children Lafitte's Working Party, F.P.A. clinics do not

were planned. Dr. Theodore Noyes, son of the now reach the parents who are probably most

Founder, after twenty-two years, contended that in need of their help. These are the families who

nervous diseases were far below the average for are so often in trouble or difficulty of one sort or

the country.

another. They not only suffer sadly themselves,

The danger of drawing conclusions from iso- but become a sore burden on every local

lated experiments is well illustrated here, since authority and social agency with which they are the only possible conclusions to draw from these concerned. Whatever the trouble may be, there figures would be that coitus reservatus is a highly is often one common factor-too many children.

successful method of birth control, and that to These people will not come to a clinic. Over the

breed for piety produces longevity.

last few years the Eugenics Society has been

financing an attempt by the F.P.A. to deal with

Birth Control and Eugenics

this problem. In two large provincial towns (and

The connection between the Eugenics Society shortly in London), close contact has been estab-

and the family planning movement, both in this lished with the local health authority which

country and internationally, has been a close one. knows of families where there are already far

Under the powerful impulse of Dr. Blacker the too many children and where home conditions

Society started both the Population Investiga- are terrible. There is a team of doctor, nurse and

tion Committee and the Birth Control Investi- social worker. The parents are (with the consent

gation Committee. It has provided free offices of their own doctor) visited at home, taught the

both for the F.P.A. and the I.P.P.F. and has also most suitable method of birth control, given free

given them most generous and repeated financial supplies and followed up. Results are encourag-

help. This seems to me entirely right-not only ing, one most important point is that these

because I have been at the receiving end of this patients apparently find no difficulty in using

generosity, but because the use that is made of oral contraception and take to it readily. This

birth control must be of primary importance to sort of experiment is expensive and could not

eugenics.

have been done without the help of the Eugenics

Differences of intelligence are inherited-and Society. When enough data has been obtained,

it is a fact that children who belong to small we hope to prove to local health authorities that

families do better in intelligence tests than the such work would be well worth while financially.

children of larger families. A possible explana- Children in care are very expensive. The cost of

tion is that the less intelligent parents find it some of these problem families to the com-

more difficult to practise birth control.

munity must be enormous. If, in one year, even

The first impact of birth control clinics was ten fewer children had to be taken into care the

eugenic. Norman Himes gave figures of the cost of the scheme would be covered.

occupations of nearly 3,000 husbands from nine One of the early cries against the birth con-

of the first clinics showing a much higher pro- trollers was that of race suicide. When the birth

portion of unskilled and semi-skilled than in the rate was going down in the nineteen-thirties,

general population. Of the whole population, 13 alarming calculations were made of the rapid

per cent were classified as unskilled, but 34 per dwindling of the population. It was taken for

cent of the clinics' patients fell into that category. granted that the birth rate would continue to fall

As Himes said "the English clinics ... have been as knowledge of contraception spread. This

influential in disseminating contraceptive advice proved to be a complete miscalculation. The

to the lower social classes". The spread of birth acceptance of birth control is now almost uni-

control knowledge to these same lower social versal in this country and the birth rate is con-

classes is again illustrated by the Shoreditch siderably higher than it was. This is also true

birth rate. You will remember this was virtually for the U.S.A. It is clear that knowledge and

78

FAMILY PLANNING: AN ASSESSMENT

practice of birth control does not, in itself, lower deal with the sex problems of their patients?

the birth rate. In fact, to some extent, the United Ought we to press for all our work to be in-

Kingdom, and still more the U.S.A., have their cluded in the National Health Service?

own population problems-ours is not one of How should we tackle the problem of the

malnutrition, but of congestion. The amenities, Roman Catholic Church? Ought we to be more

if not the necessities, of life are going to be belligerent or should we concentrate on points

seriously affected if our birth rate goes on rising. of agreement and methods of persuasion?

Family Planning has had a powerful effect on The F.P.A. has concentrated on advising

the place and status of women in our social life. methods giving maximum safety-do these

Freed from perpetual baby producing and baby methods demand too much effort and sophisti-

minding throughout their best years, they can cation ? Would concentration on simplermethods

earn money and so, at least, share the status of increase or decrease the failure rate?

the breadwinner. They can also follow careers Despite all the television programmes, Press

play their part in public work and social life. articles and broadcast discussion on sex and

Family planning affords women the opportunity birth control which, even ten years ago would

to emerge at last from their age-old inferiority. have been hair-raising in their audacity, one

The history of the birth control movement in bride in thirteen is pregnant when she marries,

this country is a success story, but what of the and illegitimate births for 1960 totalled over

future?

43,000. Although pre-marital intercourse is

There are allegedly 300 abortions every day in nothing new, our attitude towards it is. Young

this country-Are we bringing that rate down? people to-day discuss it freely and many of them

One in nine newly-marrieds come to F.P.A. practise it. Who is helping them to make up their

clinics-what happens to the other eight? Do minds and who will give them birth control ad-

they go to doctors? and what training have those vice when they want it? Should we?

doctors received? Hitherto, few teaching hospi- These questions confront us-I hope that we

tals have done much-in how many medical can meet them in a way which will justify our

schools is an attempt made to train students to future as, I think, we have justified our past.

79

