G. AINSWORTH HARRISON
M.A., D.Phil. Anthropology Laboratory, Department of Anatomy, University of Liverpool

Genetics and Race*

RACES HAVE BEEN defined as "popula-
tions which differ from one another in the incidences of some genes or chromosome structures in their gene pools."' The most important aspects of this concept of race are that it concerns populations, not individuals, and genetic variation, not the variation which
is produced directly by differences of environment. In the genetic sense, a population is a group of individuals which, to some extent, is reproductively isolated from other populations. The largest Mendelian population is the species, since all the individuals of a species actually or potentially share in a common gene pool, but different species, because they are permanently reproductively isolated from one another, have different gene pools. It is generally agreed that all present day forms of man belong to the single species Homo sapiens; they mate with one another and produce viable and fertile offspring. Characteristically within a species, there is a heirarchy of sub-ordinate Mendelian populations, which to a varying degree are, and for a varying length of time have been, reproductively isolated from one another. This isolation is, of course, a prerequisite for the genetic differentiation of populations, in other words, for race formation.
As ever more data has been collected about the geographical pattern of human variation it has become increasingly apparent that there are marked differences from one population to another. In fact it would be true to say that every character which shows variation within one population also shows variation between populations.
In discussing the nature of this variation it is convenient to recognize two types of character
* The substance of a lecture given at an extra-mural
course in Cambridge on "The Genetic Side of Medicine," March, 1963.

difference. Firstly there are those differences
whose mode of inheritance is simple and more or less completely understood; they are usually, but not invariably, qualitative in nature. In contrast, there are those which involve many genes, tend to be quantitative, and have not been fully analysed genetically. The distinction is not clear cut but is worth making because of the special difficulties involved in anthropological studies when the genetic basis of some difference is not known. So far as normal, i.e. non-pathological, variation is concerned it can rather broadly be said that biochemical and serological characters fall into the first category, whilst physiological and morphological characters, depending as they usually do on many interacting biochemical and organizational factors for their development, are of the second type. It is, therefore, not surprising that almost all the characters studied by early anthropologists, fall into this latter category, since the features which first attracted anthropological attention were, naturally, the visually obvious morphological and metrical ones.
Continuous Variation This category includes such characters as skin and eye colour, hair shape and colour, fingerprints, and parameters of body size and shape as for instance stature, weight, ponderal index, head length and breadth and the cephalic index. To it, can now be added a number of physiological variables such as basal metabolic rate, vascular responses in the hand to cold, vital capacity and age of menarche. It also includes many of the marked differential sensitivities to disease such as the geographical variations in liability to hypertensive disease, and the lower incidence of mouth, lip and skin cancers, and higher incidence of cancers of the cervix uteri in Negroes as compared with Europeans.

'39 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1963, 55, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The most difficult problem involved in con-
sidering the geographical distribution in these
characters is to determine the extent to which
the environment is directly responsible for the
variation. In some cases it would seem that
environmental factors are the sole cause and that
the variation, therefore, has no racial significance
at all. It is common knowledge that the dietary
and infectious diseases have ramifying effects on
body habitus, and even such an obviously adaptive trait as the variation in red blood cell
count with altitude is, in large part at least,
attributable to direct environmental effects. In this case, it is the capacity to respond to
atmospheric oxygen tension which is genetically
determined, and this does not appear to show
inter-population variation. In other cases the
effects of the environment are less clear and this
is particularly so for parameters of growth and
development where some temporary environmental factor can have a permanent effect. Cradling habits, for instance, may affect adult head shape. Indeed, the extent to which such a
frequently studied feature as the cephalic index is environmentally labile is still unknown. If a character has any lability at all, it is apparent that the magnitude of some difference will depend upon the precise nature of the environ-
ments which produced it. It is evident then, that the usual methods of gauging environmental effects, such as the study of monozygotic twins
reared together and apart, will be of little use, since it is obviously unlikely that the various effects of the world's many environments can be sampled in this way! Some insight has been gained by the study of migrant populations, but the problem is beset by pitfalls, since it has been shown that, in many features, migrants are not random samples of their sedentary kinsfolk.
The other major difficulty with characters that are determined by many genes also concerns the relationship between the phenotype and the genotype. Even in the absence of environmental modification, it is evident that there is no necessary relationship between the comparative magnitude of phenotypic and genotypic differences. Thus, for instance, two indistinguishable phenotypes can have totally different genetic bases. There is no reason to suppose that the genes which are involved in determining the

pigmented skin of Melanesians are the same as those producing much the same colour in African Negroes. (In some respects the situation is similar to that facing the clinical geneticists attempting to establish whether more than one
locus is involved in determining some rare abnormality, but the difficulties both practical and theoretical are considerably greater.) Further, a small phenotypic difference may involve many gene substitutions, whilst a large one might arise from a few changes; it is known that the effects of the different genes can be unequal. The question of scale is also important, since gene effects may not be additive on the scale of measurement being used. Perhaps this can be most clearly seen in the case of skin colour variation, where it is possible with the reflectance spectrophotometer to measure the variation directly on different scales, i.e. at different wavelengths. When this is done for instance at 425 mu and at 685 mu it is found that the comparative differences between a series of populations which vary in shade from African "black" to European "white" are different at the two wavelengths. Thus, South African Cape Coloureds are more like Europeans at 685 mu than they are like West Africans but on the 425 scale the position is reversed. It has been shown from studies of African x European hybrid families that the genes responsible for the parental differences are additive on some reciprocal and logarithmic functions of reflectance,2 and if one uses the reciprocal of the reflectance for plotting the differences between the various populations, then the results at different wavelengths agree with one another.3 When characters such as stature are studied, where only one scale of
direct measurement is available, it is easy to forget that this scale may show no linear relationship with the underlying genetic determinants.
Discrete Variation Over the last fifty years an ever increasing number of anthropological characters have been discovered which have a comparatively simple genetic basis and which are more or less free of direct environmental determination. Examples are the blood groups, the abnormal haemoglobins, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase de-

140

GENETICS AND RACE

ficiency, serum proteins like the haptoglobins variation is not a very great help. Admittedly in

and transferrins, taste and colour blindness dealing with characters whose mode of inherit-

and the excretion of 8-amino-isobutyric acid. ance is understood, one avoids the danger of

These characters have tended to supplant convergent phenotypes with different genetic

continuously varying ones in many anthro- bases, but the problem remains ofthe recognizing

pological studies, particularly those concerned genes which are alike in state but not identical

with population dynamics, because populations by descent. Thus if two populations possess the

can be described and compared for them in same gene, it does not follow that they acquired

terms of varying gene frequencies. So far as the it from a common ancestral population and are

geographical pattern of their distribution is related; it may well have arisen quite indepen&d

concerned a number of rather general statements ently as two separate mutational events. This

can be made. Firstly, most of the variations are possibility becomes very real when we come to

quantitative variations in gene frequency rather consider the causes for inter-population varia-

than presences or absences. Usually, in fact, tion.

populations display a balanced polymorphism

for the various alternative states of the character, The Causes of Racial Variation

and what varies between populations is the level It took a surprisingly long time for the full

at which the balance is set. Secondly, each implications of Darwinism to perculate through

system tends to show a gradual change over the minds of anthropologists, and at least up to

wide geographical areas so that gradients of gene the time ofthe last war, many authorities thought

frequency, or clines, occur. Occasionally, how- of the pattern of geographical variation solely

ever, there are quite abrupt changes, and many, in terms of varying degrees of hybridization

but by no means all, of these changes tend to between a few distinct primary races of man. Just

differentiate populations on a continental basis. how these primary races came into being was

Finally, the distribution patterns of the various usually either attributed to chance or, more

characters are frequently very different, and the commonly, conveniently ignored completely.

distribution of one system may in no way It is true that throughout human evolution and

coincide with that of another. This is becoming particularly during the more recent phases there

ever more increasingly apparent as the geo- has been widespread hybridization and gene

graphical distributions are more precisely flow. Further, it is now recognized that if alter-

mapped. Nevertheless, in a rather general way, native genes are more or less of equivalent

some overall continental patterns have emerged, adaptive value their frequencies will drift in

and it is of importance that the broad classi- small populations, and until quite recently, most

fication of human populations by blood groups populations were in fact small. However, it

is in fairly close agreement with the ones that has become increasingly evident that genes are

were made using the classical type of anthro- rarely, if ever, of equivalent adaptive value-at

pological character. Thus for instance, the least over a span of time-and that what has

populations of Africa south of the Sahara are primarily caused the variation between different

not only characterized by having dark skin, populations is the differential effect of natural

spiral hair and broad noses, but also have selection in the vastly differing environments

uniquely high frequencies of the rhesus combina- inhabited by man. In other words, whatever

tion Dce, and of the Su, jsa and Fy genes. They the causes for within population variability,

are also characterized by the V rhesus antigen the between population variability is primarily

and the Hunter and Henshaw antigens in the due to the selective action of the three broad

MNS system.4

ecological variables, climate, nutrition and

This has been of some comfort to those who disease. Of course, recent hybridization, or

are concerned with determining the relationships changing ways of life complicate the relation

between populations, but when one comes to between ecology and genetic variation, but it is

consider this central problem of racial anthro- to be expected that the pattern of variation be-

pology, knowledge of the genetic basis of the tween human populations will show some

'4'

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
correlation with the geographical distribution basal cell skin carcinomas, and that on poor of ecological variables. This expected relation- diets, negro children are more susceptible to ship has formed the basis for one approach to rickets than are white, along with the demonstradiscovering the causes of the variation. It has tion that pigmented skin transmits less ultrabeen shown, for instance, that the distribution violet radiation than unpigmented skin, strongly of skin colour tends to coincide with the intensity support the view that such radiation has been of incident ultra-violet radiation, that the distri- influential in determining the world distribution bution of nasal index is positively correlated of skin colour. This, of course, does not mean with atmospheric vapour pressure,5 that body that it is the only factor concerned. Skin colour weight variation is inversely correlated with the is also important in determining the solar heat mean annual temperature6 and that other body load received and possibly also affects radiant parameters are also related to climatic factors.7 heat loss from the body. It is also known that the abnormal haemoglobins Even when there is no indication of what and G.6.P.P.D. only occur in high frequency in environmental factor is acting, it is sometimes regions of malignant tertian malaria8 and it still possible to demonstrate that selection is has been noted that the frequency of the ABO operating by comparing the frequency of the blood group genes throughout the world fit the character in different age groups. It has been distribution to be expected if people of type 0 found that the frequency of G.6.P.P.D. in were particularly susceptible to bubonic plague Nigeria changes with age,'2 and it is possible that and those of type A to smallpox.9 Such associa- at least part of this represents selectional effects. tions, of course, only provide a clue to the The trouble with this approach is that, unless possible selecting agents; usually there are some selection is extremely strong, very large samples complications, and the relationships may be in are required to detect significant changes. Yet fact misleading. Thus, as already mentioned, it an advantage of one gene over another of as is not clear to what extent variation in body size little as 1 per cent, which would be extremely and shape, is due to direct environmental action hard to detect by any method, will be important and is without a genetic basis. Further, although in evolutionary terms. the abnormal haemoglobins and G.6.P.D.D., The realization that natural selection is the only occur in malarious areas (excepting, of cause for race differentiation obviously complicourse, recent emigrants from such areas) it is cates the problem of determining racial relationnot certainly known why there are different ships. In particular, it is evident that similarity types of abnormal haemoglobin, and there are of environment-and therefore of selective malarious regions where neither the known forces-is as likely to produce similarity of abnormal haemoglobins or G.6.P.P.D. are to be genetic structure as is close relationship. This found. The relationship between the distribution is just as likely-and in some ways more likelyof the ABO blood groups and smallpox seems for single gene characters as for multifactorial to be entirely coincidental, since although an ones. Certainly there is no justification for antigenic overlap between A-substance and assuming that all sickle cell genes in existence
vaccinia was originally claimed,'0 the present had the same unique origin. It may be so, but evidence strongly points to it being artefactual."1 since mutation is a recurrent phenomenon, one
It is evident that any possible association be- would have expected the gene to arise in every tween some ecological factor and a genetic population, and where it was an advantage, i.e. trait needs to be tested experimentally. The in malarious regions, to spread. finding that in malarious regions young children Further, in evolutionary terms changes in with the sickle cell trait have a lower parasite gene frequency can be quite rapid. In the case count than those with only normal haemoglobin of the gene for sickle haemoglobin it has been confirms the view that the possession of the calculated that with the estimated fitness of the abnormal haemoglobin protects against the three genotypes in East Africa, it would take severe effects of malarial infection. The facts only about forty generations for the gene to that ultra-violet radiation causes sunburn and reach its equilibrium level of about 20 per cent
142

GENETICS AND RACE

this level is determined by the relative fitness
of the two homozygotes). Further, if migration to the non-malarious environment occurs, there
will at first be quite a marked drop in the fre-
quency of the sickle gene, because individuals with the sickel cell trait are now at no advantage
over those with only normal haemoglobin, and there is still a heavy loss of sickle cell genes
through the very low viability of the homozygote
sickle cell genotype. This is rather clearly seen
amongst slaves shipped from West Africa to
Surinam or Curacao. There is no reason to
suppose that the slaves to the two areas differed in the frequency of the gene or that subsequent
hybridization has been an influential factor,
but in Curacao, a non-malarious region, the gene
is at a very significantly lower level than in
malarious Surinam."3 However, the rate at which the gene is eliminated once it has become rare
is infinitely slow because it will then mainly
occur in heterozygous state, and its very presence can be used as a population marker over quite a long period of time. Nevertheless, except in the
more extensive surveys it is quite likely to go undetected (this would be especially so if all the known phenotypic expressions were completely recessive), and when it reaches a very low frequency, the position could not easily be distinguished from an abnormal gene which is solely present in a population as a result of recurrent mutation.
The realisation that it is the environment, rather than relationship, which ultimately determines the genetic structure of populations has invalidated much of the work that was done in anthropology before the last war. It is clearly evident that before any reliable analysis of evolutionary affinities can be made from the degree of genetic similarity between populations it is necessary to know the nature and magnitude of the selective forces which have operated on the genes over the time period concerned; knowledge we are never likely to have.
When one comes to think of the pattern of human heritable variation as being a function of environmental selection, it is much easier to explain the fact that the distribution of many characters show quite different geographical patterns than it is on hybridization hypotheses. Further, it is now recognized that clines can

result not only from gene flow between populatious, but also from the presence of geographical
gradients in the relative strengths of opposing selective forces. This, of course, is not to say that the effects of hybridization are relatively unimportant; indeed many of the unique features of human evolution can be directly attributable to widespread gene flow between populations; but it does mean that attempting to determine relationships between populations is an extremely hazardous activity.
The independent geographical distribution of characters and the ubiquity of clines also, means that any formal classification of man into distinct races must, to some extent, be artificial, even if such a classification is attempted solely on a phenetic basis (i.e. on the degree of overall similarity irrespective of phyletic affinity). In animal taxonomy it is common practice to employ the so-called 75 per cent rule14 by which a population is regarded as a distinct subspecies only if 75 per cent of the individuals comprising it are recognizably distinct from other populations. Now, whilst it is possible to distinguish a number of populations of man from one another on this basis, they are typically interconnected by a whole range of populations showing practically every degree ofintermediacy. Any classification must obviously therefore be arbitrary. However, it does happen that, for one reason or another, clines have varying gradients and are steeper in some places than others. Further, as has already been mentioned, some characters do tend to show the same general pattern of variation. Even to-day, with our vastly greater knowledge of human variation, it would still seem true to say that, until quite recently, human populations were fairly clearly differentiated on a continental basis and it is for this reason that most anthropologists continue to recognize the existence of, at least,
major races of man.
REFERENCES
1. Dobzhansky, T. 1955. Evolution, Genetics, and Man. Wiley, New York.
2. Harrison, G. A. and Owen, J. J. T. 1956. Acta. Genet. 6,481.
3. Weiner, J. S., Harrison, G. A., Jopp, W., Singer, R. and Harris, R. (in preparation).
4. Mourant, A. E. 1961. ih Genetical Variation in Human Populations. Pergamon. Oxford.

143

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

5. Weiner, J. S. 1954. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 12, 1.
6. Roberts, D. F. 1953. Amer. J. phys. Anthrop. 11, 533.
7. Coon, C. S., Garn, S. M. and Birdsell, J. B. 1950. Races. Thomas, Illinois.
8. Allison, A. C. 1961. In Genetical Variation in Human Populations. Pergamon. Oxford.
9. Vogel, F., Pettenkofer, H. J. and Helmbold, W. 1960. Acta Genet. 10, 267.

10. Pettenkofer, H. J. and Bickerich, R. 1960. 261. Bakt. 1. Orig., 179, 433.
11. Harris, R., Harrison, G. A. and Rondle, C. J. M., (in press) Acta Genet.
12. Harris, R. and Gillies, H. M. 1961. Ann. hum. Genet. 25, 199.
13. Jonxis, J. W. P. 1959. In Abnormal Haemogloblns. Blackwell. Oxford.
14. Amadon, D. 1949. Condor, 51, 250.

'44

