REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

75

The author starts vith the premise that " there is no antagonism

between the claims of the future and the present, the race and the

individual." We admire his optimism, but cannot altogether share it.

The eugenic ideal must share the burden of any ideal of conduct, in

demanding self-sacrifice from some of its followers, especially under

present conditions when so many anti-eugenic social customs are in

vogue, and the necessary re-adjustments have still to be made. The

statement of the equality of but fundamental difference between

men and women is perhaps largely recapitulation, but is so presented as

to bring under critical examination many present customs-such as

methods of education, ideals of development, problems of marriage and

divorce, economic position, etc. The author insists on the need for

bringing the educational ideal into accord with the requirements of racial

well-being. He controverts Mr. Wells and i\Ir. Shaw's ideas on marriage

and defends monogamy on biological principles, advocating at the same

time an adjustment in marriage customs to meet the requirements of

intellectually developed women. He emphasises strongly the danger to

the race of any tendency which decreases the marriage rate among the

more able women and thus deprives the future generation of its just

inheritance.

The obvious reforms with reference to reducing the rate of infantile

mortality, and equalising the numbers of men and women who emigrate,

are advocated to assist in returning the selective function to the hands

of women, but it may be some time before the numbers of men and

vomen are again equal in Great Britain, though no one can doubt that

the attainment of this end would solve many problems, both social and

eugenic.

Foerster, F. WV. Marriage and the Sex Problem. Translated from the German by Mleyrick Boah, B.Sc. London. \Vells, Gardner, Darton and Co., Ltd.; pp. 228.

THIS book is of very varied merits from the eugenic standpoint. On

one point we are in entire agreement with the author, and that is in the

recognition that all real improvement in human conduct, to be stable,

must be based on worth of character and individual exercise of will,

as he himself states, our aims are alike, although we differ as to the ways

in which these aims may be realised. Perhaps partly owing to the

policy of the " Bund fur Mutterschutz " and similar German organisa-

tions, whole

Dr. Foerster is rather
with the agitation- for

apt to confuse the eugenic reforms in marriage and

movement as a sexual relations

which is now causing so much outcry in his country. It is probably owing

to this confusion that he sees in eugenics an ideal antagonistic to religion.

He takes up an attitude towards science and the growth of knowledge

which apparently divorces science from religion, he therefore proceeds to

depreciate the value of science and the need of understanding the laws of

Nature. It seems difficult to understand the outlook of those who

postulate a perfect Creator and then belittle all his creations ! Surely,

the laws governing the universe and, incidentally, the human species are

the most wonderful expressions of the Divine mind, and as such should

be reverently studied? Ever since the earliest tradition a knowledge

of good and evil has brought with it the responsibility of exercising choice and judgment, why, therefore, should we be exempt from that responsibility when our limited understanding is capable of grasping

some of the methods by which racial improvement may be attained ? The Eugenist agrees that three things are required in the complete human

being: good character, ability and health-all being interdependent.

In social progress some reforms in existing customs may be found

necessary (we do not allow that many of those mentioned are either social or eugenic), but why should Dr. Foerster imagine that " There will be a practical dissolution of all authoritative truth . . . . following

76 EUGENICS REVIEW.
upon this will come an appalling moral degradation which will gradually permeate the masses. . . . The most honourable traditions of humanity will then reckon for nothing "? If an emotional basis of character training must inevitably lead to this, then surely it is all the more urgent that an ethical ideal of racial responsibility shall be inculcated into the rising generation, and their sentiment of duty towards their neighbour extended to include the future generation. This will furnish both a scientific and an ethical appeal, and perhaps do something to stem the downfall of western civilisation which Dr. Foerster foresees in the inevitable weakening of the religious organisations during the period of transition from an ignorant to an educated populace!
Boaz, FRANZ. Changes in the Bodily Form of Descendants of Immi-
grants. New York: Columbia University Press. London.
Henry Frowde; I9I2; pp. xii. + 573; price 7s. 6d. net.
THIS volume contains a complete account of the researches undertaken by Professor Boaz at the request of the United States Immigration Commission. It is reprinted from the reports of that body. The author's main conclusions were made public some time ago, but in this volume may be found, in addition, a detailed tabulation of the anthropometric data on which they are based, and also a consideration of some of the criticisms which have been directed against them. The most remarkable changes pointed out are in the dimensions and form of the head among Hebrews and Sicilians. The relation between the length and breadth of the heads is usually expressed as the " cranial index," that is to say the breadth is recorded as a percentage of the length. In persons whose heads are long and narrow the cranial index will be low, and where it is short and broad, high. Hebrews born in Europe appear to have a cranial index of about 83, whereas the heads of Sicilians in Sicily have an index of 78, about that of Oxford undergraduates. In America the Hebrew skull gets relatively longer and the Sicilian relatively shorter, the index changing in the first case to 8i and in the second to 8o.
As a simple explanation of the change observed in the former case, it has been suggested that in Europe the babies are kept swaddled in manner which binds them hand and foot. Thus constrained they are placed on their backs, so that the skull, while in a plastic condition, is subjected to a more or less continuous pressure from behind, and its length decreased thereby. Consequently, the cranial index of the European-born Hebrew does not represent the true racial skull form but merely an artificial condition, due to a restrictive method of clothing babies which is abandoned in the free air of the great American Republic. The children who pass their early infancy in the United States lie as it pleases them and their heads attain a natural length, which shows itself in the decrease of the cranial index.
This explanation is carefully considered by Boaz, but he gives many reasons for not accepting it. Evidence is also brought forward to show that the apparent change is not merely due to a chanee in the type of Hebrew immigrant. It is also noted that the relative length of the skulls of Hebrews appears to increase with the length of time spent by their mothers in America before their birth. In estimating the reliability of these and other results obtained, it must be borne in mind that the numbers dealt with are rather small, and it has thus been often necessary to compare or class together measurements and indexes which, in their original form, could not be fairlv compared and grouped together. This necessity has involved the application of rather elaborate corrections to the crude data-a process which sometimes introduces an element of doubt as to the meaning of the conclusions arrived at.
EDGAR SCHUSTER.

