-370 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Reports.
FEEBLE-MINDED IN ONTARIO. FOURTEENTH REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDING OCTOBER 31ST, 1919.
THIS report, as usual, is of a general and discursive nature, andl contains much readable matter. It is evident in spite of the widespreal scientific initerest in the diagnosis, cause and treatment of inental deficienev, resulting in the establishment of many psychiatric clinics, that the actual inistitutional accommodation for defectives in Canada falls far short of what has already been provided in England.
A Royal Commission on the care and control of meintally defective and feebleminded persons sat in 1918-1919, and the final report by the Conmmissioner, MIr. Justice Hodgins, was presented on October 18th, 1919. This report containis a specially interesting section dealing with the work of the Division of Neuropsvehiatry in the United States Army and the American Expeditioniary Force.
In discussing the prevention of mental defect a significant quotation is given from Dr. Helen Y. Campbell, Chief Medical Officer of the Infants Department, Bradford, England, as follows:-" We are also confronted with the problem of the actually mentally deficient, of the more or less feeble-minded, and of the deranged, epileptic, or chronically alcoholic or otherwise mentally abnormal mother. The bad 'mothering' of these cases is quite unimproveable at an infant welfare centre, and a very definite if not relatively very large percentage of our infants are sufferinga severely as a result of dependence upon such 'mothering'."
It may be incidentally remarked that if infant welfare centres succeed in checking the high mortality which now exists amongst the offspring of such parents, they will be doing a serious disservice to the rest of the community, for such children almost invariably grow up a menace to the state even when not actually certifiable as mentally defective.
A good deal of study has been given in Canada and America to the association
of immorality, mental defect and venereal disease. The Director of Social Hygienle Work in Michigan reports that 75 per cent. of the prostitute class is infected with
some form of venereal disease, and that 75 per cent. of the infected are not normal mentally. That the provision for these is quite inadequate she instances the fact that "we have 37 totally feeble-minded venereal prostitutes, some of them imbecile, who cannot be interned in Lapeer, and consequently will have to be returned to society." Refuges for women report the numbers of girls from 14-21 years of age who seek their shelter, who, although superficially normal are either defective or entirely lacking in moral sense. This unstable border-line class presents one of our most difficult problems in England.
A large amount of mental survey work has been done in the various provinces, and the extent of the defect (liscovered may be gathered from the figures froni Indiana, where it has been estimated that there are 56,718 defectives, classified as follows:-
In the community, not in need of institution care .. .. . 21 ,604. In the community, in need of institutional care .. .. . 18,362. Having care in school for Feeble-minded youth .. .. .. 1,409. Having care in other public institutions (poor asylums, orphan
homes, prisons) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2,909.
Dr. Heleni AMacMurchy is to be congratulated upom her wide survey and upon the interesting manner in which she presents it.
Annual Reports of the Committee of the Manchester and Salford Sanitary Association of the Ladies' Public Health Society for 1918 and 1919.
THIS report is evidence of the very enlightened and practical sense of citizenship
which exists in Manchester and Salford. At the Annual MIeeting on July 2nd, 1920, an address was delivered by AMajor Darwin on "Eugenics-the Science of
improving the racial qualities of future generations," and an original address, with lantern views, by Professor J. B. Cohen, of Leeds University, on the "Prevention of air pollution." Both of these lectures are reproduced in the appendix of the report.
E.I.C.

RECENT AND PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

371

Proceedings of the International Conference of Women Physicians. Vol. 1. Conservation of Health of Women in Marriage. The Wonman's Press, 600, Lexington Avenue, New York. Pp. 183.
THIS sixth volume of the Proceedings of the International Conference of Women Physicians contains the reports of the speeches and papers of some sixteen women physicians and of the discussions founded thereon. It is of importance to the members of the Eugenics Society because all these papers and addresses relate to the conservation of the health of women in marriage. Naturally the speeches anid papers are of unequal value, but they all deserve to be read because they furnish us with facts and with opinions founded on the laws, social customs, problems, and the attemps at answering the problems of Eugenics in may different countries. Among these countries are Holland, Norway, France, Sweden, Italy, South America, the United States, Scotland and England.
The first paper reported is one by Dr. Ada Potter, entitled "Voluntary Parenthood in Holland." This little country has warmly taken up the idea that lno child should be born unless its existence is sincerely (lesired by both parents. Hence, of course, follows the belief that voluntary limitation of the size of a family is desirable, although Dr. Potter tells us that criminal abortion is not approve(d of and that Ino physician has a right to interfere with the life of the child when it is once conceived. Probably all Christian nations are agreed that infanticide and criminal abortion are illegal and sinful, but there is no agreement on the question of the desirability of preventive conception.
Other members of the Congress deal with the protection of healthv marriage
by the exchange of certificates of health as proposed in Norway and already existing1
in some of the States of America.
Dr. Anna Mioutet discussed illegitimacy in France and Dr. Dagny Banig deals with the same trouble as it presents itself in Norway.
The prevention of the venereal diseases by means of the "packet svstemi'i -and by immediate self disinfection is discussed by Dr. E. H. Hooker, Dr. Mlary
Gordon, Dr. Giboulot, and others. In this group the most valuable paper is that contributed by Dr. Mary Gordon: it is throughout of a high moral tone, and she
justly points out that neither prophylaxis nor self disinfection can secure freedoml from venereal disease, also that the education of the public anld the raising of the moral and spiritual tone of the nation are the only efficient safeguards of healthv marriage and the only guaranitee that this, and all succeedinig generations shall be
eugenic in the best sense of the word. M. S.

"TIIE STATE AND SEXUAL MORALITY," beinig the Report of the Conmmittee of Inquiry into Sexual 1lorality George Allen & Unwiin, Ltd., 1920.
Price is. 6d. net. Pp. 77 .
THIS Report embodies the findings of twenty-six men anid womeni on Venereal Diseases, Protection of Mlinors, Age of Consent, Youthful Offenders, Industrial and Reformatory Schools, Crimes of Violence or Fraud, Public Indecency, Solicitation, etc., with a statement of the laws framed to regulate these various matters, alnd the views of the Members of the Committee of Enquiry on the laws as they at present exist.
The book is clearly expressed, up-to-date, and shows a real anXiety to improve public morality and public health without the introduction of unjust and oniesided legislation, and without resorting to doubtful methods of preventing venereal disease.
AIn excellent index makes this little work really useful as a book of refereilec. H.A.MI.

American Journsal of Physical Anthropology, Vo. III., No. 3. STUDY OF ANCIENT EGYPTIAN TEETH, by Sir Armand Ruffer. Studies of the incidence of disease in ancient times are of necessity rare though this has not prevented many authors from asserting that many familiar troubles, particularly those connected with the teeth, are very largly modern phenomena. It is thus of peculiar interest to find that the late Sir Armand Ruffer, whose death was so great a Joss both to England and to Egypt, had completed a study of the incidence of

372 EUGEANICS REVIEWv.
dental disease in Ancient Egypt before he fell a victim to an enemy submarinein the Mediterranean. Briefly summarising his conclusions, he found that:-
(1) anomalies in the position, structure and number of teeth were rare and
did not seem to become more common as modern times were approached;
(2) attrition was very marked and probably played a considerable part in favouring the entrance of the micro-organisms of suppuration;
(3) dental caries occurred at all periods of Egyptian history, but seem tohave been less frequent in predynastic times;
(4) alveolar and perialveolar abscesses were common at all times; (5) chronic suppurative periodontitis was a common disease in ancient Egypt; (6) no syphilitic or rachitic teeth have been found; (7) there is no evidence of the use of the toothbrush; (8) dentists did not interfere operatively in many if in any cases.
A .M .C .S. Eu gLnique, Vol. II. No. 6. This numnber coIntainis among other items of interest the report of an address by AM. Popillault oni the inheritance of moral characteristics. The address was
followed by a discussion in which IM.NMi -arch, Houssay and others took part. The lecturer based his remarks on the work of the late Dr. Goring and, while recognising the great value of his memoir, offered certain criticisms as to his method of classifying psychological characters, which criticism met with approval fronm most of thesubsequenit speakers.
Attention is also drawn to a paper by MIerzbacher, which was published in 1909 and which has apparently escaped the notice which it should have received. Details of several family histories were given bv Merzbacher in which various defects re-appeared generation after generation, in particular a certain form of nervous disease which was correlated with atrophy of the-white matter of the brain, anid a form of muscular atrophy. These and other defects were almost confined to the male miiembers of the families in question, thus suggesting some form of sex-linked inheritance.
A.M.C-S. IIinidu Message 11. xi. 1920. SOCIAL RECONSTRUCTION IN INDIA. We continue to receive a weekly copy of theIIindul Message, but regret that our RE:VIEW, which is presumably sent in exchange, should have so far exercised no apparent educating influence upon the editor 1 In this leading article he contrasts the descent of Hindus from the body and limbs of Purusha (God), with that of the so-called civilised western peoples "from one or more tribe of savage or semi-savage ancestors and even to the anthropoid apes of the Catarrhine period, if we are to believe in the theories of Darwin and other biologists." The Darwinian theory he sums up as foollws:- "Marry, multiply, let the strongest live and the weakest die-that is Darwin's enunciation of the gospel of evolution-of the struggle amongst the nations for mutual exploitation and destruction. This blood-thirsty, fanatical, and irrational and intolerant creed of race ascendancy can never bring peace or joy upon this planet to the races of mankinid." The widespread ignorance and deliberate misrepresentation existing in the world to-day must make eugenicists despair.
E.I.C.
Parents' Review, December, 1920. HEREDITY, by Ethel Somers (pp. 916-919). We welcome a little general introductory article on this subject in the Parents' Reviezw, which deals as a rule with educational and environmental topics. Every parent has a natural interest in the likenesses and differences between parents and children, and the study of heredity should inevitably lead to the appreciation of the eugenic ideal, the aims and end of the study being, according to the writer, "the making and maintaining of the largest possible number of the finest possible people."
E.I.C.
Revue de l'Institut de Sociologie, Vol. II., Jan., 1921. LEL MIECANISME DE L 'HEREDITE, by L. Verlaine. In this article the author criticises the manner in which the problem of inheritance is generally approached by biologists. MIany of his criticisms are suggestive and worthy of attention

RECENT AND PERIODICAL LlTERATUTRE.

373

though a fairly conielusive reply could be maade to the points to which he appears
to attach most importanice, and in particular to his criticismis of the distinctioln drawni between variations re-appearing in successive generationis under the samiie stimulus and those which re-appear without ainy such stinmulus. The article is to be followed by onie dealinig with the application of the study of inheritanlce to sociology, which should be of interest to eugenists.
A.M.C-S. Science Progress, Vol. 59, Jan., 1921.
THE INHIERITANCE OF ACQUIRED CHARACTERS, by Professor EA,. NV. MacBride . Reference was made in the last number of this REVIEW to the recent experimeents of Alessrs. Guyer and Smith. Professor MIacBride describes their experiments anid also at rather greater length the famous experiments of Kamnmerer. It will be remembered that Kammerer's work has been severely criticised, notably by AMr. Bateson. Kammerer has, however, lately imiade a further conitribution to the problem, and this in Professor AMacBride's view considerably strengthens his case. Professor MacBride in fact concludes by sayiing that " a very stroing prima, facie case for the inheritability of acquired characters has beeil made out, aind that no serious efforts have yet beeni made to combat the evidence."
AM..C-S.

