ISABELLA LE1TCH
O.B.E., M.A., D.Sc., Commonwealth Bureau of Animal Nutrition, Rowett Research Institute, Bucksburn, Aberdeen
Growth, Heredity and Nutrition*

Animal Breeding
IT IS NOT at all clear to me whether Eugenics, like animal breeding, should be regarded more as a science or as an art; nor
do I know whether its aims include selective breeding to "improve" the human population as the stock breeder has improved farm animals. But, whether science or art, if there is to be practical application of rules or ideals, the first need is for criteria of merit. In animal breeding the desideratum is a product or performance: speed in the racehorse, milk in the cow. And what makes selection for any such performance possible is that it should be known, by experience, to be associated with some bodily character, or group of characters. In the cow for instance the girth of the "barrel" and shape of the udder are important "points". But conformation is not always a good guide. It is true that within recent years we appear to be becoming a little less dependent on morphological characters. A search is being made for biochemical characters which can be measured and used instead. In the human population many biochemical peculiarities, which are gene transmitted, have been recognised, but most of them are criteria of abnormalities, of disorders, not of merit, and so are of negative value only.
Again, within recent years, the animal breeder has sought to make good some of the shortcomings of conformation as a guide to potential performance by invoking the aid of the statistician. But the statistician's measurements of heritability, say of milk yield, have not added much to the practical outcome of rule of thumb selection in the traditional manner.
Not only so, but there is always the unknown and incalculable danger from association of
* Part I of a paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on May 20th, 1959.

genes, which may make hay of the best planned breeding programme. One of the main problems of dairy husbandry just now is the short herd life of the dairy cow. In many herds sterility is the rule after only three, or at most five, calves have been produced, instead of anything from ten to fifteen in the original stock. No satisfactory explanation in terms of faulty diet or hygiene has been found and it seems at least possible that breeding for high milk yield on the basis of parental performance and filial conformation has meant also breeding for a short productive life. We should perhaps be cautious about the use of physical criteria to predict what are complicated physiological processes.
The Influence of Environment That is not all. Even if a given set of physical characters is a reliable indication of the
presence of a desired set of "performance"'
genes, the expression of genetic potential is greatly influenced by environment, and in particular nutrition, both in plants and animals. The alpine dandelion, which was described as a separate species until someone thought of transplanting it to the valley, the rachitic child, the foetal malformations that result from dietary deficiency or excess, or from infection with rubella during certain sensitive stages of foetal development, these and many other illustrations show how the gene itself depends on correct nutrition for its proper expression.
Human Diet and Health For more than twenty years Dr. Thomson and I, first as disciples of Lord Boyd Orr and later with the collaboration of several colleagues whose names appear in the list of references
below, have been much occupied with questions of human diet and health. Whether the picture

Igs THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1959, 51, 3.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is of the broad differences between rich pro- growth to the final correct adult proportions of

ductive countries and the under-developed the body. You will remember the text-book

regions, or between social classes in this or any drawing of the proportions of the human body

other country, there is always a gradient with from the two-month-old foetus to the adult.

wealth in quantity and quality of diet associated Arrest of growth at any stage must mean rela-

with parallel gradients in rate of growth and tively long torso and short legs; conversely,

adult stature, physical performance (when com- completed growth means long legs and there

parable performances can be measured), mental can be no doubt that the long-legged form is

ability and resistance to disease. When we that idealised in art and romantic writings. It

began our studies there was a sufficiently large is also that which, in general, in the statistical

gradient in quantity and quality of diet in this and population sense, connotes both health and

country to be responsible, on our standards for ability. Curiously enough we hear more often

nutrient requirements, for considerable differ- of "arrested development" in the psychological

ences in growth and health, and our standards field than in the anthopometric.

were, I think, abundantly confirmed by the The concept, then, is of a sort of develop-

remedial effect of war-time rationing which, if mental and physiological Elan vital, not at all

it did not eliminate, at least greatly reduced the in the sense in which Bergson used that term in

differences of diet with social class. Our study his Creative Evolution, but in a strictly onto-

of the secular change in rate of growth of genetic sense. There is a developmental tide i

school children (Boyne, Aitken and Leitch, the affairs of man... . But such a concept has

1957) shows the change that has accompanied no place among the accepted criteria of "fit-

improved diet over the last thirty years.

ness". In the strictly Darwinian sense, as I see

That picture, which recurs within all popula- it and as it has been recently described by

tions and when populations are compared, Lerner, "Natural selection is a term serving to

poses two questions. To what extent, if at all, say that some genotypes leave more offspring

is the correlation of good diet with good than others," or "The individuals who have

growth, good health and high intelligence due more offspring are fitter in the Darwinian

to some linkage of genes for height, health and sense." In the human population we are faced

high mental attainment, or to the independent with the complication of differential birth rates,

effects of better diet, better hygiene and better those who possess merit in growth and develop-

education, which are associated in our social ment on the whole leaving fewer offspring than

inheritance, on independent genes for height, others. But then number may be a poor

health and brain? That is to say, is the inheri- criterion of desirable properties in any popula-

tance social, in three linked parts, or genetic tion.

in three linked systems?

Lerner has described the biological phen-

Physical Development

omena of primary interest to geneticists as arranged on three planes: the physico-chemical

Contemplating that array of correlated virtues or intracellular; the phenotypic or individual,

in the human population, and putting alongside and finally "the properties of groups, including

it such exceedingly mundane facts as that the means and variances of different metric traits

pig which is well-grown at weaning will be a and attributes which bind individuals in time

superior pig all its life and on into bacon and and space . . . the population level." It is there

ham, we arrived at a concept of a growth and in respect of the Darwinian criterion of fit-

potential which, if fufilled, connotes fulfilment ness, of capacity to leave offspring, that the

of the development of other characters. In Baird school has, all unwitting, entered the

terms of that concept it is not necessarily height, genetic field. Dr. Thomson has some peculiar

per se that is of merit but the completion of findings to show you.

iS6

