A. E. MOURANT
M.A., D.Phil., D.M., M.R.C.P.
Bl00d Groups in the Study of Human Populations

htroduction
W HEN A EUGENIST turns to the study of genetics I suppose that he thinks in terms mainly of those characters
which can be described as advantageous or disadvantageous to the individual or to the human race. Unfortunately for the geneticists, but perhaps fortunately for the race, goodness, cleverness, good health and beauty are not simple genetical characters. In so far as they are genetically determined at all, each of them is the resultant effect ofa very large number of different genes acting together. The same is true of all those characters of shape, size and colour by which we recognize and classify human beings. Almost the only characters of direct and obvious interest to the eugenist which are genetically simple are the congenital diseases, or at any rate the majority of them, and these fortunately are relatively rare.
The blood groups are genetically very simple, in this resembling congenital diseases, and the rules by which they are inherited have in nearly all cases been very fully worked out; they possess, moreover, the advantage that, the genotype having been determined once for all at the moment of conception, the adult phenotype develops almost completely by the time of birth and quite fully by the age of about one year, and thereafter remains fixed for life. A year or two ago one could have made this statement quite categorically, but it is now known that, in a few individuals in every hundred thousand or every million, the ABO blood-group phenotype, though not, of course, the genotype, is modified by disease. This is, of course, quite unimportant
* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on November 18th, 1959.

in population studies, however important it may be from a medical point of view; the change moreover, is not one which would deceive a competent serologist who was aware of the
possibility. Nevertheless, the blood groups cannot be
regarded simply as neutral markers like labels attached to individuals or populations from the outside. As we shall see later, the blood groups of individuals do, though to a minor degree, affect their health and fitness, and so these characters are involved in the processes of natural selection and of evolution. However, as a first approximation, we can regard the frequencies of the blood groups in a population as remaining unchanged from one generation to the next; so that they are, in fact, the most useful of all markers in studies involving ancestral relationships between populations, and calculations of the proportions in which the original components have entered into a hybrid race.
Blood Group Testing When I wrote the notes for this lecture I intended to describe very briefly how blood groups were determined. Having seen how many of my blood-grouping colleagues have come to support me by their presence, I feel somewhat embarrassed at this. Nevertheless, I feel sure that there are some of you who have not done any blood grouping, so I shall describe very briefly how the tests are done, in order to give some idea of what I am talking about when I refer to someone as being, for instance, group MN, or Rh-positive.
As you know, the blood consists of a great many components, of which the most abundant are the red corpuscles or red cells, which are microscopic reddish-coloured discs, and the

7 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1960, 52, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

almost clear fluid in which they are suspended, anything from two to perhaps a dozen distinct

the plasma. Although the red cells are so minute, genes.

being only 1/3,500 in. in diameter, each never- It would take me far too long to describe the

theless contains many millions of chemical genetics of each of the blood-group systems, but

molecules, and this gives considerable scope for I must say a little more about the three systems

the development of a variety of those particular with which we are mainly concerned in popula-

molecules which determine the blood groups. tion and anthropological studies. First of all,

These chemically very complex substances, the ABO system: as many of you know, there

known as antigens, are situated on the outer are four main blood groups, 0, A, B and AB.

skin of the cell, and something like sixty different These are the products of three different kinds

blood group antigens are known, of which any of allelomorphic genes, 0, A and B; each

one individual has perhaps a dozen or twenty. individual will, of course, have two such genes,

Corresponding to each of the known antigens alike or different, one received from each parent.

is a particular reactive substance (an antibody) This gives a possibility of six different genotypes,

which is contained in suitable testing fluids. 00, AA, AO, BB, BO and AB. The reason why

These fluids usually consist of serum obtained there are only four blood groups, or distinguish-

from human beings or animals, or in certain able phenotypes, is that AA and AO are indistin-

cases of extracts of plants, but we shall for the guishable, corresponding to group A, as are BB

moment treat them as empirical testing reagents and BO, corresponding to group B. The other

without worrying about their origin. If a two genotypes, 00 and AB, correspond, of

particular sample of red cells contains the antigen course, to blood groups 0 and AB respectively.

which corresponds to a given testing fluid, then, Thus, when we have determined the blood

when the fluid is added to the cells, the latter, group of an individual, there may still be some

instead of remaining separate, alter their doubt as to the genotype. However, if we test a

surface properties and stick to one another to sufficiently large number of persons we can

form clumps. The essential blood-grouping test calculate the frequency of the three genes in the

thus consists in adding separate portions of each population as a whole. We do, in fact, frequently

blood sample to a variety of these testing fluids, find it convenient to express the composition of

and seeing whether the red cells go together in a population not in terms of the blood groups,

clumps.

or phenotypes, but in terms of the genes.

One reason for doing this is that it reduces

The Genetics of the Blood Groups

the number of mathematical variables. In the

By carrying out such studies on the red cells of enormous numbers of human beings-for instance, there are in the literature the published results of over 6,000,000 ABO blood-grouping tests-and by carrying out such tests on members of known families, it has been possible to determine the way in which each of these antigens, or rather, the ability to make it, is inherited. It has thus been found, by testing many thousands of

case of the ABO system the frequencies of four
blood groups are reduced to those of three genes; moreover, the total frequencies of the latter add up to 100 per cent so that if you know the frequencies of A and B you can tell that of 0, and there are thus really only two independent variables; if you plot on a graph the percentages of gene A in one direction, and those of gene B in the direction at right angles to it, the composition of any population can be expressed com-

families, some for one or two antigens and some pletely by means of a single point. As you will

for large numbers of them, that these substances see later, we frequently represent and compare

are the product of genes; in general one may say series of populations by means of graphs of this

that each antigen is determined by a single gene. sort.

The same family studies have shown that these The Rh or Rhesus system is much more

genes fall into eleven major independent geneti- complex. I will not, however, weary you with

cal systems which we refer to as the blood-group its full, and indeed unfathomed, complexities,

systems. Within each system you may have nor with the interminable controversies that have

8

BLOOD GROUPS IN THE STUDY OF HUMAN POPULATIONS

been waged over them. I shall merely try to set out a relatively simple scheme which is widely accepted as being a fair approximation to the true state of affairs. Whereas the ABO groups are the
expression simply of one pair of genes at corres-
ponding loci on one pair of chromosomes, the
Rh groups may be regarded as being due to a
pair of sets of genes, each set occupying three
closely adjacent loci on a chromosome, the loci being occupied respectively by gene D or d, by C or c, and by E or e. The linked sets of genes are represented by sets of symbols such as CDe
cDe, cde, but for some purposes it is useful to
express them in a sort of shorthand (which actually has priority to the three-gene system); the short symbols for the three examples just
given are: R1, Ro and r, respectively. Persons
who have at least one D gene are known as Rh-positive; those with two d genes as Rhnegative.
It is now known that the scheme just described is an over-simplification: there are certainly more than two possible allelomorphic genes for each locus (though each individual can have only two); there appear to be more loci than three; and each of the supposed simple genes may itself be complex; however, for most purposes the simple hypothesis of three adjacent loci is adequate. Because the genes on a single chromosome are so close together they are inherited en bloc. It is thought that if you were able to study many thousands of individuals from selected matings, as you can with mice, then, once in several thousand families, you would probably find that the process of crossing over had taken place, and that a block of genes
present in a parent had not been passed on in-
tact to a child. However, with the limited numbers of human families available for testing,
no convincing exceptions have been found to the rule that each block is passed on intact. With the exception of little d, which is rather mysterious, each of the genes corresponds to an antigen, and each of the latter to an antibody present in a testing fluid, so that instead of a single reaction of a single chemical substance being passed on from generation to generation as with the ABO system, in the Rh system it is a set of chemical compounds, or a set of reactions, which is passed on.

The MN system is genetically similar in plan to the Rh; here there are two main closely linked loci, one occupied by gene M or N, the other by S or s. Again as with Rh, the complexity is certainly greater than is expressed by this simplified scheme. There are other allelomorphic genes that can be present at each of these two loci; there are certainly more than two locipossibly five or more-and again the supposed genes may themselves be complex. For to-night, however, we shall keep to the simplified scheme.
There are eleven major blood-group systems; we have so far considered three. In most of the remaining cases the genetics are considerably simpler than in the ones I have described, but as each system is studied more and more closely, unsuspected complexities tend to appear.
Blood Groups and Anthropology
I want to turn now to the application of these genes, considered as markers, to a variety of populations. When we study the distribution of the genes of the ABO, Rh and MN systems throughout the world, we find that the latter can be divided into seven or eight fairly distinct regions corresponding reasonably closely to the regions into which most physical anthropologists would divide it; within each of these areas there are relatively small variations in the frequencies of the genes of most of the bloodgroup systems, whereas between the areas there are frequently very much bigger differences. This is true, in particular, of the Rh and MN systems; but in the case of the ABO system, although the average frequencies are quite characteristic for each major area, there are
very wide variations in frequency within each of the areas, even down to quite significant differ-
ences between adjacent counties in this country. I have suggested, and I shall revert to this
suggestion later, that the reason for this is that the ABO blood groups are subject to a much more rapid variation than the others by means of natural selection in relation to features of the environment. It is probable that the Rh and MN blood groups also are subject to natural selection, but, if so, at a much slower rate, so that the inter-marriage which takes place between people from different parts of Western Europe, for example, is sufficient to keep Rh and MN

9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

FREOIJE

".~.~~~~*lb--

.EM60 ~ ~ 96

55-6~0 ~ ~~~~*

*~

F

~,'-

73-5-30 ao-AI~C ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

-FF

FF.

FFFF

* I F~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1 ".

E~~

*4580 *

~~~FIGfUREF

F

F F ,F F F FF

DISTRBUTIN OFBLOO GROU GENE, FF,FIN'EUROPEIFF

FFFF

blood-group frequencies uniform over the whole area, whereas there are wide variations in Western Europe in the frequencies of the
ABO blood groups.
Now I want to turn to a map of Europe (Figure 1). This shows the frequencies of the 0 blood-
group gene throughout the region. Most of the data were obtained from records of the blood transfusion services in the various countries. The point to which I want to draw your attention is the high frequency of the blood-group gene 0 in North-Western Europe, and particularly in the so-called Celtic countries of Scotland and Ireland. Incidentally also in North Wales, as shown by Dr. Morgan Watkin, the Welshspeaking people taken by themselves have a high frequency of group 0, but this scarcely

shows on the map, where data for the total population have been used.
The surprising thing is that the Icelanders have similar blood group frequencies to the Scots and Irish, and different ones from those found in most of modern Scandinavia, although the
sagas tell us that the Vikings who colonized Iceland went from Scandinavia. There are various suggested reasons for this difference between Iceland and Scandinavia. From what we know of the rate of natural selection, it is extremely unlikely that a population like the present one of Southern Scandinavia would have altered in 800 or 900 years to what we now find in Iceland. One suggestion is that the original Icelanders came mainly from the British Isles, and only a ruling class, who wrote

I0

BLOOD GROUPS IN THE STUDY OF HUMAN POPULATIONS 34 - .
,GEO 30- RO

z
1N IX 25
w0~~~~~~~AH
w z w
20-

OK

15

6 10

20

B GENE PERCENTAGES

FIGURE 2

THE A AND B GENE PERCENTAGES OF JEWS AND NON-JEWS IN EUROPE

A Austria

H Hungary

P Poland

B Byelorussia

J Jugoslavia

Ro Romania

C Czechoslovakia K Karaites

Ru Russia

GEO Georgia

L Lithuania

U Ukraine

GER Germany

N Netherlands

the sagas, came from Scandinavia. The most likely explanation, however, is that the Icelanders did indeed travel mainly from Scandinavia, but that the race which then lived on the coasts of Scandinavia was very similar to that found in Scotland and Ireland, and that the majority of present-day Scandinavians are descendants of more recent immigrants into the peninsula. We have some interesting evidence in support of this. We have known for a fairly long time that there was a rather high frequency of Group 0 on the west coast of Norway, and very recently it has been found that there are enclaves in Sweden with blood-group frequencies quite as extreme as those found in Iceland.

We shall next consider some people of a rather special kind, namely, the Jews. In the diagram
(Figure 2) there have been plotted for a number
of different populations, in the manner already described, the percentages of the A and B genes. Each of the lines on the diagram refers to a
particular country of Europe: the end marked by a heavy black dot represents the Jewish population, and the other end of the line the non-Jews. We have very little information about the Jewish communities in Western Europe, so that most of the lines refer to Eastern Europe.
The points on this diagram represent mainly pre-war observations. Although the pre-war Jewish population of each of these countries

II

THE EUGENICS REVIEW 34 -

30

LziJ

0
gr

25

LLI

a-

LiJ z

<D 1

<20-

TUNISIA
IALERIA

15
6 10 15 20 22
B GENE PERCENTAGES
FIGURE 3
THE A AND B GENE PERCENTAGES OF JEWS AND NON-JEWS IN NORTH AFRICA

differed appreciably in average composition from the non-Jews, the average over the whole
of Eastern Europe was about the same for Jews as for non-Jews, so it might be thought that there was no essential difference in blood-group frequencies and racial composition between the Jews of Eastern Europe and non-Jews. However,
when the Rh groups of European Jews are studied (and unfortunately the only adequate
data we have are from Jews who migrated to Canada), it is found that, while the Jews from Eastern Europe have much the same ABO blood-group frequencies as Eastern Europeans in general, their Rh groups differ quite considerably from those of the non-Jews. The Jews have a much lower frequency of Rh negatives and a higher frequency of CDe (R1), which would fit in with a population derived from the Eastern Mediterranean area.

While the diagram for Europe looks rather confused, that for North Africa (Figure 3) is much simpler and easier to understand. Here we see that the Jews in those North African countries for which we have adequate data represent a fairly homogeneous population.
Similarly the non-Jews (Arabs in this case) are also relatively homogeneous but differ quite
systematically from the Jews. Turning to quite another part of the world,
namely the Pacific area, I am sure most of you have read the book by Thor Heyerdahl in which he claimed that the Polynesians came from South America. He has subsequently written another book in which he goes into more
detail, and now claims that they came in part from South America and in part from what is now Western Canada. A great many anthropologists have strongly criticized his views, but

12

BLOOD GROUPS IN THE STUDY OF HUMAN POPULATIONS
z~~~~~~~~9 -&- --

PFIIEtMTAE SECE:

*S -55 15 -20

40 -4
ED10- 5

E5-4

0 30 Ma

-5-0 E3 S

E2'3

0Dg

FIGURE 4 DISTRIBUTION OF BLOOD- GROUP GENE A IN THE ABORIGINAL POPULATIONS OF THE WORLD

it is interesting to see what light the blood groups throw on his theories. First of all, as
regards ABO blood groups (Figure 4), the
Polynesians in general are very high in blood
group A and, unlike the Micronesians and
Melanesians, they are almost completely lacking in group B: in both these respects they resemble the Indians of Western Canada. But the ABO blood groups in general show such wide varia-
tions within small areas that one cannot lay too
much stress on deductions from them. However, when we come to study the Rh
groups and the distribution of the Rh gene E (Figure 5) I think we are on somewhat firmer ground. Here you will see that the highest frequencies of the E gene in the world are those found in American Indians generally, particularly in Western Canada, and also, incidentally, in the Eskimos. The only other peoples who have
similar E frequencies anywhere in the world are Polynesians, particularly the Maoris. One, of course, classifies the Polynesians with the American Indians in the broad group of Mongolians or Mongoloids, but this also includes

the Chinese, the Japanese, and a great many other peoples in Eastern Asia who mostly have quite low frequencies of the E gene. Actually the Japanese have rather high frequencies of E, but they also have a high incidence of B, which is lacking in American Indians and Polynesians.
Though I am far from being convinced that the Polynesians came from America (in fact, I think it is rather unlikely) I do feel that the Polynesians, from the blood group evidence, are more closely related to the American Indians than is either race to any other race' in the Pacific area which has been adequately studied from the blood group point of view. We may still find, when work is done in Eastern Siberia, some evidence of a people from which they both arose, but that is speculation. I am happy to say that anthropological blood group work is now starting up in Russia again, and a certain amount of work has been done in Eastern Siberia, so that we may hope for important information on these points in the next few years.
I now want to turn to some of the differences between major races, and especially between
I3

!~~~~~~~~THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I X~~~~~~~~~~~I * .S
. 9.. @
~ ....

....

unar.l0PERCENTAGE FREQUENCIES:

ww 30

03040- S0

4 0-40

*

E 15-20

10 -15 E

FIGURE 5 APPROXIMATE DISTRIBUTION OF THE RH BLOOD-GROUP GENE E IN THE ABORIGINAL POPULATIONS
OF THE WORLD

Europeans and Africans, or rather, between
Caucasoids and Negroids. Most of the basic investigations leading to our present knowledge
of the blood groups have been carried out in Europe and North America using blood samples from persons of European origin. In such work blood groups cannot be recognized as such unless there are differences between individuals within the population supplying the specimens. It follows that most of the recognized bloodgroup systems involve differences within European populations, and that the antigens and genes discovered in this work mostly have substantial frequencies in such populations. More recently investigations have been extended to people of other races. The Japanese have for many years been active blood group workers and have, of course, investigated mainly persons of their own race, but in Europe and America a great deal of work has now been done on the blood of persons of African origin, and it has been found that there are a great many blood group antigens which are peculiar to Africans, or which have a much higher frequency in Africans than in Europeans or Mongoloids.

There are several variants in the Rh system that
behave in this way, and several in the MN system. There is a third allele in the so-called Duffy blood-group system: there are only two alleles known in Europeans, but what appears to be a third allele is quite common in Africans. There is also a separate blood-group system, the Js system, where the only recognizable antigen is found almost exclusively in Africans. In contrast to this, there is only one blood group antigen, the Diego antigen, known to be a peculiar to Mongoloid peoples.
I think that one reason for the apparent divergence of the Africans is that such a lot of
work has recently been done on American Negroes in America and on African Negroes in this country, but this can be only a small part of the complete explanation. It does appear as though the African races generally must have been rather long separated, genetically speaking, from the peoples of the rest of the world, and
undergone their own evolution with respect to blood-group antigens.
It may be asked why you do not find the same
sort of thing in Australia, since Australia is also

14

BLOOD GROUPS IN THE STUDY OF HUMAN POPULATIONS

supposed to have been genetically and physically Africans and Europeans. I think a great deal

separated from the rest of the world for a very more critical genetical work ought to be done

long time. One explanation of this may be that on this subject. The circumstances under which

the aboriginal population of Australia is, and Professor Gates's work had to be done in

always has been, very much smaller than that of Australia were by no means as conducive to

Africa. This will have two effects: firstly, that critical work as those under which Dr. Ains-

it is harder to get blood samples of Australians worth Harrison has been able to carry out in-

than of Africans, so that considerably less vestigations on Negro-European crosses in

research has been done on them. Secondly, Liverpool, from which he made the very

because of the small population there will have interesting deductions which he described to

been much less scope for mutation. Moreover, this Society about three years ago.* In view of

while Africans are fairly sharply cut off from the the importance of the subject it is to be hoped

rest of mankind, or were until comparatively that similar work will be done in Australia.

recently, by the Sahara Desert, it seems that One could go on describing all sorts of fascina-

Africans within Africa have always been pretty ting variations in blood-group frequencies, and

mobile; therefore, not only will one have had the deductions to be made from them, but

relatively large numbers of mutations because I want to turn now to rather more general topics

of the big population; but, because of the and see what we can deduce of a more general

mobility of the Africans, any of these mutations biological nature from the distribution of the

which was favoured by natural selection in the blood groups. I want to remind you of what I

African environment will have had a chance to said about the ABO blood groups and the Rh

spread to the whole population of Africa south and MN groups, namely that you get much more

of the Sahara, and that is what we rather find: rapid variation of ABO frequencies within a

those genes which are almost completely con- major region than of Rh and MN, and I sug-

fined to Africans are, in fact, found pretty well gested this was because the ABO blood groups

in every part of Africa, other than the extreme are subject to a higher degree of natural selec-

north. Incidentally, several of these genes are, in tion. It might be suggested that the reason is

fact, found to a very limited extent in this really that many more people have been tested

country, even in perfectly blond, blue-eyed for ABO, and therefore that the variations are

people, and it may well be that such people, as more apparent than real. Such a false appearance

well as all the rest of us, carry genes which came of uniformity might apply to the Duffy or Kidd

out of Africa in the last 2,000 years. Ultimately, groups, where relatively few tests have been

of course, all our ancestors probably came from done, but I think that we now have sufficient

Africa.

data for Rh and MN to be sure that there really

The other suggestion is one made recently is a high degree of uniformity in Western

by Professor Ruggles Gates in a talk which he Europe, a much greater uniformity than in the

gave at the Royal Anthropological Institute. case of the ABO groups.

He suggests the Australian aborigines are closely related to Europeans, and his evidence is that Blood Groups and Diseases

whereas in hybrid populations of European Sir Ronald Fisher and Dr. E. B. Ford have for

and African origin there is little or no visible many years been suggesting that the blood-

segregation of the genes for skin colour, that is group genes are subject, like all other genes, to

to say you very rarely get families consisting of natural selection, and that the present distribu-

some almost pure white and some almost black tion which we find is a product of that process.

children from one pair of parents, you do get Dr. Ford in particular, for about twenty years,

something approaching this in Australians; he has been urging those in a position to do so to

therefore suggests that the number of colour investigate the frequencies of the various blood

genes by which Australian aborigines differ groups not only in the normal healthy populafrom Europeans is very much smaller than the tion, but also in people suffering from a variety

number involved in the difference between * THE EUGENICS REVIEW, 1957, 49, 73.

Isr

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of diseases, and for the whole of this time (at evidence is desirable. The need for such caution

least twenty years) some people have been trying is illustrated by a number of cases where very

to do that. Unfortunately they have mostly promising results for a particular disease at one

been people working in single hospitals who centre or for one period have failed to be con-

have taken fifty or 100 cases of a particular firmed at a different centre, or for a subsequent

disease and shown that the frequencies did not period. It is, however, highly probable that there

differ significantly from those found in the is an excess of group A among sufferers from

population as a whole.

diabetes mellitus, pernicious anaemia and

There was one notable exception to this cancer of the uterine cervix, and that there is a

failure to test adequate numbers, that of the deficiency of 0 and an excess of non-secretors

relationship between the Rh or Rhesus blood among cases of rheumatic carditis.

groups and haemolytic disease of the newborn, You will note that most of the conditions

but to consider this to-night would take too which I have mentioned are diseases of the

long and take me too far from my main theme. gastro-intestinal tract, and that in some of them

So, rather reluctantly, I must leave it and not only blood group but also secretion is

continue the consideration of the relationship involved. It looks, therefore, as though there is

of other diseases to the blood groups. In the years some connection between the nature of the

between 1920 and 1953 there were a few rather gastro-intestinal or other mucous secretion and

promising individual discoveries, but the first the liability to these various diseases, but it is a

real break through was made in the latter year little difficult in most cases to explain how this

by Professor Aird, Mr. Bentall and Dr. Fraser connection arises.

Roberts when they showed, on the basis of very I think it will be easier to give a plausible,

large numbers, that there was a highly significant though not necessarily a correct, explanation in

excess of blood group A in sufferers from carci- the case of rheumatic carditis. This condition is

noma of the stomach. Since then, at frequent a late effect of rheumatic fever, which is itself

intervals, other diseases have been shown to be one effect of infection with haemolytic strepto-

characterized by similar abnormal distributions cocci. One of the things for which investigators

of the blood groups. We find in duodenal ulcer have been looking, in studying blood-group

the most striking case of all: people of group 0 frequencies in different diseases, is significant

are 1 6 times more likely to get ulcers than disturbances of these frequencies in infectious people of other groups; in the case of gastric diseases, since it has long been known that the ulcer, again group 0 is in excess, and if you are blood-group antigens are closely related to in group 0 you are 1.2 times more likely to have antigens carried by certain bacteria. It might be a gastric ulcer than if you are not. In the case of expected that if you had a particular blood-

duodenal ulceration, and probably also for group antigen on your red cells you might have gastric ulceration, sufferers also show a higher difficulty in producing an antibody which would incidence than the normal population of failure kill off bacteria which carried a similar antigen.

to secrete the individual's ABO blood group It would then be a good thing to have as few

antigens in the saliva and other fluids. The blood-group antigens as possible, and be of

secretion or non-secretion of these substances group 0. Therefore, one might expect a defici-

is determined by a pair of allelomorphic genes ency of group 0 in sufferers from infectious

independent of those determining the blood groups themselves.
The diseases already mentioned are those for which a connection with blood groups is most firmly established. For certain other diseases the statistical connection appears highly signi-

diseases, as is found in rheumatic carditis. This is, in fact, an over-simplification, since even group 0 people have the blood group antigen H, and since one type of haemolytic streptococcus (Type 14) carries an antigen which is related to H as well as to A and B.

ficant but, because the work has been done all

at one centre, or for other reasons, caution is Blood Groups and Natural Selection

necessary in assessing the results, and additional I want now to venture beyond the bounds of

I6

BLOOD GROUPS IN THE STUDY OF HUMAN POPULATIONS

established knowledge into speculation regarding having had their blood groups very fully investi-

the origin of the blood groups. We must conclude gated, but also in having had great evolutionary

from our study of the relation between blood success during the latter part of geological

groups and disease that, whatever may be the history. One wonders whether the ability to

precise mechanism, the blood groups are develop blood groups is one of the features

subject to natural selection in relation to the leading to evolutionary success, or whether

environment. In the case of duodenal ulceration evolutionary success stimulates the production of

an important factor is the nature of the available blood-group antigens.

food, so that, if they have to eat a very rough or Finally, I want to mention some specific irritating diet, this may put the people of group suggestions which I have previously made in an

O at a disadvantage to those of group A by attempt to explain the origin of the blood

tending more strongly to give them ulcers. In groups; but in view of some recent discoveries the case of other diseases the relative advantage in human palaeontology, I do so with even or disadvantage of a particular blood-group greater diffidence than hitherto. It is generally

may result from the bacterial environment.
So far we have considered selection only as it might affect fully evolved man. The human
blood groups, however, are likely to have been inherited, in part at least, from our pre-human

agreed that man first developed in Africa or perhaps Southern Asia. Until recently it appeared that the critical stage of evolution occurred in a relatively short space of time, geologically speaking, so that we might imagine

ancestors. We do not know what blood-group that the earliest men, although having relatively antigens were carried by those ancestors, but large brains and hence the ability to make and we may gain some clues by looking for blood use tools and to construct clothing and dwellings,

groups in the lower primates, in mammals lived at first in a similar microbiological and generally, and in other classes of vertebrates. biochemical environment to their ape-like Even fishes are known to have blood groups, ancestors. However, with their ability to protect

and nearly every mammalian species that has themselves from the cold and to get supplies of

been adequately investigated has been found to food, they were able to spread to other environ-

have them.

ments, and could, by means of their intelligence

Among the anthropoid apes one finds anti- and use of their hands,' meet the grosser harmful

gens which are closely related to those of man; features of the new environments. But they

in the MN system in particular, an M-like came up against dangerous micro-organisms

antigen is present in many if not most species of and perhaps various noxious biochemical features

primates; but as one climbs down the family of the environment from which they could not

tree from man through higher apes to lower protect themselves by the use of their brains

monkeys, one gets more and more remote from and their hands, so that it was only as they

the well-defined human pattern in the reactions evolved biochemically, developing among other

of this antigen.

things new blood groups, that they could spread

Another point about human beings is the effectively to all the new areas which, physically

enormous variety of blood-group antigens they speaking, were open to them.

have been shown to possess. This is certainly I have, however, been a little disturbed by some

due in part to the fact that human beings have recent discoveries, for instance, that the Austra-

been very much more fully investigated than any lopithecines, with their small brains, and living

other species of mammal, but there seems to be quite a long time ago, were already making and

little doubt that a good many species of mam- using simple tools: there is even a possibility that

mals have a much smaller absolute number of Oreopithecus, living in Italy at the beginning of

blood-group antigens than has man. One the Pliocene, had already passed the point at

species of mammal which, like man, has an which the direct line of ancestry of man had

enormous variety of blood-group antigens is the become differentiated from that of the anthro-

common ox or cow, and it may be significant poid apes. I am not sure yet how far the ideas

that cattle resemble human beings not only in I have just put forward are compatible with or

17

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

adaptable to the longer time-scale of human evolution, and the less sharp change from ape to man, that these discoveries seem to imply.
If I have not given you any firm conclusions on the more fundamental issues, 1 hope I have shown you how interesting the study of blood groups can be, as applied to human populations, and what valuable help they can give in tracing the history of such populations.
REFERENCES The facts mentioned in this talk have been drawn from many hundreds of published papers. The few works which have been cited specifically are listed below: the only way to guide the reader to the remainder is to cite a few publications, mainly of my own, which contain full bibliographies. For the basic facts of blood group distribution the following may be consulted: Mourant, A. E. 1954. The Distribution of the Human Blood Groups. Oxford, Blackwell Scientific Publications. Mourant, A. E., Kopec, Ada C. and DomaniewskaSobczak, Kaziiiera. 1958. The ABO Blood Groups: Comprehensive Tables and Maps of World Distribution. Oxford, Blackwell Scientific Publications.

More recent facts are set out and discussed in three papers published in the British Medical Bulletin, May 1959: 15, Pt. 2. Roberts, J. A. F. Blood Groups and Disease. 129-133.
Sheppard, P. M., Blood Groups and Natural Selection. 134-139. Mourant, A. E. Blood Groups & Anthropology. 140144. In addition to some of the above publications, the following are individually cited in the text: Aird, I., Bentall, H. H. and Roberts, J. A. F. 1953. Relation between cancer of stomach and the ABO blood groups. Brit. med. J. i, 799-801. Heyerdahl, T. 1950. The Kon-Tiki Expedition. London, Allen & Unwin. Heyerdahl, T. 1952. American Indians in the Pacific: the theory of the Kon-Tiki expedition. London, Allen and Unwin. Mourant, A. E. 1959. The blood groups of the Jews. Jewish J. Sociol. 1, 155-176. Watkin, I. M. 1956. ABO blood groups and racial characteristics in rural Wales. Hered. 10, 161-193. I am indebted to Messrs. Blackwell Scientific Publications Ltd., for permission to reprint Figures 1, 4 and 5, also to the Council of the Royal Anthropological Institute in the case of Figures 1 and 4; and to the Editors and Publishers of the Jewish Journal ofSociology for allowing me to reprint Figures 2 and 3.

I8

