C. P. BLACKER
Population, Religion and Birth Control

Conference held in Zurich of the Marriage Guidance Commission of
the International Union of Family Organizations, June U7th tol2oth, i9g9

N O DEATH CONTROL WITHOUT BIRTH organisations, the Eugenics Society therefore

CONTROL. This lapidary statement took the initiative in drawing attention at last

appears in a chapter-heading ofDr. Colin year's conference to this aspect of the problem

Bertram's recent book which was appreciatively of uncontrolled fertility. Our jointly produced

reviewed in our October number. The chapter is statement had a stormy reception and the

appropriately entitled "Hopes and Possibilities". attempt would have wholly failed had it not

The chief significance of the above-mentioned been for the initiative and resourcefulness of

conference held during June in Zurich may later Mr. Joseph Brayshaw who, the day after,

be discerned in an attempt to bring this ele- gathered round himself the movers of several

mentary truth home to certain circles. Resistances inconclusive amendments and persuaded them

in this field are familiar: they are compounded to agree on a recommendation which was later

of sentiments which are in varying degrees unanimously approved by the Union's Com-

religious, "demographic" and political. The mission of Marriage Guidance and still later by

political component contributed nothing in its Conseil Gin6ral or Governing Body.

Zurich where Marxist doctrines were not heard; It was suggested above that demographic

its place was taken by religious and "demo- considerations could impede recognition of the

graphic" resistances.

principle: no death control without birth con-

trol. Such considerations weighed heavily with

Background The background of the Zurich meeting was provided by a much larger conference of the
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANISATIONS
(the I.U.F.O.: the Union produces a journal Familles dans le Monde) during June 1958 in Paris. An account of this conference appeared in the October 1958 number of this RvEw. But it may be helpful to recall the salient features.
The I.U.F.O. was founded in 1947 through French initiative. As implied by its title and by that of its journal, the Union's objective is to

the French members of the Union, for France had suffered during the first war and in the interwar years from an excess of deaths over births. Hence French demographers were frightened of birth control. Indeed several had proclaimed that birth control, freely practised, will necessarily cause depopulation. It was therefore in no way surprising that, in the discussion of the small group convened by Mr. Brayshaw, demographic issues were in the forefront. They were reflected in the resolution which was finally approved.
This was as follows:

promote the welfare of families throughout the The fifth section [of the I.U.F.O.], having

world. But in the course of the deliberations of
the last ten years, wherein the Eugenics Society has participated as an Associate Member of the Union, little attention had been paid to the effects on families (mainly those in under-

heard the proposal of Dr. Blacker and without prejudging in any way the fundamentals of the problems, recommends to the General Council of the I.U.F.O. that the different causes of population pressure and all the possible solutions should be studied and that to this end the

developed countries) of population pressure and of the associated scourges of undernourish-

task should be entrusted to the Marriage Guidance Commission.

ment, squalor and premature death.

In the above recommendation the main

Together with three other British voluntary concern is with population pressure and its

217 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1960, 51, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

solutions rather than with events within the wished to include a demographer from the

family.* The solicitude was, so to speak, trans- United Kingdom, and they named Professor

ferred from the intimacies of hearth and home D. V. Glass and Mr. Norman Carrier as being

to the more rarified plane on which are dis- specially acceptable. Mr. Carrier was able to

cussed the diagnosis, causes and cures of accept and he played a valuable part in the

population pressure.

conference.

The Union's Commission on Marriage

Guidance (it has three other Commissions) met Themes and Chairmanship of the Conference

in Zurich to give effect to the decisions of the The conference lasted three days. Some of the

Conseil General.

themes (here quoted verbatim) were elaborately

stated. For example, the theme for the first day

Groundless Misgivings

was "Various causes of population growth and

The programme for the Zurich conference, the tentative solutions to be applied to this

drawn up by the Union's secretariat, generated problem: the notion of demographic pressure:

certain misgivings which, in the event, proved main factors and scientific fields, demographic,

groundless. The essential issue might, it seemed, economic, sociological and psychological". The

be side-tracked. The Marriage Guidance Com- specially invited demographers here made their

mission was, as a body, scarcely competent to contributions. The theme of the morning of the

discuss economic and demographic conundrums. second day was "The religious position on

There exists in all countries a circle of people of population growth or demographic pressure and

high academic standing who contend that there family planning, with special reference to

is really no population - resources problem. Protestant, Jewish and Roman Catholic posi-

These declare that the possibilities of increasing tions". In the afternoon of the second day the

food production throughout the world could applications to India of the issues raised in the

easily match foreseeable increases in the world's morning were discussed. The third day was

population. The outcome of Zurich, it seemed, devoted to "The task of the Marriage Guidance

could depend on what "experts" were invited. Counsellor and the organisation of a Family

A discussion which should be concerned with Guidance Bureau".

family problems could get lost in speculations At all sessions Professor David Mace presided

about hydroponics and algae. The conclusion with his customary skill, tact and courtesy. At

could emerge that, in the general uncertainty, the outset, he stressed the need for tolerance;

the wisest course of the Union was to do nothing. he reminded us that the room contained people

Misgivings were further aroused when it was who held widely different and sometimes opposed

noted that, though a session had been allocated convictions and that some of us would have to

to a consideration of India's problems, the listen to arguments which we might hold to be

under-developed countries whose spokesmen not only misguided but pernicious. In the event,

had been most articulate about the problems of Dr. Mace must have been satisfied with the

population pressure were scarcely represented. manner in which his guiding principle was

The secretariat in Paris wanted to invite followed. A remarkable spirit of tolerance was

demographers. It was reassuring that they displayed by all; at no point was acrimony

shown; and the delegates finally dispersed with

* Events within the family had been stressed in our an enhanced respect for each other.

joint memorandum which had stated that "Population

Pressure depresses the standard of living, causing poverty from which women and children mainly suffer" and that the spokesmen for underdeveloped countries were aware of "the need to prevent increasing resort to criminal abortion". In the course of a speech by which I had introduced the memorandum, I had also used the following words: "From a world standpoint (though not from a European and still less from a French standpoint) population pressure could almost be regarded as the most important factor in family welfare".

Impressions of the Conference
From the standpoint of the Eugenics Society the discussion on the second day was of principal interest. There was no avoidance of the topic of family planning; but the contributed papers were perhaps weighted from the medical angle in favour of the Roman Catholic standpoint.

21 8

POPULATION, RELIGION AND BIRTH CONTROL

(For this the Secretariat was in no way respons- introduced stems not so much from the people

ible.) One was submitted by a doctor representing of the East themselves but from the West".

the (British) CATHOLIC MARRIAGE ADVISORY This prevailing idea-that the "West" was

COUNCIL, and a long communication was also forcing birth control down the throats of guile-

distributed by a medical representative of less Indians-Mrs. Mehta gently refuted. The

Washington's GUILD OF CATHOLIC PSYCHIATRISTS. movement, she asserted, was on the contrary

But the standpoint of the British FAMILY genuinely spontaneous and "authochthonous";

PLANNING ASSOCIATION was effectively though it could never have reached its present dimensions

briefly presented by Mrs. Jean Medawar. After if the British had not left India in 1947. Another

the Conference a Swiss participant told me that member of the audience asked her what Indian

the manner in which Mrs. Medawar's con- religions were opposed to family planning. To

tribution had been delivered and received had this Mrs. Mehta replied: "None. There is only

provided for him a memorable example of how one religion in India which is opposed-the

people could be brought to recognize basic Roman Catholic." Another delegate made an

differences in their convictions and yet hold emotional appeal to the idealism of the nations

each other in enhanced respect. Each side had of the "West"; these, he said, should buy world

perceived that the other was well-intentioned surpluses of food and ship them to India as

and sincere; suspicions of duplicity and malig- gifts. Mrs. Mehta briefly replied that India could

nity had been dissipated. A similar impression not be expected to live on charity for ever. The

of basic goodwill and sincerity was received accelerating growth of India's population was

from Pere Stanislas de Lestapis, S.J., by non- worsening her predicament. Indians could not

Catholics.

continue indefinitely to double their population

What Mr. Maurice Veillard (a past president every forty years. The problem was for India

of the Union) had called "the Anglo-Saxon and not for other nations, however well-

standpoint" had been strengthened by the disposed, to solve.

appearance on the second afternoon of Dr. The themes (above-quoted) which were dis-

Abraham Stone who had flown in the morning cussed during the three days gave little scope for

from Poland. Though Dr. Stone had submitted considering the effects of population pressure

no prepared paper he made two short but on the well-being of mothers and children. This

effective contributions to discussions. Few aspect could have been more effectively elucidated

indeed of his many friends in the I.U.F.O. could by social workers and health visitors than by

have suspected that they would never see him demographers; I did my best to draw attention

again. A concise paper entitled "The Church of to it in a speech which was perforce short, for

England and Birth Control" was forcefully but translations into both French and German were

temperately delivered by the Rev. G. R. Dunstan; required throughout. As I spoke I had in my

and on the last morning Mr. Reginald Pestell, mind's eye the image of a diminutive Indian

the Field Secretary of the (British) NATIONAL mother aged nineteen whom I had seen six

MARRIAGE GUIDANCE COUNCIL gave a lucid years before at a Welfare Centre in Bombay.

summary of the selection methods and other She was depriving herself of food in order to

activities of his Council.

feed four sickly looking children. I was assured

The discussion about India was introduced that there were tens of thousands like her in

by Mrs. Hansa Mehta, once Vice-Chancellor of India.

Baroda University. The substance of her address Professor Mace wisely decided that no

contained little that was new; but the manner in resolution or even recommendation to the

which she delivered it could not have been Conseil General was called for. Throughout the

better attuned to her audience. She quietly conference M. Xavier Ryckmans, the Union's

dissipated what turned out to be a widely-held respected President, had attentively listened to

misconception which had been expressed in one the proceedings and was therefore perfectly

of the previously circulated papers in the follow- informed of what had transpired. So also were

ing terms: "The anxiety to see contraception M. Jean Delaporte, the Union's Secretary

219

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

General, and M. Robert Boudet, its Director of Services.
The door is now open for further action if this be deemed appropriate in view of the general aims and internal interests of the Union.
The representatives of most of the British

member-associations who were present may well feel that both the "Anglo-Saxon view" and the Asian were more effectively communicated and understood at Zurich than at any previous conference sponsored by the Union. For this they have again to thank the President and the Secretariat.

POPULATION STUDIES
A Journal of Demography
Edited by D. V. GLASS and E. GREBENIK

Vol XIII No. 1.

CONTENTS

July 1959

W. D. BORRIE
R. K. KELSALL and SHEILA MITCHELL RAYMOND T. SMITH GALINA V. SELEGEN J. G. C. BLACKER D. F. ROBERTS and R. E. S. TANNER E. P. HUTCHINSON R. P. DoRE Book Reviews

The Growth of the Australian Population with Particular Reference to the Period Since 1947. Married Women and Employment in England and Wales.
Some Social Characteristics of Indian Immigrants to British Guiana. Changing Features in the Soviet Population Census Programme. Fertility Trends of the Asian Population of Tanganyika. A Demographic Study in an Area of Low Fertility in North-east Tanganyika. Swedish Population Thought in the Eighteenth Century. Japan: Country of Accelerated Transition (Review article).

Subscription price per volume of 3 parts 42s. net, post free (or American currency $6.75). Single parts £1 each plus postage (American $3.25, post free).
Published by the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE, at the LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE, 15 HOUGHTON STREET, LONDON, W.C.2.

220

