EUGENICS AND SOCIALISM

Their Common Ground and How it Should be Sought

By HERBERT BREWER

T HE success of eugenics necessarily essential reason why both aspects should

depends upon the degree to which it not ultimately be regarded and reconciled.

is able to influence, directly or Stock raisers devote close attention to the

indirectly, the mass of the population. pedigree of their animals, while neglecting

Whatever may be one's opinions as to the no point connected with feeding, shelter,

validity of socialist ideas, it cannot be and veterinary care. There is no a priori

disputed that in relation to the largest reason why radical reform in raising the

section of the population they are always standard of life of the masses should make

powerful and often dominant. That the improvement in their hereditary quality

wage earners, through trade unions and impossible. Indeed, to the extent that an

co-operative societies as well as through understanding of eugenic aims is advanced

political organizations, are so largely under by more education, leisure, and culture, a

socialist leadership, makes it important to higher general standard of living will

take into consideration the psychology of facilitate success. Moreover, the socialist

the socialistically-minded in undertaking is bound to admit that the organized society

the task of enlightening the public at large he proposes would require a higher level of

upon matters of eugenics.

intellectual and moral capacity than does

In some quarters, it is believed that the the existing order. Measures tending to

socialist and the eugenist philosophy are raise the innate bases of such capacity must

fundamentally opposed. If that view were therefore tend to improve the chances of a

correct, the outlook for eugenics, in a world socialist community working successfully.

where the drive of egalitarian democracy is

so potent a force, would not be promising. LABOUR AND BIRTH CONTROL

The writer believes, on the contrary, that The support that has been given by

the socialist and the eugenic outlook are socialists to birth control, though it has not

far from incompatible. It cannot be denied, been prompted by definitely eugenic con-

however, that in the main the socialist atti- siderations, has been of considerable value

tude to-day is negligent or mistrustful of to eugenics. The late Labour Minister of

eugenics. Medical and other representa- Health took a bold and important step in

tives of the socialist movement who have authorizing contraceptive advice for mothers

denounced sterilization of the feeble-minded attending welfare clinics in cases where the

as degrading, cruel, and subversive of work- health of the mother would be endangered

ing-class interests, probably speak for a by further pregnancy. Whatever be the

large number of followers.

interpretation given to the qualification of

There is reason for thinking that this health reasons, it is probable that such

obtuseness to eugenic considerations on the reasons will often coincide with eugenic

part of the political ' left ' largely arises indications. In principle the change is

from adventitious and avoidable causes. highly significant; for it involves the

It is natural that the social reformer, pre- admission by the State that conception can,

occupied with pressing environmental evils, and sometimes ought, to be prevented.

should tend to overlook the deeper seated When Labour is thus tending, unavowedly

and more stubborn factors which lie in but perceptibly, in a eugenic direction, the

humanity itself. But there appears no time would seem opportune for cultivating

I9

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

among its supporters a more conscious and policy of taxation and social reform which

thoroughgoing support.

would slow down or reverse those legislative

The Eugenics Society is rightly dis- tendencies which have been so distinctive a

sociated from political affiliations. I do feature of the past few generations. Those

not suggest that it should seek them, nor tendencies, which all parties have in

that it should not criticize a socialist govern- different measure advanced, the socialist

ment as freely as any other. What I do would carry much farther. The socialist

suggest is that it should find more room in induction, drawn from another body of data,

its propaganda for arguments and appeals would indeed have it that the present marked

calculated to carry conviction to people inequalities of income are not only morally

influenced by socialist fallacies-or, if you unjustifiable, but are productive of economic

will, by socialist truths.

disorder and of the many-sided evils of

" The majority of Englishmen," said poverty.

Eleanor Rathbone, "whatever their class I will not attempt to discuss whether the

and politics, have intensely conservative formulation of the eugenic problem to

minds, and are influenced greatly by tradi- which I have referred is intrinsically sound.

tion and the phrases in which tradition has It may be stated, however, that it has been

clothed itself. A proposal to which they severely criticized by biologists of the

may take an unconquerable aversion if they standing of Jennings, Haldane (J. B. S.),

meet it clad in phrases which are repugnant and Hogben. Whatever its validity, it

to an already established prejudice may be would appear to be incompatible with

received with acclamation if it can manage socialist methods and objectives. That does

to enlist in its service the particular set of not dispose of the question of whether

catchwords, which happen at the moment socialism can march with eugenics. There

to be in favour with the particular set of may be methods of approach other than

individuals one is addressing."*

those to which the socialist takes objection.

If we suppose a classless society where

CLASS DIFFERENCES

economic advantages are substantially

It is not necessary to believe that socialists are more under the sway of catchwords than other people, to regard that statement as possessing much relevance to the present question. But there remain some differences between socialist and eugenist tendencies which cannot be

equalized, can we point to motives for eugenic improvement which will still exist in
sufficient strength to serve as engines of progress? If we can, then the disputable eugenic proposals here in review need not
stand as insuperable obstacles to a modus
vivendi.

approximated by a mere exercise of tactful phraseology.
An influential school of eugenic thought
takes the view that material success in the existing economic system is significantly identified with superior hereditary ability, and holds that the eugenic problem may be formulated as one of increasing the fertility of the well-to-do, and of checking that of the less prosperous classes. The means proposed to this end involve preserving or increasing the material advantages of the well-to-do over the poorer classes, by a

THE HUMANITARIAN ARGUMENT
In truth, eugenics can call upon motives immensely more broad and deep than are evoked by schemes which follow the contours of class egotisms. Rich or poor, humble or exalted, whether under a capitalist or a socialist order, one overwhelming reason applies universally in favour of everyone being born with a good hereditary endowment. This reason is that without good heredity, a life worth living for the individual is all but impossible. Good health, constitutional soundness,

longevity, high vitality and intelligence-

e The Disinherited Family, p. 265.

these are goods which every rational being

EUGENICS AND SOCIALISM

21

ought to regard as paramount. These To enlist a generous humanitarianism in
qualities should be praised as the most valu- the service of eugenics is to make economic able ingredients of the good life, apart sanctions largely irrelevant. A eugenic
altogether from the material gain they may policy conceived in such a spirit is best
bring. Just as the most powerful reason for calculated to smooth the formidable difficul-
being well born is that life may be worth ties which stand in the way of persuading living, so the compelling consideration for hereditary unfitness to extinguish itself. stopping the procreation of unfitness is that Disinterested humanity and pity are crebeing ill-born means to endure suffering and dentials, armed with which eugenics can degradation. Not economy, but humanity, with confidence deliver its message to
is the decisive reason why the multiplication individuals of every class and creed. When of the feeble-minded should be arrested. it comes to do so, widely, persistently, and The poor, no less than the rich, the socialist devotedly, among those in whom it awakens
no less than the conservative, has reason responsive convictions will surely be a great
for desiring that either they shall have number of those who call themselves children well-born or else no children at all. socialists.

Eugenics Rev'iew, Vol. XXIV, No. 1.

