242 EUGENICS REVIEW.

engagements to seize that rare chance. Needless to say that our outing

would have been very different to that of the ordinary race-goer. After

leaving London as late as possible and in comfort, we should have gone

straight to the starting post, just in time to see the start, where we might

have had the fun of seeing a jockey thrown, I was told, and with the

certainty of seeing the horses in all their freshness and beauty. Then

after a short scamper in the open in order to get a distant glimpse of the

finish, there would have been ample time to return to town before the

crowd had begun to think of moving. But I must resist the temptation

of telling anecdotes about one who was both very loveable and very

great, a rare combination on this earth. As to those readers who have

not had the privilege of Galton's personal friendship, we believe that

if they will read this volume from cover to cover, and if they will

follow patiently his career " through the great and the little, through the

apparently trivial and the apparently vital incidents of this story," they

" cannot fail to fall in love with a nature which met life joyously, and

from childhood to extreme old age resolved to see life at its best and

be responsive to its many-sided experiences.' "

LEONARD DARWIN.

Hartog, MARCUS, M.A., D.Sc. Problems of Life and Reproduction. Progressive Science Series. London. Murray; 1913; price 7s. 6d.; pp. xx. +362; figs. 4I.
THIS is a book to know and to admire. For it deals in a fresh and interesting way with many of the fundamental problems of biology, and gives us the conclusions reached by an investigator of distinction, who has very emphatically a mind of his own. The first essay is on the significance of fertilisation, and this Professor Hartog finds in rejuvenescence. " The creation of a new cell, whose nucleus and protoplasm have not been previously associated in a common cell-life" gives individuality another chance. The saying that " Nature abhors perpetual self-fertilisation " was an exaggeration of the truth that races require rest and change. In the sixth chapter the author discusses in a very learned way all the different forms of fertilisation or syngamy, and suggests the formula that what is brought about is a distinctive reorganisation of the cell, which often leads to something new. In the second essay Professor Hartog exposes some of the difficulties that beset corpuscular theories of inheritance, such as Weismann's. The packing of the germ-plasm with various kinds of determinants becomes so complex that we are reminded of the Spanish King's comment on the epicycles required to render the universe workable on Ptolemy's geocentric hypothesis: " Had I been consulted at the creation, I could have simplified matters." We shall only note that the Mendelian theory of inheritance which is so much in vogue to-day does not seem much simpler than XVeismann's. And, after all, life is a very intricate business.
The next three chapters deal mainly with cell-division, which is a central problem in biology. The power of spontaneous division is one of the most characteristic differences between the living and the notliving, and any light on the instability that makes a unit divide is most welcome. Professor Hartog draws a useful distinction between constructive processes leading directly to an increase in the living substance and those leading to the accumulation of reserves which become available by the action of an internal ferment. One cannot help speculating as to the possibility of some " autokatalysis " being at the bottom of celldivision, but Professor Hartog's contribution, which is of great interest, is on another line. He finds evidence of "mitokinetism, a new dual heteropolar force," quite different from surface tension, osmosis, electrostatic force, or the like.
The next two chapters show in a lively way that there is a good deal to be said for the Lamarckian theory of the transmission of indi-
'Page 4.

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

243

vidually acquired structural modifications. There is quite a considerable amount of hard-hitting, all good-humoured, of course, and very dexterous. Professor Hartog has a strong sympathy with the mnemic theory that the germ-cell in some unknown way garners the imprints of some of the organism's experiences, and that these may have their outcome in development. " For the present, at least, the problem of heredity can only be elucidated by the light of mental, and not material, processes." His essay on the biology of Samuel Butler is very good reading. The volume ends with a valuable essay on "interpolation in memory" and some wise counsel on " Nature Study."
We have not forgotten the philosophical chapter on " Mechanism and Vitalism," which appears to us to be the best of the many good things in Professor Hartog's book. It is an admirable statement of the apartness of "vital behaviour," which is self-preservative, self-regulated, and adaptive. The concluding paragraph should be writ large, " We may distinguish all aggregates of matter into three classes:-
" (i) Organisms, which grow and store energy and matter for their needs and for those of their lineage, and which reproduce, and are selfregulated;
" (2) Machines, which are aggregates of matter not in continuity with organisms, and which are selected, constructed, or formed by an organism for the purposes of the organism itself or of its race;
"(3) Things at Large, which do not come into either category, and which are conditioned by their antecedents only."
We have to thank Professor Hartog for these valuable essays, which should be read by all interested in the general problems of life and reproduction. We wish, however, that he could find time to write a book more perfectly unified and with less allusion to other people's right and wrong notions-expressive, in fact, of his own very distinctive outlook.
I. ARTHUR THOMSON.
Drage, GEOFFREY. The State and the Poor. London and Glasgow. Collins; 1914; pp. 264; price is. net.
MR. DRAGE'S book is written rather from the point of view of a Poor Law reformer than of a eugenist. Pauperism in general, in his view, " is the result of the defects of our industrial and in a lesser degree of our educational system " (p. 235). More particularly for the able bodied pauper is the main crux of the situation, " the industrial system is responsible." Even the vagrant he approaches with the open heart and hand of the social reformer. " Care should be taken," he tells us, " to provide that every man should have a chance in the first instance and hope even in the last resort." In dealing with the feeble-minded, indeed, he quotes approvingly the view of Mr. W. H. Dickinson, that our policy as to the feeble-minded mother is a source of the gravest social danger, and is " eating into the very vitals of our nation." But he mitigates this judgment by quoting also the opinion of Mr. Charles Booth, who thinks that "the evil is summed up in a certain number of unsatisfactory babies, most of whom die " (68), while at the same time like all the more enlightened reformers he would concentrate attention on the improvement of the chances of the children, for whom he draws up a comprehensive programme in the short chapter of " conclusions." Apart from what he says, with less, I think, than his usual fullness of information, in the "dry facts" of latter day elementary education, his remarks here might be accepted as the basis of a new Poor Law policy in which all reformers might well unite.
For the rest, his book is a masterly summary of the present state of Poor Law administration, and might have been published by the Majority
as a sequel or supplement to their Report of i9o8, on the understanding
that it was prepared to drop its own proposals as to the new authority, and adopt those of Mr. Charles Booth and Sir Arthur Downe, and to see in much that has since taken place an invidious attempt on the line

