REVIEWS OF BOOKS

INDIA
Gadgil, D. R. Women in the Working Force in India. Kunda Datar Memorial Lectures 1964. London, 1966. Asia Publishing House. Pp. 33.
THIS IS THE inaugural lecture under the auspices of the Kunda Datar Memorial Lecture Series instituted by the University of Delhi.
Very little is known about the extent and pattern of the employment of women in India. There was no uniform definition of worker in the 1951 and 1961 censuses, so that intercensal comparisons are not possible and hence for the lecture the author has mainly drawn upon the data of the 1961 census and the recent surveys
done in the country. The 1961 census showed thirty-three million
women as cultivators. This figure was derived fromthe definition of workerwhichwouldbe open to various interpretations in practice. In case of seasonal work like cultivation a worker was defined as one who "had some regular work of more than one hour a day throughout the greater part of the working season". Keeping these limitations of data in mind, we find that women's participation in economic activities varies a great deal from state to state, there being 85 females to 100 male workers in cultivators' families in Maharashtra and less than fifteen in West Bengal. The social conventions relating to outdoor work by women play an important role, and non-participation of women in economic activities and especially in manual work is considered to add to social prestige among cultivators. But social sentiments are not so important as regards agricultural labour provided by women of the lower Hindu castes, the scheduled castes and tribes. Moreover among these groups there is also strong economic pressure in favour of women seeking employment. The difference is noticed in the results that taking the whole of India there were 50 female workers per 100 male workers in cultivators' families, whereas there were 82 female agricultural labourers per 100 male agricultural labourers.
With regard to the employment of women in urban areas, recent surveys in Kanpur and Lucknow showed that most of the women migrate to the cities with the head of their

family or on marriage, and though a great majority of them were employed in agriculture in the villages they stopped working after migrating to cities. The 1961 census also showed that a very small proportion of women were working in the cities, the percentages of female workers among total workers being 8-6 in Greater Bombay, 62 in Delhi, and 5 7 in Calcutta.
In urban areas the women are generally in relatively simple patterns of employment, work in less skilled and technically less advanced industries, or are in domestic service. Recently there is some evidence of a growth of employment of women in government service, business and professions, though all this affects only the small minority of the educated and the middle class women.
Our present understanding about the employment of women and the changes that are taking place in it with economic development is not well advanced due to lack of data. As Professor Gadgil points out, the weight of evidence on farm business and rural life and labour suggests that in the last decade no changes in the structure or in the magnitude of operation have taken place on a scale that could bring about large real changes in female workers' participation in agricultural business.
This lecture raises many thought-provoking issues regarding employment of women in the country, which deserve serious consideration from all those interested in the policies of social reconstruction.
SAVITRI THAPAR
Boute, Joseph. S.J. La Demographie de la Branche Indo-Pakistanaise d'Afrique. Societe d'Etudes Morales, Sociales et Juridiques. Louvain-Paris, 1965. Nauwelaerts. Pp. 404. Price FB.500. $10.
THE AUTHOR, WHO is a member of the select group of those who are expert in demography as well as theology, here analyses the vital statistics of Indians and Pakistanis living in Africa-and also in other areas overseas from Asia. He has done so in the general expectation that these overseas communities might represent a form of demographic development which

ER-M

165

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

could occur in due course in southern Asia itself. Although the data are not plentiful or easy to handle, he has made a very thorough study, with the aid inter alia of techniques created by Professor Brass.
Indians in Africa are predominantly urban, educated and commercial-at least when considered relatively to their country of origin. Although fertility within marriage is high, marriage itself takes place later than in Asia, and consequently the birth rate is not so large. Such a development would be useful in India as a way of reducingburdensomepopulation growth; it would achieve this without recourse to forms of birth control to which the author's Church might be opposed. One wonders, however, what the prospects really are that the 500 millions in India and Pakistan, mainly rural and uneducated as they are, will in the forseeable future adopt the habits of a million or so persons of their race who live in quite different circumstances in Africa. In spite of this doubt about the author's main reason for writing the book, his study of this group of people is not "slanted" and has a considerable interest of its own.
P. R. C.
PSYCHOTHERAPY
Axline, Virginia M. Dibs: In Search of Self.
London, 1966. Gollancz. Pp. 186. Price 25s.
"DIBS" IS A sensitive, moving and absorbing account of the treatment by play therapy of a highly intelligent five-year-old boy who was living in such a state of unhappy rejection of the world around him that his parents and some of his teachers had assumed him to be mentally defective or hopelessly schizophrenic.
In school the child had refused to participate in any activity; he spent much of the time cowering against a wall, and resisted, often violently, efforts to get him ready to go home. His parents, a gifted and intellectual couple, felt there was nothing which could help him, but they eventually consented to his going to a weekly play session of one hour with Miss Axline at the New York Child Guidance Clinic. In the play room the only direction given to the child was that he should decide for himself what
166

he would do. Miss Axline maintained a passive role, offering neither praise, nor blame, nor affection. She merely quietly repeated some of the comments the boy made, or described in a few simple words the activity in which he had been engaged.
The story is unfolded through the medium of the fully recorded weekly sessions which con-
tinued from the winter until the summer vacation. Apart from a brief and rather cool
initial interview with the boy's mother, there
was for a long time no contact between the therapist and the parents, but as the boy began to make headway the mother came of her own accord to see the therapist and revealed her own and her husband's earlier bitter feelings towards him, and his disturbed early history.
In his unrestricted play he relived many painful experiences and expressed his hostile feelings while comforting himself by infantile activities like sucking a feeding bottle. He also disclosed his innate ability, his love of order, his excellent reasoning powers, and his appreciation of language and of beauty. An independent assessment of his intelligence made at the end of his treatment gave him an IQ of 168: by then he had made a happy adjustment to life at home and school.
This account, beautifully and faithfully related, should be read particularly by those who doubt the profound effects which loneliness and lack of affection can have on the behaviour of a young child.
Another case-history with an equally remarkable outcome has recently been reported by Cyril Williams in the Journal of Developmental Medicine. The child's parents were of the professional class, and his mother had refused
to have any contact with her baby when she learnt soon after his birth that he was hydrocephalic and blind. At five years, after a series of changes of placement in institutions and foster-homes, he was assessed as an idiot, unable to walk, stand, talk or feed himself. His hearing was doubtful, and he had unpleasing mannerisms.
He was admitted to a home for the ineducable blind, where his condition was considered one of psychotic withdrawal. He improved dramatically with the stimulation he received there,

