EUGENICS WITHOUT MENDELISM
Some Criticisms of Current Points of View

By J. A. FRASER ROBERTS, M.A., B.Sc., F.R.S.E.

T IHE science of genetics still possesses defect inherited as a simple Mendelian reces-

much of the glamour of novelty, and sive, the defectives being allowed to repro-

for that reason the place of Mendelian duce, and, assuming certain proportions, he

discovery in eugenics is perhaps sometimes shows what the effect will be in the first few

accepted a little uncritically. It is because generations of preventing the breeding of

I believe that the application to human such defectives. For purposes of illustra-

affairs of some of the deductions drawn from tion he applies the calculation to the prob-

Mendelian discovery is difficult to justify or lem of inherited amentia, though, of course,

rather may not be particularly useful, and as he points out, the inheritance of

because I believe that some possible contri- amentia cannot possibly be as simple as

butions of value do not receive the emphasis this. If it is assumed that mating is at

that they should, that I venture to offer random, that there is no differential survival

some criticisms.

value as between normals and defectives,

Let us, then, in the first place analyze and that the incidence of the defect be taken the case of a difference in characterization as roo per io,ooo of the population, the re-

that depends upon a single Mendelian factor sult of preventing the breeding of defectives

difference; in the second place consider would be to reduce the proportion from ioo

whether in fact many important differences per io,ooo to 82.6 in one generation, to 69.4

are inherited in this simple fashion; and in two generations, and to 59.2 in three

finally what useful contributions can be generations. In successive generations the

made in the common case of complicated and rate of elimination falls off-for example, the

therefore unanalyzable inheritance.

proportion is still 25.o after ten generations.

Probably no type of inheritance has so Dr. Fisher also pointed out that the mating

profoundly coloured eugenic thought as the of defectives was certainly not at random,

case of the single-factor difference with and on that account the rate of elimination

dominance, in which the dominant type is would be considerably higher than these

regarded as the normal and the recessive theoretical figures indicate.

tvpe as defective. It is impossible to read One doubts xwhether it is generally realized

much eugenic literature before coming that a calculation such as this involves the

across the words " defectives " and " car- assumption of a fixed ratio between the

riers." It is urged that defectives should number of defectives appearing and the

not produce offspring, because they will number of carriers in the general popula-

spread defect in a heterozygous form tion. In this particular example the asthroughout the normal population, and it is sumption has to be made that no less than

also stated that the problem of the carrier I,8oo per io,ooo are carriers, and it also is all-important. In this connection there follows that although the reduction in the

are some very well-known calculations of proportion of defectives appearing is rapid

Dr. R. A. Fisher that repay careful exami- during the first few generations the reduc-

nation.* Dr. Fisher takes the case of a tion in the number of carriers is not so

* The Elimination of Mental Defect. EUGENICS rapid. If the figures are more fully set out

REVIEW, VOl. XVI, P. II4.

thev appear as follows:

I87

i88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

No. of Normals per Carriers per Defectives per

Generation. xo,ooo

10,000

IO,OOO

-... 8,100 ... I,8oo ... I00

I ... 8,264 ... i,653 ... 82.6 2 ... 8,403 ... I,528 ... 69.4

3 ... 8,520 ... 1,420 ... 6 ... 8,789 ... I,172 ...
IO ... 9,025 ... 950 ...

59.2 39-0 25.0

alter the proportion of A a to aa. It should be noted that if there is no difference in survival value selective mating will not alter the total number of a's in the population, but will simply affect the combination in which they occur.
THE PRACTICAL POLICY TO ADOPT

On the assumption of random mating the It remains to consider what practical

proportion of carriers to defectives must al- policy can be adopted if it is in fact found

ways be very high. If it is assumed that that some important difference does depend

the population is reproducing itself in each upon a corresponding simple Mendelian fac-

generation, that is, that the proportion of tor difference. Two courses are open. First,

carriers and defectives remains unchanged, to attempt to reduce the number of a's in

there is a very simple relation between the the whole population, or, on the other hand,

two figures.

to ensure, as far as possible, that they do

not occur in the combination aa. I would

Let m =the percentage of carriers,

suggest that in any conceivable case the

and let x=the percentage of defectives. number of carriers must be so large that it

Then m= 20 V/x- 2x.

is impracticable to attempt their elimina-

tion.

In the case already given x=- and m= I8. It has been said that one birth in every

If the population contains 5 per cent. of six is a still-birth. Whether this figure is

homozygous recessives the percentage of accepted or not it will be agreed that the

carriers is approximately 35. If the popula- proportion is high. In addition, experi-

tion contains 0.25 per cent. the percentage mental data obtained from domesticated ani-

of carriers is 9.5.

mals suggest that the death of the zygote is

There are two ways of regarding a popu- a frequent occurrence at too early a stage

lation of this kind. One is to consider the during pregnancy to be recognised as abor-

proportion of the homozygous defective tion. There can be little doubt that much

type, which we can write shortly aa. The of this mortality is genetic, and its amount

other is to consider the proportion of genes gives some indication of the extent to which

a in the whole population irrespective of lethal and sub-lethal factors are distributed

whether they occur in the combination Aa throughout the human population. This

or as aa. If the survival value (viability conclusion is amply confirmed by the fre-

+fertility) of aa is not the same as that of quently undesirable results of the marriage

the rest of the population, as we have of relatives who in stock-breeding practice

hitherto assumed, the population will not would not be regarded as closely related at

remain constant. If the survival value of all from the point of view of inbreeding.

aa is greater there will be an increase If the carriers of recessive lethals and de-

in the number of a's with each gene- fects were eliminated one wonders how many

ration; there will be a fall if the survival human beings would be left.

value is lower. Any such change, however, If a defective tvpe is quite capable of

is necessarily very slow, and an observed breeding and does breed freely under pres-

rapid change could not conceivably be as- ent conditions, is it justifiable to attempt to

cribed to this cause. This is clearly shown prevent such breeding? We have seen that

bv the continual occurrence of recessive such an attempt would only have a compara-

lethals, although the survival value of aa tively small effect upon the total number of

in such a case is zero. On the other hand, carriers in the general population that must

if mating is not at random the effect is to be assumed to exist. It seems unfair to draw

EUGENICS WITHOUT MENDELISM

I89

such a sharp distinction between the defec- generation simply by ensuring that reces-

tive and the carrier.

sive homozygote or carrier mates only with

There is another consideration too. It normal. It should be noted that once this

is sometimes suggested that if a defect is done differential survival value will no

depended simply upon a Mendelian re- longer play a part, so that there will be no

cessive it might well be that apart from need to fear an increase in the number of

that single defect the individual pos- those particular recessive genes in the popu-

sessed very valuable hereditary characterias- lation.

tics that should not be lost. It is very diffi-

cult to deny the cogency of this view. If SIMPLE CASES OCCUR SPORADICALLY

the " village Hampden " or the " mute in- We have so far considered the problem of

glorious Milton " is denied the opportunity the recessive defective on the assumption

of expressing his potentialities through the that this type of inheritance can be deduced

accidents of environment, he can equally be in the case of important characteristics.

prevented from doing so because he is un- Now we have to ask whether defects are

fortunate enough to be homozygous for some often inherited in this way, or whether this

recessive defect. I would suggest that is the type of defect that presents imme-

there is a great deal to be said for the policy diate, urgent problems to those who are

that would aim simply at ensuring that the keenly interested in the betterment of the

unwanted a's appear as seldom as possible human race. That recessive lethals, sub-

in combination with each other, that is, that lethals, and undesirable factors generally

defective or carrier should mate only with are widely spread throughout the human

normal as far as this can be ensured.

population can hardly be doubted. But one

If dominance is complete it is perhaps has a strong suspicion that these are the

difficult to realize this ideal in practice, defects whose individual incidence is very

though the growing knowledge of the in- low, that they are the type that occur just

heritance of defects and the study of pedi- once with all the horror of the unexpected,

gree would be of some value. It may be and then sink into obscurity, not to re-

that at some future time-and one hopes appear until perhaps generations have

that for many defects that time will not elapsed. They appear as a bolt from a

be too far distant-science will come blue and unclouded sky, and one cannot feel

powerfully to the aid of eugenic endea- surprised that our forefathers saw in these

vour in this matter. Every eugenist must occurrences the chastising hand of God.

necessarily be profoundly interested in the It is easy to be misled by false analogies

recent work which tends to show that true with cases occurring in farm livestock. In

complete dominance may after all be a rare farm livestock a single recessive lethal or

phenomenon, and that a difference between defect may appear in a particular herd or

carrier and normal can be discovered if only strain and may assume considerable, though

tests can be devised that are sufficiently of course never overwhelming, proportions;

delicate. The work on the differential but this is due to circumstances that could

response of homozygous and heterozygous never arise in a modern human community.

agouti mice to X-rays, the work on the In stock-breeding practice a sire of outstand-

differential blood-counts of normals and car- ing merit will be used to the limit of his

riers in the case of " bull-dog " or chondro- capacity, his descendants will be inbred, and

dystrophic calves, the work on differences in in those cases where such a sire happened to

coagulation time between normal individuals be heterozygous for a lethal or defect, nume-

and carriers of haemophilia, all point the way. rous cases would occur amongst his des-

No effort should be spared to encourage cendants. On the other hand it seems prob-

research which will lead to the recognition able that with regard to such lethals and

of the carrier. With that knowledge it would defects human mating is as truly random as

be possible to eliminate a defect in one it well could be.

I90 THE EUGENICS REVIEW,

A word must be said on those cases where One cannot escape the suspicion that Men-

a departure from the normal might depend delian results are sometimes accepted with

upon a Mendelian dominant or upon a sex- satisfaction by the eugenist, not because of

linked factor, or where it might show inter- their innate value as Mendelian results, but

mediate inheritance with absence of domi- simply as a demonstration that in yet one

nance. The simple dominant can present more instance we are indeed dealing with

little practical difficulty as regards its recog- organic inheritance. It may even be that

nition and as regards prediction. It is also by thinking too much in simple Mendelian

clear that the case of the simple dominant terms, factors, segregation, and the rest, this

will seldom be of urgent practical import- essential first step is not receiving the atten-

ance. Simple single-factor intermediate in- tion it deserves. Js the inheritance of men-

heritance falls into much the same category. tal characteristics organic or social? Or is

One would only point out that the lines of the hereditary basis of any great importance

experimental work mentioned in connection compared with the environmental? Possibly

with the simple recessive would aim at we think we know, but our judgment

transferring in principle that type of in- savours too much of an opinion and is too

heritance into the category of inheritance little a deduction from observed fact. There

without dominance. It is unnecessary to is still wide scope for legitimate controversy.

say much about sex-linked inheritance. It The same remarks apply to many observed

is comparatively easy to 'recognize, and race differences. There are many lines of

many of the problems raised are similar, approach, but I will only suggest one in-

though perhaps simpler than in the case of stance to show the sort of service that the

the recessive defect. I would only suggest science of genetics can render in this con-

that those who are of the opinion that com- nection.

plete Mfendelian analysis will provide a cer-

tain basis for practice should consider whether they can form a confident, certain

A LESSON FROM CATTLE BREEDING

opinion as to whether the sisters of haemo- Mr. Buchanan Smith has recently carried

philics should marry, This is the simplest out an important piece of work on the in-

possible case, and the full data are available. heritance of milk yield in dairy cows. He

argued that if the inheritance of milk yield

THE DIFFICULTY OF ANALYSIS

is complicated many factors are likely to be involved, and that some of these might be

Most of the differences that distinguish sex-linked. A sire could not transmit sex-

normal from defective and desirable from linked factors to his sons, but only to his

less desirable defy Mendelian analysis. daughters, therefore if grand-parental corre-

This is not surprising when one realizes lations are measured they will not be of the

that in practice any problem involving the same size, and the order of magnitude can

simultaneous expression of more than a be predicted. This hypothesis was con-

single factor pair will ordinarily be in- firmed.

soluble. There is of course no reason The immediate value of this work lies, of

to assume that inheritance can be of any course, in the light it sheds on the inherit-

type other than Mendelian as far as man ance of milk yields and the deductions that

and the hiaher animals are concerned. Cer- can be drawn as to the best type of selection

tainly any other type of organic inheritance to be practised in dairy herds; but for the

has yet to be demonstrated.

human biologist this highly ingenious

How then can the complicated problem be method possesses a different interest. If

attacked? The very first consideration is there is doubt as to whether inheritance

whether a difference is inherited at all. It is plays anv part, or any but the smallest part,

remarkable how frequently in human bio- with reference to some important charac-

logy controversy turns on this basic point. teristic, and if a classification is adopted

EUGENICS WITHOUT MENDELISM

that is wide enough, it may well be that sex- factor inheritance in animals and plants

linkage would be involved in such a case. have shown that dominance may after all not

The problem would be simpler than that of be at all common in such cases, and that the

milk yield in cows, because instead of hav- F1 is more or less intermediate between the

ing to deduce the characteristics of the parental types.

males indirectly, all individuals could be The great importance of such a type of

directly measured. The correlations inheritance in man is two-fold. In the first

mother-son and mother-daughter should be place the genotype can be deduced with con-

the same; the correlation father-son should siderable accuracy for practical purposes

be lower, and the correlation mother-son from observation of the phenotype. This is

higher than these. A negative result would an intensely important point. The first

not prove anything, but a positive result criterion in breeding is the appearance of

would be conclusive.

the animals themselves, and in the case of

man it is the only 'criterion that can be

A REALLY PRACTICAL CRITERION

readily and simply applied. In the second place in multiple-factor inheritance a charac-

The next step, having demonstrated that teristic depends upon the simultaneous ex-

inheritance is playing a part, is to attempt pression of a large number of factors. Con-

to discover as much as possible about the sequently, if an undesirable type is recog-

type of inheritance involved and about the nized this type will possess. not merely one

respective roles of heredity and environ- undesirable factor, but many, perhaps very

ment. If a difference depends upon the many. No longer is it a question of con-

simultaneous expression of several factors demning a type on account of one undesir-

it will usually fall into one of two cate- able gene out of thousands, and the phrase

gories, or may fall into both. The first " bad heredity " acquires a very real mean-

category is that of multiple-factor inherit- ing. And so we come to the conclusion that

ance, and it should be noted that in multiple- when inheritance is particularly compli-

factor inheritance, in cases where we recog- cated, so is the problem likely to be hopeful

nize a normal type and an abnormal type, to the eugenist. There is little fear of

the departure from normality will tend to losing what is desirable because so much is

depend upon the expression of dominant fac- present that is undesirable. There is little

tors or of factor pairs which do not show difficulty in recognizing the undesirable

complete dominance. It is easy to show type from the breedina point of view be-

that if a defect were to depend upon the cause the breeding result can be so readily

simultaneous expression of a number of deduced from the appearance of the indi-

recessive factors its occurrence would be vidual.

almost inconceivably rare, and that it would The other general type of complicated in-

be almost impossible to visualize any type heritance depends upon the simultaneous

of selective mating that could perpetuate expression of factors which are complemen-

the occurrence of such a defect in any con- tarv to each other. Tt is possible, though

siderable numbers. The only exception hardly likely, that if such a case is not too

would be if the great majority of the popula- complicated it can ultimately be analyzed

tion carried the recessive factors and these in Mendelian terms, but the eugenist should

not only in the heterozygous state; but in hope that in any important case this type of

such a case the true distinction would be, inheritance is not involved. If it is diffi-

not that there were a large number of reces- cult to draw up a practical policy, if only

sive factors that together produced a defect, one single Mendelian factor pair is involved,

but that there were beneficial dominant fac- it is almost inconceivable that a just and

tors that prevented the expression of reces- useful procedure could be based on a know-

sives almost universal in the ordinary popu- ledge of the interaction of two or three

lation. Actually experiments on multiple- factors.

i92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW,

HEREDITY AND ENVIRONMENT

of information. The question of whether

inheritance in the case of certain charac-
It has often been pointed out and is now teristics is important at all, of what type of clearly recognized, that the separation in inheritalnce is in general involved, of the

principle of the effects of heredity and en- role of environment and how far environvironment is difficult, and that in every case ment can over-ride hereditary differences there is an unfolding of hereditary poten- normally exhibited-all these are problems tiality under the impact of environmental that could be investigated under simpler con-

conditions; but in practice distinctions can ditions in an animal population made up to

be drawn. If a difference is expressed resemble human populations. The simpli-

purely with relation to an underlying gene- fications would be very great. No one would

tic difference, and that without modification claim that if father and son never saw each

throughout the whole range of possible en- other the connection between them could be

vironmental conditions, then we can say that any other than organic. In the case of

for practical purposes the case is one purely fowls nothing need connect parent and off-

of heredity. Similarly if with regard to spring except organic inheritance. Such

any characteristic the maximum range of knowledge gleaned from animal experiments

variability can be found as a response to would greatly simplify the task of interpre-

environment in animals of identical genetic tation of results in man. One cannot escape

constitution, then we can say that the differ- the conviction that there is a whole field of

ence is purely environmental. The great experimentation and observation which has

majority of cases will fall somewhere be- not been adequately explored because the

tween these two extremes, and it must be student of human heredity has been too in-

the task of the human biologist at this stage tent upon the analysis of differences in

to evaluate the parts played bY variations in simple Mendelian terms.

heredity and environment.

With regard to this problem and to the problem of the general type of inheritance

POLICY-AND THE PROGENY TEST

involved, deductions drawn from genetical The practical problem confronting the

hypothesis and applied to biometry can pro- eugenist, if he is to advocate any action at

duce results of great value. In this con- all, involves a decision as to whether a par-

nection I should like to mention the work of ticular type should be prevented from breed-

Dr. Fisher and the work that is being car- ing altogether, or whether measures should ried out on similar lines by others. It is be advocated that would lead to the increase

perhaps unfortunate that so much of this in numbers of one type and the reduction in

work has to be expressed in terms of ab- numbers of another. On. what data must
struse mathematics, and so cannot be easily such decisions be based ? We have seen how comprehended by the non-mathematical simple Mendelism is likely to fail us, and I student. One feels confident that this is would suggest that the first criterion is the

the reason why too much stress is laid upon ludicrously simple one of the direct test by simple silngle-factor inheritance and too results. It may be a subtle distinction, but

little upon general genetical biometry.

I think that it is a real one, that it is much

Very great interest has been aroused by more important to know what the children

the work of Professor McDougall on the and great-grandchildren of defectives are

problem of the inheritance of what appears -like than to know what their ancestors were.

to be an acquired mental characteristic in It is the same point that has been mentioned

rats. This work was very fully dealt with more than once, viz. how far can the geno-

by Professor Crew in a recent review in this type be recognized from the phenotype? I

Journal, and I only mention it here as an am not hopeful of cases in which the charac-

example of the type of work that could be teristics of parents are not recognizable in

greatly expanded to provide a different type a large proportion of the offspring, but for-

EUGENICS WITHOUT MENDELISM

tunately it would appear that the majority from what is environmental, then a fortiori

of those differences which present the most all these objections apply to any attempt at

urgent problem to the eugenist are in fact genetical analysis. It may well be that

differences which depend upon many fac- the task of the human biologist is far more

tors, and that the characteristics of the to measure, to distinguish, and to relate,

parents can be clearly traced in their off- and that once he can classify his material

spring. Popular eugenic argument derives the genetic problems will almost solve them-

its force from such cases as those of the selves.

well-known defective or highly excellent

families, and these are the cases in which it can be felt that action is possible, that it

THE DISADVANTAGE OF SIMPLICITY

is not unfair, and that it would be useful. One feels that the outlook for practical

The inheritance of amentia appears to be reform is hopeful, not because human in-

one of the main planks in the eugenic plat- heritance is simple, but because it is com-

form. If arguments are based on the possi- plicated, not because it can be analyzed, but

bilities of simple inheritance and upon hypo- because it is unanalyzable. The clear-cut

thetical carriers in the general population, segregation of characteristics is the danger-

then one has the gravest doubt as to prac- sign; the conclusion that many factors are

tical improvement; but amentia is not involved is hopeful-the more the better.

simple in its inheritance, and the proportion One has to legislate for man and not for

of undesirables resulting from the marriage single genes, but if the genes that attract

of aments is high. The test is how often our attention are only numerous enough we

in matings of different types the offspring of are not unfair if we identify the genes with

aments are undesirable. This criterion the man. To the extent that inheritance

gains in value because it is one that appeals is simple and easily understood, so does the

directly to the lay mind. It requires no problem bristle with practical difficulties

elaboration and no explanation.

and doubts as to the moral validity of inter-

If it is argued that amentia and other con- ference. To the extent that inheritance is

ditions are complicated, that there are complicated, so do difficulties disappear and

border-line cases, that defect is polymorphic, doubts as to the validity of interference

that what is hereditary cannot be separated resolve themselves.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 3.

