SOME MODERN VIEWS OF THE HUMAN MIND AND ITS DISORDERS*

By R. J. A. BERRY, M.D., F.R.C.S., F.R.S.E.
(Director of Medical Services, Stoke Park Colony, Stapleton, Bristol, and Chairman o/ the Burden Mental Research Institute)

T HE case of Charles William Ross, grey matter, but its axon runs into, and

hanged in Kenya Colony on January through, the white matter, of which it forms

iith, I933, for the murder of two a part, before re-entering the grey matter to

young women, may serve as a text to illus- establish synaptic contact with the dendrons

trate the progress made during the last of the effector neurone.

twenty-five years in the scientific study of Now, instead of this theoretically single

the human mind and its aberrations, especi- internuncial neurone with an axon of appreci-

ally those due to imperfect development of able length, which is not confined to the grey

the brain and nervous system.

matter, let us introduce, between the receptor

To plunge into Ross's psychogram before and effector limbs of the arc, several scores,

explaining to you on what it is based, how it hundreds, or thousands, of exceedingly

is achieved, and the illuminating facts it minute but complete neurones, all parts of

reveals, would be a waste of time, so I must which shall be strictly confined to the grey

ask you to begin by forgetting much you matter.

were ever taught about Nature's greatest The introduction into the arc of these

masterpiece-the human brain-and intro- numerous minute granular Golgi Type II

duce you to a newer conception of neurology. neurones, in place of the single long inter-

In doing so I shall first ask you to make a re- nuncial element found in the spinal cord,

examination of the well-known neuronic arc, clearly delays considerably the passage of

which is of the first importance because it is nerve impulse through it. The arc is now no

the unit of physiological structure of the longer capable of giving a quick, instantane-

nervous system of all animals, man included. ous response to the stimuli. On the contrary,

The neuronic arc is, indeed, the kinder- an arc so constructed delays the reaction,

garten of the newer neurology, so I make no provides the important factor of inhibition,

apology for asking you to re-examine it in and produces a period of latency by holding

this newer light, and in doing so please try in check the effector response to the stimulus

to forget most of the names you ever learned until the most favourable moment for its

about its component elements.

accomplishment. Behaviour thus ceases to

be a matter of instant response to the in-

THE NEURONIC ARC

coming stimuli, but is made subject to a

A simply constructed neuronic arc is a certain degree of supervisional review, and

protective nerve mechanism, as it gives a this is the essence of mind, and the psycho-

quick, immediate and usually reflex response associational neurone and the arcs that it

to the stimulus. In the type of nervous forms are its units of structure.

system universally found in all vertebrates, as also in the spinal cord of man, it is, especi- BRAIN AND SPINAL CORD

ally in view of what is to follow, the inter- The human body is composed of thirty-

mediate or internuncial neuron which is so one segments with neuronic arcs, with a

supremely important. Its cell body is in the theoretically single internuncial element. At

the cephalic end of these thirty-one segments

* The substance of a lecture (illustrated by lantern slides) delivered before the Eugenics Society on March
20th. I934.

are the non-segmented or supra-segmental portions, with complex neuronic arcs con-

127

I28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

taining many thousands of granular Golgi vesicles. The last one of these to be added

Type II neurones as their internuncial ele- in each animal form constitutes the " end-

ments. The human cerebellum, being a brain "-an unfortunate and somewhat

supra-segmental structure, is entirely com- misleading term because it does not follow

pounded of neuronic arcs of this kind, and that the end-brain of one animal is the

is thus totally unlike the spinal cord. Inter- same as the end-brain of a higher animal.

preted in the terms of the newer neurology, In fact, it is not. The end-brain of man

the structure, functions and significance of is not the same as the end-brain of the

the cerebellum become understandable to reptile, for example, nor is the end-brain

even a sixth form schoolboy. Under all older of the reptile the same as that of the earth-

methods they are completely hidden from worm. As each of these new end-brains is

the minds of our students and practitioners added on to the neuraxis there is a shifting

in an impenetrable smoke screen of meaning- forwards to it of the functions previously

less and obsolete names, phrases and words. undertaken, if at all, by the earlier

The human brain is the product of a long 'brains' of the neuraxis, and the last one

series of evolutionary changes spread over a to be added assumes control over all the

vast number of extinct and living animal older ones. This process of shifting for-

forms and over long periods of geological wards of cerebral function to a newly

time. Fortunately, the main steps of the added end-brain is known as telencephalisa-

evolutionary changes which have alone made tion. In every instance the histological

possible the mind of man can be accurately construction of these evolutionary addi-

studied in animal forms living around us tions to the cephalic end of the neuraxis

to-day.

always involves an increase in the number

" That there is an immense gulf between and complexity of the internuncial neurons,

the primitive nervous system of the earth- so that comparative anatomy, embryology,

worm and the complex brain of man, both and histology all compel the conclusion

structurally and functionally, is perfectly that no matter what may be the behaviour

obvious. What is not so well known, of the animal to its environment the

though it is equally obvious, is that this physical instrument is always the

gulf, as regards the nervous system, is neuron."*

bridged over by living and intermediate Passing next to the cerebral cortex itself, animal forms, and in such a convincing its minute structure is now so well known that

manner as to leave no room for doubt it can be reduced to terms so easy as to be that neurons in combination of arcs, with readily understandable. The cortex is simply

a constantly increasing complexity of formed everywhere and throughout of two internuncial neurons, are the physical great types of neuronic arcs, and two only, basis of all intelligence and mind in the namely, those already described-the spinal

animal kingdom, and that disease, or developmental absence, of functioning

cord or segmented type with long internuncial neurones, and the cerebellar or

neurones is the neurological key to many supra-segmental with numerous interpolated

disorders of mind.

granular neurones.

" If the central nervous system of such

living animal forms as the earthworm, sea DUAL FUNCTION OF THE BRAIN

lamprey, teleostean fish, alligator, dog, Expressed physiologically, and in terms of

anthropoid ape, and man, be regarded in function, the human brain is thus constructed

series, it will be observed that there is for a dual purpose: to give (i) by means of

continually being added to the cephalic its segmental arcs, an immediate reaction to

end of the neuraxis additional numbers of the stimulus, and (2) by means of the supra-

neurons linked together in series of arcs, segmental arcs, a delayed, or even altogether

and that these neurons are developed inhibited, reply to the stimulus. An infant

within the successively developed cerebral

* Berry: Brain and Mind.

SOME MODERN VIEWS OF THE HUMAN MIND AND ITS DISORDERS I29

makes use of the former simpler type of from without inwards, the supra-granular

neuronic arcs when first learning to speak, cortex, the granular and the infra-granular,

and it does so in that early phase of speech and these laminie are of the first importance

known as echolalia-that is, repetition of in the modem conception of the brain and

sound without understanding.

its functions, and each stratum is composed

Now the internuncial elements of these of differently shaped cell bodies.

cerebral segmental arcs have long been The infra-granular cortex is the oldest

taught to medical students in the form of a lamina of the mammalian brain. It is com-

multiplicity of names to be memorized for posed of fusiform cell bodies of different

examination purposes, but totally void of all sizes, and subserves those instinctive activi-

sense, meaning or explanation. But fit these ties such as the self-protective and the sexual,

so-called cerebral association systems into which are essential to the maintenance of

their proper arcs, forget entirely their animal life and its perpetuation.

anatomical names, even if you know them, The granular layer, composed of very

and it is clear that they are nothing more numerous minute neurones of the Golgi Type

than the cerebral equivalents of the inter- II variety, is strongly sensory or receptor in

nuncial elements of the spinal cord type of character, particularly in primary receptive

neuronic arc with which you are quite areas, such as the visuo-sensory, audito-

familiar.

sensory, and somaesthetico-sensory but, as

Conduction over such spinal cord or cere- stated, pervades the whole cortex except the

bral segmental arcs is known as " path " agranulous, and clearly plays a very im-

conduction, because some part of the arc- portant part in the phenomena of mind, as

in this case, its internuncial element-forms it must have much to do with the retention

paths or tracts. But if we are to understand of those nerve stimuli responsible for the

the real significance of Ross and his psycho- psychological phenomena of memory.

gram, I shall have to ask you to be a little The supra-granular cortex, the most recent

patient while we examine that much more evolutionary addition to the mammalian

complex form of cerebral conduction, now cortex, is composed of pyramidal cell-bodies

known as " ripple," where the nerve im- of different sizes, and subserves those mental

pulses flow between and involve the in- functions which may be described as indica-

numerable internuncial neurons of the supra- ting intelligent, as opposed to instinctive,

segmental cerebral arcs.

acts. Unlike the infra-granular cortex, it is

but poorly developed at birth, is slow in

STRUCTURE OF THE CEREBRAL CORTEX attaining maturity, and in many individuals

If you will carefully scrutinize any modern never does so. It is the last layer of the cor-

micro-photograph, or camera lucida drawing, tex to be evolved, the last to commence to

of the normal human cerebral cortex, you develop, the last to attain maturity, and

will see that the granular cells-that is, the consequently the first to undergo retro-

internuncial elements of the supra-segmental gression, Its lack of complete development,

neuronic arcs of the cortex-occupy a very especially in the parietal and other true

definite position therein. They form, just association areas, is the structural basis of

like the milky way of the heavens, a regular amentia. Judgment, common sense, reason,

easily recognizable band almost in the exact as evidenced in behaviour, in a word, social

centre of any microscopic section of the efficiency, are largely dependent on the con-

cortex. They thus divide the cortex quite trol of the animal activities of the infra-

naturally into two parts-one lying internal granular cortex by the supra-granular.

to the granular belt and next to the white The cells of the granular cortex, as also the

matter, and another external to it, and be- minute pyramidal cells of the supra-granular,

tween it and the surface of the brain.

form the internuncial elements of the supra-

The cerebral cortex is thus distinctly segmental cerebral neuronic arcs. According

laminated, and its three layers are termed to Ariens Kappers and von Economo both

C

I30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

are receptor in function, and thus play a part GROWTH OF THE BRAIN

in the brain analogous to that of the same Whilst the mental practitioner, like Ata-

varieties of cells in the cerebellum. The lanta of the legend, has been picking up the

similarity in structure is altogether too golden apples of panel practice, the equally

remarkable to doubt a similar function. modern Hippomenes has been seeking how

The cerebral cortex is thus not that to apply the known facts of cerebral growth

higgledy-piggledy arrangement so frequently and cortical lamination to the living subject.

figured in our textbooks, but is a most Although we cannot actually see the growth

beautifully arranged and orderly sequence of of a child, we can and do estimate it by

cell-bodies and axons. Although we have as measurement; and so with the brain.

yet no staining methods which wiRl simultane- Clearly, growth is not confined to the body,

ously display both, we know that all cerebral the brain grows too; and brain growth con-

cells are arranged in regularly aligned cerns the conversion of neuroblasts into

vertical columns, and with an evolutionary neurones, myelinisation of axons, increments

lamination as perfect and as orderly as are in dendrons, the weaving of neurones into

the geological strata of the earth's crust. arcs and chains, and these into engrams, and

THE " NEWER " NEUROLOGY

pari passu with this increment in structural
materials there occurs an associated func-

Unfortunately it is only too true that there tional increase in intelligence and a gradual

is no part of the human body of which even transition from the natural idiocy of the

the most intelligent are so ignorant, or in the infant to, under normal conditions, an adult

structure of which they take so little interest, mentality. Of the growth of the brain we

as the nervous system, and yet there is none now know much. It has indeed been closely

of greater everyday importance, though studied from the time of the publication of

probably few have ever been given the chance Donaldson's Growth of the Brain, published

of acquiring it. In these circumstances in the 'eighties, to the present day.

this newer and simpler neurology comes as Brain growth may be measured by weight

a shock and appears so revolutionary that on the dead, by accurate observation in the

those hearing its lessons for the first time laboratory of the varying thicknesses of the

naturally think them untrue, exaggerated cerebral cortex, and by measurement and

and incapable of demonstration. Such an calculation in the lving. As this last has now

attitude towards the magnificent world-wide been done for you, it only remains for those

research work of the last twenty-five years, who will to apply it.

which has made the nervous system intel- It is obvious that, just as the body of an

ligible to all of us, would be disastrous to the adult is larger than that of an infant, so also

progress and dissemination of medical and is the brain. It is further obvious that all

scientific truth. But the average medical or other things being equal-which is not always

psychological practitioner seldom or never the case-the larger the brain, the larger

has the chance of learning of this progress, must be the containing skull or brain box

and even if he did would regard anything and these differences may, just as with

connected with the nervous system as being alterations in stature, be approximately

quite beyond him. I want, once and for all, indicated by measurements of the head.

to shatter this frame of mind. Scientific Just prior to the onset of puberty, there is

neurology has now definitely come within the apparently a resting phase in brain growth as

orbit of the mental practitioner, and some reflected in the size of the head. These facts,

intelligent observations of patients on these combined with those already given from

newer lines would be of value as a corrective microscopic investigation, show that post-

of, or addition to, the accumulation of know- pubescent cortical increment must be almost

ledge now at our disposal concerning the entirely concerned with the final develop-

human brain and mind and their many ment of the supra-granular pyramidal con-

abnormalities and aberrations.

trolling cells. If, therefore, an adult only

SOME MODERN VIEWS OF THE HUMAN MIND AND ITS DISORDERS I3I

possesses a brain capacity of an ii or I2- calculations for comparison for both sexes

year-old child, it is a justifiable inference and all ages up to the completion of growth

that not only is his brain development have been made for you, and it only remains

arrested, but that he is lacking in the powers for us-if we are so disposed-to make use

of inhibition and control mediated through of them.

the supra-granular cortex. A prognosis of

the consequences to society will then largely MIND AND BRAIN

depend on a study of the environment and It is perhaps one of the misfortunes of

the individual's social surroundings. Upon mental science that psychological theory so

these facts can a real practical psychology be frequently mistakes itself for, and altogether

founded.

ignores, neurological fact. But when the day

THE FRONTIERS OF ABNORMALITY

comes, and come it must, when the problems of the mind and its aberrations are strictly

In all biological problems of growth, correlated with the known facts about the

adaptability to the surroundings, reactions structure and functions of the human brain

to the environment, sexual manifestations, and its evolution there can, I think, be no

resistance to disease, and the like, there is doubt that mental science will make a great

a fairly wide range of variation, and it is and revolutionary advance.

scientifically important to know what this It is clear that the views expressed in this

range is. In other words, when do we demonstration are based on the simple fact

pass from the allowed deviation from the that the human brain is the physical instru-

normal to the confines of, at least potential, ment of the mind and that the unit of brain

abnormality? To take an instance-below structure is the neurone. There is, therefore,

what stature does an individual become a one more acid test to be applied to the truth

dwarf, and above what height is he to be or otherwise of this assumed relationship

reckoned a giant? In other words, when between mind and matter, and that is the

does a departure from the normal become so examination of the brain itself in individuals

pronounced as to warrant its being regarded known during life to have been suffering

abnormal? These are problems of everyday from a disordered or insufficient mentality.

occurrence in medicine, yet the tendency is As is well known, the human cerebral

to regard them as matters of opinion, faith, cortex presents a corrugated appearance-

and utterly unchecked beliefs. Now there the depressions being known as fissures or

is a science of statistics and it has formed no sulci, and the intermediate elevations as

part of the educational equipment of the convolutions or gyri. What is not so well

medical man, and hence the " brickbats " so known is that this convoluted appearance is

frequently thrown at medical figures by our due to the proliferation within the cortex,

biological friends, for in the presentation of during pre-natal development, of neuro-

statistical facts the medical profession has blasts and neurones. Theoretically, the

still much to learn. Statistical methods show greater the multiplication of neurones the

us how to estimate correctly departures from more should the cortex be fissured and

the average. Where the frontiers of abnorm- the more adequate should be the future

ality should be placed depends upon observa- mentality of the individual.

tion and experience in conjunction with Contrast a normally developed brain with

accurate measurements and their correct that of a typical imbecile age I2 * I years and

analysis. Departures from the normal may a mental age impossible to test but much

be estimated by the complicated calculations below 3 years. The length of this imbecile's

of the true means, their standard deviations, cerebral hemisphere is only two-thirds that

and the probable errors, but much more of the normal. The frontal operculum is not

simply by the clinically useful percentile developed. The all-important post-central

tables. In all the tests and measurements somasthetic area is almost non-existent.

used in Ross's and other psychograms, the The parietal lobe is altogether abnormally

132 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

composed of a few stellate convolutions, and and prove that her mental deficiency results

there is marked microgyria of the frontal from an insufficiency of adequately developed

association area. The naked eye appearances cortical neurones.

are in themselves sufficient to reveal to the This explanation of the psychogram and

expert that its owner could only have been the principles underlying it- has necessarily

of the idiot-imbecile class. But neurones been very inadequate and has done but scant

cannot be seen with the naked eye, and it is therefore necessary to substantiate this
naked eye evidence by that of the microscope. If both agree in their revelation of an insufficiency of cortical neurones the case is established beyond all scientific doubt, and

justice to the laborious researches in various
parts of the world which have not only
evolved it but, in doing so, have placed a new weapon in the clinician's hands. But without some explanation, however inadequate, Ross's psychogram would be unintelligible.

the facts adduced in this lecture fall into their correct places like the originally scattered

(Ross's case, which is fully described in the Stoke Park monographs on Mental De-

units of a jig-saw puzzle. As a matter of fact ficiency, I933, page 233, was then illustrated

the micro-photographs of this imbecile brain and elucidated, and his psychogram was

do amply confirm the naked eye appearance shown upon the screen.)

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE

AUTHORS' ABSTRACTS insure accuracy, advance Information, and a saving of time and costs. Since the beginning of The Wistar Institute Bibliographic

Service in I9I7, each contributor to the journals included in this service has supplied an abstract of his own manuscript. This brief summary is printed and mailed without the delay necessary to the publishing of the complete article. Subscribers to the service thus receive advance information from those best qualified to give it.

ADVANCE ABSTRACT SHEETS

bearing ten Anatomists,

otrommoermebeabrsstroafctthsewAimtehrouitcabnibSloicoi4ertayphoifcZroeofleorgeinsctess,anardetsoeMntemfborerthseopfrtehseenAtmetroimceamnbIenrsstiotfuttehoefANmuetrriitciaonn,Awssiotchioauttiocnosot,f

and sold to others at $3.oo per annum for all abstract sheets issued. This is a convenient means of selecting such articles as may be

desired in reprint form. Prices of reprints are given on each Advance Abstract Sheet.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE CARDS bearing authors' abstracts with complete bibliographic reference for all articles appearing in The Wistar Institute journals and those co-operating, $5.00 per year. Abstract cards may be obtained from the beginning of the series, June x, I9I7. Each abstract card is issued to subscribers before the complete paper appears in a journal.

ABSTRACTS IN BOOK FORM Abstracts with authors' and analytical subject indices are brought together periodically in book form. Volumes I to 7 covering the abstracts issued from June I, 1917, to December 3I, 1933, $5-oo each. Liberal discount to subscribers to the Bibhographic Service

Cards.

Tho Wistar Institute Bibliographic Service covers the publications listed below:

Journal of morphology The Joual of Compara Neulogy The American The om eord The Journal of E mental zoology The Journal of Nutriion

Amecan o al Memoirs

Amrian Journal of Physical Anthrpology

Survey of the Mount Dsert Rdgon

J l of Cellular and om ve Physiology

Folio natmico, Ja

)

EARLY SERIES

In addition to the above, bibliographic reference cards, without abstracts, may be secured for articles which have appeared in the

Journal of Morphology, from vol. I (I887) to June I, 1927............................................. 380 titles

The The

JAomuerrniaclanofJCooumrpnaarlaotfivAenaNteoumryo,lovgoyi.

from vol. I I (I9OI) to

89I) to june I,

June I, I9I7 .......... .............. 917 ............... .....................

450 344

,t,o

The Anatomical Record, vol. I (I906) to June I, I917 ................................................... 464 ,,

The Journal of Experimental Zoology, vol. I (1904) to June i, 197 ............. .................... 423 ,,

The American Anatomical Memoirs ...................

......................................

9 to

These cards, containing full bibliographic references, enable a subscriber to have a complete record of authors and titles with their

subject headings for all articles which have appeared in the above journals from their beginning to current issues.

The price for these Bibliographic Reference Cards is two cents for the first card of each title. Additional cards for each title may be had at one-half cent per card when ordered at the same time.

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY, Philadelphi', P.., U.S.A.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 2.

