THE BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION CONTROL*

By N. W. PIRIE, M.A., F.R.S.

T HIS is not the place to discuss the times reach levels which those with a different

optimal number of people in any response describe as addiction, but that must

country or in the world, nor is it the be accepted even if it is not welcomed. This

place to discuss the possible social conse- fact limits the discussion of methods of

quences of the ability to make pregnancy control. It makes it necessary to leave alone,

invariably a matter of deliberate intention. to the greatest extent possible, the pheno-

It is clear however that, although the world mena of which people are aware while

could no doubt support more people than copulating and to be chary of altering the

there are in it now, it could not support an hormone balance, for this greatly influences

indefinite number (cf. Four Thousand Million sexual enthusiasm. A fully satisfactory

Mouths, I951). It is also clear that there are method of contraception should not obtrude

many circumstances in which the ability to itself; methods that involve an insertion

control pregnancy would be an advantage. just before copulation, as most present

The words in the title were chosen care- methods do, would not therefore be ideal

fully; we are concerned with control which even if they were in other respects satis-

means not only prevention but also promo- factory. Neither, of course, are permanent

tion if there is difficulty. The words contra- or nearly permanent methods such as

ception and birth control were avoided vasectomy or oophorectomy for, admirable

because the former, although in principle it as they are in many circumstances, few people

has the required meaning, has taken on a more easily accept such a radical solution. The

restricted meaning in popular use, and the ideal is something which when eaten or

latter would extend the subject to include injected induces a temporary sterility with-

the termination of established pregnancy as out other effects. No such substance is

well. Not only is the biochemistry of known and its discovery is likely to call for

pregnancy a formidable subject but if, like much sustained biochemical research. This

conception, it is examined in both a positive is not at the moment being undertaken and

and negative sense, it leads to the discussion the main purpose of this paper is to see

of abortifacients and that would broaden the whether a prima facie case can be made out

field too greatly. It is obviously better to for its inception.

stop a conception rather than cope with an

unwanted pregnancy.

The Problem and Method

First the problem may be briefly stated.

The Ideal

Sperm are made in the testis, mature there

Both at the present time and in the past and in the epididymis and are ejaculated

many methods have been used for controlling into the vagina whence they move by

conception, but they will be referred to only swimming or bulk movement of semen into

briefly for few of them are biochemical and the uterus. Mature ova are discharged from

still fewer desirable. Thus none of the social the ovary into the mouth of the Fallopian

arrangements designed to restrict sexual tube. The sperm and ovum, or gametes,

contact or diminish sexual interest are move into the Fallopian tube from opposite

germane. People enjoy sex and are entitled ends and unite in it; the fertilized ovum, or

to go on doing so. The enjoyment may some- zygote, then continues down the tube into

*A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Societv, May 30th, 1952.

the uterus. It undergoes some stages of development on the way, but most of its

I29

130 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

development takes place after it has become attached to the uterine wall.
A chain of events as elaborate as this would be expected to contain many weak links and the frequency of involuntary sterility bears out the expectation. A better understanding of the chain would improve treatment of these cases, but our primary interest here is to find weak links that could be weakened still further. The search is for a process that is exceptional, or preferably unique, in its biochemical nature. If such a mechanism can be found it should be possible to inhibit it without upsetting any of the other mechanisms on which normal life and health depend. The evidence is largely gained from experiments with animals and this involves the difficulty that animals differ more from one another and from man in their reproductive behaviour than in most other respects. Thus the rabbit, unlike most other species, normally ovulates only after copulation and in several species sperm can survive in the female tract for weeks or even months, whereas in most species they only survive for a few days. Observations made on one species, therefore, give hints rather than evidence about the behaviour of even a closely related species. From our present point of view therefore it is a pity that the main mass of sound evidence relates to such a remote animal as the sea urchin.
Sperm and Semen Spermatogenesis in most mammals is
temperature sensitive, so that it only proceeds satisfactorily in the scrotum where the temperature is intermittently lower than that of the body as a whole. This peculiarity has excited some interest, but the deliberate maintenance of the testes at constant temperature would be inconvenient. Furthermore there is some evidence that exposure to constant temperature interferes with the production of the testicular hormones. The mechanism of this temperature dependence is unknown, but spermatogenesis is probably controlled by the balance of two or more actions with different temperature coefficients. If this is the mechanism it should be possible, and it would be more satisfactory,

to interfere with the balance chemically. Spermatogenesis is controlled by other factors such as the level of thyroid function, but an alteration of this would bring about too general effects to be useful.
In the epididymis the sperm " matures." This noncommittal term covers changes in both morphology and metabolism; thus Lardy, Ghosh and Plaut (I949) find that bull sperm entering the epididymis respire more slowly than those that have passed through it but they can be activated by storage in the epididymis and by extracts from sperm. Sperm that have not undergone these changes seem (Young, I93I) to be less able to cause fertilization, so that fuller investigation might well be profitable.
Several accessory glands are involved in making the seminal plasma and its composition is of the greatest biochemical interest. It contains significant amounts of citrate, fructose, inositol, ergothioneine and phosphatase (Mann, I95I, a and b). All these substances occur elsewhere in the body, but seldom in such high concentrations and never all together. Fructose can be metabolised by the sperm and probably acts as the main fuel for swimming; the function, if any, of the other substances is obscure. Although all these components may not be essential for the effectiveness of sperm, the general, and probably valid, assumption is that they contribute to it. If therefore the mechanisms responsible for the secretion of these unusual accessory substances could be inhibited, it is possible, though by no means certain, that sperm function would be impaired. The seminal plasma is not only a source of metabolites that may be used by the sperm, it is also a system with enzyme activities of its own. Thus at the instant of ejaculation semen is a mobile fluid, but it quickly coagulates to a gel and then several minutes later liquefies again. This process, which has excited interest since the time of Aristotle (c. -330), is now being elucidated and is probably advantageous in carrying semen to the os and ensuring its contact with cervical mucus. Semen that did not clot, or, having clotted, did not liquefy, would
probably be less effective.

BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION CONTROL

The ejaculated sperm is clearly the most this century. Ehrlich wrought a revolution

accessible part of the whole fertilization when he thought about the chemical struc-

process. Some people (e.g. Baker, I935) have ture of the agents he used and, having found

in fact written as if contraception were a promising line by random methods,

synonymous with sperm killing, and this is changed the molecule slightly in various

the aspect of the subject to which almost all ways according to a logical chemical plan

attention has been directed hitherto. This till, within that group of substances, he

is not the place to discuss all the spermicides reached optimal activity. This was the

that have been used or suggested, but it is method adopted by Baker (I935); it is

perhaps worth while discussing a few of the analytical over the chemical half of the

principles that underlie this type of work. problem, but it leaves the biochemical

We do not yet know enough about the meta- mechanism of action unconsidered.

bolism of sperm to be able to plan contracep- The second revolution springs from

tion rationally. As soon as we think beyond academic work on enzyme inhibitors and

some simple mechanical barrier we are was enunciated as a principle by Woods and

forced to use the purest empiricism. The Fildes. Drugs act, in part at least, by

problem is superficially similar to that in specific enzyme inhibitions and their struc-

chemotherapy; two systems exist side by tures have some resemblance to that of the

side, the host and the " parasite," which in normal substrate; they are analogues or

this case is the sperm. The problem is to caricatures of it. Normally the substrate

inhibit the one without affecting the other. combines with an enzyme, undergoes what-

It is more difficult than the chemothera- ever change is brought about, and then leaves

peutic problem because we have to envisage the enzyme in a state to carry out the process

the regular use of an agent during many again. The analogue type of inhibitor upsets

years; it is easier because the " parasite " the process by not letting go so that the

has no independent powers of multiplication. process catalyzed by that enzyme stops. If

we know the chemical nature of the processes

Empiricism versus Biochemical

we are trying to inhibit, the search, in the

Understanding

light of this picture, becomes a limited search

Crude empiricism, that is empiricism un- for analogues of the normal substrate. This

illuminated by established knowledge of the introduces logic from the other side. As well

mechanism by which an action takes place, as analysing the structure of our agents we

can only work in certain directions. Where must analyse the enzymic make-up of the

tests are easy to do there is perhaps no process we wish to inhibit. Success depends

reason to adopt any other method. Thus in on finding an inhibitable enzyme which is

searching for antibiotics thousands of strains unique to the system we wish to inhibit or

of microorganisms are " screened " against a which is at least very much more important

set of test organisms in the hope of finding in this system than in any neighbouring

an efficient producer. There is an old ones.

laboratory adage " Anything is worth doing Logically therefore the study of spermi-

if it is easy enough to do"; the cynic adds cides should wait until we know more about

" or if you can find someone else to do it." the biochemistry of sperm. But such a delay

But where tests are not easy to do this would be carrying logic too far. While this

empirical approach is extravagant and it work is being done much would be gained if

becomes imperative to be more analytical. some of the firms already screening synthetic

The process goes in stages. If the problem is, or natural substances for antibacterial

or is being approached as, a chemothera- activity would include the sperm of some

peutic one, the first stage consists simply of convenient mammal in their group of test

trying everything one can lay ones hands on systems. Positive or negative results in such

to see what happens. This was the state of a test would not be a final answer, but they

pharmacology nearly to the beginning of would give useful suggestions.

I32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

With many cells, even if we have a good have been claimed but they have not been

analogue, attack is not feasible because the confirmed (cf. Parkes, i944; Tyler, I948) and

cell does not pick up the analogue readily. even if it should prove possible to produce

The available evidence suggests that this is this type of immunity there is the danger that

less likely to cause difficulty with sperm it would lead to a response similar to hay

because they are exceptionally permeable. fever at any mucus surface subsequently

Furthermore the exceptional composition of exposed to sperm. Furthermore such im-

the fluid in which sperm are ejaculated munization, if powerful enough to be

suggests that their metabolism may be effective, might well prove permanent.

exceptional too. So far, however, this

expectation has not been borne out. The The Movement of Sperm

field has been admirably surveyed by Mann Sperm movement deserves more study for

(i949) and he concludes that much of sperm theoretical as well as practical reasons. Sir

metabolism depends on systems found in Geoffrey Taylor (I952) has found existing

most other cells; it is unlikely that these hydrodynamic theory inadequate to cope

could be inhibited without causing damage with it and, as a step towards improving the

to other tissues. At this stage of the dis- theory, has had to study the movement of a

cussion only the swimming of the sperm is model sperm driven by twisted rubber bands.

relevant and one anomaly has been described This demonstration of the complexity of the

that may be connected with it. Wajzer and problem and of the fact that theory has had

Brochart (I947) claim that both boar and to invoke simple, one might almost say

guinea pig sperm contain phosphoarginine. crude, experimentation is very encouraging

This substance plays a similar role in muscu- to an unashamed empiric, but it suggests

lar contraction in many invertebrates to that that no immediately useful conclusions are

played by phosphocreatine in mammals and likely.

it has not been found in any other part of a The movement of sperm towards the

mammal. Its presence in sperm would have Fallopian tube can also be obstructed by a

a double interest; it would be an interesting barrier at the cervix and both primitive and

example of evolutionary " recapitulation " more sophisticated communities have shown

and it would offer a mechanism on which an considerable ingenuity in constructing them.

in vitro search for inhibitors could start. The only technique of this type that calls for

Unfortunately this line of research does not consideration here depends on the fact that

seem to have been pursued and the statement semen and cervical mucus do not mix readily

has not been confirmed.

but that actively motile sperm invade the

Sperm are relatively good antigens and mucus. This capacity diminishes the effect

even induce antibody formation in the same of normal spermicides because the sperm get

species as that from which the sperm were away from them, but it opens up possibilities

got. Antisera immobilize the sperm specific- of rendering the mucus impenetrable. Barton

ally (Henle, Henle and Chambers, I938) and Wiesner (I95i) have found in vitro that

and Parsons and Hyde (I940) have found cetyl pyridinium chloride acts in this way

that such antisera are effective in preventing and they suggest that, although it is not a

fertilization when introduced into the vagina spermicide, it will prevent sperm from getting

of the rabbit. This is encouraging, but it into the uterus. Other surface active sub-

simply amounts to using an antibody as a stances, e.g. ricinoleic acid, appear to act in

specific and harmless spermicide. Some of the same way. This is a very interesting

the defects inherent in all spermicidal development in which the cervical mucus,

approaches to the problem remain. The high which is constantly being renewed, is in effect

antigenicity of sperm has suggested to many being turned into an occlusive cap. The

people that it might be. possible to immunize method is mentioned here, not because it has

a female against sperm so that her tissues yet been fully tested, but because it illus-

generally became toxic to them. Successes trates a new line of biochemical thought. If

BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION CONTROL

these agents are simply put in the vagina they use, but further work with this plant and

have the defect that only mucus that has others like it will be awaited with great

come through the cervix is exposed to them interest. A general inhibition of the action

and that fresh unexposed mucus is con- of any part of the pituitary, even although it

stantly appearing. This approach would be prevented ovulation or the maturation of

extremely hopeful if a substance could be oocytes, would create as many problems as

found that was excreted into the uterus and it solved. But the discovery of specific

was then able to modify mucus in this way, inhibitors, either as a result of fuller know-

but it does not seem that a substance with ledge of the function and action of the

these properties will be found easily.

pituitary hormones or by following up hints

from folk medicine, would present us with

Ovulation

one of the most satisfactory methods of

Sperm are produced in the testis by a contraception.

complete cycle of cell division and maturation

continuing throughout the period of fertility. The Approach and Union of the Gametes

Ova, on the other hand, appear to be formed In some species, e.g. ferns, eggs produce

in youth and only processes of maturation substances towards which sperm swim;

and discharge take place later (cf. Zucker- this chemotactic action greatly increases the

man, I95I). Maturation is under close chance of collision and so of fertilization.

hormonal control; this suggests that it Lord Rothschild (I95i) has pointed out that

could be inhibited. At first sight it may seem the perception of a concentration gradient

that the more elaborate process of cell by an organism as small as a sperm involves

multiplication which is involved in sperma- an unusual sensitivity to small differences

togenesis would offer more opportunities for in concentration. If human sperm were

interference and it may seem that this is the influenced in this way it ought to be possible

process to which most attention should be to attract them in the wrong direction

paid. Cell multiplication is however probably because the amount of any substance that

fairly uniform throughout the body so that the ovum can secrete must be very small and

it is unlikely to be easily stopped in one place it should be relatively easy to offer a counter

without being upset in other places as well. attraction. Unfortunately, even in the sea

The maturation of oocytes to ova is likely urchin, the evidence for any such mechanism

to be more specific.

is equivocal. In mammals the gametes

The literature of world travel contains appear to meet in the Fallopian tube by

many references to herbs that are eaten in accident and there seems to be little chance

primitive communities to prevent concep- of interfering with their meeting in this way.

tion. As a rule the plant is left unidentified, The actual union involves many separate

but one, Lithospermum ruderale, is known to processes; these are to some extent under-

be so used by the Navajo. The extracts of stood and hold out good hopes of inhibition.

the root that have been made so far are Mammalian ova have probably never been

poisonous and have to be used with care, but fertilized in vitro (Austin, I95I; Smith,

they indubitably inhibit ovulation. The I951), but Moricard (I950) has fertilized them

effect is apparently due to inhibition of the in pieces of isolated Fallopian tube. The

anterior lobe of the pituitary (Noble, Plun- nature of the contribution made by the tube

kett and Taylor, I950), but circulating is not understood, but it would repay study

hormones may also be sequestrated (Skelton for it might be specific and inhibitable.

and Grant' I95I) and there are effects on Although the whole process cannot be studied

other glands. Some of the effects can be in vitro useful information has been gained

reproduced by tannins and there is no reason about different aspects of it.

to think that all are due to the same sub- The first barrier that the sperm has to pass

stance in these crude extracts. In their is the gelatinous mass of cumulus or follicle

present state the extracts are not of practical cells surrounding the ovum. This mass can

134 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
readily be dispersed by the enzyme hyalu- by an acid and reducing environment. There ronidase which is found in the testis and in is no detailed information about the nature or on sperm. The obvious interpretation is of this action and therefore no reason to that the sperm gets through because of the think that it will be more easily inhibited presence of hyaluronidase (McClean and than hyaluronidase. The same difficulties
Rowlands, I942) and the corollary of this, apply; the inhibitor is put in at one place in
since the enzyme is found in few other places the hope that it will act at another. Nothing in the mammalian body if indeed in any, is is known about the biochemistry of the that if the enzyme were inhibited penetration penetration of the vitellus. Twvo spenn would be impaired or prevented. Hadidian rarely get into one ovum; the surface and Pine (I948) found that nitrated hyalu- becomes impenetrable soon after one sperm ronic acid inhibited the enzyme and Pincus, has passed through it. Much is known about Pirie and Chang (1948) found that it this phenomenon but its mechanism is still inhibited the dispersal of cumulus cells in obscure and it deserves still further study. vitro and acted as a contraceptive when put What a sperm can do a biochemist should be
into rabbits' vaginas before mating. Martin able to do also.
and Beiler (I952) have used the same idea to
better effect by giving phosphorylated hes- The Implantaton of the Zygote
peridin, which is also an inhibitor of hyalu- The fertilized ovum moves down into the ronidase, by injection and by mouth. In uterus and erodes an attachment site for rats it reduced fertility to one-fifth without itself. By the time attachment is complete being toxic or affecting oestrus. These and a placenta has begun to form the results are encouraging because a selective problem has passed beyond the scope of this enzyme inhibitor could be used at higher paper, but many biochemical processes are concentrations than the types of substance involved during the period of attachment. used hitherto as spermicides. If something It is now generally agreed that deficiency in even better than phospho-hesperidin can be either progesterone or vitamini E impairs found which works by a route other than the attachment and work is proceeding on the
vagina the prospects are hopeful. Vaginal possibilities of simulating such a deficiency
hyaluronidase inhibitors do not immobilize with analogues to either substance. This sperm, so that they will be ineffective unless method of approach has the great advantage they can remove or permanently inhibit the that the agent would probably be given by enzyme during the period of contact in the some other route than the vagina and its vagina; this capacity has not been demon- effects would last for several weeks at least. strated. It is claimed that the importance of Unfortunately no results have been published hyaluronidase has been exaggerated because as yet that suggest that the problem has rabbit eggs have been found that are fer- been solved, but there have been some statetilized although still surrounded by cumulus ments in the popular Press suggesting that cells; but for fertilization it is only necessary results are encouraging. A method that may for the sperm to make a tunnel large enough have a somewhat similar rationale is the for it to get through and there is no reason Grafenberg ring which was used extensively why such a tunnel should be visible. A twenty years ago but was then nearly powerful and harmless antihyaluronidase universally condemned. A loop of silver wire would not necessarily be a practical contra- in the uterus irritates the endometrium ceptive, but the possibility seems good. sufficiently to prevent implantation as a
Having passed the layer of cumulus cells rule. But implantation sometimes takes the sperm meets first the zona pellucida and place in spite of it and the ring may come out then the vitellus. Austin (I95I) finds that or get corroded. For these reasons the rat sperm make a slit in the zona and popularity of the method has declined, but suggests that this is due to the action of a there may still be the germ of an idea here. mucolytic enzyme whose action is favoured If the action is predominantly mechanical it

BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION CONTROL

may be that another metal, such as tantalum
or stainless steel, would be more suitable than silver. If on the other hand the action is
chemical and the slow corrosion of the ring is an essential part of the process, research is
called for to see if the results would not be better with slowly dispersing pellets than
with the rings used now. All the subjects for research that have
been discussed so far have certainty as their object; they have been treated from the standpoint of the prevention of conception although, as has been pointed out, the same knowledge is likely to be of use in certain

object. Much could be done to change a
population trend if the general fecundity were altered so that the same amount of sexual activity led to a different number of pregnancies. This could be the result of a
relatively trivial change. Thus it has been suggested that the decline in fertility which generally accompanies a rise in the standard
of living is due to the more widespread use of soap, for soap is a potent spermicide. Furthermore, changes in hygienic customs affect the bacterial flora of the vagina and cervix and this probably affects fecundity. The suggestion has indeed been made that

SYNOPSIS OF THE SUBJECTS CONSIDERED AND OF THEIR USEFULNESS IN CONTRACEPTION

Subject

Present Prospects for Probability of Probability of

information inhibition specificity satisfactoriness

Spermatogenesis

... ...

fair

good little little

Sperm maturation

...

. ...

little

-

-

-

Semen composition and texture

good good good some

Sperm motility
Movement through

... I
cervix

...

.

fair
some

good good

good good

some fair

Oogenesis

... little poor poor poor

Ovum maturation and discharge ... fair

good

fair

fair

Ovum movement

...

... little

-

-

-

Meeting of the gametes

... little

Union of the gametes

Traversing of I. cumulus

... good

good

good

2. zona pellucida ... little

3. vitellus ... ... none

fair

Movement of zygote .... ... ... little Implantation of zygote ... ... ... good good good good

cases of involuntary sterility. The survey of present knowledge and future prospects has been unavoidably brief and a table may make the sequence of events and their relative vulnerability clearer. It is hardly to be expected that those familiar with the subject will agree with all the judgments made on such imponderables as the extent of knowledge in different fields and the probabilities of success in research. All that can be hoped for is that absurdities have been avoided. For the sake of simplicity the table has been limited to biochemical aspects of the problem.
Social Influences on Fertility
The problem is not however limited to techniques that have certainty as their
D

floral changes could be made deliberately which would promote or discourage fertility. The decline has also been attributed to the increase in protein intake that generally accompanies a rise in the standard of living, but most of the experiments carried out with animals do not substantiate this suggestion and so many things alter when the standard of living alters that it is unreasonable to pick on one of them without further evidence. The effects of variation in the intake of protein, vitamins and other nutrients were analysed at a symposium on " Nutrition and
Fertility " that the Nutrition Society held in
I949; che record bristles with suggestions
for further work, but nothing immediately
applicable emerged.

136 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The behaviour pattern of a community been expended on their development and

affects its fertility in many other ways. Thus improvement.

the hormonal interrelations of lactation and On the other hand one is told that existing

ovulation diminish the likelihood of another methods are not so bad. " Not so bad as

pregnancy in the period while a child is being what ? " is the obvious reply. Clearly they

suckled. This is important in many primitive are better than nothing and every form of

communities where weaning, on our contem- help and encouragement should be given to

porary standards, is delayed. But Shakes- those who spread knowledge of them. But

peare accepted without surprise the weaning even among people in a civilized environment

of Juliet at three. The experience seems to they fall short of perfection and are largely

have done her no harm; she was responsive impractical among more primitive peoples.

enough at fourteen, In an industrialized It is no use arguing that they would be

community, however, delayed weaning would adequate if people were more sensible. The

have disadvantages. The precise effect of fact that people are sometimes silly must be

each social change on fecundity has not been, recognized and it is as unreasonable to

and perhaps cannot be, ascertained and it is devise a contraceptive method that dis-

unprofitable to pursue the matter further for regards this as it would be to devise one that

we are in a realm in which fad takes pre- depended on spern having properties differ-

cedence over fact. In any event, in spite of ent from those L,,ey are known to have. No

Hecate's assertion that " -security is mor- method can be looked on as fully satisfactory

tal's chiefest enemy " this is a field in which unless it has such a margin of safety as to

most people value security above a mere remain effective even when used with some

alteration in the odds however important lack of skill. Furthermore a satisfactory

that may be demographically.

method should require only infrequent

attention, otherwise a revulsion against the

Factors Disc.ouraging Research

whole business (cf. Mitchison, I930) may be

It is obvious that there is no shortage of built up. This would certainly solve one

problems in a study of the gametes, their problem, but only at the cost of introducing

union and the development of the zygote. another. The facts of psychology, incon-

From the appearance recently of several venient as they may be, are as real as the

excellent reviews (Tyler I948, Mann I949, facts of biochemistry.

Biochemical Soc. Symp. I95I, Rothschild The Royal Commission on Population,

I952) it is also clear that there is a growing reporting in I949, fully recognized the

awareness of the intrinsic interest of the defects of present methods. The Com-

subject. The need for intensive work on the mission's words are worth quoting (para.

application of this knowledge to contracep- 427): " Control by men and women over the

tion is less widely recognized or accepted. numbers of their children is one of the first

On the one hand one gets told " Work is conditions of their own and the community's

being done on that; there is so-and-so and so-and-so." This misconceives the amount of work that will probably be necessary. It is only because more than a hundred able scientists have studied pepsin during the last hundred years that we can now make adequate technological use of it. If as much
work had been done on hyaluronidase we would be using it for something, though

welfare and in our view mechanical and
chemical methods of contraception have to
be accepted as part of the modem means,
however imperfect, by which it can be exercised." The Conunission makes no proposals- about how these recognized imperfections could be remedied; its acceptance of them has the sublimity of Margaret

possibly not contraception. To take a more Fuller's remark " I accept the Universe."

recent example: antibiotics do not yet give To this Thomas Carlyle responded " By

complete satisfaction in spite of the io to God ! she'd better." Fortunately there is no

ioo million able man-hours that have akeady similar compulsion in this instance and we

BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION CONTROL

I37

may go on to consider how and by whom the exists so that what looks like hypocrisy may

necessary research could be done.

in fact be the beginnings of wisdom.

The nations fall into three fairly distinct

Potential Supporters of Research
Pressure of population and shortage of food are such well-known stimulants to aggression that the international bodies such as the World Health Organization and FAO have an obvious interest. At present they seem to be more concerned with medical services, which exacerbate the problem, and with arranging for food shipments and improvements in agriculture, which are palliatives. There is as yet no sign that the world organizations have recognized that there is a population limit somewhere and that we are not equipped with the information to deal with the problems that will arise when we seem to be getting close to it. When it is possible to plan at least the upper limit of a country's population there will be one simple criterion of aggressive intent; the ratio of population to food supply. During the last half-century there have been several examples of deliberate attempts by governments to create a population problem, even in hungry countries, by encouraging fecundity. The idea is not new; it was apparent to Shakespeare when he wrote
"To't luxury, pell mell! for I lack soldiers."

categories; some have already an obvious population problem but lack the research organization to do anything about it, at least along the lines suggested in this paper. Others, notably Britain and similar industrialized countries, feed precariously with their present populations. A few countries still seem to have ample food. We in the middle group have a special responsibility, we not only need the knowledge ourselves but we have a duty to help the others. In the past we have shown great missionary zeal in spreading education round the world and in undertaking a wide range of activities for other peoples less able to cope with them; it may be that we should undertake research
for the world also.
The best reason why we should undertake
research on contraception is that the results
would probably be welcomed by most of our own population. There are other reasons and
one important one is that this research should diminish the number of illegal abortions. There are no accurate figures, but the rate
may safely be put at 50,000-I00,000 annually in this country -and some authori-
ties give an even higher figure. Even under
proper conditions abortion is not to be undertaken lightly; under the inadequate

But Lear was mad when he said that; more conditions created by illegality it is a major

recent users of the same argument are some- health hazard and a cause of subsequent

times not so judged. Hitherto an expanding ill-health. There are many diseases which

population has found room by filling an affect a much smaller proportion of the

empty area or by shoving the earlier occu- population while having well-financed, and

pants out of a filled one. We from Britain deservedly well-financed, research organiza-

have done both exuberantly and we are open tions examining their prevention and cure.

to the charge of hypocrisy if we now say that The fact that abortion is illegal and is

other people should not follow our bad entered upon voluntarily does not affect the

example but should try to live within their medical issue. Medicine is concemed with

present domain and on its produce. There is the protection of people from the con-

no fairness in our plea; we had our turn of sequences of their deliberate even if foolish

expansion, why should not others have actions as much as with their protection from

theirs? There is no fairness but there is other causes of ill-health. We are concerned

some practical sense. It is practical, if simply with the question: How many

inmmoral, to replace the occupants of a filled abortions are due to the failure of contra-

land when there is a great disparity in the ception? Only a guess can be made, but it is

technical attainments of the two sides. There very unlikely that the number is less than

are few areas in which this disparity still half of the total. We do not therefore have

138 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to go to distant or primitive peoples to find responsibility becomes more widespread in

a reason for wanting more research on con- the community and it becomes easier to

traception-it is on our doorsteps and in the persuade those who carry undesirable traits

back streets. And it is there on a scale that that it would be a mistake for them to have

seems amply large enough to justify official children. In general the more they want

recognition and the establishment of a children the easier it is to persuade them of

research unit.

this because the positive wish to have

There are many other types of organization children is often part of a socially responsible

that should support, or at least not obstruct, attitude. For the rest the availability of fully

this research and prominent among them are adequate contraception should solve the

the religious and ethical communities. Even problem. The motive behind most copulation

if we accept the view of some religious groups is sex and not procreation. Housman's

that erotic satisfaction to an extent greater dictum

than that needed to maintain the population

The night my father got me

is to be deplored, it still seems unethical to

His mind was not on me;

use a child as the sanction for promoting this is a fairly adequate summary of the matter.

viewpoint. Similarly, fear of pregnancy Until a sustained attempt to get voluntary

seems to be a poor method of enforcing a eugenics has been made, and has failed in

moral code on those who are not married. spite of the provision of an irreproachable

If an ethical belief is worth having it is worth contraceptive technique, there is no case for

having for its own sake and lapses from it advocating further legal restrictions. The

should carry a spiritual rather than a domes- scientist is not entitled to advocate further

tic penalty; there can be no proof that the restrictions on childbearing, with all the

belief is genuine for as long as a lapse may social and emotional complications they

be followed by physical consequences. Much involve, until the research that he has done

emotional distress is caused by unattained is beyond criticism.

or unwanted pregnancies and it would seem In pursuing the question of how to get the

to be as much the business of the Churches necessary enormous amount of work done on

now to help in avoiding the, consequent the gametes we come in the end to the

personal and national troubles as it was the research worker. There is no need to enlarge

business of the Church in the Middle Ages on the intrinsic interest of the problem; it

to organize the hospitals.

is obvious, and has already been commented

Finally there are bodies such as the on briefly (Pirie, I952). This alone, were it not

Eugenics Society. Clearly there can be no for a certain prudery and the relative

eugenics unless births are in some way inaccessibility of the research material,

controlled. At present contraception works should have got much of the necessary work

dysgenically if at all. In the popular phrase done long ago. Material is now becoming

we breed from the " reckless and the more accessible and, as has been pointed out,

feckless" and the descendants of the there is an increasing recognition of the

careless and the inexpert are a growing theme. Scientists respond to much the same

community. If a1l births were deliberate there set of stimuli as other people; if ordered

might well be a sharp decline in the popula- about they are obstructive, if flattered a

tion, but it would be a controlled decline for little and offered opportunities they tend to

we should always be breeding from the most co-operate. If the public moved angrily,

philoprogenitive section of the community. even if democratically, and said, as in my

If philoprogenitiveness is inherited there will view it would be thoroughly justified in

therefore be no need to fear national extinc- saying, " What do you people think you are

tion, for as soon as it appears that a larger doing occupying all these buildings and

population is feasible or desirable expansion spending all these millions every year while

is likely to be immediate (cf. Blacker, I950). we still have to put up with the common cold

As time goes on the awareness of social and messy, inadequate and archaic methods

BIOCHEMISTRY OF CONCEPTION CONTROL

of contraception I " we scientists would talk smoothly of the difficulties and dagers and the necessity for hastening slowly. We might convince our critics, but would we convince each other? More important, would we convince ourselves ?
There is no agreement about the imminence of world overpopulation. In some quarters there is near panic, whereas the contributors to Four Thousand MiUion MouWhs, by emphasising the unexploited possibilities of getting more food, suggested that we have a little time at our disposal. At present erotics and fecundity are entangled. The thesis of this paper is that with adequate research they could be dissociated. Once a community had an emotionally and aesthetically satisfactory contraceptive technique the birth-rate would reflect the demand for children and nothing else. Without any coercion a birth-rate compatible with space and food supplies would then be achieved. This is of course a pure assumption, but it seems plausible and there is no acceptable alternative. It is clear that many social, moral and political consequences would follow the establishment of this dissociation. With these we are not here concerned; equally serious though different consequences will follow the failure to establish it. But no control can be established until we have much more knowledge, and research on the necessary scale is not yet being done.
Summary Present methods of contraception are
extremely useful and should be made more widely known, but they fall short of perfection both on the score of reliability and esthetics. They have been produced mainly by ad hoc research and the argument is developed that better results would follow a more elaborate and thorough investigation of the biochemistry and physiology of sperm and ovum and of the whole process of their union, and of the development of the zygote. This information would also help in preventing some involuntary sterility. The

existing body of knowledge is surveyed cursorily and suggestions are made about the more promising lnes.
A very great deal of work will probably be
needed before fully satisfactory methods of
contraception are developed and a few suggestions are made about the organizations or groups that might finance it and about the arguments that could be used to persuade
them to do so.

REFERENCES

Aristotle (c. -330). Generation of Animals, Bk. 2, sect. 2.

Austin, C. R. (I95I). " Observations on the penetration

of the sperm into the mammalian egg." Aust. J.

Sci. Res., 4, 58I.

Baker, J. (I935). The chemical control of conception.

Chapman & Hall.

Barton, M., and Wiesner, B. P. (I95I). " Contracep-

tion-recent developments in technique and their

evaluation." Med. Press, 226, 43.

Biochemical Society Symposia No. 7 (I95I). " The

biochemistry of fertilization and the gametes."

Cambridge.

Blacker, C. P. (I950). " The control of population."

Eugenics Rev., 42, 149.

Clark, F. le Gros, and Pirie, N. W. (eds., 195I). Four

Thousand Million Mouths. Oxford.

Hadidian, Z., and Pirie, N. W. (1948). "The effects of

serum and of hyaluronic acid derivatives on the

action of hyaluronidase." Biochem. J., 42, 266.

Henle, W., Henle, G., and Chambers, L. A. (1938).

Studies on the antigenic structure of some

mammalian spermatozoa." J. exp. Med., 68, 335.

Lardy, H. A., Ghosh, D., and Plaut, G. W. E. (I949).

" A metabolic regulator in mammalian sperma-

tozoa." Science, 109, 365.

Mann, T. (y949). "Metabolism of Semen." Adv.

Enzymology, 9, 329.

(195i a). " Mammalian semen: composition,

metabolism and survival." Biochem. Soc. Symposia

No. 7, I I.
-95i b). " Inositol, a major constituent of the
seminal vescicle secretion of the boar." Nature,

168, 1I,043.
McClean, D., and Rowlands, I. W. (1942). " The role

of hyaluronidase in fertilization." Nature, 150, 627.

Martin, G. J., and Beiler, J. M. (1952). " Effect of phosphorylated hesperidin, a hyaluronidase inhibi-

tor, on fertility in the rat." Science, 115, 402.

Mitchison, N. (1930). " Comments on birth control." Criterion Miscellany No. 12. Faber and Faber.

Moricard, R. (1950). " Penetration of the spermato-

zoon in vitro into the mammalian ovum oxydo

potential level." Nature, 165, 763.

Noble, R. L., Plunkett, E. R., and Taylor, N. B. G.

(1950). " Factors affecting the control of the

pituitary gland. II, Anterior lobe." Recent Prog.

in Hormone Research, 5, 284. "Nutrition and Fertility" (I949). Brit. J. Nutrition,

3, 79. Parkes, A. S.

(I944).

"Reproduction and its endocrine

control." Ann. Rev. Physiol., 6, 483.

Parsons, E. I., and Hyde, R. B. (I940). " An evalua-

tion of spermatoxic sera in the prevention of

pregnancy." Am. J. Hygiene, 31, 389.

140 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Pincus, G., Pirie, N. W., aad Chang, M. C. (1948). "The effects of hyaluronidase inhibitors on fertilization in the rabbit." Arch. Biochem., 19,
388. Pirie, N. W. (1952). " Basic research into contracep-
tion." Lancet, 262, 54. Rothschild, V. (i5). " Sea-urchin spermatozoa."
Biot. Rev., 26, z.
- (1952). " Spermatozoa." Science Progress, 40, I. Royal Commission on Population (1949). Report.
H.M.S.O. Cmd. 7695.
Skelton, F. R., and Grant, G. A. (I95I). " Studies on the action of Lithospermum ruderake." Am. J. Physiol., 167, 379.
Smith, A. U. (i951). " Fertilization in vitro of the
mammalian egg." Biochem. Soc. Symposia No. 7, 3.

Taylor, G. I. (1952). " The action of waving cylindrical tails in propelling microscopic organisms." Proc. Roy. Soc., 211, 225.
Tyler, A. (1948). "Fertilization and immunity." Physiol. Rev., 28, I8o.
Wajzer, J., and Brochart, M. (I947). " Pr6sence de la
phosphoarginine dans les spermatozoldes de Mammiferes." C. R. Acad. Sci., 225, 965. Young, W. C. (I93I). " A study of the function of the epididymis. III. Functional changes undergone by spermatozoa during their passage through the epididymis and vas deferens in the guinea pig."
J. exp. Biol., 8, 15I.
Zuckerman, S. (z951). " The number of oocytes in the
mature ovary." Recent Prog. in Hormone Research, 6, 63.

PPOPULATION STUDIES

Edited by D. V. GLASS

Vol. VI. No. 1

CONFN

July 1952

CICELY WATSON. Recent Developments in French Immigration Policy H. BERNARDELLI. New Zealand and Asiatic migration H. SILCOCK. Estimating by Sample the Size and Age-Sex Structure of a Population D. V. GLASS. The Population Controversy in Eighteenth-century England. Part I. The
Background
KENNETH SmirH. Some Observations on Modern Malthusianism S. W. CAFN. Infantile Mortality Rates Book Reviews Books and Publications Received Letters to the Editor
SUBSCRIPTION: 30s. ise per volume of three parts

Published for the POPULATION INVEBTIGATION COMMTrEE by the CAMBRIDGE UNIvUSITY PRESS, 200 EUSTON RowD, LONDON, N.W.i.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 8

