OMIEIEECCIOOIMNI IOCOPSLETUEINNES F

~
.1

~

B J.M.KENE

HE future never resembles the past-as we well know. But, generally sper_kig. our imagination and our owledge are too weak to tell us what
articular changes to expect. We do not
ow what the future holds. Nevertheless,
lig and moving beings, we are forced
o act. Peace and comfort of mind requirE
at we should bide from ourselves how little
e foresee. Yet we must be guided by some ypothesis. We tend, therefore, to substitute or the knowledge which is unattainable rtain conventions, the chief of which is to
sume, contrary to all likelihood, that the
ture will resemble the past. This is how e act in practice. Though it was, I think,
ingredient in the complacency of the
eteenth century that, in their philoophical reflections on human behaviour, ey accepted an extraordinary contraption f the Benthamite School, by which all
ssible consequences of alternative courses f action were supposed to have attached o them, first a number expressing their omparative advantage, and secondly anther number expressing the probability of heir following ffom the course of action in
question; so that multiplying together the umbers attached to l the possible conse-
qnces of a given action and adding the esults, we could discover what to do. In
s way a mythical system of probable nowledge was employed to reduce the ture to the same calculable status as the resent. No one has ever acted on this thory. But even to-day I believe that our
thught is sometimes influenced. by some
such pseudo-rationalistic notions.
iNow I emphasize to-night the importanlce
of this convention by which we assume the
* lThe Galton Lecture, delivered before the Eugcn~ics
ISocitey on February z6th, xg3v.

future to be much more like the past than is reasonable--a convention of behaviour
which none of us could possibly do withoutbecause, as I think, it continues to influence our minds even in those cases where we do
have good reason to expeeI'La definite change.
And, perhaps, the most outstanding example of a case where we in fact have a considerable power of seeing into the future is the prospec-
tive trend of population. We know much more securely than we know almost any other social or econonic factor relating to
the future that, in the place of the steady
and indeed steeply r;.sing level of population which we have experienced for a great number of decades, we shall be faced in a very short time with a stationary or a declining level. The rate of decline is doubtful, but it is virtually certain that the changeover, compared with what we have been used to, will be substantial. We have this unusual degree of knowledge concerning the future
because of the long but definite time-lag in
the effects of vital statistics. Nevertheless
the idea of the future being different from the present is so repugnant to our conventional modes of thought and behaviour that we, most of us, offer a great resistance to acting on it in practice. There are, indeed, several important social consequences
already predictable as a result of a rise in
population being changed into a decline. But my object this evening is to deal, m particular, with one outstanding economic
consequence of this impending change; if, that is to say, I can, for a moment, persuade
you sufficiently to depart from the established conventions of your mind as to accept the idea that the future will differ from the past.
II
An increasing population has a very iml-
portant influence on the demand for capital.
Not only does the demand for capital-

I3

%I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

apart from technical changes and an im- transport, st ndardt of lou s 1ng pUNic

proved standard of life-increase more or services were of such a character 'thatthey

less in proportion to population. But, busi- did tend somewhat to,increase the period

ness expectations being based much more on of consuption. it is well known.that highly

present than on prospective demand, an era durable objects were characteristic of the

of increasing population tends to promote Victorian civilization. But it is not equay

optimism, since demand will in general clear that the same th,ing is true to-day.

tend to exceed, rather than fall short of, Many moder inventions are directed to-

what was hoped for. Moreover a mistake, wards finding ways of reducng the amot

resulting in a particular type of capital of capital investment necessary to prdtce

bping in temporarv over-supplv, is in such a given result; and partly as the result of

conditions rapidly corrected. But in an era our experience as to the rapidity of-chadge

of declining population the opposite is true. in tastes. and. technique, our prefetence is

Demand tends to be below what was ex- decidedly directed tods those types of

pected, and a state of over-supply is less capital goods which are not. too 4iu.able. I

easily corrected. Thus a pessimistic atmos- do not believe, therefore, :that We. can rely

phere may ensue; and, although at long on current changes of technique being of -the

last pessimism may tend to correct itself kind which tend of themselves to increase

through its effect on supply, the first result materially the average period of pr6duction.

to prosperity of a change-over from an in- It may even be the case that, aparfrt m

creasing to a declining population may be the effect of possible changes in the .&te

very disastrous.

of interest, the average period may- be

In assessing the causes of the enormous tending to diminiAsh. Moreover an nimproving

increase in capital during the nineteenth average level of consumption may con-

century and since, too little importance, I ceivably have, in itself, the effect of dimin-

think, has been given to the influence of an ishing the average period of production. For

increasing populati6n as distinct from other .as we get richer, our consumption tends to

influences. The demand for capital depends, *be directed towards those articles of con-

of course, on three factors: on population, sumption, particularly the services of other J

on the standard of life, and on capital people, which have a relatively short average

technique. By capital technique I mean the period of production.

relative importance of long processes as an Now, if the number of consumers is falling >

efficient method of procunng what is cur- off and we cannot rely on any signifcant

rently consumed, the factor I have in mind technical lengthening of the period of pro;

being conveniently described as the period duction, the demand for a net increase- of

of production, which is, roughly speaklng, a Ccapital goods is thrown back into being

weighted average of the interval- which wholly dependent on an improvement inhthe

eLapses between the work done and the consumxption of the product. In other words the

iaverage level of consumto or .on a fall -inI the rate of interest. I will attempt to give

demand for capital depends on the number of a few very rough figures.to illustrate te

consumers, the average level of consumnption, order of magnitude of the different factors

and the average period of productiont.

involved.:.

Now it is necessarily the case that an Let us .c.onsider the period of- just over

increase in population increases proportion- fifty years from I86O to 1913. I fid no

ately the demand for capital; and the pro- evidence of.any important chnge in -t-he

gress of invention may be relied on to raise length of the techical perio of production.

the standard of life. But the effect of inven- Statistics of quantitwy of rea cap.ital present

tionl on the period of production depends on special difficulties.. But those wh.ich we hiave

the- type of invention which is characteristic do n~ot suggest that there have- been large

of the age. It may have been true of the
jikteentli century that improvements in

*changes in the amount of capital employed to
produce a unIit of output.0 TWo of the most

SOE -OCIC CONQNCES OF A DECLIING POPULATION

hly c ditaI nzcdservic6, those of hog
d;Ltoufreagrhraisc..udlitmuirneiarseheodld-ienstraebllaitsihveed.imApgorri-ce.Ony ifpeolewere to spenda decidedly
creased proportion of their incomes on using, as to which there is indeed a certain
ount of evidences for the post-war period, Lould I expect a significant lengthening of Le technical period of production. For the ty years before the war, during which the ng-period average of the rate of interest
as fairiy jcnstant I feel some confidence at the period.was not lengthened by much
ore than 1O per cent., if as much. Now during-the, s ame period the British
Dpulation increased by.about 50 per cent.,
d the population which British industry
d investment was serving by a much
igher figure. And I suppose that the
tandard of life must have risen by some-
here about 6o per cent. Thus the increased
mand for capital was primarily attriutable to the increasing population and to e rising standard of life, and only in a
or degree to technical changes of a Idnd
ich called for an increasing capitalization
er unit of consumption. To sum up, the opulation figures, which are reliable, indite that about half the increase in capital
a required to serve the increasing populaion. Perhaps the figures were about as
ows, though I would emphasize that
ese conclusions are very rough and to be
rded only as broad pointers to what was
ong on:

I86o
Real capital ..... I0o
| Population ..... 100 m Standard of life ..... 100
Period of Production Ioo

I9I3
270
150 i6o II0

wItIth tfhoellsoawsmetihamtpraovestmaetnitonianrythpeosptualnadtaiornd

of life period

ofanplrdodzuthcetisonamweoullednhgathveenirnegquiorfedtahne

increase in the 'stock-- of capital of only a

little more tha~n half of the increase which

actually occurred. Moreover, whilst nearly

half of the home invsmn was required

by the increae in population, probably a

substantill hiighter pzroportion of the foreign

investment of
to this cause.

that

period

was

attrbutable

wirewnpittttswyoafpyYsacanahnanaaifeoaehhhhhtmaonrnnooisgitctpsaroeeeteipOssnugustuuesrcisirtcci,rclwuwluirnfeetiootshkosoeeheaoteeeydmdaabnniwaepnnsulrxyrlslzediaxtpatiootttbwpeeemlilnahsloinaiffihettetehltieettscosagnoihenhhcittiinnieniefiyicpcdnta-noioeowocaottcpssa.-stroncuntqltneeht.rfopioaiacsmrouhhwhaetoiimnanvbonreomamdeteaoTptwnecdenoemaaficilenrrIaortihefdlterrbdibaelorec8ithiewee.tailhdtfeaftaefhcsaohsgkyifaosatruispteovetieeosleereen,noioeiacrxlhenfacTepaonfnvrnidosbiiieairnvaihachcoaeeWsownle.tnnoeoalchnntarittmdwsusocfetdtdyitheaptogionaihtpfynoBwentventiiclmuoeerhnergrstasuhhsfif.nceeroolieoiacdsnleotulntscesprnyddp.oecunuriaehg,.oanfoisrmmoncea,rmiunbtarIdtsftannoeteagcedomsteiiTtoowtctdiInetWtnthiaeiofhhcbeiiilhfnsoehbttilbno1hekistoytimsrevialinhmean5os,nsidaeahorcfevltnmela,lduaooeysllhtreokipgel,nfnrabivteodoscenwstnyesahfsouheytfwitlmrxiaoocfootta?ieoioneiaysrnatntmfoouotfnnwccshecpboouan-dtaieekdtaihaotocmdtbfumdtothtnirtnTuavmuaeelahhaeuthiin'oaolyioyeett.n-.yaeerlynnergslflfs

wpiscrhi£Iaeetnn4haoinrc,cepmstfl0rsree.oau0eelwtd0nmolhih£fenobneemInwugeair5stfmlte,ily.fwt0giieoueh0bonarrae0nereetsn'tti,stghwnmone2ei,oieleunswpislnrcainetyoovrios,8nmenctsesckvf.opetoecnemmuosktreefrt.(namoaIctcnefanea,nsndnpacttidawaamtphaaaih4ctiltanucnalpdamolhofefutrrtli1waissa5mtocothpeeeumiepesnlver.ertod)ee--.rf

lToidtttthanreriaoactaonkLtieisngee-trtnttteinohthsacafoehmtstnoeciesfseryrhunueeftartcmomfhnehipotioascgetcmhvtaieieenpaaeroIoinlvinttthnefhsularaotalatvacfoarthtgentgemoeeetiarboshmdedtpeciaessheehisfaealrenftfv.niyyerralmocitegrdsatwbdteguivuk;hobunotiiafsgminnttoaeagatpnnnsttnhtrsdhhstoe.eueooifrmfapdfreuwlprPaaurletorlittyaitpsheetlootoeiantnrhroo.ow-hs,ef

.x6 THE EUG-ENICS -

we shall return later. On these assumptions, some way -and some the other, and it- is not

however, with our existing organization, clear-assuming a constant rate of interest

and in conditions of prosperty and full -that the net result of'invention changes

employment, we shall have to discover a demand for capital perI unit of output one

demand for net additions to our stock of way or the other.

capital amounting to somewhere between 2 It follows, therefore, that to ensure

per cent. and 4 per cent. annually. And this equilibrum conditions of prosperty over a

will have to continue year after year indefi- period of years it will be essenti;d, mither that

,..nitely. Let us in what follows take the lower we alter our institutions and the distribution

estimate-namely 2 per cent.-1since if this of wealth in a way which causes a smaler

is toolw^ the arunment will be a fortiori. proportion of income to be saved, or that we

Hitherto the demand for new capital has reduce the rate of interest sumicienuy To

come from two sources, each of about equal make profitable very large changes in

strength : a little less than half of it to meet technique or in the direction of consumption

the demands of a growing population; a which involve a much larger use of capital

little more than half of it to meet the in proportion to output. Or, of course, as

demands of inventions and improvements would be wisest, we could pursue both

which increase output per head and permit policies to a certain extent.

a higher standard of life.

Now past expenence shows that a greater cumulative increment than i per cent. per

III

annum in the standard of life has seldom WVhat relation do these views bear to the

proved practicable. Even if the fertility of older Malthusian theory that more capital

invention would permit more, we cannot resources per head (chiefly envisaged by the

easily adjust ourselves to a greater rate of older writers in the shape of Land) must be

change than this involves. There may have of immense benefit to the standard of life,

been one or two decades in this country and that the' growth of population was

during the past hundred years when im- disastrous to human standards by retarding

provement has proceeded at the rate of I per this increase? It may seem at first sight

cent. per annum. But generally speaking the that I am contesting this old theory and am

rate of improvement seems to have been arguing, on the contrary, that a phase of

somewhat less than i per cent. per annum declining population will make it immensely

cumulative.

more difficult than before to maintain

I am here distinguishing, you will see, prosperity.

between those inventions which enable a In a sense this is a true interpretation of

unit of capital to yield a unit of product what I am saying. But if there are any old

with the aid of less labour than before, and Malthusians here present let them not

those which lead to a change in the amount suppose that I am rejecting their essentia

of capital employed more than in proportion argument. Unquestionably a stationary

to the resulting output. I am assuming that population does facilitate a rising standard

the former class of improvements will pro-. Of life; but on one condition only--na,mely

ceed in the future as in the recent past, and that the increase in resources or in. consump-

am ready to take as my assumption that tion, as the case may be, which the station-

they will proceed in the near future up to the ariness of population makes possible, does

best standard we have ever experienced in actually take place.~ For we br'e-qiv

any previous decade ; and I calculate that inventions falling under this head are not

learned that we have another devil at' 'our elbow at least as fierce- as the Malthusian-

likely to absorb much more than half of our namely the devil of unemployment escaping

savings, assuming conditions of full employ- through the breakdown of effective demand

ment and a stationary population. But in Perhaps we-could call this devil -too- a
the second category some inventions cut Malthusian devil, since it was Malthus

eCNDENCES OF A DEG PULATION

hiWab&6ut.him.'Forjust
I'the 'young :,.;,.,.,,,,as vwas distu 'byb.yd the
s Of pO t ashe.. aw them round
and.soght to .rational that problem,
the'older Maithus was no less disturbed the facts of. unemployment as he saw
,em round him an soug.ht,. farrless success-
y so far as his influence on the rest of the rld 'was. .concerned--to rationale that *oblem-too. Now when Malthusian devil
* is chained up, Maithusian devil U. is b Aeto lreoarose. Vhen devil P. of pulation- is chiined; up, we are free of one
enace;. but we are more exposed to the
ther devil -U. of Unemployed Resources
an we were before.
With a stationary population we shall, I
gue, be absoit. ly dependent for the mainnance of prosperity and civil peace on licies of increa.sing consumption by a
re equal dis$buton of incomes and of rcing down the rate.of interest so as to ake' profitable a .substantial change in the ngth of the period of production. If we do
ot, of set aiid' deterrmined purpose, pursue
*ese policies, then without question we hail be cheated of the benefits which we tand to gaine by.. the chaining up of one evil, and shall suffer from the perhaps more
ntolerable depredations of the other.
Yet there will be many social and political
'orces to oppose the necessary change. It is robable that we cannot make the changes
sely unless we make them gradually. We
nust foresee what- is before us and move to
leet it half<,way. If capitalist society rejects Lmore equal distribution of incomes and the orces of -banking, and finance succeed in
naintainiing the rate of interest somewhere
lear the figure which ruled on the average

rpihsbilctdrtaptettitioenliueyvamihhheoybotlswrsosreanepnpepnyeiaiolttcdodrt,erutrnuuaeut,rebehridgrltigmsmfetsnsmeo-sceiua,espsotoaicn,sefottiettrnwysfnawwhaasr.tiomceahenhtn.anshrtoenimi;yntcidafunoo,ul,taedtncaofwesawshcossnfbdhautsahetuuiseeortiitcrocordttihndsIsnlacifuhtheaisoahdspgaisnlathcbneileeteteaainettatmttplwnlstlanlyoaedshieotohlll.ilsbeittnehrrileigtouaesbdtalveogua-duceeeBecwcdhtdefainhnnaeuacsaitsbdelicatsirdduyloet-letmgpeeo)nmnetnde,pt,iwausmmatiom.rnhrfallaeohbpa,tot.yaprfapnenyoyphmndtetfolre-aorasaiot(ntidoniuhr.athounwhailaansehyanrhdettmtnai,cetdimsheisrtecaascgendpcehcrpuignhpriertheliatmnnrrasdoseorrritouaodwhtisttoeneltdptuiatetrghniauehninashheoeinooos--rgettee,lygrcfff,
ttsrsstmBtoatehithtbhhceuntoareaveaaAhdtnatetimnseisno.duamwnttcgeu.armeihootevssreneaopheltdogsryensayferat,etooao,neilfitfpaiuodhnfiwrlgnoiteovdiefharhhwfsolwiraetielysshyitwsvttnitddeeoeorphcoevorotawhacemnrhmlbnpshet,gewiilaexspann-eeoeenrttigrwtnnehnyc'lvaaaosrgiisyatbfksesllopatedesdsuoentoineehoesspvcoutuctoueltuthrsuhfllriohloseyenaedtsstiitptoeihnnimrbprongagoeeaowrrnetn,davoprchowiieboeeuewwostnhlpsvtheioteusneysiolumtlanilnoolsiahrtdsasitwd,,-eyetlen.
ficsniainoerogtIrnec.nldeeursetpIspha,oaennordfoltfnyimnlftwayorhliroesmessheuottirnmnohvemteewriaaodntcrleogtdvnaibullMylpoaoeo,l.mustaetthyhhue,aasrntieofaittfonhhreeewc,rcoehnIacsailtdirnulo-e-l

B, Eqgaiku Review, Vol.111, No.1.

