DIVORCE AND EUGENICS.
A study of the Report of the Divorce Commission indicates that the questions there dealt with have never been adequately considered from the eugenic point of view either in that Report or elsewhere, and also that the matters involved are far more complex than appears at first sight. These notes only represent a tentative survey of the subject, and a view is here taken which will not find favour in all eugenic quarters, at first at all events. The question at issue, namely, the eugenic effects of divorce granted in the cases of persons with serious heritable defects, is moreover here solely considered from the eugenic standpoint, without reference to other considerations of great importance.
Certain general questions will first be considered. It may be urged that if a couple cease to live together, it would be a eugenic advantage if both parties were free to take new mates, because the population would thus be greater than it would be if both remained sterile; and this contention may be supported on two grounds. (i) The increase in the population would, so it may be urged, favour the action of natural selection, and this would make for racial progress. But if the supply of commodities increased in proportion to the population there would be no increase in the severity of -the struggle for existence. It is true that, if supplies did not thus increase, life would become harder, and more of the weakly would be killed off in the struggle. But to claim this as an advantage is on a par with, for example, arguing against all efforts to stamp out consumption because of its beneficial racial effects. In my opinion, eugenists would do well to definitely and openly repudiate such doctrines. (2) It may also be urged that the greater the numbers the more chances there would be of favourable mutations appearing. But the greater the numbers, the longer time it would take for a favourable miutation to raise the average by a given amount. No doubt this contention may

374 EUGENICS REVIEW
be supported by the way in which continental faunae have displaced island types. But may this not be due to larger areas rather than greater numbers? In any case this argument is far too hypothetical for much weight to be attached to it, and we may conclude that a mere increase of numbers should not now be regarded as one of the objects to be aimed at by eugenists.
If a possible increase of numbers be left out of consideration, ought we then to regard divorce and re-marriage as a mere re-shuffling of the pack, producing no racial effects ? As against this view, it must be remembered that a less fit partner would be less likely to attract a second mate than the more fit person from whom he had been divorced; both because his greater unfitness would in any case render him less attractive, and also because certain forms of unfitness, such as disease, insanity, drunkenness, etc., might only have begun to show themselves during the first marriage. Thus divorce and re-marriage are in certain cases advantageous from the eugenic point of view, because the less fit partner thus becomes less likely to have progeny than the more fit party from whom separated.
On the other hand a general argument against all methods of breaking the marriage tie, or against making divorce too easily obtainable, may be founded on the fact, to quote the words of the Minority Commissioners, that " it is in the interests of the State to strengthen the sense of responsibility
in entering the married state." [Report, p. i88.] The more
binding is made the tie of marriage, the more would forethought be likely to be exercised in advance, and the greater would be the consideration given to the choice of mates. This eugenic advantage would, however, be somewhat mitigated by the fact that this sense of responsibility would be least aroused where it was most wanted, namely, amongst the careless classes. Moreover, if the door of divorce is to be opened too widely by future legislative reforms, it will be because it will be granted on grounds of mere separation for a number of years; whereas if only great and unquestionable heritable unfitness of one party are added as necessary conditions for divorce, as may be demanded in the interests of future generations, the tie of

DIVORCE AND EUGENICS

375

marriage would not thus be miaterially weakened. Thus
balancing this consideration against that mentioned in the last paragraph, it seems that on the whole it would be eugenically advantageous that the very unfit should cease to live with the more fit, who should then be free to take another mate.
There is, however, another general problem to be considered before this conclusion can be finally endorsed. Where a less fit person is divorced from one more fit, is it more advantageous that the less fit should become sterile, or that the more fit should breed ? I submit that the answer to this question depends on which is the more abnormal of the two, the less fit or the more fit. If, for example, a genius is divorced from a person only somewhat below the average intellectually, then obviously it is much more important that the genius should have subsequent progeny than that the other party should be sterile. But as no one, with the possible exceptions of Henry VIII. and Napoleon I., has ever advocated divorce on the ground of exceptional fitness, this side of the problem may be dismissed as being only of theoretical importance. On the other hand if, as is here submitted, it is far more advantageous to render sterile the very unfit if divorced than to permit a partner only somewhat above the normal to take a new mate and breed, and that the difference between the benefits thus obtainable is somewhat in proportion to the relative degrees of the unfitness and fitness of the two parties, we have here a fact of some importance. The breeder of sheep would unquestionably consider it to be a far greater disadvantage to have to allow a black sheep to breed than to be prevented from breeding from a corresponding number of white sheep of fairly good colour. If the stamping out of insanity, cruelty, drunkenness, and disease be the aim of the eugenist in this matter of divorce, according to all theories of
heredity, it would appear that the main aim of the eugenist should be to prevent the tainted from breeding. This conclusion will be reached, I believe, both as the result of theoretical study and by seeking the advice of practical breeders.
In order to apply this conclusion to the matter of divorce, we must first consider when exceptionally unfit persons are

376 EUGENICS REVIEW
divorced, which is the case under consideration, what we can predicate concerning the qualities of their divorced partners? May we not say that they will be no better and no worse than a normal sample of the undivorced married population ? If, for example, a man is divorced for drunkenness, his divorced partner is just as likely as any other woman in the community either to become insane or to show signs of marked ability. Thus far we can only say that we know nothing about these divorced partners, except that they appear to be taken at random from the married community. It is true that marriage implies some selection; but this does not necessarily imply any superiority of those divorced from the unfit over the parents of the coming generation, who must all in a sense be selected. It is true that those who marry are probably, as a class, superior to those who cohabit without marriage, and for this reason the guiltless or more fit parties to divorces will be above the average of the fertile community. Moreover, if divorce for heritable unfitness was obtainable, the party divorced from the unfit would also be above the average because of the elimination of some of the unfit by this very process of divorce. But, as we shall see later, very few would thus be eliminated, and the average would thus be but little raised. On the other hand we have to remember Professor Pearson's investigations into the question of assortative mating, which clearly indicate that the partners of the unfit are themselves below the mean level of fitness. Taking all these considerations into account, it seems probable that the divorced partner of the very unfit would, on an average, be very little, if at all, superior to an average specimen of the fertile population; and, if this be so, we are here discussing a case, if the views already stated be accepted, where it is far more important to look to the sterilization of the unfit partner than to the mating of the more fit person from whom divorced.
One consideration telling in opposition to the conclusion just arrived at has not thus far been mentioned, and that is the fact that a large number of the unfit would, in any case, be sterilized by being in prisons, lunatic asylums, etc., and that consequently the number of the more fit free to marry on

DIVORCE AND EUGENICS

377

divorce would be greater than the number of their less fit partners who could again become parents. But, if only dealing with the divorce of the very unfit, the foregoing arguments, indicating that their sterilization should be our main aim, are not, it is believed, thus invalidated; because the fertility of their partners, who would be little if at all above the average in worth, would produce little or no racial advantage. But it is important to note that, as regards the unfit who are in any case thus rendered sterile, the most important possible eugenic advantage of divorce would thus already have been obtained. Moreover, many of the unfit, who are not thus rendered sterile, would, in any case procreate after divorce; and in their case also the most important advantage of divorce thus far discussed would not be obtained. And if it be true that, these two classes being abstracted, those who remain, namely, the unfit actually rendered sterile by divorce, are few in number, it seems that the purely eugenic advantages of breaking the marriage tie are not nearly as great as they appear to be at first sight.
In order to avoid confusion, thus far divorce alone has been mentioned. But the Commission had to deal with judicial separation and nullity of marriage also; and, in many cases, the recommendations of the Majority Commissioners amount to the proposal to substitute divorce for judicial separation. It is, therefore, important to consider the contrast between the eugenic effects of these three methods of separating married persons, a subject but little discussed in the Report. As to divorce and nullity of marriage, their racial effects are so nearly identical that it is sufficient to say that all the remarks made in these
notes with regard to divorce are equally applicable to nullity. In comparing divorce with judicial separation it has been seen that the main aim of the eugenist should be to prevent the procreation of children by the very unfit; and it is obvious that this result would be equally obtained as regards the joint progeny of the parties themselves by divorce or by separation, that is, as long as the separation remained effective. But it cannot be the aim of the eugenist to encourage the re-marriage of the very unfit, and in this respect judicial separation is preferable to divorce. Many women, who if divorced for in-

378 EUGENICS REVIEW
sanity, for example, would re-marry if apparently cured, would, on moral or social grounds, refrain from procreation if only judicially separated. Again, in cases of nullity for concealed venereal disease, the man, whether apparentlycured or not, would, if thus set free, often marrv again, whilst if merely judicially separated, and if deterred by the laws concerning bigamy from attempting a second marriage, he would in many cases remain sterile. It may, no doubt, be replied
that, as regards men generallv, their sterility in these circumstances would be largely due to the existence of prostitution; and also that the numbers of both sexes who would be sterile if separated though fertile if divorced would be small. This argument, though valid, is, therefore, probably not very weighty.
The arguments in favour of divorce as compared with separation are as follows. Separation orders " in most cases remain in effective force for a short time only," and where procreation is undesirable-and in that case only-this consideration tells in favour of divorce. It is true that, even if lasting but a limited time, separation may produce some eugenic adv4ntages by lessening the size of the family; for all these questions should be considered in the light of their average results. The other eugenic arguments in favour of divorce as compared with separation are based on the factthat procreation is certain to take place subsequently in many cases; for where moral considerations do exercise an effective restraint on either of the judicially separated parties, it would be the less moral of the two who would reproduce his kind, whilst, where moral considerations would be ineffective, a superior mate would be more likely to be obtained if re-marriage were permitted than if it were not.
The general conclusions here arrived at may be briefly stated as follows. Unquestionable and very serious heritable defects should be made a ground for divorce, mainly with the object of sterilizing the unfit party; though the purely eugenic advan-
tages, which alone here are considered, of divorce over separation, or of both over leaving the marriage tie unbreakable, appear greater at first sight than on closer inspection.
X. Y. Z.

