THAT THE POPULATION OF THE UNITED KINGDOM SHOULD- BE STABILIZED AT
FORTY MILLION--A DEBATE*

CHAIRMAN: Sir CHARLES DARWIN, K.B.E.,
Sc.D., F.R.S.
SPEAKERS: C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D.;
R. PILKINGTON, M.C., M.P.; Mrs. M. A.
PYKE; P. R. COX, F.I.A., F.S.S.
THE CHAIRMAN
Tn O-NIGHT we are to have a debate. The subject is " That the population of the United Kingdom should be stabilized
at forty million." We are going to have four speakers: first, Dr. Blacker, for; then Captain Pilkington, against; then Mrs. Pyke, for; then Mr. Peter Cox, against. After that, the subject will be open to debate for anyone here present. We have to limit the time a certain amount. The first speakers will be talking for something like ten minutes each and I shall hope that, after that, nobody will force me to call him to order for speaking for more than, say, five minutes. I won't waste any more of your time, but will call on Dr. Blacker.
DR. C. P. BLACKER
I begin by thanking the two opposition speakers, Captain Pilkington and Mr. Cox, for their kindness in agreeing to take part in this debate. The debate was not entirely easy to arrange, and the fact that these two consented to take an opposite side to myself makes me the more grateful to them.
Ends should be separated from means. There is no difference, I feel, between the two sides this evening about ends. Both desire what is best for Britain and the Commonwealth. The difference is over the
* A Debate held at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on October gth, 1957.

means by which this goal can be attaiAed.
The motion proposes that the United Kingdom's population should be stabilized
at forty million. In mid I955, the population of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the, United Kingdom) stood at a little over fifty-one million. What I advocate is a Forty-three year Commonwealth plan the
object of which would be to enlarge to the maximum the contribution to the world's population made by the Commonwealth as a whole, while at the same time benefiting the United Kingdom. This plan, as I see it, calls for a programme designed at the same time to raise fertility in, and promote emigration from, the United Kingdom. The plan is a long-term plan the effect of which
would be to stabilize the United Kingdom's population by the end of the twentieth century at about the figure attained at the beginning of that century. (In I900 the United Kingdom's population stood at about thirty-eight million.) For forty years or so the loss through emigration should slightly exceed the gain through natural increases. But by the end of the century the two movements should balance one another. The more vigorous the two movements-the natural increase and the accompanying emigration-the better for the Commonwealth as a whole. Three arguments will be adduced in favour of such a Commonwealth plan-eugenic, economic and strategic.
The eugenic argument is the simplest but, from the Society's particular standpoint, the most important of the three. Its significance was brought home to me in the course of my visit to Japan in I955. If, as in Japan, a country's population is felt by its inhabitants to be so large that further increases would weaken rather than strengthen it, would

'73 TEE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1958. 49, 4

I74 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

aggravate rather than solve difficulties, conscientious and patriotic people will feel that they can best help their country by refraining from having children. But improvident and morally insensitive people
will suffer no such inhibitions. A differential fertility of dysgenic character will thus be encouraged. It is what people feel which is
here important, not what economists- pronounce. People's feelings in these matters
are mercurial, being much influenced by suggestion. Witness the upsurge of would-be emigrants since the Suez crisis.
From the economic angle, two arguments can be advanced. The first is that a country which, like Britain and Japan, must import
a large fraction of its food is in a highly vulnerable position. As we have been repeatedly told, Britain, like Japan, must export or starve. But the capacity to export and sell depends on numerous events over which the would-be exporting country has little control. Tariffs could be erected or even embargoes imposed; markets could be lost to foreign competition; and raw mnaterials (such as tobacco or cotton which are imported, processed and exported as goods) may fluctuate in price. This country imports about a third of its food. By the end of the century agricultural techniques will probably have advanced to the point that the United Kingdom could, under the spur of necessity, support a population of forty million on home-grown food. The dietary may not be Lucullan, but the dire threat of starvation will have been lifted. The second economic argument relates to automation. I believe that the world may well now be poised on the brink of a second industrial revolution one of whose many effects will be to make much unskilled labour redundant. But this is an immense subject which could be usefully debated at one of the Society's evening meetings. Suffice it that the adoption and spread of automation could simultaneously facilitate the numerical reduction of a population and the raising of that population's living standards.
Many economists see grave difficulties arising from a decline in numbers. But not all are irreconcilably pessimistic. Exactly

twenty years ago-in I937, that is before automation had begun to make its impactLord Keynes, delivered to our Society a Galton Lecture entitled " Some Economic Consequences of a Declining Population." He ended with these words:
A stationary or a slowly declining population may, if we exercise the necessary strength and wisdom, enable us to raise the standard of life to what it should be whilst retaining those parts of our traditional scheme of life which we value the more now that we see what happens to those who lose them.
The third argument, the strategic, I find the most difficult. The need for dispersal was stressed in the most emphatic terms by military authorities ten years ago. But the extent of a dispersal which would reduce the dire effects of the since-developed megaton bomb (a bomber can now be at least two million times as effective as it was twelve years ago) might be held to weaken the argument. The most recent Government statement (April I957: Cmd. I24) boldly declared that:
It must be frankly recognized that at present there is no means of providing adequate protection for the people of this country against the consequences of an attack with nuclear weapons.
But megaton bombs and inter-continental ballistic missiles apart, the events of the second great war and of the ensuing smaller wars have shown that large populations are not necessarily military boons. With his tanks, Hitler, in a few hours, rounded up the big Belgian and Dutch cities on the plains of north-west Europe; but he was held up by a scanty but scattered enemy ensconced in the Norwegian highlands. A small and dispersed population subsisting in mountainous regions is to-day the most difficult to subdue. We can recall the difficulties of the war in the Korean mountains and in the mountains of Greece's northern frontiers; also how, in I945, Hitler planned a retreat into the Bavarian and Austrian Alps.
How does the megaton bomb and the inter-continental rocket with a nuclear warhead affect the need for decentralization? This at least can be said: the more the inhabitants of our huge conurbations can be dispersed throughout a distant and at present

STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION-DEBATE

I75

sparsely populated Commonwealth, the less unimaginable will be the holocaust brought about by an all-out nuclear war.
I will now turn to how the proposed fortythree year plan could be put into effect. I repeat that I would encourage a natural increase of the United Kingdom's population provided that the increase will, during the period of the plan, be slightly exceeded by emigration. Emigration is a two-way process involving close co-ordination between the mother country and the receiving country. The mother country would be seriously weakened and its age-structure impaired if efforts are not made to secure a balanced or (in respect of age) a cross-sectional emigration. There are obvious difficulties from the standpoint of the receiving countries about taking in middle-aged and old people; but this country's position is now better appreciated by countries with immigration quotas such as Australia and Canada (which has imposed
quotas as recently as July I957) both of which prefer British to foreign immigrants. The importance of Commonwealth migration was attested in January this year by a full debate in the House of Commons on the Empire Settlement Bill. The speech by Mr. C. J. M. Alport, Under-Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations, showed a lively appreciation of the need for cross-sectional schemes and his views were endorsed by other speakers.
It will be remembered that the Royal Commission on Population was concerned with the Commonwealth's population problems. They were at pains to point out that the aggregate population of Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa amounted, in I947, to less than half that of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the United Kingdom).
The Commissioners declared (para. 332):
We have no doubt that it is in the. long term interests of Great Britain and the Commonwealth as a whole to maintain the flow of emigrants from Great Britain to the other parts of the Commonwealth at as high a level as possible.
But I hasten to say that the Royal Commission was " definitely on the side of avoiding a decline in numbers," though they

added what seems to me the important proviso " except conceivably as an incident of a large scheme of Empire migration."
The rates of natural increase in the sparsely populated countries of the Commonwealth are higher than in the densely populated United Kingdom. A newly married couple emigrating to (say) Canada or Australia will be likely to have more children there than here. By encouraging emigration, you therefore raise the Commonwealth's total contribution to the population of the world. If, on the other hand, a sense of pressure and confinement becomes widespread in Britain (of which there are signs to-day) as it has done in Japan, birth rates could drop till there is no natural increase. Instead of the fountain flowing freely, backpressure could develop; the fountain could choke and the flow cease.
Finally, two points require to be stressed. No policy aiming at slowly reducing numbers to an agreed lower level could succeed unless some restriction were imposed on the counterbalancing movement of immigration.
Our official spokesmen seemingly lack the courage to declare that an immigration quota might sometime have to be imposed by the United Kingdom. Most of the world's receiving countries (including the United States of America) have such quotas. Many countries further require that immigrants should satisfy certain medical and
hygienic requirements. WVhy should we not
do the same?
My second point is the need to define what is regarded as desirable without being unduly inhibited by regard for what might at the moment be deemed possible. What seems impossible to-day could become possible to-morrow-as we learned in the last war. Once you make up your mind on what you want, you may later come to see that where there is a will there is a way.
CAPTAIN R. A. PILKINGTON May I say first of all what a very great
honour I feel it is to be asked to address this meeting; the thanks are for me to give, and not for Dr. Blacker to give to me.
We have listened to an'extremely powerful

I76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

presentation of the thesis argued by Dr.
Blacker, and I think that many of the things that he said will find general agreement among everybody. He has given us very good reasons for his argument; but-" good reasons must perforce give place to better " !
He mentioned three main subjects upon which he rested his argument, and I shall come to them in a moment, when I get a little farther on in my speech. I want to
begin, as he did, by taking one or two general assumptions upon which I think there will be general agreement.
First of all, I think there will be general agreement upon this: that the population of the whole world is rising at a really alarming rate and that sooner or later it is bound to call into being one of three things (or perhaps a combination of two or all of those three things), war, starvation or a substantial extension of birth control.
The second thing on which I think there will be common agreement is that this increase in the world's population is happening mostly among the less civilized peoples.
And the third common assumption is that our Western civilization, our Western Europe, has pulled into one vast technological civilization the whole of the rest of the world, with the result that whatever happens in any part of the world is magnified in its effects while its repercussions will be felt round the whole planet, whether the thing that happens is good or bad. That means that in this century in which we are living there are greater dangers than there have ever been before, but there are also greater opportunities than there have ever been before.
My fourth point upon which I think there is common agreement is that in this sort of situation the importance of leadership, whether it is of individuals or whether it is of nations, is greater than it has ever been before.
Now, as we survey the world to-day, there are, of course, the two colossi of the United States and the Soviet Union, tremendous in material power and influence; but there is also this country, which has an immensely

longer and wider experience in the whole realm of politics, understood in the broadest sense, whether it be national or international, whether it be imperial or colonial, or whether it be now " Commonwealthian " (if one can use that adjective). We do not seek to rival in size or wealth or material power those two great colossi, but we do seek for ourselves power, wealth and influence, both for domestic reasons and for world reasons, and, in the pursuit of these things, the optimum population is a very important factor.
If that, then, is the general framework of the position, and if 'the r6le which this country has got to play is so vital, as I believe that it is, my argument this evening is that we can fulfil that role better with fifty million than we can with forty million, and I have chosen some half-dozen considerations to lay before you to substantiate, as I see it, that argument, and my colleague, Mr. Cox, is going to add some of his own.
First, I would like to come straightaway to the first of the reasons which Dr. Blacker himself put forward: he referred to the strategic consideration. I agree that that is an important one. He sees it as more important than it was ten years ago. I see it as less important than it was ten years ago. What he wants us to do is to transfer some of our eggs' to another basket; but, if the catastrophe comes, all the baskets, it seems to me, are going to (if I may mix my metaphors) get it in the neck and what we have to do is to see that the catastrophe does not occur, and it is to that end that I think we should devote our attention.
Dr. Blacker's second consideration was the economic one. It is one I know that is often argued-that we cannot support ourselves in this island without exporting a great deal, and that that is a bad thing. Well now, with great respect to him, I am exactly opposed to that argument, because I believe that if the need to export was removed from this country our nation would lose a stimulus, and the loss of that stimulus would not help to keep this nation the robust and adventuring sort of nation which it has been and is at the present time.
I turn to another of the considerations

STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION-DEBATE

I77

which I am laying before you during the time at my disposal-the population density of this country. It is very great; but ours is by no means the most densely- populated country in the world, as we sometimes think when we see the various conglomerations of population in this island. Japan, which was mentioned by Dr. Blacker, is more densely populated; so is Holland; so is Belgium; and there are other island examples, sometimes going up to three and four times the rate of density which we have in this island. Again, from the amenity point of view, of course we do not want to see our countryside progressively despoiled as we have in past years, but we are now within measurable distance of having the accommodation which we need for our population, and I would quote a gentleman with whom I am not often in agreement, but perhaps for that reason what he says has the more weight in this contextMr. Bevan. He said, in 1953, four years ago, " Taking the country as a whole, we are not very far removed from having the total amount of accommodation which the country requires." And since then, of course, a lot more accommodation has been provided.
These, you may say, are more or less neutral aspects of the problem. I come to a more positive consideration, and this meets, or I hope will meet, the eugenic argument, at any rate in part, which Dr. Blacker propounded to us. I maintain that a decrease would be positively undesirable in this country because it could only be brought
about by one of two ways;' either by an
extension of birth control or by an extension of emigration, both of which Dr. Blacker mentioned. It seems to me that if you extend birth control you are bound to extend it to that more intelligent section of the community where you do not want it to apply, and you- will not have it applied to anything like the same extent to the less intelligent part of the population in which, if you were going to have restriction, you would like to see restriction. So far as emigration is concerned, Dr. Blacker faced many of the
problems which there are there. However much people may make speeches in the House of Commons and elsewhere (as he
3-ER

mentioned) and say that it is desirable to
have a balanced slice of your population removed, the fact remains that it is going to
be extremely difficult to get a balanced
section of your population emigrating. The older people among the community will
always tend to want to stay in this country, and will not, of course, be so welcome in the countries to which it might be hoped that they would go.
And that brings me to the next considera-
tion, which I think is a very important one. It is at the present time of importance to this country that we do keep a very substantial proportion of young people, because, thanks to the decline in the birth-rate from War I to War II, the number of older people in our community is already greater than it has ever been in the past, and it is going to get progressively greater over the rest of this century, and we shall need all the young people coming along if we are going to maintain our standard of living and support this much larger older section of the community. That is a problem which is going to be with all the governments of this country for the next fifty years or so.
My next consideration is this: that we are already far behind the other units of the Anglo-American world, the English-speaking peoples, in the natural increase which is taking place in the various countries which make up that world. I think the figures are startling. The rate of increase in Canada is I9 per thousand, in New Zealand it is I6,
in South Africa it is i6, in Australia it is v3,
in the United States it is I3, and in this country it is only 4. Now, if this motion were to be passed, and if it were to become the policy of the country, it would mean that every other English-speaking unit throughout the world would be increasing and we alone would be dwindling, which I submit would not be a good thing.
And that brings me to my final consideration, perhaps the most important of all. Rightly or wrongly, in the world to-day it is regarded as a sign of weakness and feebleness if the population of a country is dwindling. We may- say that that is not sensible, but it is a fact, and we have to face

I78 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

facts as they are. Thanks to the effects of two wars, we are in a sufficiently precarious position as it is. The dangers that beset us are obvious and great. I said earlier that they beset the whole world; they do, but not least this country. Yet if there are dangers there are also great opportunities, and not least for us in the position in which we are, within the three circles: the European circle, the Atlantic circle, the Commonwealth circle. And to seize and make the best of those great opportunities which our position and the quality of our people gives to us, we need not only the wisdom and experience which we have accumulated, but also strength, all the strength that we can get; and my argument is that a dwindling population would be a sign not of strength but of weakness. We recognize that there are some small communities which live happy and contented lives; one may perhaps quote Scandinavia. But those nations are on the sidelines of the world at the present time. Once they were great protagonists, but no longer. We are. We are on the field of play, or the field of battle, whichever way it may be, and we need all the strength that we can get.
I am sure that this Society, whose aim is the betterment of the race, should not at the same time aim at the dwindling of the nation. I believe that we can best fulfil our destiny by improving our population of fifty million, yes, but also by maintaining it.
MRS. MARGARET PYKE I think that questions like population
pressure and stabilization of population sound rather academic to some of us, and I should like to bring them down into terms of the average human being.
In the first place, he is probably a citizen, because I think about 86 per cent of our population lives in towns. In spite of what Captain Pilkington has just said about accommodation now nearly meeting the needs of our population, I should not think that the average citizen would agree with him. The average citizen usually wakes up in a house or flat which he thinks too small, and his neighbours far too close, because there are too many people chasing too few

houses. To go to work, he probably has to
queue for a bus or train, and, if he spends ten minutes doing that going out and again
coming home he wastes eighty-three fortyhour weeks during forty years. That is more than a year and a half of his working life, wasted standing in bus and train queues. I read in The Times-the other day that in an hotel of IOO rooms with 300 days' occupancy, a reduction of ten minutes in the time needed for the chambermaid to perform her duties in a room saves £875 a year. So quite a lot
of money would be saved by avoiding the bus queues.
Then he goes to his factory or office,
which is probably also short of space or short
of air, and he has to scramble through his lunch after again waiting in a queue.
Meanwhile his wife has been struggling in a shopping queue, and his children going to schools, where they obtain education-or more likely evade it-in overcrowded classes. As for the universities, I don't know how many try to get in for each place available, but I did read the other day that the dean of one of our medical schools said that he had eight applicants for every vacancy.
If our citizen's wife wishes to go into a
maternity home, she has to book her bed nine months-or, if possible, more !-beforehand. If any of the family are ill, they have to get into a queue for the doctor or dentist, or wait in the out-patients' department; unless an operation is urgent, they are likely to die before they get it. When they die, they are still overcrowded, because there is not room for enough cemeteries. In fact, I think that what Mr. Piddington has said in his really brilliant book, The Limits of Mankind, is true: Britain is the first country in history to run out of space.
We have fifty million people here on fiftysix million acres; I agree with Captain Pilkington that we are not actually the most over-crowded country per acre, but most of the overcrowding elsewhere is in countries not so mobile as we are; generally, their populations do not yet go out in motor cars or play golf, or go to the seaside, or fly. In some cases their land is more inhabitable and fertile than ours; in fact, owing to the

STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION-DEBATE

179

combination of population density and the between bathing in a river boiling with

stage of our development, we are the first to factory effluent or in the sea where our own

feel this spatial pinch.

human sewage is inexorably returning to us.

Years ago, Mr. Piddington published a As Dr. Blacker said, it is not for us to say

calculation to show that if every family in how our population should be reduced, we

England possessed a beach hut six feet wide, want to find out if this is a good thing or

there would be a continuous terrace of huts, not; but (again to quote Mr. Piddington)

stretching four deep, right round the coast " some carefully reasoned schemes have

from Berwick to Solway Firth. In fact, there envisaged a possible flow of emigration of

just is not enough room in this country, and one million persons annually for twenty-five

we see the results in the constant struggles years and it is probable that the highly

to find space for schools, hospitals, houses, developed transport facilities and technical

roads, reservoirs, airfields and open spaces, skill of the British people could just achieve

struggles which frequently lead to eviction, the task." The resolution before you would

compulsory purchase, and quarrels between not require anything nearly as rapid as that,

rival authorities and Government depart- of course.

ments.

As regards birth control, Captain Pilking-

Now this is also an expensive business. ton said, that would be harmful because the

Traffic delays are not only irritating, indeed intelligent would apply it most. But that is

infuriating, but they are also enormously already happening. I doubt if a reduction

expensive. In London traffic moves at an in the birth rate will be necessary, but if it

average speed of eleven miles per hour, a were, I was much taken, myself, with a

shade better than in New York, where the suggestion I read in an American article the

Traffic Safety Committee has estimated that other day, that young couples should be

the cost of road congestion is i,o8o million given a cash present of several hundred

dollars a year. And, of course, overcrowded dollars for every childless year. That would

roads mean accidents, and accidents are not be far less expensive than the children

only personal tragedies, they are highly themselves are, and it would be a greater

expensive.

inducement to those possibly less well-

Overcrowded houses lead to broken homes designed for parenthood to practise birth and juvenile delinquency, and then we have control than the exhortations and persuasions

to spend money on probation officers and which we try at present.

magistrates and prisons and police.

One point I would mention which Captain

But apart from all these material ques- Pilkington made: he said he was not quite

tions, our personal happiness is seriously sure if a dwindling population (that word has

affected. Our cities are rapidly spreading an unfortunate connotation, shall we say a

like a blight and running over into all the reduced population) was a good thing.

little available space left of our lovely Perhaps it is something on which we can

countryside. I suppose all my generation give the world a lead and show that it is a

know what it is to go back to the remote very good thing. But in any case remedies

and peaceful village of our childhood and can only come after the diagnosis, and what

find it just a red-brick villa outpost of the I am asking you to accept is the diagnosis

nearest city; all the lovers' lanes and trees that our population pressure is dangerously

have gone, and there is nothing but houses high and ought to be reduced and kept stable

and shops, and a factory or two. And when at 20 per cent lower than it is at present.

we go now to our favourite river pool or

seaside beach we find it raucous with radios, MR. P. R. COX

littered with newspapers and orange peel and I should like to start by thanking Dr.

paper bags, and haunted by the sellers Blacker very much for his kind remarks; and consumers of choc-ice and ice-lollies; if I may say so, however, he has created

and as for bathing-you have a choice something of an impression that really

i8o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Captain Pilkington and I agree with him but that we have arranged to support the contrary view just for the sake of the debate ! That is not so. I do not agree with
the motion. Even if I accepted the principle, I still would not accept the way in which it is worded. In one way it gives me great regret to speak against the arguments of
Dr. Blacker and Mrs. Pyke, as they are both very much identified with societies that we
all greatly admire; but I think that the aims we have in common can be achieved by means other than those we are discussing
to-night.
The motion says that our own total population ought to be stabilized. In the technical 4anguage of demography, a "stable " population is not one with a fixed total. It is one with a constant age-distribution, constant mortality and constant fertility. It takes a hundred years of constant mortality and fertility-and, incidentally, a net migratory movement of nil-to get such a population. We have never had one and are never likely to see one. One with a fixed total as well is even more unlikely.
Previous speakers have referred to the desirability of this motion as opposed to the practicality of it. For myself, I do not see much use in discussing something that might be done unless we have a good idea how to do it; and we have little notion of how to bring about a reduction by over ten million persons in order to reach a stable population of forty million. It is a good thing for a country to have a population policy; but it must be a realistic one. Recent history provides a number of examples of governments that have tried to make changes in their populations and have not succeeded. The first example that comes to mind is that of Hitler, who in the middle nineteenthirties attempted to encourage a growth in fertility. At the time his success seemed quite impressive, but subsequent studies have shown that there was little in his population policy which contributed to the observed increase in fertility; such increase as occurred was almost certainly the effect of economic recovery from the years of depres-
sion that had preceded his rise to power.

Again, in France after I945, the population
had been depleted by two world wars, especially among men of working age. In Italy, however, there was surplus of manpower and plenty of unemployment. Vhat could apparently be easier than to encourage large numbers of Italians to emigrate to
France? The French demographic journals
were full of plans for doing so, but in the end relatively little movement occurred. The fact is that people's traditions, beliefs and habits cannot be changed overnight, but only over a long period. As Lord Simon said in his book on Barbados, the inhabitants know perfectly well that the island is overpopulated, but even so they seem to do very little about it, presumably because their habits are fixed in certain channels.
Let us suppose, however, for the sake of
argument, that we knew. how to control population. Speakers to-night have recognized that this would be a slow process, extending over many decades. Supposing we decided that we wanted only forty million people and decided to reduce to that number in forty years' time; who can say that we shall view things in the same way, and desire the same goal, in ten years' time, let alone twenty, thirty or forty years hence? By the time the target was nearly reached, we should in all probability be aiming at-something quite different. It is very difficult to plan forty years ahead in this age, or to know what the economic and political situation will be so far off.
I come now to the core of my objection to this motion. Nobody knows yet how bad it would be from an economic and political point of view for us to have a population that is not increasing. One can only infer from two of our near neighbours, France and Eire, which have been nearer than any others to having a constant population, what their people feel about such a situation. In France, strenuous efforts have been made for over a quarter of a century to stimulate the birth rate. In Eire a Population Commission a few years ago deplored the fact that so many people were emigrating; it would not admit-perhaps for reasons of national prestige-that the more energetic and

STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION-DEBATE

i8i

enthusiastic people were going abroad, and space. Such possibilities are, however, out-

leaving the less progressive and active side the scope of to-night's debate. Ordinary

behind; all the same, something of that sort emigration would be the only hope of dispos-

may well have been going on. The Com- ing of a large section of our population, but

mission also regretted the fact that Irish would so many people want to go overseas?

people marry so late, and therefore cannot That is a question that has not yet been

have large families. In other words, the Irish asked to-night: it seems very doubtful

would like to encourage an increase in whether so large a number would be willing

population; they do not feel that their to leave. If they did, would the Common-

country is being sufficiently developed at wealth want to have them? Opportunities in

present.

Australia and Canada are mainly for the

Not only is an unvarying population a most healthy and active men and women.

disadvantage, but also strong arguments The already heavy burden of the aged in the

have been advanced recently in favour of a United Kingdom would be increased if we

moderate population growth such as we have exported a higher proportion of our young

in Great Britain at the present time. For people than at present.

instance, the Overseas Migration Board The demographic position to-day in this

recommended in its first report, which was country is less unfavourable than is often

issued in I954, that there should be an realized. We are free from the great popula-

increase in population large enough to ensure tion pressure that is being experienced in

a suitable supply of emigrants to the South-East Asia and elsewhere, and yet we

Commonwealth. It is up to us to provide have not reached the comparative uniformity

economic help as well as manpower to of total numbers from year to year that has

members of the Commonwealth, and we been experienced in France and Eire. If we

should not be in a position to do that from were to interfere with this fairly happy

a position of weakness. A position of situation the consequences might well be

strength, such as only increasing numbers unfavourable.

can provide, is essential.

It has been argued to-night that a gain

One of my first reactions on seeing the from the point of view of eugenics would

motion was that there must be a misprint follow from the successful pursuance of the

in the wording: surely forty million ought at policy expressed in the motion. I would

least to be fifty million? Possibly we could not dispute that in itself, although I have

manage to stabilize at fifty million or more, argued that any gains might be more than

but how indeed could we stabilize at more offset in other ways. But the aims of

than ten million fewer than at present? I see eugenics can be pursued by means other than

now that forty million was really intended. creating an artificial decrease in the popula-

It is still a very large number-quite big tion.

enough to be seriously embarrassing in the

event of a hydrogen bomb being dropped THE CHAIRMAN

here; in such a case it would not make much We have had the four speakers introducing

difference in the general result whether we the subject. I would now ask if any member

had forty million or fifty million. With forty would like to make a few remarks.

million probably in the normal course we

should still have to import goods from over- MR. C. G. TOMLINSON

seas on a large scale. But the difference of ten Mr. Peter Cox asked whether the popula-

million is also a large number. Presumably tion had been asked what they thought

it is not the idea to wait until all those about emigrating. I submit, Sir, that the

people have died in the natural course. Planners would say: " If they don't like

How then are we going to dispose of them? to go, they must be made to go." I do submit

You have read in your papers lately about that we are suffering from too much planning

voyages to the moon, or to platforms in in this country, and what we need to do is

i82 THE, EUGENICS REVIEW

to find a way of getting rid of some of the like this, where space is so short, the moment

plans, and perhaps some of the Planners, I select a certain site, somebody else will

and then we should have a happier country. come along and oust me from it, or else a

factory will be built alongside the house I

MR. R. A. PIDDINGTON

have put up and my position will be rendered

As a newcomer here, I do not expect there impossible-."

is any keen speculation as to which side I So I suggest that, if we increase our

am on. May I stimulate it by quoting a population instead of reducing it, that

quatrain:

situation would be very much worsened.

Ill fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,

May I put it as a kind of parable? If you

Where wealth accumulates and men decay.

have twenty diners round a table which can

To which a twentieth-century hand has accommodate twenty and no more, the

added:

addition of one diner will not create one

But how much more unfortunate are those

skeleton at the feast but twenty-one dis-

Whose wealth declines and population grows. satisfied diners who would gladly forgo the

I will now confess that the last line rest of the meal. If in this country people

expresses to my mind what has happened to feel they are in that position, that life has this country during at least the last forty- become insupportable culturally, we may,

three years in particular. Still, I do recog- as a community, suddenly find we are no nize that in the future our problem with longer viable, because there is no interest

regard to population may not be so economic for anyone in the day's work.

as I may have implied. I can envisage that, It has been suggested that we might

if science makes the progress during the remedy this evil by emigration. We British

next ten years which many people expect have a long tradition of emigration; we know

and which a few people dread, we may find that it can be done, and has been done suc-

that our standard of living in Britain rises cessfully in the past-in fact I shudder to

materially; and yet I submit that, as a result think what the situation would now be like

of that, it will fall culturally.

in this country if we had never had the

To explain that paradox, I may perhaps outlet of emigration. England, I can imagine,

draw your attention to a picture we have would be one vast Birmingham, or Black-

already had put before us to-night of the burn. And I fear that still may happen unless

congestion of this country, particularly as the resolution which is before us to-night is

regards road traffic. The average motorist, accepted, not only by us but, in the end, by

inching his way back from a weekend at the public opinion in the United Kingdom.

seaside, has certainly achieved what is

called maximum economic welfare; he not MR. N. S. PERCIVAL

only has his car, he has plenty to eat, he is My sympathies are with Dr. Blacker and

well dressed; yet he cannot be said to be Mrs. Pyke, but the difficulty is, as some

happy, in fact occasionally he feels absolutely speakers have said, in putting their proposal

mutinous. What is wrong? I think increased into practice. There are two methods:

economic welfare has led to increased emigration; birth control. Emigration cer-

individual frustration. And this. frustration, tainly, if continued in its present form, will

I believe, is accumulating in this country result in the younger people leaving the

at the present time.

country, and birth control in the more

It is a very serious situation because at desirable members of the population reducing

any moment it may suddenly spread like their numbers. The same question comes

Asian influenza, and people may think of with immigration; the reason we are willing

throwing in their hand. I notice, for instance, to take all these people from the West Indies

a general reluctance among people even to is that they are young people and they are

build a house, or buy a property or to settle needed to do the jobs in this country.

anywhere, because they say: " In a country For those reasons, I think there is very

STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION-DEBATE

I83

great difficulty in this scheme for reducing That has been proved absolutely wrong by

the population, although I have great one most important example which has

sympathy with it.

emerged in the course of the last five or six

years-the United States of America. The'

MR. E. AGIUS

United States of America at present is

There is real difficulty in dealing with this increasing its population at the rate of one

subject in the time at our disposal. It is so of the four or five fastest countries in the

easy to go wrong in logic and to make false world, and, in view of its size, that means

deductions and to omit things. I cannot making a most important contribution. That

attempt to deal with it in five minutes, so I increase is not amongst the downtrodden;

will only make one contribution to this there is a positive correlation between a

debate-a quotation from a speech by Lord man's income and the number of children he

Samuel in the House of Lords. He said: has. I won't say that if he is a millionaire he

"When you stand alarmed at the idea that gets a million children, but at the present

a new mouth has been born into this world, time there is a positive correlation of that

do not forget that there has also been. born kind. So I don't think you need take too

a new life and a new pair of hands."

seriously what, for most of us, seems instinc-

tively a rather obvious danger.

THE CHAIRMAN

The main point with which I am impressed

At this point, I will put my own views in this argument is the question of spreading

before you-rather scrappily.

the business over forty years. Mr. Cox made

There was a reference to the whole of the point that we might change our minds,

England becoming like Blackburn; Mrs. but there is one thing which I think we can

Pyke, on the other hand, was objecting to forecast with most certainty in the whole

the whole of England becoming like Black- future of the world-that is that it is prac-

pool. I don't know which is the worse.

tically certain, short of collision with

Secondly, Dr. Blacker was the only another solar system or a good, effective

person who spoke about restricting immigra- atom bomb, that the population of the world

tion into this country. Whatever way the will be doubled, or very nearly doubled, by

debate goes to-night, I hope we can reach the year 2,000. Anyway, ten years after that

some kind of unanimity on that subject. I it will certainly be double what it is now.

feel, when all other countries are restricting Therefore, if you are stabilizing at forty or

immigration, it is folly for us not to do the fifty million, you are going to make this

same. That is nothing to do with more or country half as important in the whole world

less population, but sheer protection for this as it is at present. I happen to share the

country, which the United States and most view that we cannot control it, that the

other countries already have in force.

possibility of control is " out "; but if it is

Another point referred to is this question " in," if we do control it, we are writing our-

of birth control invariably affecting the selves down to something like half the

superior portions of the population. It seems present importance we have in the world.

natural to us that it should, and I suspect Finally, I would like to touch on a point

that it very often does, but there is a very that I am really rather distressed that every-

interesting and important example to the body seemed to think so important-the

contrary. As you know, ten years ago there standard of living. I don't think anyone

was a doctrine held by most people who has really tried to define what standard of

thought about the population question that living is a tolerable standard, but I have the

prosperity led to a reduced increase in advantage of knowing: when anyone speaks

population, and the inference was that if of a tolerable standard of living he means

we could make the whole world prosperous, something which is a little better than

we should make a nice, jolly family together, what he had this year! There is no other

having no children, and enjoying ourselves. answer.

184 -THE EUGENICS REVIEW

DR. G. C. L. BERTRAM

MR. CHARLES S. GREEN

I only have a few remarks. I leave aside I cannot claim,to be on either side, and I

things like whether the wording of the have been wondering, as I listened, wouldn't

motion is good or not; but it is quite clear it be rather a miracle if the first aim enunci-

what is aimed at-whether it is desirable, ated by Dr. Blacker in his thesis were

whether it is possible; and it is clearly a realized-the clarification of the mind, the

matter on which there is great divergence of collective mind, of the Council of this Society

opinion. It is something weighed in the on this question? In saying this I am reflect-

balance and it is not quite obvious whether ing, not upon any prejudices in the minds of

it is heavy on one side or the other; we all Council members: but upon the difficulty and

make our personal integrations.

complexity of the present problem.

I cannot agree with Mr. Cox at all. His I have been somewhat irritated by the

argument was really: " If you cannot be constant references to emigration, without

accurately prophetic, do nothing." It seems any sort of analysis of what emigration is, or

to me if you feel that, the best thing is to should be, from the standpoint of this

take some hashish and settle down and be motion. Mr. Piddington made some enthusi-

happy. If we cannot be accurately prophetic, astic remarks about the nature of emigration

still, we have minds, and we can attempt to in the past and present as an outlet, but has

be prophetic about the availability of food anybody, since the days of, say, Botany Bay,

in the next forty years. My own view is that even considered the possibility of making

it will become progressively more difficult serious representations to any of the

for this country to import food over the next dominions or colonies that they should, in

forty years, when the rest of the world is fact, receive a cross-section of our population?

going to have these immense population A true cross-section of our people would

increases.

include, would it not, in addition to some of

Captain Pilkington introduced an argument which has great importance-the strength of the Commonwealth. Is the strength of the Commonwealth, which we all want to see at a maximum, at its greatest with people spread or with them concentrated? We must make up our minds on that.
But we are not aiming at the strength of one nation, or of the Commonwealth; what we are aiming at is, presumably, the health and happiness and so on of the individual. So, when we are thinking of strength, we have, I feel, to look through the present, which is an unhappy and unsatisfactory stage in the world's history, and look forward to a
period when we can get closer to our ultimate aim, the health and happiness of the individual. And if one takes that into one's mind,
it does seem to me that somehow, as Mrs.
Pyke has suggested, we have to have a lower
number (though I must remind you that
there are bus queues in Sydney, too!).

the strongest and the best physially, intellectually and morally, a percentage of the aged, the sick, of the handicapped in mind or in body, a number of known cases of tuberculosis and of cancer, a few criminals and some delinquents, with a sprinkling of maladjusted scholars and young workers.
And, since we are speaking of emigration, and not of compulsory transportation, the complete willingness and desire of each individual concerned must, of course, be assumed. In fact, just ask yourselves, what would actually be a cross-section of our population, and what sort of inducement would be necessary to persuade Australia, or New Zealand, or Canada, or even one of the colonies, who are, perhaps, a little more amenable to inducement than the dominions,
to take such a cross-section. But, on the other hand, fantastic as the idea seems, should we not seriously suggest to them that that should be the case? I hazard the guess that in the long run any dominion or colony

It is a difficult integration; one has to make willing to accept, from time to time, as

it; and I would come down on the side of immigrants, such a cross-section of our

Dr. Blacker and Mrs. Pyke.

population, would benefit as greatly by §o

STABILIZING UNITED KINGDOM POPULATION-DEBATE

I85

doing as would the mother country in being relieved of its surplus. Otherwise our position at home, from the point of view of improvement through emigration, is just as fantastically impossible as speakers seem to agree would be the case if improvement were attempted by larger measures of birth control, resulting in what we can only call the wrong section of the population doing the controlling.
I do not think some of our speakers have been quite basic enough in their considerations, and I adduce this one matter of emigration as one which should be looked into further.
DR. J. P. M. TIZARD
May I say a few words about emigration and about immigration. It is surely not necessary that we should ask any of the Dominions or Colonies to take a crosssection of the population. The position is simply that, if they really want British immigrants, as apparently they do, they should pay for them-pay for that proportion of the old people and the infirm and the criminal whom the young emigrants were supporting in this country. At least this is a proposition which could be put to the Dominions, rather than asking them to take over unwilling sections of our population.
As regards immigration, if we really are the last country in the world -to have any immigration policy, I think-and here I know I am against the sentiment of this meetingthat this is something to be gloried in; that it is a part of our respect for individual liberty and is deeply a part of the tradition of this country. If there is any strength left in the British Empire, it must lie in the free interchange of peoples between one part and another. If it is the fact that this is not the case in other parts of the Empire that is to be deplored, rather than the fact that we still permit free immigration here.
When we speak of immigration to this country at the moment, nearly everyone thinks of the Jamaican population. I do not think we need fear a deterioration in this
4-ER

country from mixtures of races. After all, our strength is supposed to originate from our mongrel ancestry and in the long run the population of this country may well be strengthened by the admission of a different race.
THE CHAIRMAN
If no one else wants to speak, I will ask Dr. Blacker to reply.
DR. C. P. BLACKER
Thank you, Mr. President. I really have nothing more to add, beyond, perhaps, that, having fully appreciated how incompatible are my views with those of Mr. Cox, I am the more grateful to him for having come here and spoken as he has done, and also to my old friend Captain Pilkington. We should all be grateful to them for having put their case so well.
The essential problem, as I see it, is a Commonwealth problem of a redistribution of population, which must be effected voluntarily, through understanding and co-operation between the receiving and sending countries. Anyone who reads the reports of the Overseas Migration Board can see how much thought is being given to such co-operation, and I see no reason why this co-operation should not increase and a greater measure of agreement be reached in the future than in the past. Manifestly, one cannot compel people to migrate if they do not wish to; but there is evidence that just now many people wish to emigrate. Such a movement can be aided by governmental action-either by credits (much discussed in the House of Commons), or by part-payment of their passage; also by making arrangements at the receiving end (which Australia and New Zealand have done) for their induction into the new life. Most of the Commonwealth's receiving countries are anxious to increase their quota of British immigrants. They have expressed themselves with much explicitness on this subject.
There should be no basic difficulty in achieving accommodation if, on both sides, the necessary goodwill exists.

I86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE CHAIRMAN

also to all the other speakers who have made

It remains for us to give our warmest a number of extremely interesting contribu-

thanks to the four introducing speakers, and tions to this debate. Thank you.

POPULATION REVIEW

A biannual Journal of Asian Demography published in January and july

EDITOR: DR. S. CHANDRASEKHAR

VOLUME i No. 2

CONTENTS

Population Growth and Indian Economy

SIR PADAMPAT SINGHANIA4

Marx versus Malthus: The Men and the Symbols

WILLIAM PETERSEN

Some Principles of Population Economics

ELMER PENDELL

The Growth of Village Population and Economic Development in South Asia NATHAN KEYFITZ

Cultural Barriers to Family PlannIg in Under-developed Countries S. CHANDRASEKHAR

Housing in an Indlan Village

ALLENE MASTERS

Mangadu: Demography of an Indian Village, Part I

S. CHANDRASEKHAR

From the Press Cuttings

Institute's Activities

Reviews of Books

Publications Received

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION: Ci. $4.00

Indian Institute for Population Studies
GANDHINAGAR, MADRAS-to (INDIA)

Society for Constructive Birth Control and RACIAL PROGRESS The First Birth Control Clinic in the World

THE MOTHERS' CLINIC

The Reference Library may be con-

Founded by DR. MARIE STOPES, Mach i7th, I92I From the beginning dealing with all aspects of birth control and

aDSepnmedocnisaIltnrsatrtLuiecoctntisuorneatslo

sulted by anyone.

marriage problems.

Members of the

LibraryTTe
LiberaryisMhem .1Application'bers of

LtfhoeeforSSrnooMccdieeettimyy.nAgAOddPdOrrEePesNssN::DD1x0Ao66L-1xY0o8,,

(not Sats.L) Y101aa.mm..tot66pp.m.. .FFREEE
WWHIITTFFIEELLD SSTTREEEET,, LLONNDDONN,, W.i

aMreedirceaglulaPrrloyfegsisvieonn.
ecnabyy letter

