THE EUGENICS REVIEW.
The Sub-Man.
By R. AUSTIN FREEMAN.
The conditions of life to which primitive man is suibject are substantially identical with those of other animals, and indeed, of all other organisms. The small aggregations which form the most simple societies are mere multiples of individuals, in which no radically new factor is introduced by the association. The emergence of such factors awaits the development of at least the beginnings of civilisation.
Those conditions of life which thus affect equallv early man and the lower organisms, are characterised by a rigid individualism. Disregarding such exceptional forms as the compound zoophytes and certain social insects (which, however, form IIo real exception to the ruile) every organism is strictly individualist. Under natural conditions, collectivism is virtually unknown.
Since the point is of importance. and since the word "individualist" is frequently misused, it may b-? well to define the sense in which it
is now being employed. By individualism I mean a state in which
each individual is economically self-contained, securing its existence by its own activities and obtaining for its own benefit the entire product of those activities; neither receiving any contribution to its maintenance from any other individual nor furnishing any contribution to the support of others.
Of the converse state-collectivism-a typical in tance is furnished by our own bodies; which are made up of a multitude of structural units-tissue elements-each of which contributes to a common nutritive fund, which is the nutrition of the whole body; from which general fund each uniit draws its particular nutrition, irrespe 4ive of the magnitude of its own contribution.
Looking at the two states or systems of maintenance, that which immediately strikes us is that whereas Individualism favours the welfare and survival of superior organisms which are perfectly adapted to their environment, collectivism favours the survival of inferior orgranisms which are imperfectly adapted to their environment. An eminent economist has recently referred to "the obvious advantage of lifting the burdens from the weak and putting them on the strong"; and possibly this plan may have a symmetrical app?arance which wil1 commend it
to the economist. But to the biologi4t it will be entirely unacceptable.
If it had been in operation in the past, the evolution of superio- types by natural selection would have been impossible. If, when a favourable variation occuirred and an improved typo of organism came into being, the benefits of the improvement, instead of being applied to the superior type to secure its survival and the establishmeint of a superior race, had been forthwith transferred to the defective to enable them to survive in spite of their defects; there could have been no such thing as an advance in type. Everv favourable variation would have been cancelled as soon as it appeared.
This is not Nature's way. Under natural conditions, every

384 EUGENICS REVIEIW.
organism maintains its own existence by its own activities. If it is unable to perform those necessary activities it perishes and ]eaves no progeny. A defective organism is thus eliminated as soon a' it appea 's, and the surviving remainder consists exclusively of fit forms adequately adapted to their environmen-t. So, too, in the case of primitive man. He is engaged in a continuous struggle for the bare meains of existence. He lives from hand to mouth, precariously and with difficulty. The day's food is the product of the day's efforts, and if those efforts are relaxed, he goes hungry. There is no surplus which can be passed on to the idle, the incapable or the helpless. Outside the family, no collectivism is possible.
It is e>-ident that in such a society, the defective indi-idual has no permanent place. As soon as he emerges from childhood his defective qualities begini to take effect; and they take effect upon himself. If his deficiency is extreme he succumbs early to the hardships and lerils of primitive life. If he is less deficient, he struggles on for a time, but fails to qualify for marriage, and leaves no defective offspring. It follows that these primitive societies tend to be composed exc usively of capable and energetic men, each of whom is an asset to the community; and since the more capable are the more prosperous, anid since prosperity in primitive societies tends to be associated with more numerous offspring, and since children tend to inherit the qualities of their parents, the t ndency is for the more capable part of the population to increase more rapidly than the less capable, that is to say, for the average quality of the population to undergo progressive improvement. But an advance in the qualitv of the units of a society involves an advanice
in the society as a whole; and this advance becomes maniifested in a gradual emergence from extreme barbarism to the beginniings of civil isa-
tion.
The establishment of civilised conditions ushers in a change. Life is now easier. The daily struggle for bare existence has ceased. There begins to be a surplus of the means of subsistence which the more
fortuna e can share with the less fortunate. And w ith this easing off
of the struggle there has come a softeninig of manlners; a growth of the nobler sentiments of altruism, of charity, of sympathy; of a desire to mitigate the sufferings of the weak and helpless. Religious precept enjoins the prosperous, as a sacred duty, to make up out of their surplus
the deficiencies of the less capable. The defective individual has become an object not only of pity but of care and solicitude. To protect him from the conisequences of his own defects has become a pious act which Religion duly acknowledges. "He that giveth to the Poor lendeth to the Lord. "
Here, then,is a visible transition from a rigidly individualist state to one in which there is a clear tendency to collectivism. But it is only a tendenicy. There is no conscious acceptance of the collectivist principle. Almsgiving is still a voluntary act, and the gifts are admittedly the property of the giver, of which he has the undisputed right of disposal. Nevertheless, though it is only a tendency, it produces its inevitable effects; the unfit are enlabled to survive; and their survival perpetuates their defects and introduces an unifit element into the population which was previously absent.

THE SUB-MAN.

385

The transitioni to the next stage-that of real Collectivism-is not
yet completed. In its final form of State Socialism or Communism it
has, up to the present. been adopted. in this country, onlv by certain
political theorists. But the principle has been accepted and is being
applied on a rapidly-increasing scale. The voluntary gifts of the charitable are now being replaced by compulsory contributions,
collected by the State from the relatively well-to-do and distributed
among those who are unable to achieve their own complete maint n-
ance by their own unassisted efforts.
Looking at these chaniges broadly from the biologi al standpoinlt, it is evident that thev represent the growth of conditionis ever increasingly favourable to the survival of the unfit; and it is a matter of common observation that such survival has, in fact, occurred. Nor is it possible to doubt that as provisions increase for relieving t-he incapable of the responsibility for their own maintenance, there will be
a corresponding increase in the number of persons demanding such relief. And niow. from the consideration of the conditions under which
the unfit class comes into being, we mayr turn to the consideration of the individuals of whom that class is composed.
The unfit may be separated into groups in accordance with the
qualities which determine their unfitness. Roughly, and somewhat arbitrarily, they may be arranged in two main groups: those whose unfitness is due to some pathological condition, some gross deviation in structure or function from the characters of a completely normal human being; and those in whom such palpable abnormality is absent. The former group, which will include the insane, the epileptic, idiot>, imbeciles, deaf-mutes, certifiable mental defectives and those who are the subjects of inheritable diseases and malformations, we are not at present considering. Their increa. ing number and the social danger
that it rey resents are already attracting the very earnest attention of all
thoughtful person*. But the same cannot be said of the less conspicuous but far more numerous members of the other group. Yet, great as
is the danger to society from the multiplication of the manifestly abnormal unfit, it is small compared with that which ari,es from the almost unobserved increase of those classes of the unfit which are apparently normal; and to the latter we may accordingly direct our attention with profit, considering first their characteristics and then their influence on the community in a eugenic sense.
Siince these individuals present no gross abnormality, it may reasonably be asked, in what does their unfitness consist? In what respects do they differ from the completely normal and the completely fit? The answer is that it is simply a matter of deficiency, and particularly of deficiencv in mental development. Thev are just inferior human beings; defective mentally, morally and often phvsically. They fail to attain the minimum quality which we associate with the race to which they belong; they are probably inferior to the mtembers of any aboriginal race that is known to us. Their mental faculties even fall short of what we are accustomed to conceive as the human standard; and as we sometimes apply-not inappropriately-the term "Supermenl" to the members of that illustrious minority which furnishes the intellectual mot ive-force to society, so to these, who are as far below as

386 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the others are above the mean, we may properly apply th? term "submen ."
Owing to the inevitable segregation of the social classes, the submen of our population are almost unknown to the majority of middleclass persons. A visit to the slums brings them into view, but there they mingle with unfortunates of a better type, and commonly their character is unrecognised. or is assumed to be the product of the environ.ment. In pre-war days, before unemployment had become a recognised avocation. specimens of this class were to be met with oIn he main country roads, tramping in irregular processions from town to towni, from union to union, begging from passers-by, picking up unconsidered trifles of derelict property or sitting by the road-side, boiling the tea-
billy, refreshing themselves from the scran-bag or sorting out the day 's
catch. Or they might have been seen, accompanied by a graduated row of their offspring, slowly patrolling quiet streets singing hymniltunes. But these were solitary specimenls giving nio idea of the actual number existing. In the reception wards of prisons such as Holloway and Brixton they appeared in larger bodies; but it was not until the later years of the war that they came into view in really large numbers. Then, when the MIilitary Service Act assembled great aggregations of men, collected without selection from particular areas, onle waI able to study them in solid masses, and under conditions peculiarly favoulable for observation. For the environment into which they were introduced was at least as favourable as that to which the earlier, volunteer, units had been exposed, and' thus comparison with the latter was made easy.
In the last two years of the war, the large traininig camps contained two types of units which were peculiarly rich in examples of the subman class. There were the home-scrvice units form-xed of C .3. memi w ho had been rejected as unfit for general service; and newly-raised units mostly consisting of under-age recruits, inielu4ing the "young soldier
battalions. " The former were, of course, selected groups. They had been weeded out and were admittedly unfit. But it is to be noted that their military unfitness was based exclusively on their physical condition. Medical boards had no instructions to enquire into the mental state of the men sent for examination. Unless a man were a lunatic, an idiot or approaching the condition of an imbecile, his mental quality was not within the scope of the inquiry. Accordingly there was no reason to suppose that the mental quality of these men was exceptional; a comparison of them with the men of the new units tended to confirm this view. But if the level of intelligence that they displayed represented anything like the average of that of the labouring classes, it suggested a profoundly disturbing state of affairs. Naturally, the men were not all alike. They were not homogeneous
bodies of sub-men. But the average of quality, both inenital and
physical, was alarmingly low and the proportion of abjectly itnferior types was disconcertingly large.
In these latter cases i-l was often difficult to decide whether they
were to be regarded as normal or pathological. Admitted mental deficiency approaching the imbecile type, which commonly came into view when drafts were being examined, was definitely abnormal.

THU SUB-MAN.

3tS7

Cases of neurasthenia, of marked muscular tremor, of unexplained
nervousness, of emotional instability with a tendency to weep from no
apparent cause; the surprisingly numerous cases in which the persis-
ence of infantile habits called for special provisions in regard to sleeping
quarters; all these might be considered as borderline cases. But apart
from these more or less abnormal examples, there was a vast number of meen of whom one could sayr no more than that they were of comprehen-
sively low quality sub-men. On the physical side their inferioritv was not so noticeable. The
C.3. men were, of course, physically unfit-in a small proportion of cases. owing to military injuries; but the majority had been defective oni enilistment. In the new units a fair percentage were quite normal
as to their bodily devclopment, but in general they tended to be somewhat weedv anid undersized. Their teeth were extraordinarilv bad; so
bad that great dental establishments were attached to the camps for the
plurpose of supplying dentures to those who were from this cause unfit
for genieral service. Apparently the condition was due to rickets in early childhood, which, in its turn, must have been the result of negl1oct and injudicious feeding during infancy. And from the same caulse neglect and stuipiditv their feet presented all kinds of acquired deformities such as displaced toes, multiple corns callosities and mis-
shapen nails. Finally, the general u-.der-development was, in a
nunmber of cases, associated with delayed adolescenice, men of eiglhteen or tw+enitv having the stature and all the characters of boys of twelve or
even less.
But it wvas on the psychical side that the condition of these men was so alarming. The general average was, as has been said, amazingly low-A blut a large proportion consisted of typical sub-men, little removed from the recognised mental defective; and this type we may now con-
sider in a little more detail.
Ihis menital condition. is almost uniiimaginable by an ordiniary
educated person with fullv developed faculties. It is completely rudimentary. His mind is capable of taking in only the simplest ideas and then only one at a time. As soon as a second idea is presented the first is obliterated. He cannot take in a general idea even of the simplest kind. He cannot grasp a principle; and if an attempt is made to demonstrate it to him by a number of particular instances, the
attempt fails. The instances remain separate in his mind. He cannot conniect or compare them. He is incapable of tha simplest generalisation. And since his consciousness will hold only one idea at a time,
and since propositions remain in his mind separate and uncorrected, he is practically unable to reason and is insusceptible to proof or demonstration. Evidence makes no appreciable impression on him
since the successive propositions of an argument are considered separately, the connection between them remaining unperceived. He
cannl-ot get beyond a particular case. Owing to this rudimentary state of mind, attempts to train the
late R.A.M .C. units (which were formed mostly of C.3. men transferred from the Labour Corps) had to be to a great extent abandoned. Lectures delivered to them were a farce. The utmost simplification of the matter and the language failed to make instruction of this kind

3888-

8EUGENICS REVIEW.

intelligible. When a lecture had been delivered, a few questions made it clear that, not only had the men learned nothing; they had not the faintest idea as to what the lecturer had been talking about. Inistructioni that would have been easily grasped by intelligent children was beyonid the powers of these men. Moreover, to the difficulty of communiicating the matter itself was added the further difficulty of
achieving mere verbal intelligibility. The vocabulary of these men
was so limited, their ignorance of the meaninig of quite ordinary words
was so excessive that it was extremely difficult to frame intelligible
sentences.
The great majoritv of these men wvere able to read and write in an elementary fashioni, but ani appreciable number were completely
illiterate, and onie man could niot tell the time by a clock. The
illiteracy, by itself, was of nio great significanice. Fifty years ago
there were plenty of elderly persons of excellent intelligenice who could
neither read nior write; and in the case of the sub-menl, the accomplishment can be of little value. But in these instances, illiteracy was
evidence of excessively low intelligence, since it is practically certain
that it was not due to lack of instruction. A question which naturally suggests itself is, how does the sub-
nman of our own race compare with members of aboriginal races? Some
thirty years ago, the present writer lived and travelled for a time in various parts of West Africa and made the somewhat initimate acquaintaInce of the natives of those countries; and it was inevitable that when he encountered, during the war, these great bodies of low-type
Britons, he should recall the peculiarities of his old aboriginal friends
and institute comparisons. PsYchically, the British sub-man presents numerous resemblances
to the aboriginal n-egro, with certaini important differences. The resemblances are partly due to the crudity and simplicty of he condi-
tions of life and the domestic habits, and partly to the undeveloped state of the minid. The coniceptions of cl anliness, for inistance, are in botb those of the lower animals In their persons they are usually cle.lA in an ablu ionary sense, but their recognition of the nature of essenitial dirt is obscure. Thev will eat and drink from vessels in common use, exchange pipes or water-bottles. and if thirsty, cannot be prevented from drinking any water that may be available, even that from ponids or muddy streams. There is a total disregard as to the state of the hands. Sores, septic wounds, filth of all kinds are hand ed with no apparent perception of defilement, and food and drinking vessels manipulated without anything more than the most periunctory cleansing of the hanids.
Aniother primitive characteristic is the complete indifference to noise. Like the African, the subman appears to be unconscious of any disturbing quality in loud sounds. He can sleep or rest in the midst of an uproar, and has no idea of stepping lightly or speaking softly when he enters a ward or tent full of sleeping men. He appears to enjoy noise for its own sake, and is never quiet excepting under compulsioin. He continually sings, whistles, stamps rhythmically, drums on walls or tables, and makes noises with resonant objects or executes hideous performances with a mouth-organ. On the other

THIE SUB-MAN.

389

hand, he appears to be quite devoid of musical faculty; although, on the march, he bellowed un-ceasinglv, his vocal efforts were usually quite
unco-ordinated wA-ith those of his neighbours, so that the joint result was
mere nioise.
Aniother point of resemblanice betwveen the sub-man and the lnegro
is the frequencv of stammerinig; and the cause in both cases seems to be the same. The speech is voluble, hurried, of an imperfectly-articulated. "jabbering" quality and usuallv very loud; and in an assem-
bly, all talk at once, each struggling to make himself heard above the shouts of the others. As a result, the effort of rapid speech tends to outruin the matter and thus give rise to this defect of articulation.
But between the negro and the sub-man there are certain well-
marked differences. Thus the latter is mentally dull; he is h.elpless
an-d unresourceful; he seldom has any kind of manual skill or knowledge of hanidicraft, or. indeed, anv appreciable knowledge of any sort. He is markedlv deficienlt in self-conitrol anid in thrift and providence; his manniers are uncouth and discourteous and he has no conception of any kind of social amenities or traditional observances.
In all these respects the inegro is conspicuously superior. lie is usually vivacious, humorous, full of boisterous fun aiid high spirits. He is scrupulously polite even to his equals. He never passes a stranger oII the road without a courteous greeting. He is punctilious in respect of the traditional forms of salutationi, and makes elaborate enquiries as to the welfare of a straniger's family. He steps off the road inito the bush to let a caravan pass and speeds the carriers on their way with good wishes. Theni he is far from lacking in accomplishmenits. His kn-owledge of animals and his initerest in their habits is remarkable.
He nearly always knows the prinicipal constellationis and the planets.
He has a good repertoire of myths anid folk-stories and at least some acquainitance wNrith the complex religious traditions of his tribe. He is extremely handy an-d self-helpful. He cani fish anid catch game, he can make a fire (without mnatches), he canl cook his food, spin good yarn from the wvild cotton1 with a simple spinidle-whorl, can carry on simple agriculture, make adti mend the implemenits that he uses, and can build
a house anid thatch a roof. Specially skilled individuals practise more advanlced handicrafts ;uch as that of the weaver, the goldsmith, the stool-carver or the blacksnmith; but the above simple arts are known
to and practised by practically all. From which it will be seen that the aboriginial n-egro is economically self-contained. He can do all that is necessary for his own maintenance; he can manage his own affairs without assistanice, and is a hardy, robust, enlergetic man.
From this comparisoni it is evident that the sub-mani of our own race is markedlyr inferior to the aboriginal niegro. But the negro is very definitelv inferior to the niormal European, as is clearly shown, niot onily by the instructive initelligence tests that were used in the American army during the war, but also by the fact that he has never produced anvthing like an inidigenous civilisation. The unavoidable conclusion is that the sub -man is a degenerate form, inappropriate to our advanced civilisation, or, indeed, to any kind of human society known to us.
The above brief examination of the physical and mental peculiarities of the sub-man suggests certain questions. We naturally wish to

390 90 EUGTENICS REVIEW.
know: First, what is his numerical strength; what proportion of the whole population does his class form? Second, is that proportion
stationary or is it increasing? Third, are there any changes in the
condition of our society that can be traced to his existence? Let us consider the first question.
The number of sub-men per thousand of the population cannot be
arrived at statistically. The class is not a homogeneous one. It
merges imperceptibly at the one end in that of the certifiable mental defectives, and at the other in that of the less gifted part of the normal population. Its size has to be arriv7ed at by inference from observed phenomena apparently associated with its existence. Thus ourpersonal observations of the great slum areas of London and the larger
provincial townis inform us of the existence of large aggregations of lowtype men and women. Then there are certain facts connected with unemployment. Of the vast number of men who can obtain no work, we learn that the great proportion- belong to the category of unskilled
labourers. But what is an unskilled man? He is a man who has
reached the adult state without having acquired any special aptitude
for performing any kind of self-maintaininig activity. He is capable only of unskilled labour. that is to say, of muscular actions that are common to all human beings. But such a conditioni implies an abnormally low intelligence. There are n-o unskilled barbarians. Aborigin-ai man is. as we have seen, furn-ished with all the skill that is niecessarv to support himself aind provide for all his needs. Even the lower ani-imals are Inot entirely uInskilled, for each of them is capable of performinig efficiently all those activities often quite complexby which its owni existence anid that of its offspring are secured. It has remained for civilised man to evolve a form that presents no specific
adaptation to its environment. Again, there are certain public institutions of recent origin which
appear to assume the existence of vast numbers of relatively incapable persons. Free education, includinig, if necessary, free meals and boots, schemes for providing houses below their economic rents, school
clinics, maternity and infant welfare centres, old age penlsions, health
insurance, unemployment pay; all these benefits assume the existence of great bodies of persons who do not make complete provision for their owni support. They are of the nature of contributions produced by the surplus energy and effort of the more capable and consumed by those in whom these qualities are relatively deficient; and their magnitude is a measure of the size of the latte- class.
There are certain other social phenomena which lead the observer to infer the existence in our society of great numbers of persons of very inadequate intelligence, but their conniection with political issues renders them unsuitable for consideration in this place. But the facts alreadv noted seem to yield the conclusion that the sub-men form anl appreciable proportioin of our population.
The second question, whether that proportion is constant or increasing, may be dealt with summarily. The facts are familiar to the members of this society. The manifest probability that a man who is deficient in self-control, in providence and in a sense of responsibility for his own maintenance would tend to produce a large family is borne

THU SUB-MIAN.

391

out by observation. The fertility of the different social classes is,
roughly speaking, inversely proportional to their capability of sup-
porting their offspring. The lowest birth-rate is that of the rich and the
professional classes; the highest that of the mental defectives, the
submerged, the permanenit poor and the casual unskilled labourers. Anid it is to be observed that the superabundant fertility of the unfit is
being reinforced by an ever-increasino inhibition of eliminating
agelncies. Under niatural conditions the defective mental qualities which tend to produce excessive fertility tend also to produce an
excessive infant mortality, by which the fertility is to some extent
cancelled. But this tendency is countered by the benevolent interferenece of the fit. The childreni of the sub-people become the obiects of
public care and solicitude. with the result that the child-mortality is beinig steadily reduced. Thus, while the increase is uncontrolled, the eliminiation is being steadily inhibited. Under these circumstances
it is obvious that the proportion of the unfit to the whole population,
especially to the definitely superior part of it, must be rapidly increas-
ing: anid that if these conditions continue to operate, there must
presenftly be established an actual nuLmerical preponderanice of the unfit.
The third question, whether there are visible any changes in society that are traceable to the existence of the sub-man, is not easv to answer definitely. BuF there are certaini appearances which seem to suggest an affirmative. There is, for instance, the change in the type of social co-operation as shown by the rapid growth of collectivist institutions; institutions which have for their function the elimination of econiomic inequalities bv lifting the burdenis from the weak and puttinlg them on the strong, as our economist expresses it. Such a coniditioni is evidently favourable to the weak who have their burdens takeni from them- and unfavourable to the strong, who are thus made to bear the burdens of others as well as their own. But, in a biological
sense, the strong are the fit, and the weak the relatively unfit. The appearances therefore suggcAst a tendency for social organisation to evolve in a direction which shall render it better adapted to the needs of the unfit and less adapted to the needs of the fit; a change that might be expected to ocCur coincidently with a relative increase of the unfit
and decrease of the fit. Passing over other political changes and certain recent social
upheavals, not because they are irrelevant but because they raise contentious issues, we may note one or two social phenomena which bear on this question; as, for instance, the disastrous effect on our literature, and especially on our periodical literature, of the vast, unintelligent, uncultivated reading public that- compulsory education has brought into existence. The recent disappearance of "The Athenaeum, " which we must all deplore, is an instance of natural selection acting in accordance with an altered standard of fitness. Public entertainments, too, show a tendency to become adjusted to a declining intelligence; in particular the ubiquitous picture theatres, which, at enormous cost and bv the use of elaborate means and appliances, produce an entertainment which is frequently of almost incredible
puerility. Considering these and other like appearances together with the

392 2EUGENICS REVIEW.
confused economic conditions niow prevailing, the general lack of social co-ordination- anid the mutual hostility of the different social classes; noting the unparalleled spectacle of a population which is unable to provide itself with habitations; and bearing in mind that these coniditions coincide with a differential birth-rate in which number and fitness are inversely proportional; it is difficult to avoid the conviction that we are looking on a group of related phenomena which together indicate a decline in essential civilisation. It has been stated by a distinguished member of this Society that the rise and fall of civilisations in the pa st has had little connection with germinal change; but if we convert the proposition and consider the probable effect of unfavourable germinal change on civilisation, it will surely seem incredible that a population can declinie in quality without producing a corresponding declinie in the civilisation which it had created when its quality was better.
It would seem as though something should be said as to the possible meanis of averting the social danger created by the inicrease of the sub-men. But the subject is too large and important to be raised at the end of a paper. Whatever form the remedy takes, its purpose must be to arrest the multiplication of this class; and whoever can suggest an efficient remedy will be a benefactor, n-ot only to mankin-d at large but to the sub-man himself. For, of the man who comes into the world uniprovided with the means of secu. ing his own welfare it may be truly said that "he is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward."

