THE CONFERENCE ON AMENTIA*

T HIS conference dealt with several from the State Department of Perth

subjects of eugenic interest, and both Prison."

the opener, the Rt. Hon. Sir E. It was suggested by Dr. Ferguson-

Hilton Young, Minister of Health, and Sir Watson that the mental hospitals of the

Leslie Scott, the Chairman, emphasized the future might only contain certain chronic

importance of preventive measures for deal- patients, not well enough to live outside.

ing with mental deficiency.

There are a number of very small licensed

In a comprehensive speech, the Chairman houses (two patients) and, needless to say,

alluded to the report of the Committee on all in private care are under inspection.

Local Expenditure, which had just been The speaker somewhat reassured his

issued, and ventured to make certain criti- hearers by the information that in his own

cisms of the economy proposals. From the district no pregnancy occurred for ten

eugenic side several of these have a distinct years, and only three cases in recent years.

element of danger. For example, the pro- He considered that the most suitable sub-

posal to reduce numbers by lowering the jects for the boarding-out treatment

standard of certification, and the recom- appeared to be those quiet and harmless

mendation to place out in service, etc., patients with some chronic form of insanity

under guardianship, the higher grades, and a large proportion of imbecile and

seems entirely to ignore the well-known fact feeble-minded patients. As elsewhere, the

that in this class hereditary defect is more cost of maintenance is about halved.

often found and passed on than in the lower In the subsequent discussion Mrs. Hod-

grades.

son stated in criticism of the proposal to

The subject of the principal paper at the introduce this system, that the Inter-

morning session was " Some Practical Sug- national Federation of Eugenic Organiza-

gestions for the Boarding-out of Suitable tions had passed a resolution four years ago

Cases from Mental Hospitals." Dr. Fer- asking all members to bring before govern-

guson-Watson spoke of the family care of ments and those interested in mental wel-

mental patients which has been in vogue in fare the importance of avoiding boarding-

Scotland since I857, and described the two out those who were mentally afflicted, par-

systems: (i) where patients are boarded out ticularly psychiatric cases, and she pointed

within the grounds of an institution; and (2) out the importance of sterilization if this

where they are outside the grounds. The method were adopted in England.

system of boarding-out lunatics obtains in The afternoon session dealt with " The Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Hol- Social Control of Feebleminded Children

land, Italy, Russia, and Scandinavia, so that leaving the Elementary Schools," for

there is a large amount of data available as whereas children attending special schools

to its practicability and results.

may be notified on leaving at sixteen, or

It is, however, rather alarming to learn earlier if excluded, there exists no pro-

that it has been applied in Scotland not vision for the notification of defective only to the uncertified insane and to chil- children in elementary schools in areas dren, but " more recently to mental defec- where there has been no provision of special tives, to curatory patients, to mental schools. patients who are on probation from Sir Henry Brackenbury, in the Chair, asylums, to criminal lunatics and defectives further criticized the economy recommenda-
tions of the Committee on Local E,xpendi-

ture and the especially retrograde one

* Central Association for Mental Welfare, Report that the diagnosis of mental deficiency

of a Conference on Mental Welfare, December ist and 2nd, 1932. London, I933. Pp. 175. Price
3S. 6d.

should depend upon the nature and extent of local accommodation.

99

ioo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Dr. R. Ashleigh Glegg made a strong report of the Board of Control, which shows

plea for the primary need for biological that out of 300 criminal defectives, I75 were

teaching in the schools from the lowest between the ages of I5-21.

classes upwards, in order that in the future On Friday the " Inheritance of Mental

social problems might be viewed in their Deficiency " was dealt with by Professor

biological significance. He " considered Ruggles Gates and Mr. E. J. Lidbetter.

mental deficiency to be one of the basic Professor Gates made out a case for the

causes of social inefficiency, hampering and mendelian inheritance of mental deficiency,

impeding the wheels of progress," and based on the pedigrees from Goddard's book

maintained that the defective made the published in I9I4, but was subsequently

slum, not bad environment the defective. challenged on all sides and received no sup-

The speaker was in favour of the intro- port for this theory.

duction of the recommendations of the Mr. Lidbetter's approach was that of

Wood Committee that all school children pauper family records, extending over three

should be specially examined at the age of generations, his pedigrees showing evidence

eleven, in order that all defectives exhibit- of the intensive inbreeding of poor stocks,

ing marked abnormalities of character could producing the social problem group, which

be certified and notified to the local authority, forms the lowest io per cent. of the com-

as well as lower grades who had failed to munity. His investigations went to prove

derive appreciable benefit from school instruction; the important point being the notification of children needing care and control, irrespective of the school attended. At present
children often remain at special day schools till sixteen, without having apparently derived the least benefit from the expensive education they have received. This is

a definite relation between the various
forms of mental disability; and showed that a large number of defective children are
born in families where there is a record of certifiable insanity. It is significant that in many cases several generations intervene before the second defective appears, and that the transmission then occurs through an apparently normal member. Mr. Lid-

particularly wasteful as the accommodation better suggested the lines which a compre-

in special day schools has been almost at hensive and intensive investigation by com-

a standstill, there being only 2,000 more petent persons should take in order to

places than in I9I4, and residential special ascertain the dimensions of the problem,

schools only housing 2,000 altogether. and afford some indication of the possible

Evidence of the need for supervision and line of remedial measures.

after-care is forthcoming from the I932

E. I. CORRY.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 2.

