THE EUGENIC HYPOTHESIS*
(ii) Negative Eugenics
By FREDERICK OSBORN

N EW trends are developing in the There are no studies which tend to disprove

United States which may greatly these assumptions. The studies which sup-

affect the distribution of births. It is port them are insufficient for any certain

not unlikely that the conditions which in the proof but do provide a lead for a broad

recent past have effectively prevented parents eugenic programme, based on present know-

from exercising a free choice as to the number ledge, and acceptable because it would in

of their children are now changing, and that any event increase the proportion of children

married couples may in the near future have brought up in home environments most

a much freer choice than at present, either to favourable for development, an objective

restrict the size of their families or to have which everyone agrees is desirable.

three or fou# or more children without Such a programme has usually been con-

suffering too great an economic hardship. sidered from the point of view of positive

Among people who have this freedom of eugenics, that is, the increase in the propor-

choice at present, and the larger number who tion of above average genetic potentials from

may be so circumstanced in the future, the one generation to the next. But if the second

eugenic hypothesis may be stated as follows: assumption of the eugenic hypothesis is

First it assumes that within every section correct, namely that parents above the

of such a population the parents who show average of their group in socially valuable

the more socially valuable traits and give the traits will tend also to be above the average

best promise of providing a good environment in genetic potential, then the converse must

for the development of their children will, also be true, and couples below the average

because of their superior energy, courage and of their group in socially valuable traits will

affections, tend to have larger families than tend to be below the average in genetic

those parents who show less socially valuable potential. We are not speaking now of

traits and give less promise of providing a carriers of recessive genes for specific defect,

good home environment for their children. who so far as is now known are widely

Second it assumes that within every racial, scattered through the population; we have

social and economic group those parents who in mind simply those who have on the

show better than average socially valuable average poorer genetic potentials for

traits and give the best promise of good intelligence, for effective personality, for

environment for their children's development vitality and energy, and for resistance to

will tend to pass on to their children a many ofthe diseases which reduce human

better than average hereditary potential. efficiency.

Finally the eugenic hypothesis assumes The diminished genetic potentials listed

that the trend towards a distribution of births above are not all-or-none qualities but

which will favour more children being born matters of degree. It is now generally

in the most favourable home environments, recognized that given sufficiently severe

and the trend towards passing on to each new environmental pressures most people will

generation an improved genetic potential, go to pieces emotionally or mentally at a

will be accelerated by social and psycho- point which varies with each individual;

logical pressures brought to bear on young respiratory troubles hinder the efficiency of

people and parents in a society where eugenic even the strongest and healthiest if conditions

requirements are properly understood.

are bad enough, again in proportion to

* Reprinted from Eugenical News, March 1952. 87, i. individual variations. Those who show a

97

98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

good degree of resistance we consider normal, and those who lose their efficiency in any except the most favourable environment
we call sickly. They are not defective nor carriers of genes for specific defect, but their total genetic constitution is on the weaker
side.
Susceptibility to such lack of vigour, whether mental or physical, is known to run in family lines. There is considerable evidence and a justifiable assumption that within every social and economic group the families which are below the average of their
group in intelligence, energy and other socially valuable traits are also below the average of their group in genetic potential for these traits.
If under the practical operation of a
eugenic programme this group has less than the average number of births, thus decreasing in relative numbers, then the proportion of people with less than average genetic potential for mental, emotional and physical vigour would be decreasing from one generation to another. The importance of this
assumption can be measured by the fact that the very great majority of births occur in these large middle groups of people somewhat above or somewhat below the average in socially valuable qualities. There is no longer a eugenic trend in deaths in these
middle groups, because so few people die nowadays before the end of the reproductive
period. If there were a dysgenic trend in births among this middle group, it would be hard to offset it by even the most radical
change in the proportion of births at the extremes, where relatively few births take place. Given assurance of a trend towards
reducing the proportion of " poor " genes
among the great majority of normal people,
the eugenist could proceed with more confidence to measures for reducing the incidence of the genes for specific and dangerous
defects and malformations. Dangerous defects, when they are caused
by so-called dominant genes, could be cut down quite rapidly if the known laws of genetics were fully respected. With a sufficient advance in popular and medical understanding, of genetics and the practice

of restricting reproduction, it should be
possible to reduce the number of morbid dominant genes to not many more than those caused by new mutations in each generation. Defects caused by recessive genes present a
more complicated problem. Most carriers of recessive genes for defect
are entirely normal people. The defect will not appear unless both members of a mating are carriers, and then only when chance decrees that the defective genes from each of the pair meet in the newly fertilized cell. Genes which have a low frequency of incidence in the population will meet at such rare intervals that it is hard to tr;ace them in family lines. In small-family groups, where two carriers may mate and have so few
children that the defect does not chance to
appear, detecting carriers is a particularly
difficult matter. If a child is born with a defect caused by
recessive genes, both parents are then known to be carriers. Half the brothers and sisters of the parents will on the average be carriers, as will half the brothers and sisters of the
affected child. In the case of consanguineous marriages (of double first cousins, single first cousins, second cousins, etc.) in a family carrying a recessive defect, there is a whole hierarchy of probabilities differing according
to the degree of relationship. The nature of the problem indicates the
kind of research and the kind of eugenic programme which will have to be developed to meet it. The promise of the greatest rewards from research lies in locating the carriers of recessive genes. Neal (American Journal of Human Genetics, September I949) discusses the problem and lists several morbid recessives with respect to which it is now possible to identify the carriers. Linkage between morbid genes and non-pathological " marker genes " is not unknown. Intensive biochemical, physiological and neurological researches should make possible the identification of carriers for an increasing number
of defects. The first step in the programme will be
the better training of doctors so that defects of a genetic nature will be recognized for what they are, and so that persons with

THE EUGENIC HYPOTHESIS

99

genetic problems will be referred to a
consultation service which is inforned on
matters of heredity. There are only a few such consultation centres in the country now; they will have to be increased in
number and size.
With a better informed public opinion, and readily available medical and consultation services, married couples will be in a position to decide on how much they will limit the .size of their families where there is evidence of hereditary defect in the family line. The extent to which they should limit the number of their children will depend on the nature of the defect involved, and the degree of probability that one or both parents are
carriers, while at the same time taking into
account counteracting factors such as evidence of unusual ability in the family.
Given full information, the decision in such cases should be made by the parents on a wholly voluntary basis. The atmosphere in which the decision is made will always be a factor. If the couple have been brought up to discount the effects of heredity, and to believe that the environment can be made to cure constitutional ills, the decision may
not be wisely made. But ultimately the public as a whole, when it is well advised, may be trusted to come to a wise decision in
such matters far more certainly than anyone clothed with arbitrary powers. The success of such a programme of negative eugenics will be measured by the extent to which couples who are carriers of hereditary defect have fewer children than the majority of the
population. Defects cannot be eliminated by this process, but they can be reduced in number with a saving in human suffering,
which will be cumulative from one generation to another.
It should be possible to develop such
strong social and psychological pressures that in the great majority of cases known
carriers of serious defect would entirely refrain from having children; carriers of less
serious defect, after weighing the offsetting possibilities of the inheritance of genes of better quality, would have less than the usual number of children. The pressures necessary to bring about these results are in

the field of public health. They are par-
ticularly the responsibility of doctors, nurses
and social workers. Their application requires
more education, more research, more use of
family histories (properly reported), more
effective means of birth control than those in
use at present, so that the minimum of effort
will be required of those people who are at a relatively low level of intelligence. Provision
will have to be made for voluntary sterilization on a country-wide basis, so as to assure
that there will be no children born to parents
who are definitely known to carry the more dangerous kinds of defect. All these things
are in line with the thinking of experienced
people in these fields today. Few people, if
they gave the matter serious thought, would
maintain that couples who would transmit
hereditary diabetes to their children should
permit themselves unlimited reproduction just because insulin will save their children's lives. When these ideas are generally and
widely accepted and the training of doctors has kept pace with the necessary advances
in the field of human genetics, we may hope
that the most important possibilities of
negative eugenics will be taken care of on a
purely voluntary basis, without the necessity of interference by the State. Such a practical application of the eugenic hypothesis should
make for a substantial reduction in the proportion of serious defect in the population and in the number of carriers on the basis of present knowledge, and a far greater reduction as knowledge increases.
There will remain the problem of those carriers of defect who are themselves so defective that they are unable to control their own actions. These people do not fit into the framework of the eugenic hypothesis, which calls for purely voluntary control of births. It seems inevitable that in their case the community will have to use some form
of compulsion. The grounds for interference by the State
in so personal a matter as reproduction seem to be already quite clearly established. Any person whose mental condition is such as to justify permanent segregation in an institution seems to me by that very fact disqualified from passing upon the necessity for

100 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

his own sterlization. The community will carriers or strongly suspected of being

have to make the decision for him. That is carriers, the forced restriction of births by

the practical basis on which most steriliza- incompetents who are subject to sterilization

tions without consent are carried out in a or segregation-these would give the attack

majority of our states today.

on defect almost as broad a base as could be

If all individuals requiring permanent devised. The success of the effort would

custodial care could be seg egated in state depend on the education of the public, the

institutions, there would be no need for medical profession and public health officers,

sterilization. But neither the states nor the and the advance of research in human

federal government could stand such a heavy genetics.

expense. In many instances, custodial cases Our knowledge of genetics factors in defect

can be released on parole if they are first is far from complete; we cannot at present

sterilized. Segregation has under the proper hope to approach the ultimate goal of

circumstances the wholehearted approval of eliminating defect entirely. But there can

the public. Sterilization, which in no way be a considerable reduction on the basis of

changes a person except to prevent him present knowledge, and by means which are

having offspring, should be equally acceptable wholly acceptable to the public once the need

when the circumstances demand it.

and the means are understood. Few forms of

The automatic reduction of births among human endeavour could save present and

normal people with less than average genetic future generations from so much suffering.

capacity, the voluntary restriction or reduc- None could save so much money by so small

tion of births by competent people who are an expenditure.

Society for Constructive Birth Control and RACIAL PROGRESS The First Birth Control Clinic in the World

There is also a

THE MOTHERS' C LI NI C
Founded by DR. MARIE STOPES, March 17th, 1921.

Special Lectures

wRwehhfiieccrhhennmcaaeyye bLLbeiebrccaoornry-nFrom the beginning deamlairnrgiwaigtehparllobalsepmesc.ts of birth control and MDaenemdmobnesrtIrnsasttriuoocfntsiotnhatelo

suited and Lending
Library for Mem-

OPEN

DAILY

(not

Sats.) 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.

FREE

Medical Profession
are regularly given.

bers of the Society. Address: 1o6/1o8, WHITFIELD STREET, LONDON, W. P necessatnbylt

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLIV, No. 2

