THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
EMIGRATION.
By C. S. STOCK.
WHEN the lands which form our self-governing Colonies passed under the Flag, for the most part during the i8th Century, as a result of the great struggle ended by the Peace of Paris, 1763, and through discoveries of English explorers, their extent was little known and their real importance most imperfectly understood. The future of England is now seen to be bound up with that of her Dominions beyond the Seas, and the War has abundantly shown that they on their side appreciate the unity of the Empire. Of all the problems of reconstruction after the War, problems which already confront us, emigration is by no means the least. The difficulty of getting back the population, combatant and noncombatant, from war-work to peace-work alone makes its consideration necessary. Emigration has important racial effects, and the settlement of our half-empty lands by the-Anglo-Saxon race is a matter of great eugenic importance. Especially eugenic is the problem of inducing suitable representatives of our race to settle. From a biological point of view the conditions under which life must be lived in different countries constitute a series of standards of selection, and the difference in this respect between a crowded European civilisation and the sparse settlements of virgin lands is extreme, both
materially in the absence of a highly industrialised mode of
living, and psychologically in the profound difference of intellectual atmosphere which the absence of leisured classes

278 EUGENICS REVIEW.
involves, for there can be no leisured class on a virgin soil. It is certainly inot eugenic to encourage the emigration of people who will fail to maintain themselves under these conditions, and who will inevitably drift to the few congested centres which reproduce to some extent the industrial life of Europe. No doubt the long-continued movement from country to town in England has conferred some degree of versatility upon our industrial populations, and careful selection will certainly reveal types well suited to the life of a settler, for there is plenty of evidence that selected industrials do well.
The increase in the population of England and Wales in recent times, due to the rise and growth of industrialism, has been most remarkable. The population was estimated to be about 6 millions in I700 and nearly 9 millions in i8oi; it was more than 32 millions in i9oi and approximately 37 millions in 1914. Competent judges regard this phenomenon as quite unique in history. If the British Isles alone be considered strong arguments may be brought forward in favour of maintaining an equilibrium between births and deaths; but if we take into account the needs of the Empire as a whole there is ample evidence for believing that an even more rapid increase for two or three generations could be absorbed. The voluntary restriction of births which seems to be taking place in the most capable sections of every class does at any rate show the existence of a racial reserve of high quality which could be drawn upon were conditions such as to induce a higher birth-rate among them, and the conditions necessary are probably as much psychological as material. In the January issue of the Edinburgh Review the Dean of St. Paul's wrote:
" In Canada and Australasia there is probably room for nearly 200,000,000 people. These countries are remarkably healthy for Northern Europeans; there is no reason why they should not be as rich and powerful as the United States are now. We hope that we have saved the Empire from German cupidity-for the time; but we cannot tell how long we may be undisturbed. It would be criminal folly not to make the most of the respite granted us, to people our Dominions with

EMIGRATION.

279

our own stock, while yet there is time. This, however, cannot be done by casual and undirected emigration of the old kind. We need an Imperial Board of Emigration, the officials of which will work in co-operation with the Governments of our Dominions. These Governments, it may be presumed, will be anxious, after the War, to strengthen the Colonies by increasing their population and developing their resources. They, like ourselves, have had a severe fright, and know that prompt action is necessary. Systematic plans of colonisation should be worked out, and emigrants drafted off to the Dominions
as work can be found for them. Young women should be sent out in sufficient numbers to keep the sexes equal. We know now that our young people who emigrate are by no means lost to the Empire. The Dominions have shown that in time of need they are able and willing to defend the Mother Country with their full strength. Indeed, a young couple who emigrate are likely to be of more value to the Empire than if they had stayed at home; and their chances of happiness are much increased if they find a home in a part of the world where more human beings are wanted. But without official advice and help emigration is difficult. Parents do not know where to send their sons, nor what training to give them. Mistakes are made, money is wasted, and bitter disappointment caused. All this may be obviated if the Government will
take the matter up seriously. The real issue of this War is whether our great Colonies are to continue British; and the question will be decided not only on the field of battle, but by the action of our Government and people after peace is declared. The next fifty years will decide for all time whether those magnificent and still empty countries are to be the home of great nations speaking our language, carrying on our institutions, and valuing our traditions. When the future of our Dominions is secure, the part of England as a World-Power will have been played to a successful issue, and we may be content with a position more consonant with the small area of these islands."
These are the words of a member of the Council of the Eugenics Education Society. One of the lessons we have learnt from the War is that we are too dependent on overseas

280 EUGENICS REVIEW.
supplies for the simplest necessaries of life. A few rough figures will give a sufficiently clear view of the state of affairs. In I9I6 we imported nearly I00 million pounds worth of wheat and meat. The people of the United Kingdom depend on importation for four-fifths of their wheat and three-fourths of all food. If Germany, with her Navy and mercantile marine swept from the sea, were in that position she would be unable to continue the War; as it is she can feed her people off her own soil. We have thought too exclusively of cheap supplies and not cared where we got food as long as we got it cheap. Our own arable lands have largely fallen to grass, and great numbers of our country folk have migrated to the towns. There are one million fewer workers in the shires and villages than there were fifty years ago. The British Empire occupies a quarter of the whole land surface of the globe, but
the white agricultural population is only I31 millions out of 58,
a number altogether too small to develop our land resources. Germany with one sixty-fourth of the area of the British Empire has an agricultural population of 20 millions out of 66; France I8 millions out of 36. Germany has 6o per cent. more land under cultivation, and produces three times the food.
There has too been little effort to keep men of British descent within the Empire. After the Boer War large numbers went to the United States of America, and there are thousands there now who are still strongly British in sentiment. If all the Englishmen who have settled there in the last fifty years had settled in the Empire our white population would be 8o millions instead of 58. These facts, taken in connection with the existence of vast tracts of unoccupied fertile land within the Empire, suggest that the best racial policy would be to aim at an overflowing rural population, the surplus of which would go to people and cultivate British territory across the seas. In the present conditi-on of home agriculture it is possible to take the view that since we are liable to be starved out if we lose command of the seas, the British Isles are dangerously full. This most certainly is not the case of our Dominions.

EMIGRATION.

28I

In 1917 Colonial officials were asked to make a rough estimate of the numbers of ex-service men from the United Kingdom and other parts of the Empire which their respective

States could absorb during the first, second and third years

after the termination of the War. Here are some of the

answers:

CanadaNorth-West

First year. Second year. Third year.
... 20,000 30,000 40,000

New Brunswick ... 3,000

Nova Scotia

... 5,000

5,000

--p
3,000

Quebec ... ... 550

Ontario ... ... 8,ooo 12,000 i6,ooo

Australia-

1 Western Australia 3,350 5,5oo more.

2 New South Wales ...

The somewhat exceptional position of New Zealand and of

South Africa will be considered later. We must endeavour to

get a broad view of the situation as a whole, and some atten-

tion must be paid to vital statistics. These figures, based on

information in the Colonial Year Books, are only approxi-

mate;.they refer, except where otherwise stated, to the year

1912 and represent rates per thousand of total population per

an num.

Country.

England and Wales ...

Canada

... ...

Australia

... ...

New Zealand ... ...

Population.
36,000,000
7,000,000 4,000,000
1,000,000

Birth Death- Net rate. rate. increase.
24 13 II
23 I I 12
28 II 17
26 9 17

The high net increase in New Zealand is largely due to a very low death-rate. In Australia the higher birth-rate is compensated by a higher death-rate and gives about the same figure. Compared with the United Kingdom, Canada has the advantage owing to its low death-rate. Since our concern is with those parts of our self-governing Dominions which consist largely of virgin soil, and are thus open to settlement, the approximate figures for each State must be examined.

In past times in three years as many as 30,ooo have been settled. In the three years before the War, 29,400 immigrants were absorbed without difficulty.

282 EUGENICS REVIEW.

State.

Nova Scotia ...

Quebec ... ...

Ontario ...

Manitoba ...

...

Saskatchewan ...

Alberta ...

...

British Columbia ...

Yukon

...

Birth-rate. Death-rate. Net increase.

25 I4 I I

I637...

21

... 23 I 2 II

i830...

I2

... 20

6 14

I024...

14

19 I0

9

7 7 0...

The difference between conditions in the long-standing civilisation of Catholic French Canada and of the few industrial centres and those in the prairie provinces are reflected in these figures. Quebec, with a birth-rate of 37, has a death-rate of i6, but in spite of that shows the highest net increase of 2I. Of the prairie provinces the only one that comes anywhere near this figure is Manitoba with I8, due largely to a low death-rate. Abnormally low death-rates in Saskatchewan and Alberta only lead to a net increase of 14.

Australia-
State.

New South Wales

Victoria ... ...

Queensland

...

South Australia ...

Western Australia

Tasmania ... ...

Birth-rate. ... 30
26...
... 29 28... 29...
... 30

Death-rate. Net increase. II I9 12 14
II i8 I0 I8 I I I8
I0 20

Leaving the territories out of account, the birth-rates and death-rates are much more uniform than in Canada, and the net increases, if we exclude Quebec, higher.
In I9I I there was a deficiency of female population all over Canada except in Quebec and Ontario. This, however, was very unevenly distributed, the excess of males in the NorthWest being serious. In Australia in I9I2 the males were everywhere in excess except in Victoria, and the excess was not only less serious but much more evenly distributed than in Canada. In I9II in New Zealand there was a slight excess of males following more vigorous immigration of male settlers, but a few years before an excess of females was shown. Generally

EMIGRATION.

283

speaking this state of affairs was reversed in the United Kingdom. A few figures may now be given showing the actual (not approximate) numbers of people settling permanently in the Dominions. They are taken from charts prepared for the Colonial Institute, and show the total overseas passengers minus British subjects returning from non-European countries, thus presenting a balance account of permanent settlers.

United States ... ... Canada ... ... ... Australia & New Zealand South Africa ... ... Other Places ... ...

1912.
Total. Per Ct. Balance.
117,310 25 45,817 186,147 40 133,561 96,800 21 79,726 28,216 6 4,233 39,193 8 5,148

1913.
Total. Per Ct. Balance.
129,169 28 52,155 196,278 42 127,656 77,934 16 57,263 25,855 5 377 40,404 9 4,546

Total 467,666 268,485 Total 469,640
About i of these were English.

241,997

In I9I3 it was estimated that the net emigration of males from the United Kingdom between the ages of i8 and 30 was greater than the normal increase by growth of population. In the case of Scotland and Ireland the net emigration between these ages was more than double the natural increase. If the War continues till April, I9I8, the whole of the natural increase of the male population of England and Wales between the ages of 20 and 35 since I9I I will have disappeared. During the War there has been practically no emigration from the United Kingdom, so that the Dominions have been deprived of their normal flow of immigrants, and thus, so far as women and children are concerned, the population of the United Kingdom available for emigration has pro tanto increased.
The broad eugenic principle we must recognise is the increase of the Anglo-Saxon race in the temperate Dominions. The Royal Colonial Institute has done a great deal of work in this direction. About nine years ago a conference attended by delegates from some fifty societies met at the Institute. One result of this was the formation of a standing committee representative of all the societies, which still meets. Owing largely to the efforts of the late Lord Braye, the Empire Settlement Committee was constituted, which formed two sub-committees-

284 EUGENICS REVIEW.
one to deal with home settlement and the other with settlement overseas. The two-fold character of the main Committee
must not be overlooked, its interest in settlement at home and overseas being equally great. These three Committees have met once a month for the last three years and have produced a considerable amount of literature. In I9I6 Sir Rider Haggard undertook a mission throughout the Dominions to see exactly what the chances were for the settlement of exsoldiers and sailors and their dependants. Deputations waited upon the Government immediately before and after this mission, a full report of which has been published by Messrs. W. H. Smith and Sons. The report showed that the Dominions took some interest in the settlement of their own ex-service men, but that no provision had been made for others. The mission influenced the Dominion Governments in such a way that, speaking generally, we may now say that the door is open. Legislation has made it possible for our own people to settle under nearly the same conditions as Colonials themselves. Below is a short summary of some of the offers.
Canada.-In the prairie provinces of Manitoba, Sas-
katchewan and Alberta i6o acres free and a loan of £300-.500
repayable in fifteen years are offered to approved ex-service men from Great Britain or any of the self-governing Dominions. If applicants are not farm-trained, free training is provided by the Government-wheat cultivation mainly, and some mixed farming.
The Canadian-Pacific Railway has a scheme referring mainly to Alberta.
Ontario.-When a sufficient number of suitable applications have been received a farm colony will be established under
a superintendent, in which the men will be housed centrally, special arrangements being made for married men and a school house erected. Provision for social intercourse will not be lacking, and instruction in farming will be given free where
necessary. Eighty acres free and a loan of ZIoo repayable in
twenty years. Some capital desirable but not essential. British Columbia.-Plans for a community settlement are
now being considered.

EMIGRATION.

285

New Brunswick.-A scheme has been authorised for the establishment of community settlements, each one of I00 to 250 families. A church, public hall and school to be erected.
Demonstration farm with teams and implements for hire. Farms of from io to ioo acres radiating from this centre. Ten per cent. of cost paid on application and balance spread over
twenty years. Capital of £6oo to £63oo desirable but not essen-
tial. During development of scheme ex-service men can obtain employment in preparing the holdings.
Australia.-The Commonwealth will find the funds and the States the lands, a joint Board supervising conditions. Capital required will be very small. British ex-service men are equally eligible with Australians, but the latter have prior claim. Queensland is arranging group settlements. Western Australia is doing the same, settlements of about jo with 40 acres each being proposed. Victoria, New South Wales, South Australia, Tasmania, all make liberal offers of' land, training, and advance of capital. Generally a small amount of capital is desirable, but in many cases by no means essential.
In regard to capital it should be remembered that many ex-
service men will be entitled to long-service pensions on demobi-
lisation, and all will receive allowances amounting to some £X5, while officers will receive a great deal more.
New Zealand.-British ex-service men are equally eligible with New Zealanders, but the latter have prior claim. Location of land is by ballot and a choice of tenures allowed. The requirements of New Zealand are very different from those of Canada and Australia, since she does not possess vast areas of land still awaiting cultivation.
South Africa.-The presence of native labour alters the whole problem of immigration, and the land areas immediately available are not large. In other parts of Africa there are openings for educated men willing to act as overseers, and there are good private offers for those who have capital, as the following examples show:
North Charterland Exploration Company.-Ten farms of 1,ooo acres each offered at Is. 3d. per acre for tobacco or cotton. Capital required not less than £700.

286 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Sundays River Settlement.-Land and house at £35 an
acre; good climate and a railway. Suitable for officers. These offers are sufficiently varied and liberal to make an
appeal to members of all classes. Some of these schemes deal with community settlements on co-operative lines. The eugenic importance of this type of settlement will be considered later. Training as a rule takes place in the country where the settler means to live, but since transport is likely to be a great difficulty after the War the waiting time could be spent on getting an elementary knowledge of agricultural work here. This will form a most valuable test of fitness, and some definite
arrangement of this kind is a clear eugenic requirement. The Y.M.C.A., the Church Army, and the Salvation Arfny either have already or contemplate establishing farms for this purpose.
In many of the schemes prepared preference will be given to married men, and in some married men alone are eligible. On several grounds this would seem to be a sound policy. During the War many Colonials have married over here; some 12,000 Australians have done so, and they can get assisted passages for their wives. In some cases a man who has been in a State or Dominion for a short time can obtain reduced passages for wife and family as nominated emigrants. Widows of ex-service men are often offered the same facilities as their husbands would have had. Orphans sent out young enough to grow up in their new homes form a very valuable class of immigrant. In the case of New Brunswick some twenty children selected from London Poor Law Boards were put into a home at St. John's and distributed to farms not too distant for them to attend school. The result was quite successful. We should give as good conditions on this side of the water, but the Government has been slack. The land question, however, is still a hornet's nest for Home Governments. Something, but very little, has been done. The Small Holdings Colonial Act is grossly insufficient; in some respects the scheme is co-operative, but at
present provision is contemplated for about 240 families only. Simply as a framework the Act is a good one. The Board of Agriculture for Scotland under this Act is empowered to acquire land for experimental small-holdings colonies primarily

EiNIIGRATION .

287.

intended for ex-service men. The Duke of Sutherland in presenting a farm and buildings in that county has made his gift conditional on definitely eugenic qualifications. The farm must be used for the settlement of sailors and soldiers who have volunteered without compulsion and have a good record for foreign service, preference being given to men in good physical condition.
The main Committee already referred to, of which Lord Tennyson is chairman, was asked by the Colonial Secretary to report (amongst other things) on the steps to be taken by the Home Government in concert with the Dominions Governments for the formation of a central authority to control emigration. That report, generally known as the Tennyson Report, was issued in August, I917, and points out that only within the last few years have the problems of population begun to be studied in the light of Imperial necessities, and that henceforward no part of the Empire must consider emigration strictlv from the point of view of its own interests and needs. Cooperation is needed. Opportunities offered to ex-service men at home and in the Overseas Dominions must not be regarded as in any way antagonistic; they are parts of one great policy for settlement within the Empire.
Eugenists have not always been careful to reflect that conclusions arrived at from an exclusive study of the vital statistics of the Old Country are bound to be modified when brought into relation with the larger questions raised by the vital statistics of the whole Empire and its extraordinary inequalities in density of population. The Tennyson Committee recommended the establishment of a Central Board. It would certainly be undesirable to set up an authority independent of any existing or prospective authorities concerned with emigration generally; and it may be said that a central authority would be preferable to a Government Department on several grounds, one being that a Government Department would be likely to scrap existing machinery which ought to be retained with its wealth of local initiative and enthusiasmthings of great price which tend to disappear under excessive centralisation. It is essential that the Overseas Governments

288 EUGENICS REVIEW.
be represented on any central authority, so that their needs may be known in all respects, and that their powers should be not merely advisory but executive. In the matter of finance Credit Banks are suggested, but a central fund is wanted for land development. A difficulty arises here, since at present the only constitutional authority existing to deal ,with the Empire as a whole is a Parliament in which the United Kingdom alone is represented. Prompt action is absolutely necessary, for if the authority is not in working order before the War is over, the Government concerned will be open to the charge of having neglected an important side of reconstruction work, and there will be grave danger of men drifting away outside the Empire. There is a further strong argument why such an authority should be set up now; no better chance is likely to recur, for emigration is at a standstill, and powerful vested interests usually hostile to change and often indifferent to large Imperial necessities have practically vanished. Although an Emigrants' Information Bureau exists, it is true to state that there is no body really competent to say what persons are suitable as emigrants and where they are most wanted. If emigration must be looked at as a whole, and if therefore the Dominions Governments must be represented, other vital interests cannot be left out. Racial problems of the first importance are raised, and eugenic considerations must not be allowed to fall into the background. The proposed central authority would be seriously incomplete were purely eugenic interests unrepresented. Happily there is no lack of distinguished talent among the members of our Society, many of whom are able and doubtless willing to put it at the disposal of the Government; and when the formation of the central authority is begun this matter ought to be pressed. A central authority would sweep away the evils of casual unregulated emigration. The licensing of passage brokers and passage brokers' agents would do much. Their interested mendacity in painting all things couleur de rose has led to a vast deal of disappointment and suffering in the past. The main trouble about emigration to Canada has been lack of careful placing,
often due to deliberate fraud. For example, for some few years

EMIGRATION.

289

round about I897 emigration to Canada averaged about 50,000 per annum; 1907, however, was a boom year, and the figure
rose to about 250,000. In order to get this number the various agents threw their nets over all. In one case a large number of immigrants arrived at Montreal, one of the few congested centres of Canada, only to find that there were practically no opportunities for them there at all; it was, in fact, a case of
dumping. Some held out for a few months till the winter, and then all those unfit for the land found themselves without work. Canada has no Poor Law, and I907 was a dreadful year, a great increase in crime being traced to the emigrants. As a result of this unhappy experience the Dominion Government was obliged to be stricter about admissions. In Canada the number of industrial centres like Montreal and Toronto is very small, and industrials as such are not wanted. The future of the country lies in the North-West, the. vital statistics of which should be noted. Those who desire an unvarnished account of the disasters which may overtake would-be settlers who are uninformed and ill-prepared will find it in the narrative of William Lane's experiment given in Cunningham Grahame's "WVhere Socialism Failed," an unnecessarily provocative title to a most informing book.
The methods of the Salvation Army form a splendid contrast to this state of affairs.
The guiding principle is to make provision at every stage. Its action is determined by need overseas and not by economic pressure at home. For instance, if an employer asks for female factory hands, the Army asks whether housing accommodation is actually ready; if it is not, no one is sent over. No children or families are sent out without reasonable accommodation being actually ready. The passage is managed in this way: A ship taking, say, i,ooo emigrants has four Canadian and four English officers attached. During the voyage the eight sit down together before the list of applications and offers; they compare notes, and before it cnds all the emigrants are allotted to districts. Special trains are chartered with sleeping accommodation, food, etc., and the emigrant is usually set down at

290 EUGENICS REVIEW.
his actual situation. The Army insures him against loss of luggage and unemployment, so that if by chance a situation shall fall through he is moved to another at the Army's expense. The men go straight on to the land at once and are trained there, information as to conditions of living being given on the passage over. Most are taught on their own farms, but the Army has two quarter sections as an experimental holding with an expert in charge. The new settler is seldom able to take up a quarter section straight away. In
"one case, for instance, in Alberta twenty families arriving in
May were put into tents, and all but one eventually settled. E'xperience shows that industrials can make good on the land; in fact, selected industrials frequently do better than country folk. In Queensland Cockneys have done very well. A case in Canada is provided by a Battersea navvy with six children, who took up a quarter section at once. He went to a lumber camp during the winter, but in his absence his daughter of sixteen started the ploughing. Curiously enough, on the next holding was a Kentish man with three generations of farming behind him who was still going on in the old-fashioned English way. Capital in kind-stock and implements-is advanced. The land is sometimes grubbed and staked out by a company, the intending settler being employed upon the work and being treated during that time as a wage-earner, thus learning a good deal about the land, his family joining him when clearing is finished (see New Brunswick Scheme).
Latitude makes the Australian winter very different from the Canadian, and the housing question is far less pressing. It is common for the whole household to sleep on the verandah, so a house with few rooms is sufficient. What sleeping out really means must be carefully explained to emigrants, who probably think of it in connection with a very different climate. In past years big families have not been very welcome, but owing to the rise of dairying during the last fifteen years there is now a demand for young labour. The irrigation and artesian possibilities of Australia are very great. Wonders have been done by this means in other countries, such as the arid districts of South California and Arizona.

EMIGRATION.

291

The land and climate of New Zealand are eminently suited
to emigrants from this country, and wealth is said to be very evenly divided there. The requirements are different from those
of Canada or Australia because New Zealand does not possess vast tracts of uncultivated land. Also it is very distant and,
generally speaking, emigration is not assisted, so a different stamp of emigrant tends to settle. This may perhaps be regarded in New Zealand as an advantage. The branch representative on the General Council of the Eugenics Society is the High Commissioner-a guarantee that eugenic considerations will be kept
before the New Zealand Government.
South Africa is in a different category altogether, owing to the presence of a large reserve of native labour, and the vacant
Crown lands are situated for the most part in remote and water-
less regions, and require opening up to prepare them for settle-
ment. The Union Government considers that making provision for members of the South African contingent alone will considerably tax its resources. Some of the offers of private companies further North have already been noticed.
Though there is certain to be strong opposition in the Colonies to an influx of immigrants on such a scale as to disorganise local conditions of labour, there is no doubt that they look to their racial future with some anxiety and that they desire a higher population of British descent. This at once brings us to the birth-rate. However successful settlers may be, eugenically speaking they will have failed if they cannot maintain their numbers. This problem of numbers for ever facing the human race in new and unexpected forms is a complex interlacement of material and psychological factors. Certain broad influences are worth examining. The inequality of the sexes is one. Australia, and especially Canada, want women. The United Kingdom possesses an excess. But experience shows that a sufficient number of married women must be reinforced by a corresponding amount of domestic help owing to the severe conditions of a settler's life. The Canadian Government has recognised this and has made great efforts to increase the immigration of women willing to act in that capacitv. Emigration societies

292 EUGENICS REVIEW.
in this country have seconded that effort and, knowing that domestic help is almost the sole field open to women, have induced many women of good education to train themselves for it. Gentlefolk unwilling, perhaps, to undertake such work in this country have gladly trained themselves to undertake it over there. The results on the whole have been decidedly eugenic, for the Societies have aimed at getting a good type of woman, and statistics show, in one case at any rate, that most of them married in four or five years. About half went to ranches and half to the towns, and hardly any returned. The Salvation Army figures show that of women who settled in the Vancouver district some 6o per cent. married within two years. In South Africa the domestic servant is often the only woman available as a wife for a man of quite good position. Male emigration to Canada has greatly exceeded female. In the past twelve years the Salvation Army has sent out some 8o,ooo persons, mostly single men, hardly any of whom went to industrial centres. In view of the deficiency of female population in the Dominions, any policy short of emigration of the sexes in approximately equal numbers must be regarded as dysgenic, and doubly so, for disproportion of the sexes at home and abroad will check fertility in both places. It is thought that one effect of female labour on the land will be to make many women wish to become settlers after the War.
It is worth mentioning here that the Board of Agric'ulture and Fisheries are keeping a register of women employed and willing to be employed in farm and dairy work in this country.
The question arises as to whether the family is not, after all, the proper unit for emigration. The Salvation Army finds that emigrants are more likely to do well where families settle; but this unit is more difficult to handle owing to housing accommodation. The Salvation Army gladly deals with families, and big families too where it can, taking the view that the larger the family the greater the claim. Is the family economically of greatest value here or there? The expenses of settlement are probably greater in the Old Country. In the case of married men, their wives and families often follow later. The obvious disadvantages of this need not be entered into.

EMIGRATION.

293

On the whole the emigration of young newly married couples
would seem to be best from every point of view. Neglecting purely psychological factors, next to a scarcity
of women lack of domestic help seems to be the greatest
influence in lowering the birth-rate. Life on a virgin soil makes
such stern demands that domestic help of some sort is essential for the production of a family. For instance, enquiries made in Prince Edward's Island, a rural community about half the
size of Yorkshire, elicited the fact that domestic help formerly obtainable was now impossible to get, and that this alone
severely limited the birth-rate. Much the same has been
observed in Australia, where it is found that families will not
settle if no bush nurse is to be had. In some parts of Canada
small maternity hospitals have been set up to meet the difficulty. A partial solution may be found in the help of children who
are not too young, but we are very backward compared with
Colonials in training our daughters from the earliest age to help in the home. There seems to be only one way out for settlers on virgin lands, and that is co-operation. Group
settlements seem to provide the only satisfactory solution Communities, whether closely organised or loosely scattered, provided they are not so scattered as to make frequent intercourse impossible, seem most likely to succeed not only eugenically but from other points of view also, for instance, winter in the North-West of Canada is a thing of iron and the loneliness of an isolated settler extreme. Particular attention is
drawn to those schemes already outlined in which the principle
of co-operation is recognised. Forms of mutual help which the canons of respectability in the Old Country forbid seem easy of
realisation in the New. The day of dumping-strange that such a word should
be used of the most precious of all material-is over, and that of organised emigration has come. What likelihood is there, that ex-service men will wish to go on to the land either here or overseas? Everything depends upon what the men them-
selves wish.'There is a passage in Lord Charnwood's report
on "' Professional Re-Education after the War " bearing upon this. " There has been, I am told, a desire manifested among

294 EUGENICS REVIEW.
French soldiers drawn from the towns, just as among such men in our own Army, to be started as small farmers after the War. But the tendency in the opposite direction seems to be regarded as more general." It is a question of persuasion and offers are liberal, but the old mendacious methods of the past must be quite abandoned. The true facts about life on the land must be set forth. As against the undoubtedly hard conditions of a settler's life here, and especially abroad, is to be set the advantage of ownership and of being one's own master, and this is likely to outweigh other considerations. An enquiry made among Io6,ooo men of different regiments as to whether they desired to go on to the land gave only 17 per cent. in favour of that proposal, but were the opportunities really understood it seems certain that a far greater proportion would desire to go on to the land. The Colonial Institute has sent out for distribution a questionnaire, with leaflets giving information, to the Y.M.C.A. huts in France, hospitals in England, and the Salvation Army, the result of which will be awaited with interest. Some co-partnership applications, including one group of ioo, have already been received. Such a highly important enquiry ought really to be undertaken by the Government. The eugenic questions involved are concerned with the Empire as a whole. If our best types only were to emigrate this would be dysgenic for England, though eugenic for the Dominions, and vice versa. The principal thing to be secured is that the flow of good material be kept within the Empire. How can the distribution between this country and overseas best be maintained? We should keep an eye on charitable institutions and see that bad stock is not specially helped. To what extent should we try to divert inferior types to lands outside the Empire? What is the best age to emigrate ?-and the best unit for emigration ?
Wherever possible in this short review eugenic questions have been raised, but a close and extended study of the facts will be necessary before many questions which ought to be asked can be put rightly, and meanwhile the urgent immediate necessity is to get a central authority established and to make sure that eugenic interests are represented upon it.

EMIGRATION.

295

EMIGRATION CONFERENCE.
A Conference on Emigration was held at 13, Onslow Crescent on Tuesday, November 6th, at 8.45 p.m., with Major Leonard Darwin in the chair. Sir Harry Wilson, K.C.M.G., C.M.G., Secretary of the Royal Colonial Institute, gave an account of the policy and activities of the Institute in regard to land settlement at home and overseas. Commissioner D. C. Lamb explained the principles and methods of the Salvation Army in dealing with emigration to Canada. The Hon. Mrs. Norman Grosvenor and Miss Vernon, both members of the Joint Council of Women's Emigration Societies, discussed the question of female emigration. Professor MacBride, F.R.S., considered the conditions of life and requirements in Canada, and Mrs. Gordon Wasche those in Australia. Mrs. Theodore Chambers, Mr. Newton Crane, and Mrs. Nevile Rolfe, O.B.E., took part in the general discussion. Captain Edgar Schuster, Lieut. G. P. Balzarotti, of the Italian Delegations, and Mr. C. S. Stock were also present. The Chairman, after thanking speakers for putting their special knowledge before the Conference, outlined some of the questions eugenists would have to answer. A general survey of the whole subject will be found in the preceding article.

Literaturer. W. R. Inge. " The Birth-Rate." Edinburgh Review, January,
19I7.
2. Empire Settlement Committee Report, 1917. 3. Colonial Year Books. 4. Royal Colonial Institute Publications. 5. Report on "Professional Re-Education after the War."

