EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES OF HEREDITAR INFLUENCES ,ON BEHAVIOUR*

By Professor ROGER W. RUSSELL, M.A., Ph.D.,
Department of Psycholo,y, University Colle,e, London

Introduction

a suitable subject for research. The best one

TN I883 Sir Francis Galton's concern with
substituting a planned selection for natural selection in the interests of racial
improvement resulted in his definite proposals for an applied science of " eugenics."

can expect to do is to study the behaviour of human subjects selected on the basis of certain hereditary and environmental relationships. As Professor Penrose has
described it(30):

The thinking and research which led to these

" The data are provided by circum-

proposals and to the later development of stances outside the control of the investi-

-eugenics also created a " new " psychology, gator and their study forms a descriptive

in which emphasis was upon the individual and inductive science with some resem-

differences rather than the central tendencies blance to astronomy as opposed to

in the behaviour of living organisms. Interest experimental physics."

in l'homme moyen shifted to interest in A number of techniques have been developed.

the variations of behaviour in different which may be applied to these ends, the

strains, breeds and species. The research most popular in the past involving a com-

which followed this shift in interest demon- parison of the variation in behaviour of

strated that the behaviour of living organ- monozygotic twins with that of dizygotic

isms - like their morphological, neuro- twins. These techniques have been employed

physiological and biochemical characteristics in an impressive number of studies, but the,

-is influenced by hereditary factors. In no results have not been entirely unequivocal.

way did this deny that behaviour could be Experimental "-psychogenetics "t is limited

modified by environmental factors. Recent by the fact that man cannot be employed as,

research has provided some grounds for the a subject for research, and human "psycho-

belief that the limits of the capacity for such genetics" by serious limitations of the

modifications are themselves influenced by manner in which man, as a subject, can be

inherited properties of the organism. The manipulated. The advantages of! supple-

intimate interactions of heredity and environ- menting one approach by the other should

ment in the development of behaviour have not be overlooked in the discussion to follow,

become topics of the gravest importance to which is concerned primarily with the experi-

individuals and to social groups. It is with mental approach and, therefore, will not

certain problems arising from the systematic give human " psychogenetics " the attention

study of such influences on behaviour that it deserves in a complete picture of the

this paper is concerned.

genetics of behaviour.

The approach which is most likely to pro- The ultimate goals of the experimental

duce satisfactory answers to many of these approach are to determine whether or not

problems is that of experimental genetics in specific behaviour patterns are influenced by

which hereditary and environmental factors -genetic factors, and, if they are, to study the

are controlled and systematically varied. number and nature of the genetic factors

Because of the techniques employed in this involved, the location of the gene or genes

science man, with his cultural patterns of on the chromosome, and the manner in

social behaviour and his long life span, is not

t" Psychogenetics " is a termn employed by Professor
* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the C. S. Hall in his excellent review of " The Genetics of

Eugenics Society on December i6th, I952.

Behavior "(21).

D 19

20 'THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which the genes function in influencing the behaviour pattern. By examining typical attempts to reach these goals we shall see the research procedures- 'which have been employed and gain some insight into the present state of knowledge concerning hereditary influences on behaviour. Of necessity the examples chosen for this purpose can represent only a small portion of the total
available.
Behaviour Patterns Influenced by Genetic
Factors
It is from the examination of differences in the behaviour of various strains, breeds, or species of animals that information concerning hereditary influences on behaviour, is obtained. The student of " psychogenetics " can, and, in a number of cases, has taken advantage of the fact that different strains, breeds, and species of animals, some highly inbred, are already available for experimental observation. Such groups, differing initially in certain genetic characteristics other than the particular behaviour under study, are exposed to a set of stimulus conditions which elicit this behaviour. When consistent differences are observed between the responses of the various groups, conclusions concerning hereditary influences on the behaviour may be drawn. Similar comparisons may be made by selectively breeding animals of a heterogeneous parental population in which individuals differ in the particular pattern under study. A number of studies have employed the first of these general approaches, which I shall refer to as the comparison of strains. The particular behaviour patterns studied have been very diverse, but reference to a few may illustrate the type of information which may be provided by the application of this approach.
However, before we begin to examine this information it is important that a point be made regarding terms used to describe behaviour patterns studied in " psychogenetics." Terms such as " general activity," " savageness," "learning," and " emotionality," may appear to be vague and to lend themselves to many different interpretations. They need not be vague and difficult to

interpret if they are defined in-terms of the
actual operations employed in observing and
measuring the behaviour they represent. An
experimenter does not study " learning." He studies the behaviour of a particular
organism in a particular type of maze under a
particular set of circumstances. With prac-
tice the behaviour may show a progressive
change of such a nature as to justify its inclusion in the class of phenomena called " learning." This class is a general one, con-
taining many particular behaviour patterns,
all of which have certain characteristics in common but which differ in other respects. Because it can be established that behaviour in a specific learning situation is influenced by genetic factors, it does not necessarily follow that " learning " as a class is likewise influenced. Indeed it has been shown that strains of animals bred for speed of learning under one set of maze conditions are not rapid learners in other maze situations(36), and animals bred for the excessive emotionality of their behaviour when exposed to certain forms of stimulation are not overemotional when exposed to others. (4) In the following discussion it will be convenient to use short descriptive terms for a number
of different behaviour patterns, but it should be kept in mind that these expressions are ultimately defined in terms of the actual operations employed in observing and measuring the behaviour they represent.
Anyone who has systematically observed the behaviour of infrahuman animals knows that striking inter-individual differences in levels of general or " spontaneous " activity. occur even when such variables as age, sex and environmental conditions are controlled.
It has been pointed out that such differences appear to be correlated with speed of learning, characteristics of responses during "experimental neurosis " and other complex forms of behaviour, and it has been -suggested that these differences are "constitutional" in nature. This latter hypothesis, made on the basis of more or less casual observation, needs specific verification before it can be accepted as a valid statement of the facts. Some favourable evidence has
come from comparisons of different breeds of

EXPE;RIMENTAL/SSTUDIES

dg^s.(I) The activity of animals rppresenting (6, 7, 8) has indicated that one variety of

a }number of different breeds was measured tropism, geotropism, as it appears in young

in terms of the nu'mber of movements made rats is significantly influenced by genetic

during observational periods of twenty-four factors. Young rats when placed on an

1hours, the movements being recorded auto- inclined plane crawl up the plane; they are

matically. Analysis of the records revealed negatively geotropic. The angle at which

significant inter-breed differences of such a an animal crawls up the plane-is a function

nature as to indicate the existence of three of the angle of inclination of the plane. The

activity groups: breeds such as the German angles of orientation of three different

shepherd and cocker spaniel belonging to a strains of rats were measured, with the resnlt

"high " activity group; the British bulldog, that members of each inbred strain showed

dachshund and pekingese, to a " medium" consistent functional relations between: angle

activity group; and, the bassetthound to a of orientation and angle of inclination of the

" low "' activity group. The records also plane, but different strains yielded charac-

showed that these differences were reflected teristically different functions.

primarily in the amount of nocturnal activity It should not be assumed because of the

shown by the three groups: activity of the emphasis in this paper on genetic factors

" active " group being distributed fairly influencing behaviour that behaviour is not

uniformly during the twenty-four-hour test altered by an organism's life experiences.

periods, the " medium " group being most " Psychogenetics " is concerned with the

active during the day, and the " low " group nature of the genetic background- upon which

showing scarcely any movement at night. are projected modifications of behaviour

There is considerable evidence that this during adjustment to environmental changes.

general or " spontaneous " activity is aroused Evidence is available which indicates that

by various types of internal stimuli, singly or this capacity for modification-learning.-is

in combination, and it is interesting that itself an inborn characteristic of livir

even such a non-specific form of behaviour organisms. Some of this evidence comes

appears to show the influence of genetic from comparisons of different strains of

factors.

animals. For example, one study(2) of

Compansons of the " savageness" and albino, grey, agouti, chocolate and yellow

"wildness " of various strains of animals mice showed consistent differences in learn-

have also revealed significant and consistent ing performance among the different strains.

differences. Mallard ducks can be tamed'in Another study(3) compared the leaniung

captivity while black ducks do not tame. (3I) performance of normal control rats with

Wild rats and half-breeds from them, even that of a strain of inbred rats with less than

though the latter were bred and reared in the laboratory, were significantly more " wild"

normal brain weight.' The latter learned more slowly than the former, and this dif-

and " savage " than quarter-breeds, yellow- ference consistently increased during the

hooded animals and pure albino rats. (37) three generations studied.

These differences persisted throughout their There is evidence for genetic differences in

lives, even though they had spent most of the the " emotionality " of animals. " Emotion-

time under the uniform environmental condi- ality " was measured in terms of the number

tions of the laboratory, and the strains bred of defecations, urinations, attempts to escape,

true. This". . . strongly suggests that the and position changes when the animals were

differences arise -- from hereditary rather placed individually for a standard period of

than environmental factors." '

time in strange and stressful environments.

Other forms of behaviour are elicited by In one study(I3) highly inbred grey Norway

specific external stimulus conditions and rats gave significantly higher scores than

follow a very stereotyped course. Some of Wistar albino rats when members of each

these have been referred to as " tropisms." strain were exposed to the same test condi-

A very extensive series of experiments tions. Another series of observAtions(4o)

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

showed consistent differences between two influence the reactions of one animal to

strains of rats inbred for their maze-learning another of 'the same s'pecies - social

performances. The faster learners were more behaviour. In one rather typical study(35)

disturbed by non-maze situations than were fighting between adult male animals was the

the slow learners.

form of social behaviour observed. The

One of the most interesting stories in the reactions of several strains of mice, all very

present literature on experimental " psycho- nearly pure-bred, were compared under con-

genetics" describes efforts to study the ditions which enabled the researcher to dis-

genetic basis of a certain type of " abnormal card possible environmental factors as

behaviour" usually referred to as " adio- important variables. Indications of genetic

genic seizures." Rats and mice hav&-servied7 differences were found between all except

as subjects for most of the experimental certain closely related strains, the basic

analysis, but the phenomenon has also been behavioural characteristics of the strains

demonstrated in other animals. When the showing ". . .. wide differences, little vari-

animal is confined and exposed to an audi- ability, and no overlap under the conditions

tory stimulus of relatively high frequency tested."

and intensity it may respond by a period of Such studies as these have capitalized on

very violent running followed by apparent the fact that different strains, breeds and

coma or by an epileptic-type convulsion. species of animals may differ in a number of

Not all animals respond in this manner, but characteristics, including their typical be-

several investigators have shown(i2, I5, 20, haviour pattern. The general procedure has

26, 27, 28) that certain strains have a sig- been to start with the different groups already

nificantly higher percentage of susceptible established and to examine them for inter-

animals than do other strains. On the surface group variations in behaviour. In a sense

this would seem to support the view that this procedure does not fulfill all the require-

genetic factors are operating. However, ments of good experimental method. The

closer examination of the several experi- independent variable, genetic constitution,

ments reveals a number of complications. has been varied by choice of subjects .rather

One of these complications arises from appar- than by actual manipulation of subjects.

ently contradictory results obtained by two However, the procedure has met other

researchers(I2, I6), one of whom found that requirements of experimental. method-sys-

wild grey Norway rats bred in captivity were tematic observation, control of variables

highly susceptible to audiogenic seizures such as external environmental conditions

while the other obtained no seizures in a large during observation, and measurement of

group of trapped wild Norway and Alexan- specific behaviour patterns-and, therefore,

drine rats. Part of the difficulty here lies in greatly increases confidence in the interpre-

the fact that little information was available tation of results. The casual observer of

as to how inbred the strains really were, but animal behaviour may ask what is new about

there are other difficulties, to which I shall the information obtained by application of

refer later. More adequate control of the the procedure just discussed. He may say

extent of inbreeding in the strains studied that he has often " seen " differences in the

has been achieved in a series of observations behaviour of different strains, breeds, or

on the susceptibility of mice to audiogenic species. By applying the procedures of

seizures.(20) Two pure strains of mice were experimental " psychogenetics " it becomes

cwnpaxed and one strain displayed signific- possible to go far beyond the general impres-

antly more hyperactivity, wall-jumping, sions of the casual observer by stating how

wild circling activity, convulsions and dying, significant the observed differences are, that

presumably from respiratory failure, than they do in fact represent the influences of

did the other.

genetic rather than extragenetic factors, and,

A few studies have been concerned with eventually, by learning a great deal more

the possibility that genetic factors may about the nature of the genetic factors

EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES

involved than casual observation could ever
divulge.
The second general procedure employed in determining whether or not a particular behaviour pattern is influenced by genetic
factors reverses the order of events charac-
terizing the procedure we have just discussed.
IX involves first measuring the behaviour
pattern as it appears in a heterogeneous
parental generatio;n and then inbreeding under uniform-environmental conditions those animals exhibiting the pattern and those not exhibiting it. When the behaviour can be measured along a continuum inbreeding may be carried on in family lines from parents exhibiting the behaviour to different
degrees. If the behaviour is influenced by heredity such selective breeding after a number of generations results in strains that
breed more or less true for the behaviour under examination. In order to produce pure strains, the inbreeding frequently has been limited to the particular family lines initially selected from the parental genera-
tion. A study of two strains of rats selectively
-bred, one for activity and the other for inactivity, clearly illustrates the use of this method and the necessity for precautions in limiting inbreeding to selected family lines. (33) Activity was measured in terms of the niumber of revolutions turned by the animals in a revolving drum during a standard test period before feeding time. Precautions were taken to feed the animals at the same hour each day, to keep them in darkness during the test period, and to control extraneous stimuli in the observation room. Inbreeding was carried out at both extremes of the distribution of activity.
During the first four generations care was not taken to breed within family lines, and the results clearly show the effects, for not until the fifth generation when ancestry did become a consideration in the breeding was the difference between active and inactive strains significant. With continued inbreeding of family lines two strains were finally established which showed consistent differences in activity level-one being highly active; the other, highly inactive.

Some of the most extensive s§elective breeding experiments have involved the
maze-learning behaviour of rats*; One of
these studies(39, 40) used a I7-unit multiple-T
maze as the problem to be learned. Through-
out the eighteen filial generations during
which selective mating was continued, each' animal, at the time of test for speed of learn-
ing, was given nineteen trials in the maze, the
total number of errors occurring during these
trials serving as the measure of behaviour.
The parental generation consisted of an unselected, heterogeneous sample of rats. Selective breeding was accomplished by
"... mating together the brightest rats within each of the brightest litters, the dullest within each of the dullest." The separation of two strains-" maze bright " and " maze dull."-was definitely noticeable by the second filial generation and, by the seventh generation, there was practically no overlapping between them. Other studies, similarly conducted, have yielded comparable
results. Another example of selective breeding for
a specific behaviour pattern appears to have
verified the conclusion arrived at by comparison of strains that susceptibility to audiogenic seizures in rats is affected by genetic factors. (I5) The parental generation was divided into two groups, one of which con-
sisted of animals having seizures in 50 per cent or more of the standardized test trials
and a second with seizures in less thax, 50 per
cent of the trials. Matings between highly susceptible animals and between animals of low susceptibility as well as between animals from both of these groups were carried on for six generations. By this time evidence of consistent trends toward increases in high and low susceptibility to seizures had become apparent, suggesting that genetic influences
were involved.
A selective breeding experiment(I8, I9) of particular importance to those interested in the study of behaviour disorders was designed to investigate the "emotional" behaviour of rats exposed to a mildly stressful situation, in which quantitative measures of " emotionality" could be obtained.. The reactions of a heterogeneous parental genera-

- ''CH.t, EUGENICS REVIEW

tio were measured and inbreeding carried o- for twelve filial generations by mating together " emotional " animals to produce .an "emotional" strain and "non-emotional" nals to produce a "non-emotional' strain. The magnitude of the difference
between these two strains increased until the ninth generation, when it became relatively stable.
Perhaps you have noted that, in illustrating the ways in which these two general approaches have been applied, I have selected several behaviour patterns the genetic bases of which have been examined by both. In the vast majority of cases information obtained by one approach has confirmed that obtained by the other. The diversity of behaviour patterns studied and theoretical considerations regarding the
nature of the behaviour lead us to believe that hereditary factors influence all behaviour to some degree. We have seen that such
influences are operating in general activity and specific tropistic responses, in adjustment to external environment conditions through learning, in " emotional " reactions to environmental stresses, in the " abnormal" behaviour of audiogenic seizures and even in certain social acts involving two or more members of the same species. The application of experimental methods has added objective support to our beliefs con-
cerning the roles of genetic factors in behaviour and has provided means of obtaining more precise information as to the way in which these roles are played.
The Nature of Genetic Factors Involved
When it is established that a specific behaviour pattern is influenced by heredity the question arises as to the number and nature of the genetic factors involved. The experimental methods which geneticists have developed to answer this question require the use of two or more pure strains differing in the behaviour under study. By crossing two inbred strains and later their first generation hybrids, by backcrossing these hybrids to either parental strain or by outcrossing them to any other strain, variations in the behaviour of offspring may result which justify

conclusiotfs concerning the number of genetic factors involved in the behaviour and the
nature, for instance dominant -or recessive, of these genetic factors. To date relatively few studies have reached this point in the genetic analysis of behaviour and, of those that have, only a few have presented
unequivocal results. As you may recall, studies of geotropic
responses of young rats showed that different strains of animals breed true for certain
geotropic constants but that these constants differ in magnitude from strain to strain. Crosses between two such strains have produced hybrids which, according to the
researchers(g, io) are identical in their geo-
tropic responses with the parents of one strain. These results have been interpreted as indicating that rather simple dominance relations exist between homologous genetic factors from the two strains.
It would not seem right to discuss " psychogenetics " without some reference to " waltzing " mice, for they provide some interesting examples of the application of Mendelian principles. In one very early investigation(II) a pure line of Japanese waltzing mice was
mated with a pure line of European albino mice. The first filial generation contained no waltzers and breeding within this generation produced offspring in the ratio of four
normal to one waltzer (close to the 3: I proportion expected with recessive inherit-
ance). This picture. of genetic factors operating to influence behaviour, when supported by subsequent studies, suggested that waltzing was transmitted as a recessive unit character.
Other neuromuscular abnormalities, characterized by trembling of the limbs and body and accompanied by deficient growth, and death before five weeks of age, have been
observed in certain strains of deer mice. (24)
Since all affected individuals were produced by related unaffected parents it appeared that this syndrome was " due to a recessive mutation of a single gene locus...."
One investigator(23) has described a strain of what he called " clumsy " pigeons or " homeless homers." The behaviour of these birds resembled that of a blind pigeon,

EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES

25

although it was established that they could number and severity of seizures. All neces-

see. According to the investigator, " They sary crosses were carried out and, with one

grope their way about, walk off precipices, exception, the results conform to what would

crash into walls during flight, fumble their be expected were audiogenic seizures "in-

food, and would be quite incapable of sur- herited as a single dominant gene." But the

viving in the wild state." This behaviour story is still not complete, for another

appeared initially in the offspring of normal investigator, using another genus of mouse,

pigeons, which suggested that its genetic has obtained results which strongly suggest

constitution was simple and recessive in that susceptibility to audiogenic seizures is

nature. This hypothesis was supported by inherited as a single recessive gene. (2i)

further breeding in which crosses between Since these two experiments on mice appear

" clumsy " animals produced only " clumsy " to have been adequately designed and con-

offspring, While outcrosses yielded only ducted, the differing results may mean that

normal offspring.

the genetic constitution of the same behavi-

These are examples in which the number our pattern in different genera may be

and nature of the genetic factors influencing different, a point of considerable potential

behaviour patterns appear to be relatively importance in " psychogenetics."

simple. But as we would anticipate, this is The importance of starting a genetic

not always the case. Let us return for the analysis of behaviour with pure strains of-

moment to the mi

enic animals becomes particularly apparent when

seizure. Genetic analyses of this behaviour the literature is searched for examples in

pattern as it appears in rats have led re- which several sets of factors-multiple fac-

searchers to propose three different types of tors-act together in affecting the same

genetic constitution, a result which appears behaviour pattern. If pure lines are crossed to be a function of the fact that impure and multiple factors are involved the first

strains of animals were used. The observa- filial generation should show uniform be-

tions of two investigators(27) indicated that haviour and the second generation, a wide

the seizure frequency of susceptible offspring variability in behaviour. (34) Several inves-

of two susceptible parents was only slightly tigafors have advanced hypotheses that

greater than that of susceptible offspring of behaviour patterns such as general

one non-susceptible and one susceptible activity(5), maze learning(39) and "emoparent. From these results they concluded tionality "(2i) are affected by multiple

that " susceptibility is transmitted as a genetic factors, but they have obtained in-

-unitary character," and- that " it is trans- conclusive results when the hypotheses were

mitted as a dominant trait." On the basis of tested, primarily because impure strains of

a later study(26) one of these researchers animals were used.

altered his opinion and " concluded that the Other complications which may arise

hereditary nature of the transmission of con- during attempts to determine the nature of

vulsive tendencies is complex in nature." genetic factors affecting behaviour are illks-

Observations by a third investigator led him trated by two breeding experiments(4I, 42)

to postulate that two pairs of genetic factors involving selection in dogs of " aptitudes"

influence susceptibility to audiogenic seizures. useful in hunting and other kinds of work.

It appears from all this that genetic factors The behaviour patterns studied were those

are at work in the manifestations of this least affected by training and which appeared

behaviour pattern in rats, but, as regards the very early in the life of the dog. In one case

number and nature of the factors involved, dogs of a breed which gives tongue on the,

"you pays your money and you takes your trail while pursuing game were mated with

choice." The best designed genetic analysis dogs of a breed which trails mutely. All the

of audiogenic seizures so far available(43$ offspring gave tongue on the trail but had

employed as subjects two pure stra

the type of voice characteristic of the6

house mice which differed greatly in the parents who trailed mutely. In the dthe

- - THE.E~UUGECNEINCCSSREVIEW

stdy 'bodily appearance and certain be- the morphological, neurophysiological and

haviour 'patterns characteristic of hunting biochemical characteristics of the organism.

were examined. The first crossing of pure It is through such characteristics that genetic

breeds revealed the operation of dominance factors exert their influences on behaviour.

or partial dominance, but further generations As yet there is very little information avail-

did not indicate any clear or simple Men- able as to how such genetic factors function

delian segregation of the behaviour patterns in producing their effects. In one. study(3)

involved. Second generation crosses pro- referred to earlier, significant differences were

duced offspring who, in some cases, resembled found between the speed of learning of

one pure breed in appearance but showed the normal control rats and of a strain of inbred

behaviour patterns of the other parental rats with less than normal brain weight.

breed.

Although it is not altogether surprising that

From what has been said it is obvious that variations in the characteristics of the brain

those interested in the genetic analysis of are associated with variations in complex

behaviour patterns have set about their task' behaviour patterns, the study does illustrate

by utilizing research designs already avail- one approach to the problem of how genetic

able in biogenetics. Presumably they will factors may produce their effects on be-

continue this practice when they have haviour. Another approach has involved

developed their field. of study to the point comparisons of various structures in animals

where they can attack the problems of map- from strains differing in certain behaviour

ping chromosomes and of determining the patterns. Attention has been focused on

precise way in which genes influence particu- such structures as the endocrine glands in

lar behaviour patterns. As yet but little emotional and non-emotional strains of rats

information is available which even begins to and brain weights of " maze bright " and

touch on these problems.

" maze-dull " animals. Comparisons of

The exchange of homologous parts between physiological processes in different strains

chromosome pairs during the development of also have been made, respiratory metabolism

germ cells provides a means for locating of active and inactive strains of rats being an

genes on chromosomes. This process of " cross- example. In other experiments(38) extensive

ing over " is evidenced by the separation of environmental variations have been intro-

" linked " characteristics which have consis- duced during tests of different strains for the

tently appeared together in past generations. behaviour characteristics in which they

" With the exception of some of the neuro- differed. If such environmental variations

muscular disorders, e.g. waltzing, shaker, and had the effect of upsetting the differences

pirouetting, there is no information regarding between strains some clue might be obtained

the location of the genes on the chromosomes as to the mechanism by which the genetic

for behaviour characters."(2i) Recent re- factors involved were influencing behaviour.

search(25) has shown that there are in a

number of animal species many cases where Interaction of Heredity and Environment

behaviour patterns are associated with coat Early studies of eugenics have pointed to

colour genes, and it has been suggested that the fact that individuals showing certain

"the associated coat colour genes may be types of behaviour patterns, i.e. low general

used as genetic markers of such traits. When intelligence and neuro-psychiatric break-

so employed, it will be possible by manipulat- down, often had family histories of similar

ing the coat colour markers to synthesize new behaviour patterns in previous generations.

combinational trends in morphology physio- The tendency was to interpret such informa-

logy, and resultant behaviour for psycho- tion as indicating an hereditary basis for the

logical study."

behaviour in question. Studies of the inter-

Any scientific approach to the study of actions of heredity and environment in the

behaviour must recognize that all behaviour development of behaviour soon showed the

patterns are dependent upon and limited by potential fallacy of such conclusions, for this

E1 XPERIMENTAL STUDIES

27

type of information is not adequate to rule out the possibility that the family environment is a major contributing cause.
In discussing methods for studying the
influences of genetic factors on behaviour the necessity for controlling the environment in which the organism develops has been emphasized. But this is not always as simple
as it may appear on the surface to be. (34) In
some instances important environmental factors may not be recognized and, hence, go uncontrolled. In other instances adequate
controls may be difficult to achieve.
Earlier in this paper it was remarked that one~ of the most interesting series of studies in " psychogenetics " has been that in which possible genetic influences on audiogenic seizures have been examined. From what has been said so far it appears that the susceptibility of rats to such seizures does have a genetic basis and that multiple genetic factors are probably involved. But there are two important considerations of an environmental nature which complicate any such conclusions. Research(I4) has shown that, not only does susceptibility change with age, but that the nature of the sound stimulus used to induce the seizures has an effect on the age of maximal susceptibility. If this is true, as it seems to be, it is possible that the number of animals in any particular generation of any particular strain which show the behaviour may vary as a function of the organismic variable of age and/or the environmental variable of the nature of the auditory stimulus. Apparently contradictory conclusions might be drawn from different genetic studies in which these two
variables were not subjected to identical controls. It has also been shown(29) that in one colony of rats the vast majority of those susceptible to audiogenic seizures were suffering from purulent otitis media, while those not susceptible very seldom showed this form of middle-ear infection. I have been informed by members of another labora-
tory that this relation between susceptibility and infection approaches a perfect correlation when more refined methods of examining for infection than those used in the initial study are employed. It is possible, if this
E

relation is a valid one, to account for results obtained in certain genetic studies of suscep-
tibility to audiogenic seizures in terms of
differential exposure to infection. Matings between two susceptible animals might be-
expected to provide greater exposure of
offspring to infection than matings between non-susceptible animals and matings of sus-
ceptible with non-susceptible animals might be expected to occupy an intermediate posi-
tion between these extremes. In the earliest
genetic study of audiogenic seizures(27) the rank order of percentages of susceptible offspring resulting from these three types of matings is exactly as would be predicted from these assumptions. This does not estab-
lish the validity of the assumptions but it
does illustrate a type of complication that may cause serious misinterpretations of
experimental results in which differences between strains have been found.
Recent research has indicated how very rapidly behaviour patterns may be learned in
the period immediately following birth. One writer on the subject(22) has suggested: " Much that we attribute to instinct, because no prolonged learning is evident, might thus be due to learning that needs only a few seconds for completion." In many species one of the most important environmental influences during early development is the interaction between parents and offspring. It is very probable that much of the early behaviour of the offspring is affected by learning resulting from tkis interaction. If parents have behaviour patterns differing significantly from those of other parents it is perfectly possible that the young of these parents may also differ in their behaviour, not because of genetic differences but because they have been exposed to different learning situations. Let me give a hypothetical example to make this point more specific. If we are interested in searching for possible genetic factors influencing susceptibility to breakdown under stress referred to as
".experimental neurosis" in the early research literature, we might decide to breed selectively animals breaking down easily and those very resistant to breakdown. The offspring of these two lines would at some

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stage in their development be tested for sus- heredity and environment is a major concern

ceptibility. The results of several generations in experimental " psychogenetics." As Pro-

of such inbreeding might, and I predict fessor Haldane has written(7): "The inter-

would, be two strains of animals, one very action of nature and nurture is one of the

susceptible to stress and the other very central problems of genetics. We can only

resistant. We might then be inclined to say determine the differences between the dif-

that susceptibility to breakdown under-stress ferent genotypes by putting each of them

is influenced by genetic factors. In so doing into a number of different environments.

we would be overlooking a potentially We compare two pure lines of mice not only

important environmental variable had we as regards colour, hair form, and other

not taken the precaution to examine the characteristics which are little affected by

effects which rearing by a susceptible mother nurture, but for such characters as resistance

as compared with rearing by a resistant to different bacterial and virus infections,

mother might have on the behaviour of the each of which must be tested by appropriate

various offspring during the tests for sus- changes of environment."

ceptibility. Significant differences in the There are other reasons for being inter-

behaviour of offspring from the two lines ested in the interactions of heredity and

might be accounted for partially or wholly in environment. Investigators responsible for

terms of environmental differences resulting most of the studies already discussed were

from interaction with the two types of motivated by a desire to understand the

mother rather than in terms of genetic dif- basic principles underlying genetic influences

ferences. On the basis of his own observa- on behaviour, but there are those whose main

tions one writer(32) has suggested that concern is with the practical problems of

environmental factors of this order are opera- developing strains with characteristics of

tive in the appearance of " wildness " in rats, adjusting to particular environments. Breed-

which depends to some extent upon whether ing in this latter case is for genotypes that

or not the offspring are reared by a wild are suitable for particular types of environ-

mother and whether or not they are reared ment and not for a " super "-genotype most

with other wild rats.

effective in all environments. The wide

These interactions of genetic and environ- diversity of physical and social environ-

mental factors may be summarized in terms ments in which infrahuman animals

of an analysis of the general courses of pheno- and man must live and work may

typic variation. (34) There appear to be not be at all consistent with concepts of a

three main paths by which genetic and en- super-race or a super-man. From the

vironmental factors can influence a specific research point of view this suggests the prac-

behaviour pattern. The first is that deriving tical value of studying the interactions of

from the genetic characteristics of the heredity and environment in influencing the

organism showing the behaviour. A behavi- behaviour of different strains, breeds, and

our pattern, at least in certain species, can species of animals under a variety of dif-

also be affected by the maternal environ- ferent environmental conditions.

ment, which in itself is determined partly by the genetic constitution of the mother and Conclusion

partly by the mother's previous reactions to If time and your indulgence permitted,

haers,ecpohynsdicpaalth.envTihreonrmeemnati.ninThgipsactohnsctointsuitsetss

this discussion could be made much more
complete, but I doubt that increasing the

of environmental influences which are entirely number of examples of behaviour influenced

independent of the genetic constitution of by genetic factors would alter very much the

the stock to which the individual belongs. It general impression which this brief examina-

is because all these paths may be involved tion of contemporary experimental " psycho-

to some extent in the manifestation of any genetics" conveys. Certainly knowledge in

behaviour pattern that the interaction of this area is fragmentary and in need of much

EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES

29

supplementation. There is no doubt in my
mind that the importance of this field of
experimentation warrants the effort necessary to develop it as a systematic and reliable
discipline. There are many important principles of behaviour which can only be dis-
covered and clarified by research of this kind. During several years of investigation into
problems of experimental psychopathology I have been particularly impressed with the
importance of this point of view. There is a wealth of circumstantial evidence suggesting that the development of " abnormal" be-
haviour patterns under the stresses of environmental circumstances is to some extent influenced by genetic factors. Since behaviour disorders analogous to those in
man can be produced in infrahuman animals under controlled conditions there seems to
be no reason why application of the methods of experimental " psychogenetics " cannot help greatly in clarifying and extending our
knowledge of psychopathology. Selective
breeding of infrahuman animals for susceptibility to breakdown under stress might well result in the development of susceptible and resistant strains. Once such strains were
available it would be possible to proceed to
the genetic analysis of the behaviour, to examine the relations between it and other psychological characteristics of the animals, and to determine the effects of varying the
environmental stress conditions on the differences of behaviour between the two strains. Since these differences in reactions to stress are undoubtedly reflected in morphological, neurophysiological, and biochemical differences between the strains, it also would be possible to compare various organs and processes within the animals, thus obtaining valuable information concerning the physical correlates of behaviour disorders. -Such an
approach to these very important problems of adjustment could not employ man as its subject. It is illustrative of the valuable roles which the methods of experimental " psychogenetics " can play in understanding the influences of heredity on behaviour.
By now you may have suspected that I am somewhat enthusiastic about the promise experimental " psychogenetics " gives for

future contributions of importance to the understanding of the behaviour of man and his infrahuman relatives. If I have not con-
veyed this enthusiasm to you the failure is
on my part and cannot be attributed to any lack of inherent interest or importance in the experimental study of hereditary influ-
ences on behaviour.
REFERENCES
I. Anderson, 0. D. (I939). " The spontaneous neuromuscular activity of various pure breeds of dog and of inter-breed hybrids of the first and second generation." Amer. J. Physiol., 126, 422-3.
2. Bagg, H. (I920). " Individual differences and family resemblances in animal behavior." Arch. Psychol., 6, I-58.
3. Bassett, G. C. (I914). " Habit formation in a strain of albino rats of less than normal brain weight." Behav. Monogr., 2, 1-46.
4. Billingslea, F. Y. (I94I). "The relationship
between emotionality and various other salients of behavior in the rat." J. comp. Psychol., 31, 69-77. 5. Brody, E. G. (1942). " Genetic basis of spontaneous activity in the albino rat." Comp. Psychol. Monogr., 17, No. 5. 6. Crozier, W. J., and Pincus, G. '(1929). " Analysis of the geotropic orientation of young rats." I and II. J. gen. Physiol., 13, 57-I19.
7. Crozier, W. J., and Pincus, G. (I93I). " Analysis
of the geotropic orientation of young rats." III. Parts I and 2. J. gen. Physiol., 15, 201-42.
8. Crozier, W. J., and Pincus, G. (I93I). " Analysis
of the geotropic orientation of young rats." IV. J. gen. Physiol., 15, 243-56.
9. Crozier, W. J., and Pincus, G. (I935). " Analysis
of the geotropic orientation of young rats." IX. J. gen. Physiol., 19, 2 I1-20. Io. Crozier, W. J., and Pincus, G. (1936). " Analysis of the geotropic orientation of young rats." X. J. gen. Physiol., 20, III-44. ii. Derbyshire, A. D. (I902). " Note on the results of crossing Japanese waltzing mice with European albino races." Biometrika, 2, I01-4, I65-74, 282-5.
I2. Farris, E. J., and Yeakel, E. H. (I943). "The susceptibility of albino and grey Norway rats to audiogenic seizures." J. comp. Psychol., 35, 73-80.
I3. Farris, E. J., and Yeakel, E. H. (1945). " Emotional
behavior of grey Norway and Wistar albino rats." J. comp. Psychol., 38, IO9-I8.
I4. Finger, F. W. (I943). " Factors influencing audiogenic seizures in the rat. II. Heredity and age."
J. comp. Psychol., 35, 227-32. I5. Griffiths, W. J. (1942). " Transmission of convul-
sions in the white rat." J. comp. Psychol., 34, 263-77.
i6. Griffiths, W. J. (I944). " Absence of audiogenic.
seizures in wild Norway and Alexandrine rats.'" Science, 99, 62-3. I7. Haldane, J. B. S. (1946). "The interaction of nature and nurture. " A nn. Eugen. Camb., 13,
197-205.
i8. Hall, C. S. (I938). " The inheritance of emotionality." Sigma Xi Quart., 26, I7-27, 37.
I9. Hall, C. S. (I941). " Temperament: A survey of animal studies." Psychol. Bull., 38, 909-43.

THE- EUGENI4CS RICEW

2Q. Hall, C. S. (Ig947). "Genetic differences -in fatal audiogenic seizures between two inbred strains of
house mice." J. Hered., 38, 3-6.
2I. Hall, C. S. (i95I). "The genetics of behavior." In Stevens, S.S. (Ed.) Handbook of experimental 'psychology. New York: Wiley & Sons.
22. Hebb, D. 0. (949). The organization of behavior.
- New York: Wiley & Sons. 23. Hollander, W. F. (1938). "'Clumsy' pigeons."
J. Hered., 29, 65-6. 24. Huestis, R. R., and Barto, E. (1936). " An inherited
tremor in Peromyscus." J. Hered., 27, 436-8. 25. Keeler, C. E. (I948). " Materials for the synthesis
of hereditary behavior trends in mammals."
J. comp. physiol. Psychol., 41, 75-8I. 26. Maier, N. R. F. (I943). " Studies of abnormal
behavior in the rat: XIV. Strain differences in the inheritance of susceptibility to convulsions." J. comp. Psychol., 35, 327-35. `27. Maier, N. R. F., and Glaser, N. M. (I940). " Studies of abnormal behavior in the rat : V. The inheritance of the 'neurotic pattern.' " J. comp. Psychol.; 30, 4I3-I8.
28. Martin, R. F., and Hall, C. S. (I94I). " Emotional
behavior in the rat. V. The incidence of behavior
derangements resulting from air-blast stimulation in emotional and non-emotional strains of rats."
J. comp. Psychol., 32, 19I-204.
29. Patton, R. A. (I947). " Purulent otitis media in albino rats susceptible to sound-induced seizures."
J. Psychol., 24, 313-I7. 30. Penrose, L. S. (I949). The biology of mental defect.
London: Sedgwick & Jackson. 3i. Phillips, J. C. (I9I2). " Note on wildness in duck-
hngs." J. Anim. Behav., 2, 363-4.
32. Rasmussen, E. W. (939). " Wildness in rats." Acta Psychol. (Hague), 4, 295-304.

33. Rundquist, E. iE. (I933), "Inheritance of span..
taneous activity in rats." J. comp. Psychol., 1X,--
415-38. 34. Russell, W. L. (i94i). " Inbred and hybrid animals
and their value in research." In: Snell, G. D. (Ed.) Biology of the laboratory mouse. Philadelphia: Blakiston. 35. Scott, J. P. (I942). " Genetic differences in the
social behavior of inbred strains of mice." J. Hered.,.
33, II-I5.
36. Searle, L. V. (1949). "The organization of here-
ditary maze-brightness and maze-dullness." Genet. Psychol. Monogr., 39, 279-325. 37. Stone, C. P. (I932). " Wildness and savageness in rats of different strains." In Lashley, K. S. (Ed.)
Studies in the dynamics of behavior. Chicago;
Univ. of Chicago Press.
38. Tryon, R. C. (I93I). " Studies in individual- differences in maze ability. V. Luminosity and visual
acuity as systematic causes of individual differences
and an hypothesis of maze ability." J. comp. Psychol., 12, 40I-20. 39. Tryon, R. C. (I940). " Genetic differences in mazeElearning ability in rats." Yearbook Nat. Soc. Study Educa., 39 (I), III-I9. 40. Tryon, R. C. (I942). " Individual differences." In Moss, F. A. (Ed.) Comparative psychology. New York: Prentice-Hall. 41. Whitney, L. F. (I929). " Heredity of the trailbarking propensity in dogs." J. Hered., 20,
56I-2.
42. Whitney, L. F. (1932). " Inheritance of mental aptitudes in dogs." Proc. 6th int. Congr. Genet. [Ithaca, N.Y.], 2, 2II-I2.
43. Witt, G. M., and Hall, C. S. (I949). " The genetics of audiogenic seizures in the house mouse." J. comp.
physiol. Psychol., 42, 58-63.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 1

