STERILIZATION IN DENMARK

A Eugenic as well as a Therapeutic Clause
By H. 0. WILDENSKOV
(Physician-in-Chief to Den Kellerske A andssvageanstalt, Breining, Denmark)

IN Notes of the Quarter (page 200) in the Section 2 is social-eugenic-the con-

October issue of this REVIEW, the sen- sideration of the offspring being here the

tence occurs: " We do not understand absolutely decisive factor, which is ex-

the object of the Danish sterilization law, pressed as follows: " Operations on the

which is not, apparently, intended to pre- genital organs may be permitted in

vent reproduction." It is, I am sorry to psychically abnormal persons, who, al-

say, my usually very well-informed fellow- though they do not present any such

countryman, Dr. Soren Hansen, who has danger to the public security as dealt with

occasioned this misunderstanding, as he in Section i, still render it important to

writes on page 233 : " Last year a steriliza- society and beneficial to themselves, that

tion law, the first in Europe, was passed they be rendered incapable of reproduc-

authorizing the directors of these institu- tion."

tions to have certain troublesome aments sterilized-but mainly dangerous sexual offenders."
Being one of the directors mentioned, I shall try to point out that this idea is not correct, and I trust that I shall succeed in giving a better understanding of the Danish Act.
As far as I know, the Canton Vaud of Switzerland-and not Denmark-was the first European country to pass a Sterilization Act (January Ist, 1929). As to the experience with this Act, I may refer to the results of the first year, published by Dr. Wanner in L'Hygiene mentale, No. 7,
I930, PP. i63-72. The Danish Act is now of two years'
standing (being passed June Ist, I929). It consists* of two main sections, aimed at two kinds of widely different individuals:

Thus, it is emphasized in this Act that
Section I deals with the public security, and Section 2 with the question of reproduction. In practice, this means that Section i demands castration, whereas Section 2 demands vasectomy or salpingectomy.
Dr. S6ren Hansen thinks that the Act is aimed at " certain troublesome aments." That this is correct in the case of the sexual offenders (Section i) is obvious, of course; but it does not apply to Section 2, which does not say one word about " the aments " being " troublesome." They may be so, but only to the public purse-through their offspring.
I may reply to the erroneous conception of the Danish Act by giving an account of my own recommendations, as prescribed by the Act. I wish to point out that my authority of recommendation for sterilization is

Section i is strictly limited to sexual limited to the two most troublesome depart-

offenders, as it says: " Persons who, ments of this institution : (i) the island-

through the abnormal degree or character departmentt for criminal, mentally defective

of their sexual desire, are liable to com- males (95 inmates), and (2) the island-

mit crimes . . ." This paragraph does department for mentally defective women

not take into consideration the question (44 inmates), criminal, sexually loose, or

of offspring.

vagrant. It is easy to understand that this

* Mental Welfare, Vol. 8, I927, pp. 74-78.

t An account of these island-departments is given in Mental Welfare, Vol. 8, 1927, No. I, pp. 1-7.

3"1

3I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

human material entails a relatively frequent operated on. There remain, then, ten

employment of Section i, as one has to be women on whom the operation has been

very cautious in recommending the applica- performed. Before their admission to this

tion of Section 2 on women who are not only institution, they had given birth to 23

erotic, but also criminals or vagabonds. children. After the operation, these girls

This is really the crucial test of the efficacy are discharged to private families; a small

of a sterilization Act.

annual compensation is paid these families;

and the girls are under the supervision of

EUGENIC PRACTICE UNDER THE ACT

the institution. Of the aforementioned ten

According to Section i, I have recom- girls, nine have been discharged in this

mended five men for castration. Of way, on an average eight months before the

these four have been operated on and dis- writing of this paper. In none of these

charged, and at the time of writing they cases has it been necessary for me to fetch

have been living in society for one year; them back to the institution. Seven of them

one is still awaiting operation. In three of have behaved creditably; one girl had inter-

these patients it was a question of recurrent course with a mentally defective man, a

assaults, in one it was obscenity towards comrade of her brother, who was also a

children, and in one it was recurrent homo- mental defective. This girl was transferred

sexuality. I am still in touch with these to another family in another rural district,

individuals. They all declare that they are away from the unfortunate association with

satisfied with the operation. As far as my her brother. Another girl claimed that she

experience goes, we have here at our dis- was pursued by an old man. The sub-

posal a truly curative operation that sequent trial gave no definite evidence that

changes these individuals from the most coitus had been accomplished, but the girl

dreaded criminals to persons that are was transferred to another district.

altogether harmless sexually. Up to the

present, I have recommended only persons -AND SOME NOT STERILIZED

over 30 years, in whom puberty may un- For the sake of comparison, I may men-

questionably be regarded as completed. tion that three non-sterilized girls were

With the favourable results from the opera- placed under similar conditions for about

tion, however, it is now my intention tenta- the same period. One of these had to be

tively to lower the age limit to about 25 taken back to the institution, as she was

years. In none of these cases has the opera- pregnant.

tion caused any injurious psychic or physi- The only man recommended for this

cal effects. I have had an intimate operation has been discharged tentatively.

knowledge of these five individuals through He has now become engaged to a mentally

a number of years prior to the operation, defective girl, who has already two illegiti-

and I cannot now find any indication of any mate children, whereas he has begotten only

change in their behaviour or appearance one child. Both have consented to his

except this one, that the sexual reaction is sterilization.

altered. I consider this operation, which is Before recommending the above-men-

usually denounced as inhumane, to be by tioned women for sterilization, I made a

far the most humane procedure against field study of the hereditary aspects of their

these persons, who are otherwise sentenced cases. All the recommendations were

to indefinite internment for many years. explained on the grounds that in all proba-

According to Section 2, I have recom- bility these women would give birth to

mended thirteen women and one man defective children, and that their behaviour

for sterilization. Amongst the women, and working capacity was good enough to

one died from an acute disease before the entitle them to a ' try-out ' in society,

operation; one was not approved by the whereas the probability of defective off-

Department of Justice; and one is not yet spring was so great that it did not seem

STERILIZATION IN DENMARK

3I3

warrantable to discharge thefn from the institution without being sterilized.
Thus, in a total number of 44 female inmates, I3 (or 29.5 per cent.) have been recommended for operation, io (or 22.7 per cent.) have been operated on, and 9 (or 20.4 per cent.) have been discharged. They have all been recommended for operation according to Section 2 of the Sterilization Act.
Experiences obtained in this particularly difficult material do not lend any support to the objections raised by the opponents of sterilization, namely, that after the operation such girls will be given particularly to licentiousness and the spreading of venereal diseases. Economically, these operations mean for the present a saving of about 8,ooo Kroner (Danish crowns) a year; and besides, the discharge of these inmates has enabled me to meet the requirements of new

admissions without a costly extension of the department.
CORRIGENDA
We much regret that, owing to linguistic difficulties, two slips occurred in Professor Hansen's article in our last number:
i.-Page 23I, column i, the sentence, one may date the beginning of
eugenical work here from I788, when the country became a single province." The words here italicized should be, " when compulsory treatment of venereal diseases was introduced in a single province." The whole country followed suit the next year.
2.-Page 232, column 2, the phrase, " Deaf-mutism is generally spoken of as always the final result . . .," should have been, " Deaf-mutism is-generally speaking-always the final result . . ."-ED.

JOURNAL OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION AND INTERNATIONAL LAW

THIRD SERIES.

VOL. XIII. PART IV.

NOVEMBER I93I.

1. ARTICLES:-

CONTENTS:

The Future of Prize Law and the Freedom of the Seas. By T. Baty, Esq., D.C.L., LL.D.
Disraeli and the Constitution. By W. I. Jennings, Esq. " Dominion " Nationality. By E. F. W. Gey van Pittius, Esq., M.A., Ph.D. A Comparison of the General Principles of Criminal Law in England with the " Progetto Defini-
tivo di un Nuovo Codice Penale " of Alfredo Rocco. By W. T. S. Stallybrass, Esq., D.C.L. Foreign Persons and Companies doing Business in Germany. By Dr. Fritz Oppenheimer. John Selden and Jewish Law. By Dr. Isaac Herzog. Notes on Imperial Constitutional Law. By Professor A. Berriedale Keith, D.C.L.

2. NOTES.

3. NOTICES OF BOOKS.

Annual Subscription, One Guinea.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION, 1 Elm Court, Temple, E.C.4.

All communications respecting Advertisements to be sent to
MESSRS. MACMILLAN & CO., LTD., St. Martin's Street, London, W.C.2.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 4.

