THE DESCENDANTS OF SIR GEORGE
*VILLIERS *

By PAUL BLOOMFIELD

AT the present time the public interest Lord Keynes had been reading the late Mr.

~L4in genealogy, such as it is, rather tends W. T. J. Gun's Studies in Hereditary Ability.

Lito be concentrated on the pedigrees I was so intrigued that I began looking

of horses. This subject is suggestive enough. things up, and the more I looked the more

For instance The Times of April 8th, I946, my interest grew. Then I resorted to

discussing two famous sires of steeplechasers, Galton's Hereditary Genius. I was moved to

mentioned that a stallion called Marco was see that that great man lhd been very warm

the link between them. " Marco was also the grandsire of Hurry On, who was the

on the track of this astonishing genealogy, without however once in his epoch-making

grandsire of Bogskar. My Prince was a son work mentioning the name of Villiers.

of Marcovil, who was by Marco. Cottage's dam, Casetta, was by Marco. It is evident,"

Galton's conviction that a certain general ability is strongly inherited has been amply

said The Times correspondent, " that the borne out by science in the last forty years.

line of Marco still continues to dominate this In his recent re,port on Intelligence and

field of sport."
This is interesting, but how much mofe
interesting if we were to find that the line of some human sire dominated a field humanly even richer than sport. And this is what we do find-a startling discovery, I think, and not only in one case, but in no case more so than that of an Elizabethan gentleman who died in the year I6o6 after being married twice and having had five children by each of his wives. You or I might have some occasion for pride if we were descended from him, a probability against which the chances are no more, roughly, than 2,000 to i. Most people would agree that a 2,000 to i winner in the other field I was alluding to would have been worth backing.

Fertility Sir Cyril Burt says: " There is now
overwhelming evidence to show that, of the individual differences revealed by tests of
this 'general factor,' the greater amount is due to the individual's innate or inherited
constitution." Galton was not on such firm
ground when he used the Bach family to illustrate the inheritance of artistic ability.
In such matters a man's powers lie more
between him and his Muse-or.the grace of
God. But he was amply justified when he took several groups from the Villiers Connection (though, as I say, without' mentioning that name) to prove the persistence of their practical endowments. Let us see what
these amounted to.
Sir George Villiers, dying-in i6o6, was quite unaware of his significance as fountain-
head of what Lord Keynes called " the true

Our Elizabethan gentleman's name was Sir George Villiers. It will be suspected that he had something to do with James II's favourite, the Duke of Buckingham. This is correct: he was the Duke's father. I had
not heard of him myself till about three
years ago, when I came across his name in

blood-royal of this country." He was unaware of it because, when he died, his
second son by his second marriage-the
future Duke-had not yet attracted the
king's attention. From the moment he did so the die was cast. To begin with, the leading men or mistresses of the Stuart kings,

a paper which Lord Keynes had slipped into and of William III, and of Queen Anne, were a little book mainly about economists. all descendants of Sir George. This brings

* Adapted from a broadcast talk given on March 12th,
1947.

us to the most significant fact about the whole Connection, namely that the field in

63

00
u- 2
I
10
.- 0
8
t0
0
.0
01
0 0 0
0

THE DESCENDANTS OF SIR GEORGE VILLIERS

65

which Sir George was a " Marco " was the average and the average of other classes.

political field. It is a remarkable tale. What does this indicate where the Villierses

From Walpole to Mr. Attlee there have are concerned ? This: that we should be

been forty-two Prime Ministers. Seven of making a mistake if we underrated their

them have been descended from Sir George. hereditary ability-as by insisting that, after

Two others in the Connection could have all, in the seventeenth century Buckinghar

been Prime Minister if they had wanted: and his cousins had a flying start because

a Lord Waldegrave and a Lord Clarendon. capable middle-class men and women were

The actual seven were Chatham, Portland, not yet in a position to compete with their

Grafton, Pitt, Russell (Lord John, grand- social betters. What we should consider is

father of Bertrand Russell), Derby, and Mr. that the Villierses were in competition with

Winston Churchill.* Nobody should imagine an established and powerful community of

that this exhausts the Connection. Far Cecils, Howards, Talbots, Dudleys, Sidneys

from it. Seven Chancellors of the Ex- and so forth-and really, they won hands

chequer trace their line from Sir George, down. The two Buckinghams, father and

and among the ten Foreign Secretaries of son, were the two most prominent men in

this stock Castlereagh was one and Mr. England in three reigns. But the versatile,

Eden the last up to date. There have been vicious second Duke left no children. The

hardly any administrations without their key man was the first Duke, that strange,

representatives of Sir George Villiers, the glamorous figure who so enraged Parliament

two in the present Labour Government being that he may almost be given credit for the

Lord Listowel and Lord Pakenham.

Petition of Right. Buckingham was a

In a superficial view the ascendancy of shameless nepotist, if one may extend the

Sir George's offspring was less a matter of reference of this word to half-brothers and

hereditary ability than (granted certain brothers-in-law. It is, however, necessary

worldly advantages to start with) of judi- to note that being a successful nepotist, a

ciously marrying into other powerful families successful favourite, required certain out-

and having plenty of children. Of course these two things are very important. But

standing qualities. ceded Villiers in the

-kiRnogb'esrtaffCeacrtri,onws,holacpkreed-

we cannot so simply account for the way the those qualities and ended his life in serious

Villierses swept those kings and queens off disgrace. Villiers was impeached and not

their feet and, before long, the whole nation long after assassinated, but he held his head

as well. Our first obvious inference from high to the end-by which time the nest had

what we know about the inheritance of been feathered.

general ability is that even opportunity is Let us see if we have any clue to the

less important than heredity. The point is developments that followed. It seems clear

not that the Villierses were rich and grand, we have. Many of these people had two

and that they filled high offices. The point qualities among others which leap out at us

is that they were effective: intelligent, and both from the written and the painted

singularly apt to pass on their effectiveness descriptions we have of them. They had

to their children. Though to-day we may great charm. And they had a certain core

fairly hope that more equal opportunities of toughness. That amazing gold-digger,

will level up people's condition we must not Barbara Villiers, Duchess of Cleveland, had

jump to rash conclusions beyond that. On great beauty as well. We can quite under-

any level of society there are greater differ- stand why Charles II had a passion for this

ences in intelligence and ability between lady who, by him, was the ancestress of so individuals in that class than between their many eminent people. But it was not the

beauty of Sir George's great-great-grand-

* Lord Melbourne makes a probable eighth. There
seem to be good reasons for believing that his father was Lord Egremont, who was a descendant of Sir

daughter, Arabella Churchill, that inflamed James II. Charles rudely said that his

George Villiers.

brother's confessor must have chosen her for

66 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

him by way of penance. What Arabella There was the bigamous Duchess of Kingston.

had was the fateful charm-her brother, the There was that great rake, the Marquess of

great Marlborough, had the looks. Eliza- Hertford, to whose son and illegitimate

beth Villiers must have had the charm, too: grandson we owe the Wallace Collection.

charm and force of personality, or else how There were plenty of others, among them

should she, with her squint, rather than any Lady Caroline Lamb-if we can call her

of the other, beautiful, talented ladies of the wicked. I confess it impresses me to think

court, have won the austere William III's that the wickedest man and the second-

heart ?

wickedest woman I have known myself were

We must pass on-to the Pitts and to Fox. both descended from Sir George. They were

Fox like the Younger Pitt was seventh in both charming, and are both dead now,

line of descent from Sir George Villiers. It -having died young. They burned the candle

is astonishing! I am far from wanting to at both ends. It would be absurd to take

claim any merit if I put my stress here on them as having been specially representative

something that escaped Galton. But the of the Connection, though most of -the

facts are striking. What happened was that famous ones have been worldly-the genes

a great nabob, nicknamed " Diamond " they carry, their special genes, seem to be

Pitt, had made a fortune in India. He had for that practical general ability which

a son Robert who became father of the Galton affirmed to be transmissible. Never-

future Chatham. There was evidently theless the great philanthropist, Lord Shaftes-

plenty of practical ability in the Pitts, but bury, was one of them.

I doubt whether the Pitt character by itself It is an amiable tendency in the public

was enough to inspire Chatham, in the crisis that they like to hear of men and women

of the I750's, with the conviction that he rising in the world through their own effortsO

was the one man who could save England. From Log. Cabin to White House: admir-

He said: "I can save this country-and able! But surely it should not be thought

nobody else can;" All this I attribute to less of a satisfaction to be able to trace the

Robert Pitt having married Harriet Villiers. line of a man who has emerged from obscurity

This is the family in which saving England and has the additional social virtue of being

(in a certain sense) has' run since Marl- able to transmit his valuable qualities to

borough's day. It is of genealogical relevance his descendants. We cannot say that Sir

that Harriet's paternal grandparents were George Villiers started from nothing. Perhaps

cousins: both descended from Sir George. it was the enterprising Villiers who may be

The Chatham earldom became extinct; presumed to have come over with the Con-

the Younger Pitt never married. Eminence queror who was the new variation-who had,

is not enough; there have got to be children I mean, the seed of ability which only

-and in most Villiers branches there were ripened five hundred years later. I think

quiversful. Fox, however, with a certain the significant ancestor was further back

appropriateness, also died childless-died than that, but this is because I am tempted

within a year of Pitt, close to whom he lies to accept Burke's statement that the family

buried in Westminster Abbey.

came from L'Isle Adam. A descendant of Sir

There is no space to say much about the George however informs me that the earliest

descendants of Sir George who mustered in forebear of whom he is certain is Alexander

such force to pass the great Reform Act of de Villiers of Kinalton, who lived in the reign

I832, or about the extravagant, brilliant of Henry II.

Lord Durham, son of a Villiers mother, who Before Sir George's time there was a

showed the way to turn the British Empire French Villiers who as Grand Master of the

into a Commonwealth of Nations. I ought Knights of Malta proved himself a remark-

at least to make some mention, in passing, able man. Three centuries later his des-

of the wickedness that has been regarded as cendant, Count Villiers de l'Isle Adam, was

a conspicuots feature of the Connection. a distinguished writer. One of the pleasures

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

67

of genealogy to which I look forward is testing Sir George's link with L'Isle Adam; another is tracing the marriages of the French Villiers women. I shall be surprised if these researches do not turn out rewarding.
We may or may not admire Marco for being a sire of notable steeplechasers. It would be a wretched, backsliding social
philosophy-and a highly unscientific one-
that made us hesitate to value the emergence
of capable and tenacious breeds of men.

For my part, I should be happy to be able to trace my descent to Sir George Villiers. If I had my choice in these matters (not that I am dissatisfied withR my own ancestors) I should prefer to Sir George a Quaker gentleman who in I672 astonished the people of Aberdeen by walking through the streets of their city in sackcloth. His name was
Robert Barclay, among whose many remarkable descendants was Francis Galton
himself.

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

Positive Eugenics: A Proposal
FELLOWS and Members will be interested to know that Dr. C. P. Blacker's contribution to the April I946 REVIEW under the above title is now available to a wider public. The article has been reprinted in British Thought I947,* an American publication devoted to the " most significant of to-day's writing on such varied themes as Sociology, International Affairs, Literature, Science, Economics, Politics and Art by Britain's most eminent writers and thinkers."
Institute of Sociology
FIELD study meetings will be held in Denmark (island of Als and Copenhagen) from August I5th to 26th, and in Switzerland (Rhone Valley and Berne) from August I4th to 27th.
The annual conference will take place from September 3rd to ioth at Ashburne Hall, University of Manchester, with " Searchlight on Community: theory and practice" as the main subject of discussion. There will be lectures by specialists on the historical, psychological and sociological aspects, and reports on present-day experiments in community. Visits will be arranged to community centres in Manchester. Information may be obtained from the Hon. Organizer of
* New York I947. The Gresham Press Inc. Pp. 46I.
Price $3.75.

Field Studies, Le Play House, Ledbury,
Herefordshire.
Family
THE new quarterly journal* under this title, edited by Crystal Herbert in collaboration with the Family Relations Group, deserves every success. Founded in the belief that the family tradition is vital to the physical and moral well-being of the nation, and to democracy itself, it will deal with such subjects as education, religion, child welfare, social service and town planning; and with the many problems that arise from a failure of family life, such as child neglect, delinquency and divorce. As an indication of the spirit with which the editor is approaching her task it may be mentioned that she has sought, and been fortunate in securing, the collaboration of Lord Horder and Mr. Cyril Bibby as advisory editors. The journal is pleasant to look at and read, and it may be hoped that before very long there will be enough paper available for it to be produced at shorter intervals and in much larger numbers.
Birthday Honours Two awards will give particular satisfac-
tion to readers of this REVIEW: the honour of knighthood to Dr. W. Norwood East,
* Single copies, Is. 3d.; subscription, 5s. a year.

