REVIEWS OF BOOKS

to be reminded just how wrong intelligent work in breeding apes and monkeys in order to

people can be in reading their preconceptions elucidate problems of genetics has yet to be

into the behaviour of these animals. Even the embarked upon. Surely this is a field where

discovery of evolution by the agency of natural there are immensely instructive lessons to be

selection has contributed sometimes to obscure learned. The idea of a selective grading up of

the picture. People in search of biological an- human beings in respect of intelligence and other

alogies and missing links have over-simplified the qualities of positive biological value, suggested

distinctive and idiosyncratic qualities of the pri- by Professor H. J. Muller and the present writer

mates, both in a specific and an individual sense. as being feasible through the employment of

In helping to correct the picture, this book may artificial insemination, might be carried out in

be regarded as a valuable introduction to the apes without encountering many of the objec-

study of ethology in relation to the non-human tions which have been raised regarding donor

primates. The really scientific study of the insemination in the human subject. Breeding

behaviour of these animals may be considered apes by AID need excite no more moral

as dating from Sir Solly Zuckerman's study of objections than breeding cattle in the same way.

baboons, The Social Life of Apes and Monkeys, But it might throw immense light on what might

published in 1932. This work evoked a great be accomplished in the genetic ennoblement of

interest, but tended in some respects to distort the human species by voluntary choice of

the true image of the non-human primate, in germinal material, whose general image and

that the characteristics of the baboon were acceptability is likely to be very different in

sometimes extrapolated to other primates whose AD2000 from what it is to-day. The same idea

closer study revealed them to exhibit different might be applied to canines and breeding them

patterns. The phenomena of dominance, for for intelligence, longevity and other qualities

example, so markedly shown in the baboon are combining benefits for the dog with instruction

relatively weak or even absent in some other for its master should be far more rewarding than

primates. The picture of the gorilla conjured the senseless sort of genetic debasement which

up by the script writers of Hollywood was now goes on in selecting for arbitrary show points

perhaps partly built on the basis of such of negative biological value. One cannot help

unwarranted extrapolation. In real life, the thinking that a chimpanzee with a pongid IQ of

gorilla, far from being a brutal and pugnacious 160 plus might be a quite entertaining companion.

aggressor, whose diabolical nature might lead The authors of this work have happily

him to ravish beautiful women, is a creature summarized its spirit and content in these words:

who would rather flee than fight and who is "The real lives of monkeys and apes are quite as

quite disappointing from a Hollywood point of odd, and in many respects are still as mystifying-

view, when placed in a potentially piquant as the fanciful tales of yesterday. The truth may

situation. It seems that once a gorilla did by not be stranger than fiction, but it is just as.

accident get shut up all night with an attractive exciting". This indeed merits the verdict of an

young woman, but it displayed no attempt to exciting book.

do the things which provide headlines for the

HERBERT BREWER

more popular Sunday newspapers. In fact it

showed itself to be a little frightened, a little

lonely and snuggled up to the young lady, not

WORLD RESOURCES

for any unbecoming purpose, but merely for warmth and comfort. Clearly it is much safer
for a young woman to pass the night in the cage of a gorilla than in Central Park, New York.

Smith, G. H. (Editor). Conservation and Natural Resources. New York and London, 1965. Wiley. Pp. xi+533. Price 75s.

There is an informative account here of the Fisher, Joseph L. and Potter, Neal. World

studies being prosecuted in primate life and Prospects for Natural Resources. Baltimore,

behaviour and from the fact of it being un- 1964. Johns Hopkins Press (London, 1965.

mentioned it may be assumed that experimental Oxford University Press). Pp. vi+73. Price 12s.

163

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

PLATO CONTENDED THAT tree-covered and
well-watered land had been turned into the arid area around Athens by human improvidence. Other thoughtful people have both pointed out past mistakes and warned against the continuation of present policies. The warnings have generally gone unheeded until much of the damage was done. A few months
ago, in spite of the unanimity of experts, the whale fishing industry decided to go on killing whales at a rate that will exterminate the whale-
and the industry. The picture is not however all gloomy. At
the end of the last century, far-sighted scientists, mainly in the USA, caught the imagination of a few governments and, with the valuable but accidental support of people such as Theodore Roosevelt who were primarily interested in hunting and scenery, introduced legislation setting aside large tracts as Nature Reserves and controlling the exploitation of other tracts. The idea spread and a distinction was made between mere preservation, and conservation, in which the tract is used in a manner that preserves most of the amenities and gives a maximal return of useful products. This is a matter of good housekeeping and the idea has been extended to other renewable resources, such as water, and to non-renewable resources such as minerals.
The twenty-three essays (by eighteen authors) that make up Conservation andNatural Resources survey the progress that has been made in the USA. A third of it deals with water and minerals. Much useful information is assembled here but it is not particularly relevant in the present context. The history of farming and landownership in America is extremely interesting for, in that country, Europeans moved into land that had been used for hunting only. We can thus trace the whole effect that man, by deforestation, ploughing, draining and irrigation, has had. The history of the chicanery ofwould-be exploiters trying to defeat conservation is set out fully and depressingly.
Two articles deal with wild-life and fisheries. In accordance with the practical objectives of the book, much quantitative information is given:- thus birds are credited with preventing 500 million dollars' worth of insect damage while rodents do twice that amount of damage;

hunters and fishermen spend 3,000 million dollars on their sport each year.
People do not seem to handle their own affairs
as well as those of their plants and animals. The chapter dealing with human conservation is brief and inadequately documented, but it contains six maps showing such things as natural increase, income, and expenditure on schools and medical services. Alaska now seems to be the "boom" region. It would have been interesting to have
had more explanation of the surprising statements that death at forty is an economic advantage to the community and that "only 10-15 per cent ofthe seventeen million Americans needing some sort of mental care are getting it". There are some sensible comments on race prejudice. One point is made that cannot be too often restated; although the position of Negroes is improving, their relative position is deteriorating.
The booklet World Prospects for Natural Resources is a useful survey of statistics published by FAO and UNO up to 1962. Its optimistic tone could then have been justified for it looked as if world food production was keeping pace with population. In 1966 one wonders; population is now increasing faster than food production. Furthermore, figures are given showing that in 1930 the USA moved from its old position of exporter and became an importer of both food and minerals. As standards of living increase, several other countries are likely to follow the same trend however much they may long all to be net exporters. Part of the optimism is based on the steady fall in the prices of such commodities as sugar and cotton during the past fifteen years. It is surely carrying respect for "the market" too far to assume that this shows that supply is equalling need rather than that consumers rings are forcing down the price the primary producer gets and so increasing the disparity in standard of living between the well- and ill-fed countries. It would be interesting to have authoritative figures showing the ratio between "aid" given to underdeveloped countries during the past twenty years, and what they have lost because of the diminution in the prices they get for their products.
N. W. PIRIE

164

