PROFESSOR L. C. DUNN,
Sc.D., Columbia University
Cross Currents in the History of Human Genetics*

I HAVE RECENTLY BEEN re-examining the by which genetic elements reproduce and main-

historyof genetics inthe formative period from tain their continuity with opportunity for change

1900 to about 1930. I have gained the impres- and evolution, and on the means by which genes

sion that influences which played on human control metabolism and development. But most

genetics during that period had a good deal to do observations on human heredity were not

with delaying its progress in the next twenty years oriented in any clear way toward such problems.

and have not yet ceased to operate. It was then Matters of greater moment seemed to be the in-

caught upin the cross-currents to which all studies heritance of "insanity," of "feeblemindedness"

of man are exposed. The effects of science on and other then vaguely defined mental ills, the

human life are always immanent, yet never so effects of parental age or alcoholism or social

immediately apparent as when man himself status on the offspring, and similar studies

is the object of inquiry. In the period of which I pursued for immediate social ends.

speak, his confidence as controller of his own An interesting comparison, which I shall not

destiny had been aroused by recent scientific be able to pursue in detail, is that between

discovery and by social and political conquests such dominant interests of the period as those

of new environments. Rapid translations of new just cited, and the direction initiated by Garrod's

knowledge into terms applicable to improve- paper of 1901 on alcaptonuria and especially

ments of man's lot is at such times likely to take by his Croonian lectures of 1908. One reads

precedence over objective and sceptical evalua- to-day those lectures as published in successive

tion of the facts, a danger of which cautious issues of the Lancet for that year with admiration

scientists have long been aware. The testing of for the depth and breadth of Garrod's scientific

hypotheses by factual observations and the understanding of genetics and of evolution, and

construction of general theory, the normal then turns with amazement to the reports of

methods of science, are certainly no less import- discussions on human heredity at the Royal

ant when human beings are involved, yet one Academy of Medicine which ran through five

often finds these neglected in human genetics later issues of that same volume. Except for

in that period. Progress in human genetics Garrod's strong supporter and genetical adviser,

seemed to have been impeded less by lack of William Bateson, there is little evidence that the

means than by lack of a clear scientific goal, numerous participants in those debates realized

and this at a time when the major problems of what, in fact, the problems were.... Garrod's

genetics were taking a clear form. The particu- work had little effect until many years had

late nature of the transmission mechanism of passed; while those interested in the social

heredity had focused attention on the means applications proposed by eugenics largely domin-

ated the field of human genetics.

* A shortened version of the Presidential address at the meeting of the American Society of Human Genetics, May 3rd, 1961. It was printed in full in The American Journal of Human Genetics, March 1962, 14, 1-13. Here we have omitted Professor Dunn's opening remarks; other omissions are indicated thus: ...

Influence of Eugenics on Human Genetics It will, I think, be clear to anyone who examines the records of the period from 1900 to aboat the

69

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1962, 54, 2.

ER-C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

middle thirties that the manner in which the as well, since we can hardly overlook lessons for

eugenics movement developed cast a long the conduct of our lives in the present and the

shadow over the growth of sound knowledge of future.

human genetics. The ideals of eugenics as In both of these respects the history of con-

originally proposed by Galton in 1883 and re- nections between eugenics and human genetics

stated in more concrete form in 1901 can hardly has a special relevance. The connections were

be held responsible for this, for they will appeal very close, and were especially evident in the

to most people as embodying a noble conception. United States, where interest in both fields was

But there grew up within the eugenics movement widespread at the turn of the century. Human

ambivalent attitudes through which it tended to genetics was often treated as part of eugenics,

become all things to all people, here a science, or as it was often called, human betterment or

there a social movement, and in Germany an race improvement. It was that part concerned

instrument, through the so-called eugenics with acquisition of knowledge of human heredity.

laws of 1933, of the ferocious application of The association tended to be maintained because

prejudice which seemed to many people to be both subjects were frequently pursued and often

the logical extension, the reductio ad absurdum, taught by the same persons. Those who had been

of ideas to be found in eugenic programmes attracted by the promise inherent in the newly

elsewhere. One effect of all this was to deflect discovered work of Mendel often added to their

attention from the essential scientific problems repertoire the results of earlier studies like those

and to discourage persons interested in these of Dugdale (1874), and others who had dealt

from pursuing them with human material. It with mental deficiency and criminality as social

seems as though some perverse kind of Gresham's problems.

law might have been operating here, bad coin There were however a few whose position was

driving out the better.

most clearly stated later by Bateson (1919):

A second cause of failure and delay in human genetics was the all too frequent relaxation of critical criteria and a lowering of standards which would not be tolerated in other branches

The eugenist and the geneticist will, I am convinced, work most effectively without organic connection, and though we have much in common, should not be brigaded together. Genetics are not

of genetics. In course of time this, like the handi-
cap imposed by eugenics, became less important in relation to the rising tide of good scientific work, both practical and theoretical, in human genetics. Signs of the change may be seen in Penrose's paper of 1932 and in Hogben's book
of 1933. As these changes went on, the name
eugenics disappeared from several institutions and publications dealing with human genetics. On the other side some of the eugenical organizations (like the American Eugenics Society) tended to assume a more responsible attitude toward the scientific facts underlying social applications

concerned with the betterment of the human race but with a problem in pure physiology, and I am a little afraid that the distinctness of our aims may be obscured.
But in general the position in most countries was that implied by an index entry in the one serious attempt to trace, from documents, the history of some of the important ideas about heredity. That was the essay of Alfred Barthelmess (1952) in which under the entry Mensch we find "sieh auch Eugenik."
The nature of the relations between eugenics and the study of human heredity was strongly

and toward research in human genetics.

influenced by three facts. The first is that the

1 think it can be shown, however, that neither formulation of the problems and programme of

of the chief defects seen in the adolescent period eugenics antedated the recognition of the

of human genetics has in fact disappeared to-day. particulate nature of heredity. Early work in

Now, while J suppose that the chief function of eugenics was thus guided by a view of heredity

historical analysis is to gain views that are more which proved to be without general validity.

satisfying, intellectually and aesthetically, than The second is that eugenics achieved organized

those afforded by studying only the present forms before genetics did. It thus became at the

state of knowledge, still it has its practical side very least a part of the environment in which

70

CROSS CURRENTS IN THE HISTORY OF HUMAN GENETICS

genetics grew up. The third is that stated by convinced of the heritability of mental qualities

Bateson: they had different goals.

through his studies first of Hereditary Genius

(1869) and then of Inquiries into Human Faculty

Galton and Eugenics

(1883), and had devised statistical methods for

The development of my argument now requires the study of inheritance which led him to his Law

a brief sketch of the history of eugenics. The best of Ancestral Heredity in 1897. His views on

source book for this is Karl Pearson's great four heredity were always based on this "law" which

volume biography of Galton (1914-1930).

turned out to describe certain resemblances in

We may formally date the beginnings of graded or continuous characters between parents

eugenics in its modern form from Galton's and offspring but of course provided no explana-

Huxley Lecture to the Royal Anthropological tory or general principle such as that discovered

Institute* on "The possible improvement of the by Mendel. This is not to say that his eugenical

human breed under existingconditions of law and proposals would have been invalidated by his

sentiment." Galton's ideas on this subject had acceptance of Mendel's principles. Those pro-

been adumbrated long before this time, first in a posals were based primarily on the supposition

paper of 1865. By 1883 they had been given the that heredity was an important cause of differ-

name of eugenics but had not then attracted ences in physical, mental, and moral qualities,

active attention. Nor did the seed sown before and that was sufficient for his purposes.

the anthropologists in 1901 appear to have taken Divergences soon appeared in England both

root quickly in England (although it fared better among the supporters of eugenics and between

in the United States) and it took further effort these and the school which was shortly to call

on Galton's part to get a fellowship in eugenics itself genetics, but was at first referred to as

established at University College, London, in Mendelians. The internal cleavage in eugenics

1904. This led first to the organization of a was that between the research and the propa-

Eugenics Record Office and then in 1907 to the ganda interests, as represented by the Eugenics

Galton Laboratory of National Eugenics (both Laboratory and the Eugenics Education Society.

endowed by Galton) and in the next year to the The laboratory resisted and resented interference

organization of the Eugenics Education Society. with its primary function by the Society. "It

One should note two coincidences of date: 1865 will never do," wrote Galton to Karl Pearson

was also the year in which Mendel presented (the director of the Eugenics Laboratory) on

his results at Briinn; and 1900 was the year of February 6th, 1909, "to allow the Eugenics

the famous "re-discovery" of these. But there Education Society to anticipate and utilize the

was no more connection between the ideas of Eugenics Laboratory publications,"t and he

Galton and Mendel in 1900-01 than there had reminded the Society of the "differences between

been in 1865. It was chance of the same kind the work of the two classes of publication." The

which gave both men the same year of birth- founder of the movement saw quite clearly the

1822. distinction between research and propaganda,

Galton's ideas concerning eugenics had been and in his last public lecture on "Probability,

formed first after reading the Origin of Species. the Basis of Eugenics" (Oxford 1909) he came

The substitution of social control for natural out quite clearly for research as the immediate

selection in guiding human evolution was for need, social application as the distant goal.

Galton "the logical application of the doctrine But dissension between Society and Labora-

of evolution to the human race," but the first tory continued and finally Galton was impelled

ambivalence appeared when he added that the in a letter to The Times (November 3rd, 1910)

result ofhis study had been "to elicit the religious to make his position quite clear vis-a-vis the

significance of the doctrine of evolution. It Eugenics Laboratory and the Eugenics Educa-

suggests an alteration in our mental attitudes tion Society. "Permit me," he wrote, "as the

and imposes a new moral duty." He had become founder of one and the honorary president ofthe

* Nature, November 1st, 1901.
t Life, Vol. Ma, p. 371.

other, to say that there is no other connection between them.... The Laboratory investigates

71

-THE EUGENICS REVIEW

without bias ... large collections of such data sidered to be of no help at all. In fact at that

as may throw light on some of the many prob- stage it was not helpful. This of course is only

lems of eugenics. The business of the society is to say that the purposes of the biometricians

to popularize results."* This cleavage, which and eugenists differed from those of the proto-

was to reappear time and again as the movement geneticists. Purposes, like tastes, may not be

grew, marked a separation, often not well fair game for scientific dispute, although neither

defined, between those interested in science and side admitted that.

those interested in social and political questions.

The progress of genetics may not have been Eugenics in the U.S.A.

directly affected by such disagreements within In general the alienation between the two

the eugenics movement, but the occasional schools was a local British affair. One aspect of

excesses of persons with political motivation it, however, involved the beginnings of the

revealed the source of danger which eventually eugenics movement in the United States. There

broke into the open in Germany.

the ground had been prepared by studies like

The other cleavage which became apparent those of Dugdale (1874) on the Jukes family and

at once in England was that between the Men- of Alexander Graham Bell (1883) on deaf

delians led by Bateson, and the followers of mutism. However in name and purposes the

Galton, led first by Weldon and then by Karl eugenics movement in the U.S.A. was clearly

Pearson, and known as the Biometricians. The descended from the British one. It differed

verbal battles between these sharply opposed sharply from its parent in its attitude toward

schools certainly did delay the development of Mendelism. The first proponents of eugenics

both genetics and eugenics in Great Britain. in the U.S.A., of which C. B. Davenport was

Karl Pearson, the first director of the Eugenics the most active, were thoroughgoing Mendel-

Laboratory, and, after Galton, the leading ians, and eugenists because they were. In fact,

eugenist, never recognized the importance of Davenport might have been called a super-

Mendel's principles upon which genetics was Mendelian. One has only to read his conclusions

founded. As late as 1930 he could say "during the on the monofactorial inheritance of a violent

last twenty-five years we seem to-day scarcely temper or a wandering habit to realize this.

nearer the exact knowledge of the laws of hered- The British eugenists correctly surmised that

ity; the further we advance the more complex this attitude could (as in fact it did) bring the

does the problem show itself."t It was not that he whole movement into disrepute. Dr. David

(or Galton) failed to understand the primary Heron of the Galton Laboratory vigorously

principle of segregation, although he did not attacked in 1913 the first papers to come from

appreciate the relation of dominance to it. Davenport's newly established Eugenics Record

Indeed in 1904 Pearson foreshadowed an im- Office (founded 1910). Heron wrote:

portant extension of the principle of segregation by showing that Mendel's ratio IDD: 2DR IRR tends to maintain itself indefinitely in
random breeding populations of large size

We have selected this rounded group of papers because they deal with a very pressing subject, that of mental defect, and in our opinion form a very apt illustration of the points just referred to,

(cf. Wright 1959). Galton likewise applied the i.e., careless presentation of data, inaccurate

term "atomistic" to Mendel's system: But neither Galton nor Pearson nor their followers found their interest satisfied by the newprinciples of Mendel. The heredity in which they were

methods of analysis, irresponsible expression of conclusions and rapid change of opinion.... The Mendelian conclusions drawn have no justification whatever ... The authors have in our opinion done a disservice to knowledge,

interested could not (they thought) be studied struck a blow at careful Mendelian research, and

in that way. What they thought important to understand was quantitative variation in human

committed a serious offence against the infant science of eugenics.

intellectual ability, and Mendelism they con- Heron's criticism, it must be acknowledged,

* Ibid, p. 408.
t Ibid, p. 309.

was more than merely another skirmish in the war being waged between the Biometricians and

72

CROSS CURRENTS IN THE HISTORY OF HUMAN GENETICS

the Mendelians. In this case the point at issue founded in 1903 the chief German journal in this

was fundamental scientific method, and Daven- field, the Archiv fur Rassen-und-Gesellschafts-

port and his collaborators were at least guilty biologie. In an article in this journal in 1909

of a lack of caution from which the whole Galton agreed with the editor that Rassen-

eugenics movement was to suffer. It was at this hygiene and Eugenik were to be regarded as

time, 1910-1915, that single gene interpretations synonymous. Any misunderstanding on this

began to be applied with great confidence score was removed in 1931 when the chief

(amounting in some cases to recklessness) to German society in this field, the Deutsche

differences in mental ability and to mental Gesellschaft fur Rassenhygiene (founded in

diseases. The outstanding example was feeble- 1902) added "Eugenik" to its title. The direction

mindedness, and on the basis of the first pedi- in which Rassenhygiene led had become evident

grees published by Goddard in 1910 Davenport* long before Hitler came to power; and the advent

adopted the hypothesis that mental deficiency of the new laws for sterilization of the unfit and

in general was inherited as a Mendelian recessive. unwanted, and for the exclusion of Jews from

In this he was followed by many others, and the new state were greeted with editorial acclaim

eugenical programmes and some legislation were in the Archiv. The speed with which the first

based on this assumption. Stanley P. Davies, of these laws were prepared and promulgated

who reviewed the history of this period in 1923, within the first few months of 1933 is probably

called it "the alarmist period." The first fruits to be explained by the composition of the

of new methods of mental testing were garnered committee of experts which drafted them. This

rapidly and widely, and the over-emphasis on included Ploetz and his fellow eugenists Rudin

bad heredity as the cause of mental deficiency and Lenz and others who had worked in this

and mental disease, and on restrictive or negative field together with Heinrich Hinumler. Frick,

eugenics as the only possible cure of a social Hitler's Minister of the Interior, whose depart-

ill brought on its inevitable reaction. H. S. ment was charged with the administration of the

Jennings in 1925 attempted to restore common laws, said upon their coming into force: "The

sense by his critical attack on the whole concept fate of race-hygiene, of the Third Reich and the

of unit characters and on the unreality of the German people will in the future be indissolubly

either/or distinction between heredity and en- bound together."t The situation was made quite

vironment in the determination of human (or any clear by von Verschuer in the introduction to his

other) characters. Raymond Pearl in 1927 said: book Leitfaden der Rassenhygiene, published in

Orthodox eugenists are going contrary to the 1941.

best established facts of genetical science and are in the long run doing their cause harm.

Es ist entscheidend fur die Geschichte eines Volkes was der politische Fuhrer von den Ergeb-

One of the signs that the public image of eu-

nissen der Wissenschaft als wesentlich erkennt and zur Tat werden lasst. Die Geschichte unserer

genics had been affected by this and similar wissenschaft ist aufs engste verknupft mit der

criticisms was revealed when G. K. Chesterton published in 1922 Eugenics and Other Evils....
Although his criticisms were not always cogent, his suspicion of eugenics, race hygiene, and

deutschen Geschichte der jungste Vergangenheit. Der Fiihrer des deutschen Reiches ist der erste Staatsmann der die Erkenntnisse der Erbiologie und Rassenhygiene zu einem leitenden Prinzip in der Staatsfuhrung gemmacht hat. (p. 11)

"scientific officialism" of the German type proved to have been well-founded.

Decisive for the history of the people is what the political leader recognizes as essential in the results

of science and puts into effect. The history of our

Rassenhygiene
In Germany the eugenics movement took the name Rassenhygiene from a book of that title

science is most intimately connected with German history of the most recent past. The leader of the German state is the first statesman who has wrought the results of genetics and race hygiene

published in 1895 by Alfred Ploetz who also into a directing principle of public policy.

* 1911. Eugenics Record Office Bulletin 1. t Arch. Rass. Ges. Biol. 27, p. 451.

This statement by a leading German human geneticist was made with some deliberation,

73

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

for it appeared first in identical form in an article hygiene was to delay for a generation the

by von Verschuer in Der Erbarzt, 1937, p. 97, development of a science of human genetics.

and although it has been omitted in a recent In the United States, as in Britain, anthro-

(1959) edition of the above book, the author has pologists in general did not respond to eugenical

not to my knowledge publicly altered his posi- appeals. The kind of racialism which had become

tion on enforced race hygiene. Although not attached to eugenics was not calculated to

all geneticists who remained in Germany thus appeal to persons whose profession it was to

accepted the eugenical and racial doctrines and study and interpret human differences objectively

practices of the Nazis, there is at least evidence and in socio-cultural as well as biological terms.

that even the serious scientists among them Human genetics has to-day become a useful

underrated the dangers of the movement until contributor to anthropology, mainly through

it was too late. From this the melancholy gene frequency studies, and by the application

historical lesson can be drawn that the social of good objective methods generally untinged

and political misuse to which genetics applied to by racialism. However, there are still reminders

man is peculiarly subject is influenced not only of the uncritical use of what look like genetical

by those who support such misuse, but also by methods applied to racial anthropology. What

those who fail to point out, as teachers, the shall one say, for example, when three authors,

distinctions between true and false science.

after anthropometric examination of forty-four

In von Verschuer's book of 1941 Galton is Italian war orphans of whom the fathers were

acknowledged as the modem founder of race unknown but assumed to be "coloured" draw

hygiene as eugenics; but to Gobineau is given sweeping conclusions concerning heterosis

the greater credit of having first brought race ("established with certainty"), inheritance of

into politics, thereby becoming the founder of erythrocyte diameter ("very convincing") and

political anthropology, a field in which the other statements not supported by evidence.

leading later exponents in Germany were Eugen Yet these are statements made in 1960 by Luigi

Fischer and H. A. K. Gunther. In contrast to Gedda and his co-workers Serio and Mercuri

the situation in Great Britain in which Galton in their recent book Meticciato di Guerra. R. R.

had been unable to arouse the interest of anthro- Gates, who writes an, introduction in English

pologists, the German eugenics movement had to this elaborate book refers to it as an important

close connections with the kind of anthropology contribution to what he calls "racial genetics."

which was pursued by anthropometric methods. Others will have greater difficulty in detecting

Since this was not guided by a theoretical any contribution to genetics, but may see in it,

rationale such as might have been supplied by as I do, a reflection in 1960 of the uncritical

population genetics, it fell the more quickly a naivete of that early period of human genetics

victim to the pseudo-science of the promoters which delayed its progress. And the same year-

of the Aryan mythology. The chief research 1960-sees also the appearance of a new journal

institute was the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Mankind Quarterly devoted in part to racial

Anthropology, Human Genetics and Eugenics, anthropology of the above kind (again described

of which Eugen Fischer was the director. Many as such by one of its editors . . . and embodying

members of this institute had become so racist attitudes of the earlier period. Truly the

politically involved with Nazism that after the past is not yet buried, and human genetics, in

defeat of Hitler's regime the institute was not spite of its recent evidences of new life, is still

continued by the West German State, thus exposed to old dangers.

fulfilling rather quickly Frick's prophecy of the Eugenics movements grew in many other

interdependence of race hygiene and the Nazi countries in the period before and just following

state. It must be noted that in the debacle the first world war, but space will permit taking

eugenics carried anthropology and human account of only one such development.

genetics down with it. There can be no doubt that

in Germany, formerly a centre of genetical Eugenics in the U.S.S.R.

research, the effect of its association with race It may be regarded as an anomaly of history

74

CROSS CURRENTS IN THE HISTORY OF HUMAN GENETICS

that in Russia eugenics did not appear in an
organized form until after the revolution of 1917,
and this notwithstanding the enunciation of ideas very similar to those of Galton by W. M. Florinsky in 1866. In 1919 a eugenics department was started in the Institute of Experimental Biology in Moscow under N. K. Koltzoff, and shortly thereafter a Eugenics Bureau began in Leningrad under J. A. Philiptschenko. By 1925 thirteen research articles on human genetics, sensu stricto, had been published from these institutes. The Russian Eugenics Society was founded in Moscow in 1920, with local branches in Leningrad, Saratov, and Odessa, and the Russian Journal of Eugenics under Koltzoff and Philiptschenkobeganin 1923 (cf. Koltzoff, 1925). The difficulties and later suppression of eugenics in the Soviet Union were foreshadowed by an event in connection with the publication in 1924 of Philiptschenko's book on eugenics. While it was in production at the government printing office, according to Weissenberg (1926) there was inserted in the introduction a statement to the effect that measures with important eugenical effects were the destruction ofthe bourgeoisie and the victory of the workers. What part the existence of eugenics there played in bringing about the suppression of genetics in the U.S.S.R. is not clear to me. The first institute to be suppressed appears to have been that concerned with human genetics, the Gorky Institute for Medical Genetics, but this may have been incidental to the condemnation and execution of its director, S. G. Levit, as a "traitor."
Scientific Methods Although the chief cross-currents operating on human genetics were generated by persons pressing for social and political regulation of human breeding, frequently to the neglect of sound scientific method, others of less marked and definite character traced to relations, or lack of them, between genetics and medical research. Apart from lack of understanding of genetics on the part of physicians, there were frequent expressions of active lack of interest, since principles discovered in peas and exploited and extended by experiments with flies were not thought relevant to human beings. And if, physicians often said, a disease was inherited,

that meant it couldn't be treated and knowledge about it was not likely to be useful. The gap due to mutual lack of appreciation and of common experience and training as between medical men and geneticists has shown some signs of narrowing, but is certainly far from being bridged. This
would require further will and effort on both sides. Nor can one conclude as yet that the confusion
between the aim of eugenics and the facts of human heredity which Bateson pointed out has yet been cleared up. As eminent an acknowledged leader in genetics as Professor H. J.
Muller has recently restated the adherence to ideas on controlled human breeding which he outlined in his book of 1935 Out of the Night. The central idea, eutelegenesis, had been
developed by Herbert Brewer (1935) who probably was unaware of an earlier similar proposal by A. S. Serebrovsky (1929).... In his reiteration of this proposal in 1959, Muller has refined and extended it. He now proposes to retain the whole genotype of such men (which the processes of meiosis would tend to break down) by multiplying samples of their diploid spermatogonial cells in tissue cultures and subsequently obtaining embryos from these by some form of ectogenesis. Even though the technical problems involved might in some future time be solved, several more important scientific ones would still remain. Such schemes assume that there is an ideal genotype for a human being. Plato could entertain such an ideal but can we do so after our experience of the variety of genotypes in successful populations? Can human cultures be maintained by an ideal genotype? Even though the proponents of eutelegenesis should admit that there might be several good kinds of human being, are there objective scientific criteria by which they might be selected? Even though choice of sperm or genotype donors were to rest with persons as benevolent and acute as I believe Professor Muller to be, selection would still be subject to changing tastes and ideals and thus to control by imposed power as in the Nazi state. Muller illustrates this in his own examples of the
eminent men he might have chosen, for in his
list of 1959 as compared with that of 1935, Lenin,
Marx and Sun Yat Sen have been dropped and
Einstein and Lincoln added.

75

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

To me such schemes seem to express the same sort of benevolent utopianism as did some of Galton's proposals of sixty years ago, but now they must be viewed in the light of some actual experience with them. Then as now they were backed by the prestige of men of deserved eminence in science, then of Galton, to-day of Muller, but this did not save the earlier programmes from grave misuse and ultimate damage to both human society and science. In fact the high scientific standing of their proponents increases the dangers of uncritical acceptance of them as bases for social and political action, with the ever attendant risk of loss of public confidence in genetics as applied to man if or when their unsoundness becomes manifest.
Such considerations remind us of the dilemma which scientists face in their desire both to advance sound knowledge and to make it serve its essential social function. In the case of human genetics, I do not believe that the problems posed by the cohabitation of these two purposes are to be settled by divorce, as Bateson suggested. The problems posed by the continuing occurrence of diseases and defects ("Our load of mutations" Muller 1950) are real and they must be faced, both as biological and as social problems. Both sets of interests must be free to develop, and better together than separately for this is the condition under which common criteria for criticism and rigorous judgements, so badly needed in all fields affected by potential social applications, may be evolved.
Conclusion If I have strayed somewhat from the limits of 1900-1930 that I had set for myself for a historical review, I suppose this is a reflection of my view that some of the cross-currents operating in the earlier years of this century still play upon us. It seems to me that their influence in the first two or three decades was in part due to the lack of a clear vision of what studies of man have to contribute to the elucidation of general problems such as the mechanism of evolution and of gene action. The rise of population genetics and of physiological genetics have now turned attention to the rich source of material for these problems provided by human populations, and by the

accumulated experience of medical and anthropological research. Recent discoveries, such as the identification of human genes controlling serological, biochemical and developmental processes subject to the action of natural selection should now give human genetics that orientation toward important biological problems which was not generally recognized in its early days. What seems to me to be most important, especially in its implications for the future, is the growing recognition of the logical unity of genetics, for its essential problems, being concerned with a system of elements having similar attributes in all forms of life, can be seen to transcend the special problems of the different categories of organisms. Human genetics, freed from the narrower bounds and conflicting purposes which hindered its early growth, seems clearly destined to play an important role in the advancement of the whole science of genetics of which it is a part. And that, in the long run, may constitute its best contribution to the satisfaction of human needs.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bateson, B. 1928. William Bateson, F.R.S. Naturalist. Cambridge University Press.
Bateson, W. 1919. Common Sense in racial problems. The Galton Lecture. Eugen. Rev. 11.
Bateson, W. and Saunders, E. R., 1902. Royal Society Evolution Reports 1902-1909. Report 1 (December 17th, 1901) p. 133.
Barthelmess, Alfred. 1952. Vererbungswissenschaft. Freiburg/Munchen. Orbis Academicus.
Bernstein, F. 1924. Ergebnisse einer biostatistischen zusammenfassenden Betrachtung uber die erblichen Blutstrukturen des Menschen. Klin. Wochenschr. 3, 1495-1497.
Brewer, Herbert. 1935. Eutelegenesis. Eugen. Rev. 27, 121-126.
Chesterton, G. K. 1922. Eugenics and Other Evils. Cassell.
Davenport, C. B. 1914. Reply to criticism of recent Americanwork byDr. Heron of the Galton Laboratory. Eugenics Record Office, Cold Spring Harbor, N. Y. Bulletin 11.
Davies, S. P. 1923. The Social Control of the Feeble Minded. Ph.D. Dissertation, Faculty of Political Science.
Columbia Un8versity Press. Dugdale, R. L. 1874. The Jukes; a Study in Crime,
Pauperism, Disease and Insanity. New York. Florinsky, W. M. 1866. Uber die Vervollkommung und
Entartung der Menschheit. Petersburg. Garrod, A. 1908. Croonian Lectures to the Royal
Academy of Medicine. Inborn errors of metabolism. Lancet, 2: 1, 142, 173, 214.

76

CROSS CURRENTS IN THE HISTORY OF HUMAN GENETICS

Heron, David. 1913. Mendelism and the problem of mental defect-a criticism of recent American work. University of London, Publications of the Galton Laboratory, Questions ofthe Day and the Fray, Number 7.
Hogben, L. 1931. Genetic Principles in Medicine and Social Science. Williams and Norgate. 1933. Nature and Nurture. Allen & Unwin.
Jennings, H. S. 1925. Prometheus or Biology and the Advancement ofMan. Dutton.
Joravsky, David, 1961. Soviet Marxism and Natural Science 1917-1923. Columbia University Press.
Koltzoff, N. K. 1925. Die Rassenhygienische Bewegung in Russland. Arch. Rass.-u-Ges-biol. 17,96-99.
Muller, H. J. 1935. Out of the Night: A Biologist's View of the Future. Vanguard.
- 1959. The guidance of human evolution.'Perspectives in Biol. and Med. 3, 1-43.
Pearl, R. 1927. The biology of superiority. The American Mercury.

Pearson, Karl. 1904. On a generalized theory of alternative inheritance, with special reference to Mendel's laws. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London A 203: 53-86.
- 1914-1930. The Life, Letters and Labours of Francis Galton. Volumes I, H,II m, a. Cambridge University Press.
Penrose, L. S. 1932. On the interaction of heredity and environment in the study of human genetics (with special reference to Mongolian imbecility). Jour. Genet. 25, 407.
Serebrovsky, A. S. 1929. Antropogenika Medikobiologcheskii Zhurnal 5: 3-19 (Russian, as cited by Joravsky 1961).
von Verschuer, 0. 1959. Genetik des Menschen. Urban. Schwarzenberg.
Weissenberg, S. 1926. Theoretische und praktische Eugenik in Sowiet Russland. Arch. Rass-u-Ges-biol. 18, 81.
Wright, S. 1959. Physiological genetics, ecology of populations and natural selection. Perspectives in Biol. and Med. 3, 107-151.

77
ER-D

