114 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

great in the Air Force and Navy, and we had
therefore lost many picked men. She appealed to the Press to counteract the feeling among all ranks of those chivalrous men who refused to marry because they did not wish to leave a widow. If they had to leave a widow, they should also leave a mother. The young men in the Forces should be urged to marry as quickly as they could.
MRS. MITCHELL told of the campaign of
the Incorporated Midwives' Institute to
obtain State aid to enable mothers to stop away from work for four weeks before the
birth of a child and eight weeks afterwards. LADY CHAMBERS asked if a special film
could be made to be shown throughout the country, and if the Ministry of Information
would allow this.

MRS. GRANT DUFF replied that the Ministry of Information had turned down the Society's film as unsuitable, but said that they would make one if the Ministry of Health asked for such a film.
LORD HORDER said that the suggestion
was good in principle, and he would try and see if the new broom at the Ministry of Health would sweep in this direction. The
luncheon had evoked proof that the Eugenics Society was alive. The discussion had brought to light a number of suggestions about the ways in which the eugenic principle could express itself. He was grateful to Mrs. Grant Duff for having brought this scheme into operation, and for the support of all present.

THE STUDY OF RACIAL MIXTURE IN THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH
Some Anthropolo,ical Preliminaries By K. L. LITTLE
(The Duckworth Laboratory, University Museum of Archcsology and Ethnology, Cambridge)
IN a recently published and noteworthy anthropometric material collected by Prosymposium entitled " Race Relations fessor Melville J. Herskovits, who in his turn and the Race Problem," eleven pro- attributes the rise and growth of this new
minent American writers reviewed the socio- hybrid " race " to the effect of social logical implications of racial contacts on the selection. American continent, with special reference Although the interest shown in North to problems arising out of the very large America to problems of racial relations in racial minority in the U.S.A. of some I3 particular, and to human genetics in general, million American Negroes. One of these as proved by the articles in such journals as authors, Professor S. J. Holmes, has pointed the American Journal of Physical Anthroout elsewhere that there are three racial pology, is readily understandable, it stands possibilities in view for the United States. out in very sharp relief to the lukewarm The entire population may become attention afforded to such matters in the " white "; it may become " black"; or countries which compose the British "whites " and " blacks " may fuse together Commonwealth. The latter empire cominto a hybrid stock. This last possibility prises practically speaking members of every seems to be fairly well substantiated by the major and minor race group in the world, and

THE STUDY OF RACIAL MIXTURE

so contains the elements of most possible Papuans ... ... 275,000*

forms of human miscegenation, yet official Fijians ... ... ... 84,ooo

information regarding the actual racial com- Australian aborigines... 62,000

positions of these populations is often very Maoris ... .. .. 63,000

incomplete, and particularly so in the colonial
areas where it would be most interesting.*
Nor, anthropologically speaking, can much of the semi-official data, as displayed, for example, in such books of reference as the Encyclopaedia Britannica by the use of phrases as " the higher-type races," " black low type,"
etc., be considered more satisfactory. The fact, however, that nothing like a complete
anthropometric survey has yet been instituted even in this country, may help to explain, though not to condone, the lack of more exact information elsewhere.

From the above it will be clear that elements in varying degree are present from all four major racial stocks, i.e. Caucasoid,
Mongoloid, Negroid and Australoid. In the case of the Papuans and Fijians, previous hybridization involving more than one of
these elements seems clearly responsible for their present racial " make-up." Speaking of to-day, the " whites " are racially excluded from any appreciable degree of mixture
with the non-Europeans, either by legislative or social strictures. This applies most strongly in the case of the small and

Populations and the Sociological Position
The consideration of sociological factors in dealing with the problems which arise out of race and racial hybridization is a sine qua non. The following facts and

diminishing aboriginal population. In New Zealand, though the Maoris are not par-
ticularly racially divergent from the English settlers, both groups maintain a social segregation.

figures, though for obvious reasons incom-
plete, may therefore be accepted as a necessary preliminary to the review of the racial situation in those areas under the
British flag where symbiosis is a phenomenon of importance. Partly for reasons stated above, very little information regarding purely " native " populations is included, although in this connection it need hardly be pointed out that what significance is

Canada
"Whites" (mainly British and French
ongn) ... some ioooo,ooo Aboriginal Redskin In-
dians and Eskimos ... 128,000 Asiatic origin (chiefly
Chinese) ... ... 70,000
Negroes... ... ... 20,000

attached to racial mixture as such, is as The aboriginal Indians and Eskimos

important from the biological and eugenical (Mongoloid) are already fairly strongly

point of view where races of non-Caucasoid mixed with " white " blood. This hybridizing

origin (i.e. in general terms-non-European) process is still going on in some degree, but

are implicated, as it is in the case of stronger social determinants segregate the

European-non-Caucasoid miscegenation.t " whites " from any conspicuous mixture

with the other races.

Australasia

"Whites" (mainly

South Africa

British) ... ... 6,6oo,ooo

" Whites" (mainly

Chinese (and others of

British and Dutch

Asiatic origin) ... I22,000

origin)

... ... 2,000,000

Bantu ... ... ... 6,6oo,ooo

J Some of the difficulties of distinguishing populations by race from colonial reports have already been quoted by Dr. R. R. Kuczynski (I937) in Colonial

Indians... ... ... 220,000
Mixed" Cape Coloured " 770,000t

Populations. t The word " British " indicates populations origi-
nating in the British Isles.

* Approximate estimation. t E. A. Walker, 1940.

I6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The "Cape Coloured," who comprise easily recognizable "hybrid" population

elements from three racial stocks, have resulting from the residence of " British"

originated from a mixture of Hottentots (and, therefore, presumably not separately

with Bushmen, Bantu and Malay (ex Java, classified), West African and East Indian

Siam, etc.) together with a considerable seamen and others. Here, it must be stressed.

addition of European blood, and some as much as in any other part of the Common-

definite Mongoloid infusion in the shape of wealth, biological phenomena tend to be

Chinese must also be counted. Here the greatly obscured by sociological factors.

sociological situation is probably more com-

plicated and more rigid than in any other How Will Racial Relations be Affected in the

area of the British Empire. The hybrid Future ?

" Coloured " population acts as a social and In sociological science it is no more than

racial " buffer " between the " Whites " a truism to state that the structure of no

and the Negroid Bantu; that is to say, society is static. This would be clear even

whereas the two latter are completely if the disruptions achieved by such forces

segregated, there is continuous mixture as war did not make the presence of the

between the Coloured population and the dynamic factors which are continuously

poorer " Whites."

changing and modifying institutions and

West Indies

traditions even more obvious. It may,

"Whites " (practically all British) ... ... 130,000
"Coloured" ... ... i,6oo,ooo About four-fifths of the "Coloured"
population here is Negroid in origin, although
some aboriginal Indian blood must not be
disregarded. In the past this population was fairly well " hybridized" by miscegenation between the " white " settlers and the slaves they imported. To-day, a segregation,

therefore, be thought unquestionable that present forms of racial or social segregations will undergo corresponding alteration, becoming either more elastic or more rigid in
the process. In the former event then not only will the racial composition of populations change considerably, but many new " racial" populations will emerge. In this light, then, eugenic considerations involve
not only the forms of racial hybridization

possibly stronger than is the case in the at present in force, but the far wider possi-

Southern States of the U.S., obtains.

bilities of the future; since it is but reason-

Great Britain The I93I Census of England and Wales differentiates the non-British population on the lines of " foreign-born population by couDtry of birth and nationality." On this basis the figures obtainable are as follows
European countries ... 226,000

able to suppose that in human genetics no less than elsewhere, the biological results
become more diverse as new and additional factors are added. Moreover, specific as well as general consideration seems all the more
necessary, when it is remembered that answers stlll to be provided for certain ambiguously interpretable phenomena are

Asiatic ,,

... II,300

in a sense but the preface to wider fields.

African

... 6,200

(chiefly Egypt) American countries ... I1,000
(the U.S. excepted)

Some Anthropological Considerations The eugenic attitude to questions con-
cerning racial or human hybridization in

Although the " alien " population of general considers quite logically two factors.

Britain is proportionately very small, it is The first appertains to the qualities of the

nevertheless the case that racial problems in parental stocks; the second to the qualities

the local sense are of not inconsiderable of the offspring. It is also not unusual to

moment. Reference is made, of course, to assume a priori, on general biological and

large sea-port cities like London, Liverpool, genetical grounds, that when one progenitor

Cardiff, etc., where there is a distinct and is " inferior" to the other the likelihood of

THE STUDY OF RACIAL MIXTURE

II7

the offspring exhibiting the desirable char-
acteristics of the " superior " parent is diminished.
Over questions relating to the " quality" of racial characteristics, as well as to the
genetical result of their mixture, many
notable spears have been broken in the past
by such scientists as Davenport, Mjoen, Fischer, Castle, etc. The not inconsiderable
amount of controversy which arose over such theories and explanations as " blended
inheritance," " harmonic and unharmonic features," " instability," etc., relating to hybrid populations, has but lately subsided
and little would be gained in seeking to
revive it. One observation, however, not
necessarily indicative of belligerent neu-
trality, may, perhaps, be permitted: that strictly from the anthropological point of
view discussion as to the dysgenic effects of
hybridization on the basis of adjudged
qualities and features of racial stocks must be regarded as premature. It is but fair to offer substantiation for this statement. In the first place, however, although the main racial groups of mankind are fairly strongly
differentiated on the basis of physical characteristics, the divergence is one of degree and
not of kind. Secondly, although there are significant group differences in physiological activity, there is yet no definite proof that they are determined by racial heredity.
Thirdly, although it is perfectly legitimate to suppose that racial differences in mentality may exist, they are not as yet scientifically demonstrable. As a rider it might be added that Race itself, being essentially a group concept, there can in no sense be any idea of racial "purity" attaching itself to -the individual, for where certain features attributed to one race may actually overlap in the case of certain members of an entirely separate race, any attempt to isolate individuals (as in genetical practice is inevitable) in terms of specific racial qualities is
rendered doubly precarious. The anthropologist, therefore, is obliged to
be very wary of genotypical considerations unless of a somatic kind interpretable in racial terms, i.e. as a group study, and to concentrate his main attention on what in a

genetical sense is the second consideration, the nature of the hybrid population itself.
Yet here again, the present range of legiti-
mate operations is limited. Eugenical con-
siderations of the first order demand and
reasonably expect to derive information from the " hybrid" as to the actual mechanism
of inheritance as well as to the process of
hybridization itself. The answer, it has to be admitted, even to certain Mendelian questions, is still inconclusive. For want of adequate data, the genetic basis of specific
racial traits is unknown, and although certain
physical characteristics owe their origin to
simple gene differences, other features have a much more complicated heredity, being dependent upon the interaction of multiple
genes, which in consequence makes the pro-
cess of segregation which follows aRl the more
difficult to interpret. Of even more fundamental importance,
as at first sight it appears to conflict with the
Mendelian laws of inheritance themselves, is the problem of accounting for the low degree of variability evinced by hybrid populations. As Mr. J. C. Trevor has already illustrated, with a few debatable exceptions, hybrid populations which have resulted from the mixture of parental stocks of more or less
widely divergent racial origin show varia-
bilities tending to be neither particularly
high nor particularly low, and, in fact, not greater than the variabilities of either parent race. To use the words of the geneticist, H. S. Jennings, on this subject-" It is unthinkable that human beings should not follow the same laws of inheritance as other ainimals," and several explanations have been advanced to account for the phenomenon. The suggestion of Professor Muller, on neo-Mendelian lines, is that the high degree of variability, often found intra-
racially, i.e. between members of the same
race, is probably due to rather rare genes, so that un]ess some of these are part of the
genic equipment of the relevant parent races, there will be no adequate basis for high variability amongst the hybrid population. Herskovits, to whose work in revealing the emergence of a new " fixed" hybrid race amongst the American Negro reference

II8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

has already been made, explains the situation basis according to whether they may be

on the basis of Mendelian laws being obscured regarded as (i) non-adaptive, (2) to have

by social factors. Finally, it has been con- originated in functional modifications, e.g.

tended, not without some justification, that malar breadth of the face, (3) to be easily

the real blame should be ascribed to certain modifiable through the action of environ-

inconsistencies of method in the accumula- mental factors, like nutrition, etc.* In

tion and assembly of the material, as well as particular, care will be taken to include

to ununiform statistical treatment.

features which have special racial signifi-

Although, therefore, it may be true that cance, like limb proportions, the degree of

there is nothing truly irreconcilable between prognathism, etc., and also those features

low hybrid variability and modem genetical in which the parental stocks are observably

principles, it seems clear that here, just as most distinct. For purposes of the sub-

much as in what may be considered as the sequent analysis it will be highly valuable,

more primary consideration, polymeric if not essential, to know not only the

traits, the situation is sufficiently confused immediate characteristics of the parents of

to merit extensive attention and closer data. the Fi cross, but the degree of homogeneity

or heterogeneity of the stock to which they

The Procedure

belong. Needless to say, in the preparation

The anthropological procedure envisaged of the material for statistical treatment and

will require in many ways a more rigorous analysis consistency of method will be as

systematization than has hitherto been necessary as it is in the accumulation of the

practised, though it is desirable that room data themselves, and in this connection it

should be left for the inclusion of new factors, will be as important for comparative,purposes

which reasonably may be expected to evolve to know the degree of reliability of the Means

in the course of the study. In the initial contrasted as it will be to obtain the usual

process of random sampling, for example, it statistical constants. In comparing the

will be desirable, if not essential, after the characteristic variability of one population

conventional selection according to age, sex, with another, Professor Wagner has pointed

etc., to differentiate according not only to out that in general all the somatic characters

genealogical stages, but in regard to economic must be taken into account so far as they

class or social status, age-group,* and even are of a nature that their variability can be

habitat and climate.t In the choosing of determined, and suggests for the purposes of

physical criteria, measurable and descriptive, group comparisons the use of the formula

attention will be paid not only to those of known Mendelian significance like length

xv
nn.,

where

n

is

the

number

of

characters

of face, head breadth, hair form, eye colour, in question and z v is the sum of their

etc., but to the more modifiable ones like coefficients of variation, in order to provide

stature and body weight. The actual selec- a " mean " coefficient of variation. Another

tion of characters is itself a process demanding method for use in a similar connection has

great care. The genetic basis of several been devised by Dr. Morant. This, by taking criteria in formal use is yet unknown, and into account the variances (v's) of a number

it is suggested that interesting results might of characters, provides another conventional

be obtained by the choosing and use of a estimate of the variability of one series as

large number of characters on a three-fold compared with another.

*H. L. Shapiro (1931). The Chinese Population in Hawaii, American Council. Institute of Pacific
Relations. t Franz Boas (1928). Anthropology and Modern
Life. It must be noted, however, that Boas's findings regarding the change in the head shape of American immigrants has received severe criticism on statistical grounds.

In such an analysis as this the question as to how far physiological and psychologi-
cal characters may usefully be employed naturally arises. Anthropological opinion differs greatly on this point. Tests can be
* E. A. Hooton (I926). Science, 68.

THE STUDY OF RACIAL MIXTURE

ii9

made on skin, auditory sensitivity, etc., and secrets to lines of inquiry compatible with

have been used for some time past. They are the wielding of the microscope. Indeed,

clearly of most use when they can be inter- what conclusions have so far been reached

preted in absolute terms. Physiological point quite the other way: that far from

functions like metabolism, respiration, speed following out any simple process, human

of nerve conduction, etc., are also amenable heredity unfolds itself in many directly

to testing, but owing to environmental unanalysable ways. Certain traits and

factors like cultural and climatic conditions characters follow automatically from certain

have a limited range of application. The miscegenations: others appear to require

same unfortunate handicap so far obtains in definite though often unspecifiable environ-

the case of the interpretation of most of the mental conditions to evoke them. Some

results gained by psychological methods. features rise clearly above all external

inhibitions; others, if latent, are obscured

The Requirements of the Future

by social, climatic and nutritional influences.

None better than the anthropologist is Professor Ruggles Gates declared some

aware of the present meagreness of his time ago that in his opinion it was doubtful

6ffering to the eugenic consideration of the even if marriages between north and south

racial problem. It would be idle, neverthe- Europeans (members in general anthropo-

less, to imagine that less ambiguous evidence, logical terms of the same major race group)

or even a more exact technique, is to be are wholly desirable in their results. It has

gained except on the basis of much more already been mentioned that the variability

widely obtained data than are at present to be expected in quantitative characters

available. It would be equally wrong to between the members of the same race is

infer that the employment of more controlled greater than it is between race groups

experimentation following the lines of the themselves. It is possible that considerations

orthodox laboratory methods of biology, even which differentiate ecologically one part of

if obtainable, would provide a satisfactory a large area inhabited by members of the

means of making good the deficiency. same major race group from another part

Though it is not unreasonable to hope that may in the qualitative sense be responsible

Man will one day consider himself as worthy for still further increase in intra-racial

of at least the same amount of study as he is variation; for example, parts of Mediter-

prepared to devote to the lowliest member of ranean Europe, ecologically alike and to

his own zoological class, comparatively some extent racially akin with parts of

little would be gained by installing human Mediterranean Africa, are in ecological

beings behind the bars of the experimental terms very distinct from the northern areas

cage. of Europe. From the eugenist's point of

Complicated as is the environmental view as much as from the anthropological

machinery which impinges upon the ordinary standpoint, it therefore seems feasible to

rat, the factors which affect Man are a suggest that material collected on intra-

hundred times more inextricable and diverse racial mixture may be as relevant to the

in character, and as is equally plain, many problem as are the materials appertainimg

times more so than in the case of (say) to wider contacts, and that work on racial

Drosophila. Such work on genetical lines that hybridization should include studies not

has been done on animals closest to humans, only of the mixture of very divergent stocks,

as, for instance, the ape, more than supports like Caucasoid and Negroid, but of those

the argument of complexity. Surely, then, springing from the union of parents of the

it is to be looked upon rather as a logical same broad racial ancestry.

consequence of the nature of man's biological Discussion as to the best means of

equipment than as a cause for wonderment attaining eugenic desiderata is bound to

and even disappointment that the mechanism some extent to be controversial; but it is

of human heredity has not yielded all its heartening at least to note that geneticists

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and biologists, no less then eugenists, are alive to the requirements and potentialities of the future. It is interesting in this connection to note the words of Professor J. B. S. Haldane:
" I would urge the extraordinary importance of a scientific study of the effects of racial crossing for the future of the British Commonwealth. Until such a study has been accomplished, and it is a study which will take generations to complete, we are not, I think, justified in any dogmatism as to the effects of racial crossing. It may not be desirable to forbid it, but there can be little reason, I think, to encourage it as between the widely different races of mankind."
At the present time this country and the British Commonwealth are engaged in a bitter and costly struggle. Nevertheless, it is recognized that planning and construction must go on. New cities will have to be built over the ashes of the present ones to house the populations of the future. Is it not true, also, that the foundations upon wbich the human and racial relationships of those populations will rest are in no less urgent need of examination and reconstruction ? These are grave days for science and scientific workers. Yet the hour at present is no graver than it was for the scientists of Barcelona, who, conscious even that their work might be

lost, went calmly on amidst the chaos of the siege to amass much-needed serological material out of the very shambles.
References
Thompson, Edgar T. (Editor) and eleven other
Contributorb (I939). Race Relations and the Race
Problem.
Herskovits, Melville J. (1930). The Anthropometry of the American Negro. Columb. Univ. Contr. Anthrop. LXI.
Encyclopeadia Britannica (I939). The British
Empire. Area and Population.
Kuczynski, R. R. (I937). Colonial Populations.
Walker, E. A. (1940). South Africa. Oxford Pamphlets on World Affairs.
H.M. Stationery Office (I93I). Census ofEngland
and Wales. Trevor, J. C. (1938). Characteristics of Hybrid
Populations. Eug. Rev., XXX.
Muller, H. J. (I936). On the Variability of Mixed Races. Amer. Nat. LXX.
Hooton, E. A. (I926). Methods of Racial Analysis. Science, LXIII.
Shapiro, H. L. (I931). The Chinese Population in Hawaii. The American CounciL Institute of Pacific Relations.
Boas, Franz (1928). Materials for Study of Inheritance in Man. Columb. Univ. Contr. Anthrop. VI.
Wagner, K. (1932). The Variability of Hybrid Populations. Amer J. Phys. Anthrop. XVI.
Morant, G. M. (I935). An Attempt to Estimate the Variabilities of Various Populations. Z. Rassenk. ii.
Gates, R. Ruggles (1923). Heredity and Eugenics.
Haldane, J. B. S. (1939). Heredity and Politics.

in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL. BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order. POREIGN BOOKS not in stock obtained under Licence.
A visit to thu Department is respectfully suAested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioninA, interests

II. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd., Phone: EUSton 4282 (5 lines)

136 GOWER STREET
Eugenics Review, Vol.XXXI No. 4.

