EUGENIC ASPECTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY

HE proposition " That the programme textile industry, for instance, the birth-rate

of social security set out in the
Beveridge Report should be supported on eugenic grounds" was discussed at a
Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society held at the Rooms of the Royal Society,

of the semi-skilled workers was lower than that of the employers, so that it looked as if, apart from the social problem group, we were getting to a state of very little difference of fertility between the economic classes.

Burlington House, Piccadilly, W.i, on The persistent fall in the birth-rate during

Tuesday, January i8th, I944, at 5 o'clock. the last seventy years--except for the flare-

Mr. B. S. Bramwell, who took the Chair in up during the war-was due mainly to two

the unavoidable absence of Lord Horder, groups of causes. The first was the psycho-

urged that Sir William Beveridge's recom- logical group. High in this group she placed

mendations should be considered strictly in the feeling among potential parents of inse-

their relation to eugenics. This was not the curity, especially of economic insecurity,

occasion for a discussion on the wider aspects above all the fear of unemployment.

of the subject.

The other big group of causes was very

Mrs. E. M. HUBBACK said that she pro- familiar-the economic causes which acted

posed to take the definition of eugenics given throughout nearly all society, except in the

in the Aims and Objects of the Eugenics 5 per cent at the top, and in the 5 per cent

Society as " the a.ttempt to promote fertility at the bottom who formed the social problem

of persons who possess inborn qualities above group and were probably already breeding

the average." Her task, therefore, was to as fast as was physiologically possible. In

inquire, first, how the fertility of such persons practically every other class the economic

could be promoted; secondly, to determine motive was decisive in determining the

who possessed inborn qualities above the number of children. Among these were the

average-namely, whether in our present people whose income was so low that the

social conditions we could tell the difference birth of another child meant not enough

between the worse and the better stocks; food, house-room, clothing, or medical care,

and lastly, to discuss the Beveridge scheme both for the possible new child and, if it

itself, and to ask whether it would influence came, for the existing children. There were

the birth-rate in the direction in which we also those, in another section of society, who

wished it to go.

could not afford a second son because they

She reminded the audience that the birth- could not send him to an expensive school.

rate was now such that the population was The economic motive applied to all people

not replacing itself and that our net repro- who would like to have more children if

duction rate was somewhere in the neigh- having a family did not represent such a large

bourhood of 8o. It might be asked whether financial handicap.

in certain sections of the population, on the Turning to the second question, namely

whole the better-fed and better-off sections, whether those with inborn qualities above

the birth-rate was smaller, and in the less the average could be recognized with any

well-educated portion, the birth-rate was certainty, she suggested that one of the

larger. In fact, it had been found by experts reasons why eugenics made such slow pro-

that the differential birth-rate was changing; gress was that, as long as there were great

that whereas in the past there had been great environmental inequalities between different

differences between different economic sections of the community, it was not easy

sections of the population, much lower rates or even possible to disentangle differences in

among the richer and much higher ones hereditary endowment. It was now known

among the poorer, in recent years this had that although certain groups of middle-class

changed. It had been shown that in the children were taller and stronger and more

17

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

intelligent than children from slums, these pensions could not possibly be eugenic; the

differences were wiped out if these slum old Hindu system of marriage at an early age

children were given the same conditions as and death on widowhood, though undesirable

the others.

on other grounds, was more likely to promote

The recommendations of the Report, she the population because there were no old

suggested, made substantial contributions people to be kept by those who were still in a

with respect to both causes of reduction in position-to produce children. Every effective

the birth-rate. In the first place, they would man, who would be able to have healthy

give a sense of security, parfly by the benefits children and could keep them, now found

which would come into operation when the himself burdened by rates and taxes which

ordinary earning-power had gone, because he had to pay for the support of others. He

of unemployment, illness, old age or other was not sent to gaol if he did not have

cause, and, perhaps even more, by the children, but he was sent to gaol if he did

assumption on which the whole Report was not pay the rates; and about one-fifth of his

based, that we should be able to prevent income had to be paid away to the com-

mass unemployment. Secondly, there were munity for various social services before he

the proposals for encouraging marriage and could have children of his own. The Bever-

having children. The marriage benefits, the idge scheme called upon those who were able

maternity benefits, and, above all, the scheme to earn money to find the money to keep

for family allowances, would remove some those who could not or did not work, and

of the economic deterrents to parenthood. those persons whom one would on eugenic

Lastly, -the provision of pensions for old grounds encourage to have children were

people would stimulate fertility, for many being taxed to pay for the others.

families could not afford young children It might be argued that the most effective

because of the need of keeping older de- member of the community might be ill or

pendents.

out of work, and there must be something

It might be asked whether the scheme like a Beveridge scheme, but that assumed

would not have a dysgenic effect in en- that the only way in which a man could be

couraging fertility in the social problem kept when unable to work was by social

group. But, in fact, this group was already insurance. There were other ways. A man

breeding as fast as it could, and the Beveridge might for the first few years of his working

benefits, by favouring a higher standard of life be able to depend on his parents, later on

living, might even, for some of its members, he could save or insure voluntarily, but by

result in a more ordered life and the beginning the Beveridge scheme he was compelled to

of the planned family.

pay just as much as the person who would

Mr. CECIL BINNEW pointed out that, draw out far more. In other words, there

although Sir William Beveridge's Report was no longer any basis of insurance in the

had been put over with a great deal of pub- scheme. In no insurance scheme could one

licity and had been accepted by many entirely adjust the rates; those who were

without thought, it was an elaborate and bad risks paid too little and were carried by

detailed scheme, and the only fair way to those who were good risks. In the Beveridge

criticize it from a eugenic or any point of scheme any attempt to adjust the contribu-

view was by going into details.

tions proportionately to what people were

He began with the postulate that social likely to draw out was deliberately thrown

insurance was almost necessarily not eugenic, over. Sir William thought it out of date, and

though it did not follow that for this reason even where particular industries had schemes

it should be rejected. The whole basis of of their own they were to be swept away and

social insurance was that the more effective the people in those industries reduced to the

members of the community had to bear the level of the others. For instance, the banks

burden of the others, and this must be had a scheme to insure their employees

dysgenic rather than eugenic. Widows' against the same risks as the Beveridge

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY

scheme, and it worked so well that the paid in. At present .the professional man

employees contributed nothing and the was burdened with income tax and rates,

banks very little, the reason being that but was left outside the scope of social in-

banks employed people of a high standard surance. Under the Beveridge scheme he

who did not lose their job and were healthy. would be compelled to contribute; he would

Yet under the Beveridge scheme the bank pay 4s. 3d. a week himself; what his wife

clerks would be compelled to pay the same contributed would depend on whether she

contributions as workers in industries where was working, but under certain circum-

there was a real risk of unemployment, and stances she would be paying 3s. gd., so that

this meant that the bank clerks would be between them they would pay 8s. a week or

taxed in order to bear the risk of those who a tax of £20 a year. Therefore they would

had less certain jobs.

have to have three children before the pro-

That was the general nature of social posed children's allowances were' of any

insurance. To offset this dysgenic trend, all benefit to them. In view of the birth-rate

Sir William Beveridge offered was children's among these people it was improbable that

allowances, and they could not be regarded they would have thtee children.

as eugenic since they promoted the birth of Moreover, the contributions they paid

children without consideration whether they before they had a child must be taken into

were of a desirable type. This was clear account. Also, Sir William Beveridge

because it was a flat rate of 8s. per week and postulated that the introduction of the

the inducement would therefore be greater scheme would cost an extra £86,ooo,ooo a

in inverse proportion to the earnings of the year in income tax. The effect of the

people who were receiving it. Although a Beveridge scheme was to surcharge them

man who had an income of £io,ooo was not with a large sum of money when they were

necessarily more valuable to the community already failing to have children for the

than a man with £I,ooo a year, one could economic reason that they could not find the

say of wage-earning people that their value money. It would be observed that this class

to the community was roughly proportionate of people would get practically nothing from

to the amount which they earned. This the scheme except the cost of their burial

scheme of paying the same to everybody and some medical advice. They got no help

offered the highest inducement to those with if their work ceased, nor if they were disabled

the lowest standard and to those who were by illness for less than thirteen weeks, a

careless as to how the money was spent. period which would probably have brought

Turning from the lowest group of people, their profession to an end. The class of the

those to whom 8s. would be a consideration, community which should be encouraged to

to the higher groups, he considered the have children, both because their birth-rate

position of a young professional man. The was falling and because they were regarded

Eugenics Society had always taken the line as socially valuable, were offered nothing by

that for a system of children's allowances to the scheme, which imposed on them an

be eugenic it must not pay a flat rate but be enormous liability which they would be

worked out in each profession. Sir William unable to shoulder and yet have more

Beveridge admitted, when he spoke to the children.

Society, that his scheme would have to be He had hoped to say something about the

supplemented by schemes in the professions, psychological reasons mentioned by Mrs.

and one naturally asked him why it was Hubback, but time would not permit. He

necessary that the scheme should be com- asked those who had not read the Report to

pulsory at all. His answer was, "It has got do so and to see the kin-d of society which it

to be compulsory." Hitler himself could not envisaged. People did not want to bring

have given a better answer!

children into a world of insecurity, neither

One had to consider not only what was did they want to bring them into a world of

going to be drawn out but what had to be slavery. Those who thought that word

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

inapplicable to the Beveridge scheme should the assumption that we recognized where

read the Report through. People would be such decent people were to be found, but

sent to work they did not want, in places he for one had not the courage to make it.

they did not like. All would have identity Sir William pointed out that the remainder

cards, all would be tabulated: in other words of- causes of want in this country were the

a police state, the very thing which they failure to adapt earning-power to family

were supposed to be fighting against, would size, and with that in view he recognized the

be introduced into this country.

necessity for children's allowances, the first

Mr. G. R. MITCHISON said he could not assumption made in the Report. Children's

accept the Society's definition of eugenics allowances were, Sir William affirmed, now

because it seemed to imply that someone or generally recognized as something which

another was in a position to estimate what had to come.

were the superior inborn qualities which it What did people want who opposed this

was desired to perpetuate. He had not the Report ? What was the use of their saying,

impertinence to make such an assumption. " This is going to leave the middle-class in a

Nevertheless, he was glad the Society did worse hole than ever " ? The statement

not describe as eugenics the process of that the scheme would cost £86,ooo,ooo in

abolishing the poorer part of the population, income tax was a misrepresentation. It was

though listening to Mr. Binney he felt that perfectly true that this was the sum given by

some of the members might have that in Sir William as the cost of what he proposed,

mind. but it was not the answer to the question of

The need for social insurance had been what it would cost the middle class. The

recognized in this country since the reign of answer was that if one let other people

Queen Elizabeth and earlier; he seemed to starve, if one let them be out of work, if

remember a statement about the duties of their children were allowed to be under-

the rich in the matter of distributing their nourished, the £86,ooo,ooo would be saved,

goods to the poor which ante-dated Queen but the country would be ruined in the

Elizabeth by I,500 years or more. It was process. It was sheer misrepresentation to

too late to go back to magnificently pre- take one side of the balance-sheet without

mediaeval ideas and wash our hands of the at the same time considering the other.

poor and only look at the upper classes on This was a case where a man had found a

the system of " the richer the better." Those system which was wildly bad and confused.

ideas died some considerable time ago. He The Government Department had produced

welcomed the Beveridge Report because it a system under which a man with a wife and

seemed to him to shoulder a burden which two children who was unemployed for a time

lately we had not had the courage to shoulder, would receive an allowance of 38s. per week;

and it did mean to go forward. He would after a week or two he might become sick,

rather shoulder that burden than stay in the his need greater than ever; but because of

dark stream of moderate respectability. his illness his income dropped to i8s. per

The main object of this Report was to deal with want, which as to three-quarters or

week. A young man of I7 without wife or
dependents received gs. per week when he

more of its causes, as the experienced author was unemployed, and when he fell sick he

of it found, was a matter of temporary loss received not less but i8s. per week. Was

of earning power. How did any of us expect there any sense, an atom of common justice,

those who were faced with starvation when- in that sort of system? What the Report

ever they were out of work, or when ill- said was that it must be put right and

health affected them, to provide a healthy and fine race ? True eugenics must mean

simplified. At present four means tests at least were imposed on people who needed

enabling the decent people in every stratum assistance, not for any fault of their own but

of the population to have and nurture children. Implicit in these criticisms was

because of some accident which had happened to them. Was this not the " police " state

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY

21

of which Mr. Binney was afraid, and had it been taken away from the poor law, and was

not made a mess of things already?

now the work of the Assistance Board;

Continuing, the speaker urged eugenists secondly, the assistance to the old-age

to read the Report with a fair mind and a pensioner had also been taken away from

sense of their responsibilities towards the the poor law and was now a separate

community. They would find that it was a organization; thirdly, by the transfer of

genuine, workable and necessary scheme to poor law functions to the County and

simplify a system the complications and County Boroughs the poor law infirmaries

hardships of which fell on the people who now formed part of a national hospital

could least afford it, those who in this system; and finally, the maintenance of

civilized country were left to starve when the blind was a separate organization.

some accident happened to them. At the These four groups were the bulk of the

end of the Report there were figui'es which cases which had to be dealt with by the

Seebohm Rowntree gave for York. Those former poor law administration, and the

who could still say, having read them, that effect of their transfer had been to leave a

all they cared about was the middle class, residue so limited as to give a clarified

that they could not stand more taxes, that problem of intermittent destitution. In the

it was not their responsibility, meant that Beveridge Report, paragraph 37I, this group

they would let the poor starve in York and was divided into four: those who failed in

elsewhere !

their contributions to national insurance on

Mr. E. J. LIDBETTER said that the the grounds of deficient income, including

Beveridge Report was admittedly only an partially employed people and those who

outline of a scheme; it lacked the detail were on the fringe of employment, street

which was so necessary before it could be traders, and the like; those who were dis-

discussed at any length, and he thought it qualified for benefit through refusal of em-

better to confine his consideration strictly ployment, leaving work without cause or

to its eugenic aspect. The suggestion that. being discharged for misconduct, or those

want has in the past been due to maladjust- who refused to attend a training centre;

ment was in his view a little far-fetched. those who had abnormal needs in the matter

Want was known to be due to a variety of of diet and other needs; and lastly, the

causes of which maladjustment was only one, separated and deserted wives and children.

and not the most important.

Sir William suggested that these four groups

He would like to discuss the most im- must come into the national insurance group,

portant suggestion in this Report which, to but in a separate section. In this Sir William

his mind, had a vital bearing on the subject was using the language of insurance. Here

of eugenics. This was in Sir William was a definition of the same group taken

Beveridge's suggestion that the old poor law from the Wood Report on Mental Deficiency

group should be amalgamated with, and (the report of a Royal Commission): " Let

form part of, the nationally insured group of us assume that we could segregate as a

people. Sir William went further and said separate entity the families in this country

it was essential that this group should do so. containing mental defectives of the primary

There, in the speaker's opinion, the Report type, we should find we had collected among

made a fundamental error. To his mind the them a most interesting social group. It

old poor law group, as much of it as was left, would include a much larger proportion of

the social problem group as it was sometimes insane persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals,

called, should not be conn'ected by ad- prostitutes, inebriates and other social un-

ministration with the nationally insured fortunates than would a group of families

group of people, because in the main they not containing mental deficients which com-

are not insurable.

prise at least IO per cent in the social scale

To take the present position of that group: of most communities."

the relief of the able-bodied unemployed had That was the definition of the social

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

problem group by this Royal Commission. much wider reform, namely that of the

The speaker was not suggesting that all the whole income tax system. She accepted the

people who were being assisted to-day under view that want must be abolished, *but

the poor law fell into that group, but a very considered that by such a reform this could

large proportion of them did, and from the be achieved without placing additional

point of view of eugenics it was most im- burdens on the better types of hardworking

portant that that group should not be persons. She asked the meeting to consider

endowed with benefits such as were sug- that the income tax allowances as at present

gested in the Beveridge Report. That is why arranged could be developed in such a way

he suggested they should be regarded as the as to provide for the elimination of want in

separate community which they had always the community.

been. It was essential that there should be a Mr. TITMUSS said that Mr. Binney spent

close study of this group: some kind of most of his time- in discussing the financial

research which would enable us to under- effects of the Beveridge Report on 5 per cent

stand it, to know its fertility rate, its survival of the community, Mr. Lidbetter. most of

value, its contribution to human progress, his on less than i per cent. The bulk of the

and what demands it made upon the com- nation-8o to 85 per cent-had been neg-

munity for its care and maintenance.

lected altogether apart from Mrs. Hubback's

He agreed that its survival value might opening remarks. The 5 per cent: group at

not be increased greatly by the Beveridge the top was failing to reproduce itself when

Scheme, because it probably already repro- income tax stood at 2S. 6d. in the £, and if

duced itself to the maximum of human the whole community had followed its

fertility. That, however, was a proposition example we should have been unable to wage

which was not established by any means this war. If the social problem group, at the

and it was one of the problems which we other end of the scale, was reproducing itself

needed to understand. It was quite certain to its physiological maximum, how could the

that if this group was to be identified with inducements of the Beveridge Report have

the insured population proper, it would, to any effect ? Was it not true, he asked further,

a very large exten't, be merged into and lost that the great bulk of the additional expendi-

sight of in the great mass of organization ture of £86,ooo,ooo was due solely to the

which would be necessary to bring the ageing of the population and that in the

Beveridge scheme into operation. This, he future an increasingly larger sum would

thought, was a strong reason why we should have to be found for the care of the rising

not, as a Society, support the Beveridge number of old people? If that was true,

Report as it stood.

what did opponents of the Report suggest

should be done with the increasing popula-

General Discussion

tion of old people ?

In the course of the discussion which Mr. HALFORD said that, in his Galton

followed, Mr. HOPE-JONES pointed out that lecture, Sir William Beveridge stated that he

£86,ooo,ooo spread over the entire population did not imagine his audience would feel that

came to £2 per head and not (as stated by the Report had any eugenic value. He

Mr. Binney) £20. He questioned whether amplified this by saying that one had only

compulsory insurance would add to the to realize that the unskilled labourer had a

burden on middle-class people, for at present larger family than the skilled worker to

when insurance was not compulsory or see that his scheme could not be depended

universal the care of the old or incapable fell on to affect the birth-rate. There had been

on the generous, and it was certainly arguable a good deal of middle-class prejudice in the

that that was an unnecessary tax upon discussion; they must eliminate that and:

them.

look at things apart from their political and

Lady RHYS WILLIAMS said that the social prejudices. Mrs. Hubback was the

Beveridge proposals stood in the way of a advocate of a policy which more than any-

EUGENIC ASPECTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY

23

thing else was psychologically adversely to result in people not being able to afford

affecting the birth-rate.

to marry or have children.

Mrs. ARNOLD BROWN asked if it was Mr. BINNEY, also in reply, assured Mr.

eugenically sound that the eighth child of Mitchison that he, too, was capable of saying

a family was the best. She wondered how that the poor should not be left by the rich to

the Beveridge Report would, tackle the starve. That appeared to be irrelevant to

question of the excessively large family. the subject of the debate. Sir William had

Mr. PERCIVAL said that it appeared to be said that the main point of the Report was

assumed that if people were better off they not to transfer money from the rich to the

would have more children, although it was poor, but to redistribute income among the

a fact that the most prosperous countries poor, and his first objection to the Report

had a lower birth-rate than the less pros- was a eugenic one, because Sir William

perous. Would an increase in prosperity redistributed money by making those who

increase the size of families ?

were provident and hard-working contribute

to the support of those who were not, instead

Replies to Discussion

of having the money available for their own

Mrs. HUBBACK, in replying, recalled that families.

Sir William, in his address to the Society, Mr. Mitchison had queried his reference

had said that although he had put forward to £86,ooo,ooo and said that he did not refer

a flat-rate scheme of family allowances, he to the other side of the balance sheet. If

also advocated a graded scheme so that Mr. Mitchison was speaking metaphorically

different economic sections could, through he could not answer him, for it did not mean

some form of mutual insurance, receive anything. £86,ooo,ooo was the figure in

children's allowances in proportion to their money given by Sir William, and in answer

own expenditure.

to Mr. Titmuss the speaker said that there

She did not agree that social security would was nothing in the- Report to suggest it was

not have any effect on fertility. It might be due to the increasing number of old people.

true that in the past, possibly because the They had to be paid for, but the treatment

practice of birth control had not spread of the aged was the one thing in the Report

*throughout the social scale, prosperity had which could be defended on eugenic grounds;

brought about a lower birth-rate. But it they did not seem to have come out of it

was also true that the feeling of insecurity very well. Sir William admitted this and

which had grown in this country had ad- said that there was not money enough, but

versely affected the birth-rate and was likely it could be defended on the ground that

to continue to do so unless that feeling could money was better spent on children or

be removed.

parents than on old people.

She agreed that the breeding of some As Mr. Hope-Jones said, any social scheme

members of the social problem group should did relieve the burden on the generous by

be restricted, by sterilization or by segrega- redistributing it amongst the generous and

tion. The State medical service proposed in ungenerous, but the generous would always

the Report might be of help in this respect. find others to impose upon them!

As for Mr. Binney's observations on the He had been accused of devoting too much

expense of maintaining old people, the fact time to one section of the community, those

was they had to be maintained and could described as the middle-class, but these

not be allowed to starve. The question groups were extremely arbitary and he was

whether, as proposed in the Report, the not sure to whom reference was being made.

charge should be spread over- the whole He had devoted so much time to the pro-

community or whether, as happened now, fessional classes because his time was short

it should be borne by a few individuals, did and it was the section of the community

not affect the total amount; and if it was which he knew best, and one had heard so

spread over the community it was less likely many speeches about the fall in the birth-rate

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

among them. His principal reason, however, was that it was an important point in the Report which had been entirely neglected. The Report had on one class, which was more than 5 per cent of the community, a definitely dysgenic effect, and it was the greatest change proposed in the Report.

This feature of the scheme was, in the speaker's opinion, unworkable, and when he asked Sir William how it would work he had refused to answer.
The CHAIRMAN thanked the speakers for a very interesting debate and the proceedings terminated.

Ch. B}.C.
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL
SOCETY AND CLuC FOUNDED BY DR. MARIE STOPES IN 1921 The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the onlyfree clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first
with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births, spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy in sterile women, and general marital help.
THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT Library, Museum and Clinics open daily, io-6 (except Sats.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct. TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION
First Thursday each month Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,
Io6 Whitfield Street, W. I
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVI, No. 1

