EUGENIC LEGISLATION IN DENMARK

By H. 0. WILDENSKOV, M.D.
(Medical Superintendent of the Keller Institution for Mental Defectives, Brejning, Denmark)

I WISH to present a short report on the Danish laws dealing with mental defectives. These laws must be regarded as
being distinctly eugenic in their effect, in so far as segregation and sterilization are com-
plementary.
The scheme of State care of mental defec-

medical treatment, funeral, etc. In order to ensure that a patient does not have to wait too long before being admitted into an institution, the State is considered liable for any expenses incurred one month after a proper application form has been submitted. If the institution has no vacancy, it is nevertheless

tives in Denmark is an extremely progressive one, and is closely associated with the name of Professor C. Kellers, the founder of the present system. It is to his initiative that we
owe the Keller Institutions for Mental Defectives, with the branches on the isle of Liv0

obliged to find temporary accommodation for the mental defective. The Ministry is responsible for seeing that there are sufficient places in institutions, and this has necessitated building a large new branch which is to be finished in one year. Finally, the law

for men and on the island of Sprog6 for
women. From the beginning the " open
door " policy of these institutions has helped to build up public confidence in the State scheme, and this confidence provides a basis for further extension of State control.
Denmark now hasinstitutional accommodation for one in every 740 inhabitants. If German and English institutions were on the same scale, there would be room for 88,ooo
persons in the former and 53,000 in the latter.* Altogether, family relief included, about
two per thousand of the Danish population are covered by schemes of State assistance.
For the regulation of these great improve-
ments in the State schemes, new laws have been necessary, and those about which I am privileged to report were passed in the course of the last year by the Minister of Social Affairs.

compels all doctors and headmasters to report if they find, in the course of their work, a case of mental deficiency in need of
attention, and similar regulations apply to
State schools. If all these provisions are to have the
necessary effect, an extensive decentralisation will have to take place, in which every
Commune must take part. This is being done by a social committee established in each Commune, whose duty it is to carry out these provisions within its borders. The decision that the State should pay the whole expenses for mental defectives has had the effect of making individual Communes eager
to register their defectives, fearing that otherwise they would have to pay the cost
of their care. But since, under this Act, the State under-
takes complete financial responsibility, it thereby acquires an authoritative status in

RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATE
In the Public Assistance Act of May Ist, I933, the State undertakes complete responsibility for all expenses connected with the State care of mental defectives, including

relation to the care of defective individuals and to the prevention of their reproduction. The relevant provisions are enacted in a law of May i6th of this year. According to this
law:

such items as clothing and conveyance to the

Public care of mental defectives can

institution, and even for dental treatment, only be undertaken by recognized institu-

tions. An application for admission can be

* The number of mentally defective persons who were accommodated in institutions under the Mental Deficiency Acts on January ist, 1933, was 3I,646.

made either by the parents or their representatives or by the person responsible for

28I
C

282 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the mental defective, e.g. a Juvenile Care defective need not himself give his consent

Committee (Jugendpflegeausschuss) or the for sterilization, but a guardian must give

social committee. The institution itself can his opinion in the case mentioned above. No

also initiate the procedure.

age limit is laid down.

The application for assistance is directed
to the institution which, having verified the
statements, proceeds to provide the neces-
sary aid as early as possible. An appeal
against the decision of the institution can be made to the Social Ministry, whose decision is final. If necessary it is the duty of the police to assist in implementing the decision. Application for dismissal can be brought forward either by the mental defective or by the persons entitled to make the initial appli-
cation. Dismissal, however, can only take place with the consent of the institution
concerned. An appeal against refusal to dismiss can be made to the Social Ministry, whose decision is final.

The proposal to sterilize is sent to a committee consisting of a judge, a social worker, and a medical specialist. If this committee
agrees to the proposal, the institution becomes responsible for the sterilization. If it does not agree, the operation cannot take place, and a new proposal can only be
brought up after one year has elapsed. The expenses of the operation are borne by public funds.
Sterilization is defined as vasectomy or salpingectomy. Sterilization not in accordance with the above procedure is a legal offence.
From the above, it is evident that sterilization is not conditional on the existence of a hereditary defect. Therefore, the law relies

PROVISION FOR STERILIZATION

on social values to supply reasons for sterilization-for instance, if incapacity of the mental

It is the duty of an institution to propose defective to educate and feed his children

immediate sterilization of a mental defective makes sterilization desirable, or if steriliza-

if the interests of society require it-for tion is beneficial to the mental defective by

instance, on the ground that the person con- enabling him to have greater freedom.

cerned is obviously unable to give his children These laws exercise a eugenic effect, since

a proper training or to earn a living for them; they apply extensively the principle of social

or when sterilization would benefit the care, and thereby obviate or reduce the

patient by enabling him to avoid institutional dangers of transmitting hereditary defects.

life or live under freer conditions, providing In addition, they seek to decrease the burden

there were no fear of his having children who of State expenditure by providing for

would be a burden to society. The mental sterilization in suitable cases.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 4

