THE PHYSIOLOGICAL FACTORS
GOVERNING THE PROPORTIONS OF
THE SEXES IN MAN.
By A. S. PARKES, M.A., Ph.D.
(Beit Menmorial Research Fellow.)
I.---INTRODUCTORY.
It is scarcely necessary to justify a discussion of the factors governing the proportions of the sexes in man, their importance is very evident, buit the direct bearing of the subject upon eugenics may be emphasized.
The social and econiom--ie effects of the proportions in which the two sexes occur can hardly be exaggerated but at the same time the subject scarcely seems to have received the attention which it would
appear to deserve. The whole social system as far as it concerns the sexes is founded on the fact that the two sexes are produced in approximately equal numbers, and any large variation from equality would lhave cataclysmic results. If for examplc, one sex or the other began
to be produced in overwhelming numbers the principle of monogamous marriage would have to be miiodified if hopeless clhaos wer,e to be avoided.
As a matter of practical interest it can hardly be supposed that aniy such great preponderanice of one or the other will occur naturally,
but the lesser variations in the sex-ratio (whether springing from natural or other causes) have repercussions in social directions which are of considerable importance. The excess of females among adults which was evident before, but accenituated by the war, has been not the least important factor in the emancipation of wonmeni wllich has been a featulre of the last decade.
If the excess hadl been of males ratlher than of females it is to be doubted wlhether the emnergence of the woomen into public life would have been as rapid or as extensive, for, wlhile the nmotive force of the movement may have been partly intellectual, necessity (ue to this exess has without doubt been the chief incentive. The eugenic importance of the many issues influenced by the sex-ratio makes a study of the factors which govern the sex-ratio of practical importance.
It is clear that the sex-ratio must originally be conditioned by the nature of the determination of sex, and that the factors which determine sex must be bound up with those which determine the initial proportions of the sexes. Originally, of course, the sex-ratio and its variation was used as evidence regarding sex determination, but the complexity of the factors governing the sex-ratio makes this a dangerous proceeding, and the best approach to the study of the sex-ratio is
to consider sex determination- from a genetic and cytological standpoint and to discuss the sex-ratio in the light of this more accurate
basis.

'276 EUGENICS REVIEW.
II.-THE DETERMINATION OF SEX.
Until recently the most commonly held theory of sex determination was that the sex of an embryo was determined during gestation by the conditions under which development took place. The forerunners of the essential parts of the reproductive organs of both sexes
are present in all normal embryos, and this fact gives colour to the view that embryos are potentially hermaphrodite, or are neuter, as regards sex, and that environmental conditions, particualrly those of nutrition, can accentuate one set of organs at the expense of the other set, or can sway neutrality to the male or female model. The result of such mechanism would be that in certain conditions an excess of males would be produced, while under other conditions females would preponderate. This theory, was therefore, inextricably connected with the earlier interpretations of the variations in the sex-ratio, and with the early analyses of the causes of these variations. Chief among the factors bearing upon development is, of course, nutrition and it was -about this factor that the theory chiefly hung. As usually stated the theory was that good conditions accentuated the proportion of females and bad conditions the proportion of males. It is obvious, however, that there are many grave objections to thishypothesis. In the first place, considering the great variations in nutrition to which an embryo is subjected, one would have expected from this theory to find a very much greater amount of variation in the sex-ratio than actually occurs. No enormous variation is found; As Pike (41) says, "Through periods of war and of peace, of famine and of plenty, and under a great variety of racial and climatic conditions" the variation is usually very small. Also one would have expected that, where a number of embryos are developed together in a multiple gestation, these embryos, being developed under similar conditions, would be of the same sex. In polytocus animals this is clearly not true and the same applies to multiple births in what are normally monotocus animals. In addition, in animals which normally only have one at a birth, twins must each individually have less nutrition than a single embryo, and from this fact twins should tend to be mostly males. Again, there is no evidence that this is so. Fourthly, some light is thrown on the subject by a consideration of abnormal pregnancies. It occasionally occurs that extra-uterine pregnancies, such as ovarian, tubal, and abdominal gestations are produced. Such pregnancies must of necessity be extremely badly nourished, and in some cases it has been possible to get the sex of the products of such gestations. Rauber (45) reports that nothing abnormal is found in the sex-ratio, and the fact that no excess of males is observable suggests that the malnutrition has no effect upon sex. Fifthly, the fact that the sex of an embryo is histologically observable at a very early stage of development, before the embryo makes any great call upon the mother for nourishment, seems to show the time during which the environmental conditions of nutrition can have a chance of acting is very short.
In the circumstances, however, the most damaging evidence against this theory is the evidence which tends to show that sex is determined not later than at fertilisation. Chief among these evidences

PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN.

2q77

are the facts of polyembryony. In certain cases it is known that a fertilised ovum may split into two or more fragments and that each fragment may develop into a normal individual in the same foetal membranes. In these cases all individuals developing from a singleovum are found to be of the same sex, and the only explanation for this is that somehow or other sex is determined when the individual comes into being at fertilisation. In the human subject an appreciable proportion of twins are developed from a single ovum. These are known as identical twins and are of the same sex. In the case of the four-banded Armadillo identical quadruplets are the normal thing, and here again the four individuals are always of the same sex. In certain Lepidoptera polycmbryony runs to its extreme form, and in some cases several hundred of individuals, always of the same sex, are developed from a single fertilised ovum. We may conclude therefore with ieape (18) "That the latest moment at which the sex of the offspring can be determined is at the time of fertilisation and that no influence exerted later can alter the sex."
It is not proposed here to deal with any more of the very numerous theories which have at one time or other been put forward relating to sex determination, but to pass on to the theory which is now generally accepted, namely, the chromosome theory of sex determination. The nucleus of the living cell at certain stages divides up into rod shaped bodies of chromotin called chromosomes. The number of these is constant in any given species of animal. These bodies are normally in pairs, one of each pair having been derived from each parent. In many cases, however, one pair is not complete, one of the pair being either rudimentary or else absent altogether. These odd pairs appear to be connected with the determination of sex. It is found that in one sex only is an odd pair found and in the other sex all the pairs are complete. In different groups of animals a different sex possesses the odd pair; thus in birds and Lepidoptera the female possesses the odd pair, while in Mammals and Diptera, on the other hand, the male has the odd pair.
When the germ cells are formed the number of chromosomes is reduced, otherwise the number characteristic of the species would be doubled every generation This reduction is normally brought about by one of each pair passing into one germ cell and the other of eacb pair passing into another germ cell. As regards the main body of the chromosomes which are in the pairs, the two germ cells receive the same number and same type of chromosomes. but when it comes for the odd pair to separate and pass into different germ cells it is clear that the two gametes will be differently constituted as regards the chromosomes derived from this odd pair. This means that in Birds and Lepidoptera the ova are dimorphic, while in mammals and Diptera the spermatozoa are of two kinds.
At fertilisation, in the mammal, an ovum may meet a spermatozoon of either type, and the nuclear constitution of the resulting embryo will depend upon which type is met.
If N represents the autosomes of the germ cells and X and Y the

i278 EUGENICS REVIEW.

heterochromosomes, a diagram of sex determination in the mammal may be made as follows:

Male Parent,

Female Parent

Soma

2N XX

2N XY

Gametes

Y
(N X)
(N X)

\ (N X) (NY)

2(2N XX) Females.
2(2N XY) Males.
Fertilisation thus gives rise to approximately equal numbers of 2N XX (female individuals) and 2N XY (Male) individuals.
The theory which has been outlined above depends in its origin upon cytological evidence, but two other lines of research have given strong support for the view that sex is in some way associated with the chromosome constitution of the embryo. Firstly., it is found that the inheritance of certain characters follows a course which is linked with, or limited to, one sex. Heemophilia and Daltonism are two such characters. These diseases are inherited in the following manner. Except in the rarest cases, the male only is affected and the disease is passed on not to his sons or daughters, but to his grandsons through his daughters. The sons of an affected male do not show or carry the disease and the daughters themselves carry it but do not show it. How, since a male derives his Y-chromosome from his father, whereas he may derive his X-chromosome from his grandfather through his mother, it is to be concluded that these sex limited diseases are brought about
by a factor which is in some way carried by the X-chromosome and that an affected X-chromosome is recessive to a normal X-chromosome. In any case the great point about the manner in which these diseases are inherited is that it provides very definite evidence in favour of the view hat mammalian spermatozoa areof two types, whereas the ova are all similar.
Secondly, if some spermatozoa have one chromosome less than the others, or have one rudimentary chromosome, it might be expected that the spermatozoa heads would show different sizes according to the presence or absence of the accessory chromosome. In many cases, it has actually been demonstrated that a frequency polygon for spermatozoa headlengths is dimorphic, which shows that in these cases the spermatozoa heads tend to fall into two main size groups, although the variation in each group results in overlapping.
For our present purpose the most interesting thing about the chromosome theory is the implications regarding the sex-ratio which may be drawn from it. These are as follows:-

PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN.

'279

(a) Since the two types of spermatozoa are produced in equal numbers, it would be expected that the two sexes would be conceived in equal numbers.
(b) Since sex is determined at fertilisation, it is possible to speak of a sex-ratio this time onwards right through gestation to the
oldest ages to which individuals live.
(c) The only changes which can come about in the sex-ratio must
be brought about by mortality.*
III .-VARIATION IN THE SEX-RATIO DURING THE LIFF CYCIF.
Since a sex-ratio exists from the time of conception, it is of considerable interest and utility to examine the ratio and its variations during the whole of the life cycle. With the possible exception of mankind, however, sufficient material does not exist for this under-
taking and the best that can be achieved up to the present is to examine the ratio at prominent points in the life history. Three convenient points to take are conception, birth, and maturity. In practice the ratio at birth is the only one about which any really accurate data can be obtained. The ratio at maturity can in many cases be roughly obtained, but such factors as emigrationi and immigration all disturb
the accuracy of any compilation relating to the proportions amnong adults. At the other extreme it is as yet quite impossible to observe even roughly the sex-ratio at conception and the only way in which a
rough estimate can be arrived at is to observe as accurately as possible the ratio at birth and to endeavour to ascertain what change, if anv, has taken place during gestation. Since change can only come about as the result of mortality, an examination of the mortality will supply
a clue to the change. To take an example, if at birth 104 males are produced to 100 females, and it is known that for this 204 individuals
produced at birth thirty males and twenty females have died during pregnancy, it is clear that 134 males and 120 females were conceived, giving 111.5 males at conception to 100 females, instead of 104 as was found at birth. The two factors, therefore, which govern the change taking place between conception and birth are:
(a) The amount of pre-natal mortality. (b) The sex incidence of this pre-natal mortality.
Since the ratio at birth is the basis from which all calculations of the ratio at conception have to be made, the general nature of the ratio at birth must first be considered. In the human subject, in cases where a large volume of accurate data can be obtained, the keynote of the sex-ratio at birth is equality between the sexes. Very few authen-
* This statement overlooks the possibility of complete sex reversal. It is known of course, that even in mammals, the differentiation of sex does not always follow the chromosome constitution, and that in some cases the mechanism of differentiation becomes deranged and intersexes are produced. It is very doubtful
however, whether any complete reversals to the opposite sex can occulr in mammals, although the possible occurrence of this on a large scale has been suggested by
Huxley (21) as an explanation of certain variations in the sex-ratio. It does not seem probable that complete sex reversal can be sufficiently frequent to materially affect the sex-ratio and as a working hypothesis the statement made above may be taken as accurate.

280 EUGENICS REVIEW.

tic records are to be found for any considerable amount of material showing a ratio of more than 110 males per 100 females, or less than 90 males per 100 females.*
It is proposed now to deal with the estimation of the two factors which determine the change in the sex-ratio during gestation. To deal, firstly, with the amount of pre-natal mortality, the death of an embryos iefollowed in the human subject normally by abortion and the entire evacuation of the uterus. In the lower mammals where a number of embryos are developed at one time, the death of one embryo is usually followed by autolysis and reabsorption and it is not impossible that the death of an embryo in a young stage even in the human subject, may be followed by a similar process and not result in abortion. It is very probable, therefore, that even were it possible to compute the entire amount of abortion, the full figures for prenatal mortality would not be available. Since it is not possible even to compute the full amount of abortion, and since during the first three months of pregnancy, abortion is not a necessary result of mortality, it is quite obvious that any figure which it is possible to arrive at for the amount of pre-natal mortality must fall far short of the true amount. However, the amount which it is possible to compute serves as a rough guide and the following table summarizes the considerable number of estimates which have been made.
TABLE I. AMOUNT OF ABORTION IN MAN.

AUTHORITY.

Percentage.
of births. Of all pregnancies.

Routh (46)
Priestly (43)
Whitehead (53)
Williams (54)
Franz (14)
Malins (32) Taussig (51) Pearson (39) Auerbach (1) Rauber (45)
Parkes (34)

27-4 20-0 30*0 23*0 16-0 14.0
16-20 15-4
19-3
303 28-5
10-6 24-0
19.8

From this table it may be seen that even the amount of mortality which it is possible to compute is very considerable and is quite enough to influence materially the sex-ratio if the sex incidence is at all peculiar. As regards this point, the following table is a compilation of the various estimates which have been made of the sex-ratio of abor-
tions.

* A word may be said here with regard to the manner of calculating the sexratio. In most biological literature the method of calculating the number of males per hundred females is used, whereas most statistical authors calculate the percentage of males in the given data. A still further method is to give the male proportion as a decimal of unity. The first of the systems has the almost prohibitive disadvantage for original papers that no reliable probable error can be calculated for the ratio, and the last system is somewhat elaborate. Probably the most convenient method in new work is to calculate the percentage of males occurring and this has the advantage that a reliable probable error can be calculated for the percentage.

PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN.

281

TABLE II. SEX-RATIO OF ABORTIONS.

Authority.

Age of Abortion. Number.

Lenhossek (28)

3-6 mth.

156

Carvallo (7)

Up to 4th mth.

Korosy (27)

3781

Pinard and Magnan (40)

1229

Rust (47)

Ist 6 mths.

454

Rauber (45)

Sex-ratio. 160*0 250 152 4 101-1 101*8 159.0

These figures are the ratios for the aggregate pre-natal-mortality, but Auerbach (1) gives the following table (Table III.) showing that
the excess of males in pre-natal mortality increases very considerably going back towards conception.

TABLE III. SEX-RATIO OF ABORTIONS ACCORDING TO AGE FROM AUERBACII.

Time.

. Numbers.

Males.

Females.

Sex-ratio.

7th month 750 402 348 116

6th month.

943

506

437

116

5th month.

1041

645

396

163

4th month.

1333

938

405

229

4-7th mih.

4067

2481

1586

156-4

A similar fact has been shown as regards the gross amount of mor-
tality. Guinther (17) has calculated that the curves for both the amounts and sex-incidence of pre-natal mortality follow a logarithmic formula back into gestation. This means that the early wastage of inales must be very great and considerably more than it is possible to calculate. Using, however, the imperfect figures which are at our command, various authors have endeavoured to calculate the initial sex-ratio of conception. The following table sums up the figures which
have been arrived at for this ratio.

TABLE IV. ESTIMATES OF SEX-RATIO AT CONCEPTION.

Author.

Ratio.

Bernoulli (4)

108-2

Jendrassik (24)

108-7

Lenhossek (28)

111-0

Auerbach (1)

116*4

Dawson (10)

110-0

282 EUTGENICS REVIEW.

These estimations are probably of no great accuracy, but it is safe
to maintain that a very considerable excess of males is conceived as compared with that born. This conclusion is supported by the fact that in other mammals it has been found possible to examine the sex-
ratio in utero, with the result that males have been found in far greater excess than occurs at birth.
The amount and nature of pre-natal mortality find direct continuation in the nature of still births. The question of stillbirths is, however, complicated by the fact that two factors play a part in determining their frequency. In the first place, there are the still-births which are dead when parturition sets in, and, secondly, there is the class of still-births which is caused purely by labour troubles. It is possible, however, to differentiate to some extent between these two. If stillbirths were mainly due to labour troubles, they would be most fre-
quent when labour troubles are most common, namely among firstbirths. I have shown elsewhere, (34), however, that this is not so, and that still-births, like abortions, occur predominantly at later pregnancies. Hence still-births are presumably not mostly due to labour troubles, and must be largely dead before parturition occurs. If this is the case, one would expect still-births to be roughly due to the
same causes as abortions, and therefore to present similar features. In the first place, the percentage of still-births is very considerable, and, as in the case of abortions, the sex incidence is unequal and falls largely upon the males. The following table sums up the large number of
estimations of the sex-ratio of still-births,

TABLE V. SEX-RATIO OF STILL-BIRTHS.

Authority.

Locality and Date.

Sex-ratio.

Bodio (5)
Dawson (10) King (25) Nichols (33) Lewis (29) Heape (19) Hirsch (20) Davis (9) Dilsing (11) Quetelet (44)

1887-1895 Italy
Franice Germany Austria Hutngary Switzerlaiid Belgium Holland Sweden Norway Denmark
America
Europe Cuba Germany United States Prussia

131.1 142 2 128*3 132*1 130-0
135 *0 132*0 127*1
135 *0 124-6
132*0 138-0 131-06 131.6 120--170 144-45 127-9 137-1 129-09
133*5

These ratios all centre very closely round 135, which figure, though below the ratio for abortions, is considerably above the ratio for live births. The greater mortality of the males is maintained after birth, through each month for the first year of life the sex-ratio of mortality

PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN.

288

sinks. The following table gives the ratio of mortality by three monthly periods from the time of conception to the end of the first year of life. It will be noticed that the ratio shows a continuous decline.
TABLE VI. SEX-RATIO OF MORTALITY FROM CONCEPTION TO END OF FIRST YEAR
OF LIFE.

Time.

Sex-ratio of mortality.

Authority.

$° 0-4 months
r 4-7 months

1563

Auerbach (1)

7-9 months

138 Average figure

0-3 months

131-5

Registrar General

3-6 months
.; 6-9 months

121 Registrar General 120 Registrar General

9-12 months

113 Registrar General

When this table is graphed it will be seen that the curve for the decline in the sex-ratio of mortality is very nearly linear and it is tnteresting to project back this curve to the time of conception, and ihus to arrive at a presumable ratio for the sex ratio of mortality during the first three months of gestation, a time for which no actual figure can be observed.
FIG. I. SEX-RATIO OF MORTALITY FROM CONCEPTION TO END OF FIRST YEAR OF
LIFE.
It.

(60b

oaf O )-q O4 3-6 i-I

5O.ItA tion

Poil. - it's .,& I lif e

284 EUGENICS REVIEW.
On the basis of this graph it would seem that the sex-ratio of mortality for the first three months of gestation is probably 166-168.
Attention may now be turned to the nature of the mortality during individual life and for this purpose we may examine the figure given by the Registrar-General for 1913, the last pre-war year. During the first five years of life, the sex-ratio of the mortality was 113 *4. During the fifth to tenth years this ratio has sunk to 100 7, while in the next five years, it sinks still further to 93 * 3 and this period is the only one during the whole life cycle at which more females die than males. From fifteen years onwards the sex-ratio of mortality rises steadily to the age of fifty, when a slight decline sets in. The excess of females dying between ten and fifteen is a subject of some interest, and is very probably explained by the greater severity of the onset of puberty in the female than in the male. Schultz (48) puts the actual proximate cause down largely to tuberculosis "For which disease the common occurrence of anaemic and chlorotic conditions at the time of puberty furnishes an excellent soil." Stewart (50), also, found that between the ages of ten and twenty years the deaths from pulmonary tuberculosis showv a huge excess of females, wlhile at other times males preponderate. This seems to support Schultz's suggestion.
Turning to the actual effect of the mortality upon the sex-ratio, we find that for living individuals the ratio, which at birth was 104, is reduced at the end of the first year to 102, while at the end of the second year of life further reduction has taken place to 101 *5. In the third to fifth years this has decreased to 100 * 3 the average for the first five years of life being 101. From five to ten years of age, the ratio is further decreased to 99 9, while during the following five years a urther decrease to 94 - 2 takes place. For the fifteen to twenty years of age, however, a rise is seein, following upon the increased moitality of females during the previous five years. From this point the proportion of males shows a conitinuous decline, with one small exception, right
on to old age; the exceptioni is a slight rise between 40 anid 50 years of
age following the slightly increased mortality of females at 40 to 45 years of age. During old age the excess of females is really striking, and at the age of 85 and over the sex-ratio of about 65,000 individuals is only 55 * 2.
It thus appears that during the entire life cycle, with one or two minor exceptions, the males die more readily than the females, and we are entitled to ask why this should be so. Two main ideas have been put forward relating to this problem. In the first place it is suggested (for instaince by Huxley) that certain sex-linked semi-lethal factors which reduce vitality may exist in mammals and even in the human subject in the same way as they have been demonstrated for certain invertebrates. The other group of ideas relates to the alleged great size and presumably greater requirements of the male foetus. It is not quite certain, however, as far as the human subject is concerned, whether the male foetus actually is larger than the female. Males are certainly bigger at birth than females, but it has been suggested that this is due to the probable greater age of the male foetus at birth. In any case this hypothesis does not explain why even after birth the males are

PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN.

285

nearly always dying faster than the females. Lillie (30) suggests that the greater mortality among the male foetuses is due to a disturbance of the equilibrium which protects the males from the sex hormones of the mother. This idea, however, is open to the same objections as the
previous ones, namely, that it does not explain why the same thing
still occurs after birth. All that can be said at present is that-for some reason or other the male seems to possess an inherently inferior vitality to the female, a conclusion summed up by Carvallo as "les gareons sont les plus fragiles."
Although the actual figures for the sex-ratios of entire populations considered in the aggregate have very little biological meaning, a table quoted from Balz* (2) is given below for the sake of completeness showing this figure for the chief nations of the world.

TABLE VII. SEX-RATIO OF ENTIRE POPULATIONS.

Country.

Males per 100 females.

Country.

Males per 100 females.

Great Britain Norway
Denmark
Sweden
Spain Austria Germany European Russia Switzerland Hungary France. Holland
Ireland

93*5 Belgium 94*0 Italy 94*5 Poland 95 8 Greenland
95*3 Japan 96 6 India
96*9 Bulgaria 97 *2 Serbia 97*2 Siberia 97*7 Caucasus 97*9 Korea 98 2 Asiatic Russia
98*3 China

98*4 99.0
100-5
101 5
102*0 1041* 104* 5
106*0 106*0
111*0 113*0 117 5 125*0

IV. THE VARIATION IN THE SEX-RATIO AT BIRTH.

It has been mentioned above that the only ratio for which a

considerable amount of reliable data can be obtained is the ratio at

birth, and it is of interest therefore, to endeavour to analyse the causes

of the place,

variations which are found from and from one set of conditions to

time to another,

tl5nmteh,e

from place proportions

to of

the sexes at birth. This can only be done by considering the two

factors which govem the proportions of the sexes at birth and by en-

deavouring to locate which one, if not both, has contributed the

particular variation under discussion.

* The original table given by Balz shows females per 100 males, but the ratios have been recalculated here as males per 100 females to bring them into line with the rest of the paper.
From what has been said above, it is clear that two factors govern the sex-ratio at any given time. These are
(a) The initial sex-ratio at conception. (b) The amount of mortality and the sex incidence of mortality
between conception and the given time.
Hence the factors which govern the sex-ratio at birth are the

286 EUGENICS REVIEW.

sex-ratio at conception and the amount and the sex-ratio of the prenatal mortality.
This means that variation in the sex-ratio at birth may be caused
by a variation in either or both of these two factors. Thus, a heavy foetal mortality produces, other things being equal, a low proportion of male~at birth, while a low mortality during gestation decreases the excess male wastage, and raises the proportion of males at birth. On the other hand, where the amount of intra-uterine death is more or less constant, the sex-ratio at birth will be determined by that at conception. If both of these two factors vary together, however, the variation may be cumulative or compensating. Thus a high ratio at conception coupled with a low mortality during gestation will raise considerably the ratio at birth, whereas coupled with a high mortality it will produce a more or less normal ratio at birth. Conversely a low ratio at conception in conjunction with low foetal mortality will produce an ordinary ratio at conception, whereas in conjunction with a high mortality will produce an abnormally low ratio at birth.
The sex-ratio at birth varies fairly definitely and it is attempted below to discuss the authenticity of some of these variations and their probable causes.
Racial Variation. It is not proposed here to discuss the variation among European
and other white races. This has been considered by a considerable number of authors already, and little good can be obtained from furtherdiscussion. I propose, however, to touch upon the strangely high sexratio of Jews in all parts of the world. The following table summarises the records which are in existence of the proportion of the sexes
among the Jews.

TABLE VIII. SEX-RATIO OF THE JEWS.

Place.
Prussia Posen Prussia Livonia
Prussia Breslau Livonia
Austria

Sex-ratio.
107-20 108 35
107l*64 139*84
113 114 120 105 138

Authority.
Von lircks (13)
Von Bergmann (8) Dusing (11) Carlberg and
Lenhossek Darwin (8) Darwin (8) Darwin (8) Pearl (38) Jacobs (22)

Date. 1820-1867 1819-1878 1875-1887 1873
1861-1870

It will be seen that all these ratios are above the ratios for the general population of the given area and this fact has been a subject of much discussion. Four explanations have been put forward. (a) That it is fictitious and depends upon faulty registration. (b) That it is connected with over maturity of the ovum consequent on the Mosaic law forbidding intercourse for six days after menstruation. (c) That it is due to inbreeding. (d) That it is due to a decreased amount of foetal elimination. (a) need not be considered. It has been

PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN.

287

conclusively shown that faulty registration cannot account for the facts. (b) has been disproved bv Pearl and Salaman (38) who found that "There is no evidence that in the human race the time of fertilisation of the egg relative to the catamenial period has any influence on the sex-ratio exhibited by the offspring." (c) is in itself no real explanation at all, and in any case there is no true evidence that such amounts of inbreeding as obtain in the human subject, even among Jews, have gny influence at all on the sex-ratio. (d) apparently supplies the real explanation. The great care taken by Jewish women during pregnancy must have the effect of lowering the pre-natal mortality. As a result, the pre-natal excess male wastage will be decreased and the proportion of males at birth correspondingly raised. v
A further point upon which I wish to touch is the difference which appears to exist between the sex-ratio of coloured and white races as groups. The real analytical approach to this subject is to consider cases where coloured and white races live side by side underthe same topographical and climatic conditions. The following table comprises a number of records of instances of this kind.
TABLE I. SEX-RATIO OF WHITE AND COLOURED RACES.

Authority.

Locality.

Ratio for Whites Ratio for coloured races.

Heape (19) Cuba
Little (81) U.S.A. (1st births)
Nichols (33). Columbia Jastrzebski 23 Cape Colony
,,9 U.S.A.
New York New Orleans .,V Columbia

108*42 115*51 106*2 105*4
105.7
104*5 102*0 105*0

101*2 98*61 103*0 102*6 100 - O (just under) 101-6 98*2 100.0

It will be seen that in every case the ratio for the black races is lower than that for the whites, and the generality of this phenomenom suggests that it has some real basis. It has been contended by Thomas that the wide range of variation in each group prohibits a general statement that the sex-ratio of coloured races tends to be lower than that of white races, and while his objection to such a statement is not unreasonable, yet on the basis of the above table which contains all the records I have been able to gather of the two races living side by side, it is clearly correct to say that under similar conditions colouredraces seem to have a lower sex-ratio than adjacent whites. The explanation
of this, I tentatively suggested in "Man" (1923, 97) to be a greater pre-natal mortality among the blacks. This explanation is also taken exception to by Thomas, but in the absence of an altemative one, it may be considered as a working hypothesis. It is supported by the

288 EUGENICS REVIEW.
'fact that Nichols (83) reports that in Columbia the abortion and stillbirth rate is double in the case of the negroes, as compared with the whites.
Annual Variation.
Under the stable conditions which now exist in most civilised countries, it would hardly be expected that the sex ratio would show any very great annual variation, and in practice it is found that the proportions of the sexes is remarkably stable from year to year. In England and Wales the fluctuations in the ratio at birth between 1838 and 1913 was between 105 * 4 in 1843 and 108( 2 in 1898, with the average of 104'0 coming near the lower figure. Since 1864 the variation, excluding the war period, has been between 103'2 and 10483 only. This variation is remarkably small. Figures given by Dusing (11) for Prussia between 1749 and 1849 show a variation between 102-9 and 106 * 6 for this period. This range is wider than that for England, but it is still remarkably small considering the probable errors of compilation in those days. Gini (15) gives very full tables for the ratios of most countries of the world year by year, so far as can be obtained, and these tables again emphasise the fact that annual variation in the sex-ratio is of no great dimensions. In the case of the records for England and Wales, the really interesting fact is that the variation is not round equality between the sexes, but is about a point above equality, the mean of the extremes being 103 -75. This shows that there are two factors at work. One which constantly causes these males to preponderate, and another which causes the excess to vary in amount from year to year.
In view of the small amount of annual variation, little good can be
obtained from discussing its parobable cause.
Age qf Parents. That the age of the parents has some influence on the sex of the
offspring is one of the oldest of all theories of the sex-ratio. The age of the mother, the age of the father, and the relative age of the parents have all been credited with an effect on the sex-ratio. A large volume of literature has grown up around the third point, but since it is all contradictory it may be supposed that the relative age of the parents has no definite result upon the sex-ratio of the offspring. In the same way, the investigations dealing with the age of the father have given very eontradictory results, and here again any definite influence may be
doubted. It seems, however, that the age of the mother has some effect upon the sex-ratio at birth, and it is generally agreed that the
proportion of males decreases as the age of the mother advances. At
first sight, this appears to be in conflict With the chromosome theory of sex determination, but as I have shown elsewhere (84) this result is probably brought about by the increased pre-natal mortality which occurs with older mothers. The increased mortality results in an increased wastage of males and the maternal influence is exerted purely after conception and leaves intact the chromosome theory. Parity.*
I have pointed out elsewhere (84) that there is a casual relationship

PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN.

289

between the age of the mother and the parity. Thus first births largely take place in younger mothers and the higher parities are usually
associated with older mothiers. One would expect therefore that the
proportion of males would sink in consecutive births, and this is actually found to occur. The explanation appears to be the same as in the case of the age of the mother, and to rest upon the varying amounts of pre-natal mortality.
Hybridisation. The effects of hybridisation upon the sex-ratio is a subject of con
siderable anthropological interest. Three types of hvbridisation are possible; hybridisation between white races, hybridisation between coloured races, and white and coloured crosses. As a result of a most careful investigation of the effect of hybridisation, Little (31) came to the conclusion that hybrid white matings give a significant excess of males over pure white mating, and that hybrid coloured matings give a significant excess of females over pure coloured matings. This is confirmed by Lewis (29) who found that unions of Spanish, Italian, and French male emigrants with native born Argentine females produce a higher masculinity than pure Argentine alliances or pure alliances of
any of these nationalities in Buenos Avres. Also, unions of Argentine males with females of foreign nationalities give a higher sex-ratio than pure Argentine matings. Pearl (37) came to the same conclusion. In the case of black and white hybrids it is stated by Powers (42) that there is a large excess of girls among half breeds in California, and Kohl (26)
notes that in the northern parts of the United States females preponderate in the progeny of French men with Indian women. In
another human bybrid, the Mulatto, Starkweather (49) found 12 to 15 % excess of females, while in the whole population males were in excess. Gortz (16) reports an excess of females among the offspring of Dutch men and Malay women in Java, a fact which has been confirmed by Waitj (52). Jastrzebski states that in New York City he found for the years 1910-15 the following ratios of males to 100 females; white 104 0, negroes 99*9 and mulattoes 97.9. Bugnion (6) notes that "lorsque
les blancs s'etablissent dans une colonie et forment avec les negresses une race mulatre on observe dans les premiers temps une enorme surproduction des filles." It seems therefore possible to formulate three deductions as to the effect of hybridisation upon the sex-ratio. (a) That crosses between white races produce an excess of males over pure
white mating, (b) that hybridisation between coloured races produces an excess of females above pure coloured matings, (c) that hybrids of white and coloured races show an excess of females above the pure matings of
either race.

V. THE DETERMINATION OF THE SEX-RATIO AT CONCEPTION. We have seen that the sex-ratio at birth is usually slightly above equality, and also that the ratio at conception is still more above equality, being in the case of man probably about 120 males to 100 females. This fact requires bringing into harmony with the theoretical
* The word Parity is a convenient expression for the chronological number of the pregnancy.

290 EUGENICS REVIEW.
expectation that equal numbers of the sexes would be conceived. It has been mentioned that the male producing and female producingspermatozoa are formed in equal numbers, and should thus produce males and females in equalnumbers if the equilibrium were not disturbed. It is to be supposed, therefore, that by some means or other the balance between the two types of spermatozoa is disturbed between the time of formation and the time when fertilisation occurs. There are two ways in which the balance might be disturbed. In the first place the spermatozoa are known to live for considerable periods and it may reasonably be supposed that the fittest survive in the greatest majority. In this struggle for existence one type or the other may have a slight advantage and, therefore, survive in the greatest number. Secondly, there may be a difference in mobility between the two types and a basis for this is provided by the slight difference in size between the two types which has been noticed above. In addition, the spermatozoa have a very considerable way to travel by their own powers of locomotion before fertilisation can be accomplished, and this longer journey provides an admirable basis for the operations of selective factors. What really happens is an unconscious race to the ovum and the smaller type may have an advantage owing to their smaller bulk.
It would seem that any differential mobility and vitality which exists between the two types of spermatozoa must act in favour of the small headed male producing ones, and this probability explains morereasonably than any other hypothesis the fact that more males are conceived than females. It is to be admitted that this explanation is very largely inductive, but the experimental aspect offers fascinating possibilities .
VI. DISCUSSION.
Before it is possible to make any practical applications of our knowledge of the factors which govern the proportions of the sexes it is necessary to have some idea of what would constitute an optimum sexratio. The ratio during infancy is clearly only of practical importance in so far as it will affect the adult ratio of future years; the ratio of essential practical importance is that of marriageable adults. At first sight it might appear desirable that adults of marrying age, should be equal in numbers, but this is probably scarcely accurate. Under ideal conditions where the sex-ratio permitted everybody not disinclined to get married it would probably be found that owing to the various factors (absorption in profession, etc.,) more males than females would remain single, and thus an optimum ratio would allow for a slight excess of males.
In the light of this premise the most important conclusions which can be drawn from the facts discussed above are:-
(a) That at birth a slight but definite excess of males occurs.
(b) That during infancy and adolescence the excess male mor-
tality over females reduces the male percentage to a point
where a definite female excess exists by the time maturity is reached.

P'ROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN.

291

(c) That no means of controlling the proportions of the sexes produced can yet be formulated.
It is thus clear that if the adult ratio could be the same as the ratio at birth something approaching the ideal condition would exist, and since it is the large amount of infantile mortality which causes the difference in these two ratios, it is apparent that the more infantile mortality can be reduced the nearer to the ideal will the ratio at maturity become.
Thus though no actual means can be seen of regulating at will the proportions in which the sexes are produced, something approaching an optimum maturity ratio could be obtained by cutting down to a minimum the early mortality which so reduces the male proportion among adults.

1. AUERBACtI
2. BALZ ..
8. BERGMANN
4. BERNOULI 5. BODIO .. 6. BUGNION
7. CARVALLO
8. DARWIN
9. DAVIS ..
10. DAWSON
11. DUSING..
12. DUSING..
18. FIRCKS 14. FRANZ . . 15. GINI .. 16. GORTZ . . 17. GUNTHER
18. HEAPE...

BIBLIOGRAPHY.
1912 "Das Wahre Geschlechtsverhaltnis des Menschen." Archiv. Rassen-u-Gessellschaftsbiol. Vol. ix.
1911 "Die Verhaltniszahl der Geburten in verschiedenen Landern." Korrespondenxbl. deutsch Anthro. Ges. Vol. xlii. Zur Geschichte der Entwickelung deutscher, polnischer und judischer Bevolkerung derProvinz Posen. Tubingen.
1841 Handbuch der Populationstatistik. 1895 "Movimento della Popolazione," Cofronti
Internazionali. 1910 "Les cellules sexuelles et la d6termination
du sexe." Bull. Soc. Vaud. Sci. Nat. Vol. xlvi. 1912 "La Masculinite dans les naissances humaines."' Compte rendu Ass. franc pour l'avancement des Sciences, Vol. xli. 1871 Descent of Man. London. 1918 "Birth statistics -for the Birth Registration Area of the United States, 1916." Bureau of Census. Washington. 1921 The Causation of Sex. London, 3rd Ed. 1884 "Die Regulierung der Geschlechtsverhaltnisse bei der Vermehrung, etc. JenaischeZeitsch. Vol. xvii. 1890 Das Geschlechtsverhdltnis der Geburten in
Preussen. In "Staatwissenschaftliche Studien" series. Vol. iii. Jena. 1898 Bevolkerungslehre und Bevolkerungs politik. Leipzig. 1898 "Zur Lehre des Aborts." Beitrage zur Geburtsh. Vol. xxxvii. 1908 Il Sesso dal Punto di Vista statistico. Milano. 1853 Reise um die Welt in den Jahren 1844-47. Stuttfart. 3 vols. 1923 "Letaldisposition und Sexualdisposition."
Naturwissenschaftliche Korrespondenz. Jahrg
I. 1908 "Note of the proportions of the Sexes in
Dogs." Proc. Cambs. Phil. Soc. Vol . xiv.

292 EUGENICS REVIEW.

19. Heape ..
20. HIRSCH.. 21. HUXLEY
22. JACOBS 28. JASTRZEBSKI 24. JENDRASSIK
25. KING .. 26. KOHL . .

1909 'The Proportions of the Sexes produced by White and Coloured peoples in Cuba." Phil. Trans. B200.
"Ueber das Verhaltnis der Geschlechter." Centr. f. Gyn. Vol. xxxvii.
1922 "A Statistical Method of Testing the Biological causes underlying the Excess of Male Births due to the War." Eug. Rev. Vol.
xiii.
1891 Studies in Jewish Statistics. London. 1919 "The Sex-Ratio at Birth.' Eug. Rev.
Vol. xi.
1911 ' Uber die Frage des Knabengeburtenuberschuss und uber andere Hereditatspro bleme." Deutsche mediz. Wochenschr. Vol. xxxvii.
1921 "Birth mortality in the rat and in man." Anat. Rec. Vol. xx.
1859 "Bemerkungen uber die Bekehrung canadischer Indianer zum Christenthum und einige bekehrungeschichten. In Das Auland.

xxxii.

27. KOROSY

1898 Die Sterblichkeit der Hauptstadt. Budapest.

Berlin.

28. LENHOSSEK

1903 Das Problenm der geschlectsbestimmenden

Ursachen. Jena. Fischer.

29. LEWIS, C. J. and J. N. 1906 Natality and Fecundity. London.

30. LILLIE

1916 "The Theory of the Free-Martin." Sci. N.S.

Vol. xliii.

31. LITTLE

1920 "Note on the Human Sex-Ratio." Proc.

Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S. Vol. vi.

32. MALINS..

1903 "Antenatal waste of life in nature and

civilisation." J. of Obst. and Gyn. of

British Empire. Vol. iii.

33. NICHOLS

1907 "The numerical proportion of the Sexes at

Birth." Mem. Amer. Anthro. Assoc. Vol. i.

34. PARKES

1924 "Studies on the Sex-Ratio and Related

Phenomena." (2) The Influence of the age of

the mother on the Sex-ratio in man. Jour.

Gen. V7ol. xiv.

35. PARKES. .

1924 "Some Aspects of Reproduction Considered

in Relation to Eugenics." Eug. Rev. Vol.

xv.

36. PARKES..

1921 "Sex Heredity." Sci. Pro. Vol. xv.

37. PEARL, M. & R. .. 1908 "On the Relation of Race Crossing to the

Sex-Ratio." Biol. Bull. Vol. xv.

38. PEARL & SALAA.mAN . 1913 "The RelativeTime of the Fertilisation of the

Ovum and the Sex-ratio amongst Jews."

Amer. Anthropologist. Vol. xv.

39. PEARSON

1908 The Chances of Death and other Studies in

Evolution. London.

40. PINARD ET MAGNAN

fragilitt6"Sur la

du sexe mnle." Comptes

rendus hebdomadaires des s&ances de 1' acadFmie

des Sciences. Vol. clvi.

41. PIKE . .

1907 "A critical and statistical study of the

determination of sex, particularly in Human

offspring." Am. Nat. xli.

42. POWERS

1877 Tribes of California. Washington.

43. PREISTLEY

Quoted by Routh (46).

44. QUETELET

Quoted by Bugnion (6).

45. RAUBER

1900 Der Ueberschuss an Knabengeburten und seine

biologische Bedeutung. Leipzig.

PROPORTIONS OF THE SEXES IN MAN.

29g

46. ROUTI 47. RUST ..

.. ..

48. SCHULTZ

..

49. STARKWEATHER 50. STEWART ..

51. TAUSSIG

..

52. WAITZ ..

..

53. WHITEHEAD ..

;54. WILLIAMS ..

.. 1914 "Ante-natal hygiene." Brit. Med. Jour. .. 1902 Das Geschlecht der Fehl-und Totgeburten.
Strassburg. .. 1918 "Studies in the Sex-ratio in Man." Biol.
Bull. Vol. xxxiv. .. 1883 The Law of Sex. London. .. 1910-11 "The Sex and Age Incidence of Mortality
from Pulmonary Tuberculosis in Scotland and in its groups of registration Districts since 1861."' Proc. R.S. Edin. Vol. xxxi. .. 1910 Prevention and Treatment of Abortion. St. Louis. .. 1859 Anthropologie der Naturvolker. Leipzig. .. Quoted by Routh (46). .. 1912 Obstetrics. Newv York.

