THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

T HE ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING more about this, and those Fellows and

was held at 69 Eccleston Square,
S.W.i, on Tuesday, June i6th, I942, at 5 o'clock, with the President, Lord
Horder, in the Chair.

Members who were present were asked to send in to him the names and addresses of
anyone whom they considered would be suitable speakers. It was agreed that a

special meeting of the Emergency Com-

mittee should be held in July, on a date to

MINUTES. The Minutes of the Annual be arranged, in order that the matter could

General Meeting held on Tuesday, June I7th, be discussed.

I94I, which were contained in the Annual HONORARY OFFICERS AND COUNCIL FOR

Report for I94I-2 (copies of which were THE YEAR I942-3. Following the procedure

distributed at the Meeting) were taken as of the two previous years, it was proposed

read and signed as correct.

by Miss Robertson, seconded by Mrs.

ANNUAL REPORT. The Chairman pre- Jenkins, and carried unanimously, that the

sented the Annual Report, the formal Honorary Officers and Council should re-

adoption of which was seconded by Mr. main as appointed on May i6th, I939, with

Titmuss and carried unanimously.

the exception of the following: Lord

STATEMENT oF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE Salvesen (whose death had been recorded),

SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented Sir Charles Arden-Close (who resigned last

the Statement of Accounts and Balance year), and Professor Fisher, Dr. Fraser

Sheet for the year ended December 3Ist, Roberts, and Dr. Thornton (whose resigna-

I94I. These were unanimously adopted. tions had already been reported and ac-

The Honorary Treasurer said that he would cepted); and that the Emergency Commit-

like to point out that for the past year the tee for the ensuing year should consist of the

Society had been able to live within its following: The Lord Horder, Mr. Cecil

income, partly because its activities had Binney, Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Mr. C. F.

been greatly reduced on account of the war. Chance, Miss E. Corry, Hon. Mrs. Grant

Arising out of this statement, Mrs. Hodson Duff, Mr. W. T. J. Gun, Mrs. E. M. Hubback,

asked if the question of lectures to members Dr. A. J. Lewis, Mr. R. Martin, and Mr.

of H.M. Forces from the Society had been R. M. Titmuss.

considered. Dr. Lewis said that a panel of ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR

lecturers, on various subjects, to H.M. Forces I942-3. Messrs. West & Drake were unani-

was in existence, and undertook to find out mously re-elected.

ANNUAL REPORT, 1942-3

In this Report, the accounts relate to the period December 3ISt, I94I, to December 31st, I942. The rest of the Report covers the period from March 3Ist, I942, to March
3Ist, I943.
The Report has been made as brief as possible owing to existing conditions.
General.-During the past year, the affairs of the Society have been carried on by an Emergency Committee formed from the

Council. The names of the members of this committee are starred in the list of the Honorary Officers and Council which is given
on the inside of the front page of the cover. Six meetings of this committee have been
held in the period under review. It has been the general policy of the
Emergency Committee to reduce activities
and expenditure during the war. In the last six months, however, there has been a revival

22

