0007tgLiNC :ND FAMILY SIZE* V

(P,riipa1+tunvJestiAg.atoFr tRo tAheSBEurRdeinRMOenBtEalRRTesSea,rchMT.rAu.s,t,M.SBt.o,keDP.Sacr.k,

F.R.S.R.
Colony, Bristol)

IF the population is. classified in various ways, for exampe a,ccording to occupation, or to intelligence, it is found that
the rate' of reproduction is. very d- erent in different groups-. This hole question of differential fertility occupies, probably, more

iosrauemsusbpptujoelecsitcttsstsi,bbaeolsifi.etnaaigwnticnhaloeelcmsseiimbsnseegsnlwaeeptrloyallsersctkyitonbulruoaeeptw,tontoenofmtpodspetoryaemoltseuihe,nenogtwftwiaitttsthhhke-he,
the whole of that thesis.

space in the EUGENICS REVIEW than any
other topic; anld it is not very long since
Dr. Cattell gave a lecture to the Society

Ascertainment of a
School Children

Representative

Sample

of

describing an investigation he had carred

out on fertility and intelligence. However,

I don't think that I need apologize for

directing your attention once again to this

familiar subject, for, if we, members of the

Eugenics Society,. are apprehensive about the

future, here is the reason; if we are anxious

to learn the results of scientific investiga-

tions, to initiate researches, and to make

that knowledge available to as wide an audience as possible, this is the main con-

sideration .we have in 'iind. In a word, the existence of differential fertility and the way it is operating at present, is, above all else,

the reason for the existence of our Society.
The need for vigilance is particularly great at the present time, for the perils of a
dedlinm population to this country and the
Donions are becoming widely realized. There will be an agitation for remedies, and it is to be feared that easy, politically
popular methods will be advocated. For example, family allowances on a flat-rate basis, or something like a flat-rate basis, will
probably be suggested, although the result of such measures, when they are not ineffective, and therefore wasted, will undoubtedly
be to hasten the decline in the population of

those qualities which are universally valued,

a decline that is taking place around us at

the present time, and at no inconsiderable

rate.

I do not propose to give a general account

in this p.aper,. but to present the results of a

particular investigation. As it is a familiar

4*A paper' read
October, z8th, I938.

before'

tShe

Euge%ics

Society

oni

iodRaooapatftffturetscesFtteCstloeotehxtliinahmreiunemcrepsdigveccttinesiheepaaedttsnotrvynohcTpoeyneerudoriiulfstanfsafHcelofvteatBoceel,atianurslthoystret,uneeiahenir.adt.nggeSreaaeorsftontmaAIirerchtefogrootaiartnaommhtosensmpeneroiilmtmztnge,oaayaaBottsskniuoehitcnedfrgoahgsdcoMnsoorreooetotsttlbodnxshh.hepsimceaee-BsdhetMrsrneuineseisalrcotn-emlcdtdwritteoriieeoahnneooensnle-tnnsf wwbAmgBieeuraernrogttteuuhhdapselwoftceoiniltf3tledIJhseabsiutdtbensl,otyttuwtIoo2teh,97ee2ta3t5nlh,r,bl,4ySoti0Iuehn09tnpce3odltc4cuaeh,shriamiiislavblcdeendeers.rdreretnownaT.ifihhswntoih;,tssoheIgesa9aend2vcadIhiet,toeguymsaisenvoosdaeff clpwtothttciwatoptihnofeafoihrorhhnasir-ktirereTotydsteoevebshcrcpsohlhdpaesiehheatienkoee:etnsiesrhefietrelpcdhieexsncadwatocikndcnouwrdtrshnhsaineirmiechicdepntstdafrcohnelotiogeorgoonadsivfrncot~oeunbriaoeigmhlohwhnawetrner'isfaaadynesasie.fd,swfaios.srtdmrlrioemnaehalbnofantlirgeafaFgccooumsoteaipstintootutctrnprphsnindteboaieslioeecascdgtlieuwnimaeiiit.oelmpnesathrsdny-tpldptathnwce,oooleepeAydeeplfhep.mrrotntoddu,eospaostoohted.dt,rssfpttIhreedh,baieretode,eedAutabSciur.edoloiettonibanmfehsfdutmmldtad.oomeyobcPeecenerasauortswomsbaadlctubsmaieuColwetrhelepgtrhsushxsseiwntlehgivsnecuceac,cerlcei,hhdwtmowtoldohmyohaeaheupleiurtnoioieamrrnnnlreophslolnr-eegdydenelef-sysg

237

238

THE UGikN1cS

%

those at the orthopedic hospital, and Apart- ofrvichisdsren'} l6ss,^ t, ger srn

physical and mental defectives. Natutally voups of ehildrei'-have been^unaVoidablyg

all sorts of difficulties arose in individual omitted. Thefirstconsists of a feW Childre

cases in deciding whether a dhild was a Bath omitted cause mistakes in dte: of birth;

child or not, for example in the case of would have led us to suppose that they did

children at residential institutions. Almost not fall into the group; actually an indirect

up to the present time our index has shown test showed that there were extremely few

slight changes in totals and clasification as of these, and it is,-in y.cs,a ore or 1es

further information has been obtained. Had random loss.. T-e other group omitted is

anyone examined our index a few months children attning schools remote fronx

ago and again to-day, they would have had Bath. It is a smill group, and was furthet

to conclude that one child had not only come reduced, because, at the relevant ages, many

to life after having died, but that it had also of these ildren were at the numerous pre%

mysternously vanished. A child-in the regis- paratory schools at Bith, subsey pro.

ter at one school was reported to us.-as ceeding to public.schools elsewhere. Also,

having died. It is true that at another school we approached a -number of schools at

a child of the same name was tested, but the Bristol, and in the Bath district`generally

dates of birth were different, and the names aiid so secured some more of this fraction.

were common ones. Years later it was dis- Of the 3,387 hildren ascertained and

covered that the date of birth of the supposed available, al.except twenty-five receiveda

dead child was really the same as the living mental test. The number of absentees was

tested one. Investigation showed that there l-arger than it wouldCotherwise have beet

was only one child. The mother, to escape because the childen composng the youngest

temporary embarrassment, had informed the of the four age-groups were to young for the

first school that the child was dead and had verbal group test, which was- accordingl

then sent it to another school. But I will not postponed for a year.--During the interva

take up any more of your time with the a number of children left Bath and it proved

details of this ascertament.

impossible to trace and test all of them. The

The first results I want to show you were numbers tested and the number of- absentee

published early this year, in conjunction were as follows:

with my colleagues Dr. Norman and Miss

Tested Abse%tees Tot

Griffiths, in the Annals of Eugenics (Studies on a Child Population: III. Intelligence

First three agegroups ... 2,590 9
Fourth ageogroup ...... ... 672I6

2,59 71

andFamilySize. Vol. 8. Pp. I78-2I5. 1938). Total ... V.. ... 3,362 25 3,381

The presentation was, however, detailedand

statistical, and it was thought that a less technical summary of the conclusions would
be useful. The second part of this lecture
gives additional results that have onlly just
been worked out.

A considerable part of 'the lo$s, therefor~
may be regarded as radom.; The reasons for the failure~to test tTh
twenty-five absentees were as follows:

Completeness of the Ascertainment and Medaal
Testing
The completenes of the ascertainment is
indicated by the following figures :

Children at schools co-operating, etc. ... 3,387
Children at school permitting ascerabinment

Estimate for two schools not co-operating

8'

- ~~~~~3g399

Long absences from school till leavig-ge was

attainied ... ... *... .*. ... 5

E)etls ... ... ..

..

... 2

Revisit to private school refused *.. ...I

Went to noncooperatinlg school -. ...I

We havre been sometimes asked whethe
the city of Bath might- not have given sentative, of the country generally. Actuall

I.:K.'mYSIZE2Q

has. g tyy g8drpeette
pleo~tn~IWiiir~hpoultin.The
verage t1Q 19, whihis exactly
hatwould. be pe and the rnge of
ental abilits(a~taidard deviation of just
er 15) is aga ai lywhat it sh6uld be.

etermna*ion of Fam~ Size

There wasa idbe, d consider-
lde,tihnetearsacl btaiLtt.heoffinaetetlliilgeyncepatretsitcitn-g
rs. This ineaeit that a nr of children ad left thiei d in maxi cases, could ot be tra, . '0f i 3,36z cildren tested
mily parti rcsould not be obtained in
6 cases. The reasons for this were:

Left Bathnd not traced

Deaths. *O- 'i Went to a

.... ...

...0

school ..

5!
0.. 5
.2

. ~~56

caaIannnlaocltuyahlsdeaidtrsiitsooi;nfoasn1.3e,a3oT0nnT5dehcehhriacelshdibrliesedne.nlweaoftmsitatteesgdtrefodruopmuptfohoner

mtguc5Sichro6paieouTolgcsulhnerhepid,ai.entnl5mthdocT6sertoihemetaandcopfvrh.wefeaieearlsarcaddsthenrgo'odeteenw.hls4,iewsgsiIreeuloetnnaepsmhcrumoeaeglnentwtt(slyhoIot.y.aohbBete.eva)fAeahoondrrifttvagetahnttnhenhhdedrceeoememnrlidwceossshysoOusointfllneioote,gssfr

mnweeuTramehnbesetrhefuiisotgfhuoerlrmeiiavttitabnerkgdoe.ftnuhleflorrsoirbfsaam(siailsytseirbs),i.zeofS.wtecapos-usrtsiheb,se

The intelligence
Advanced Otis, and those for the Index The norms at various
using our own group,

test used was the

the figures used
of Brightness, or

were I.B.

ages were determied,

as was fully exDlained

.10
110t~~~' 3 4
WS~~~~~~~i
Si'nW5tsv*.~9

.~~~~~.~~~FlPo00iamrP-.tof:tsIB on sib number. -:::;t~~~~~(AthotSf saf"lEugics, NIII,, )

240 j .

in the first paper in the senes in-theAnnats accurte- curvefttingshow that the re.a

of Eugenics (Vol. 6. PP. 319.38. I935). tio6hip caii be. adequately exressed by a4

The mean I.B. for the po.pulation is 100. It straight Hline, and the: best-ftting. straight

may be helpful to those.who are accustomed lie -is shown in the figure. As fat as

to thinking in terms of Binet I.Q. to point numbers go, average itelligence falls eve4

out that a diference from I00 i I.B. corre and steadily as the number of sbs increas4

sponds roughly to half that difference in Fig. '2 shows the same figures the othe

Binet I.Q. Thus an Otis I.B. of 120 correr way round. The hildren. are' divided ib

sponds roughly to a Binet I.Q. of II0, and an groups according to -their inteligence and t1t

I.B. of 70 to an I.Q. of 85.

corresponding average number of sibs sho

for each group. The dullest children have

Relaionship between Intelligence and Family Size for the Whole Group

on the average, b,out 31 sibs, and.thereis
steady even fall as intellgaenciencreases, tbe

Fig. i shows along the horizontal line the brightest childrehh a only about i sibs

4

3*O *

Cl).94

99

j24~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 4

2G-39 60-79 100)-119 140-159 180-199 220-239
Otis ILB.

Fig. 2. Rersso of 8ib nubron Otis I.B.
(Reproducedfromth Ars"als o0f EugeniCS, VIII,, 2)

number of living full sibs from 0 to I3 and Once again, as far as our results.go, a straigh

corresponding to each group of specified sib line fits the results adequately. Expresse

number is shown the average I.B.

as a correlation coefficient the figure for t

There is a steady decline in intelligence as association is -0 -224.

the number of sibs rises. The figures corre- ,I am sure that.-it is hardlynecessary t

sponling to I2 and I3 sibs appear to be rela- point out that the figures are averages. 0

*tively high, but they are based on very few coursesome verybri.ght childr come fron

children, only 6 and i respectively. Actually very iagefgIes and some very dul

INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE

wt - : - ,XI4
25.

--

g l69a3

24

20

I

019- 20-39 4059 60-79 80-99 100-119 120139 140 159 160-179 180199
- Otis .B.
Fig's 3. The scatter of intelligence aogst chlrnnt various numbers of sibs.

hildren are only children, but the opposite the dullest children only 7 per cent. were

nding is more usual. Fig. 3 illustrates this only children. Thirty-three per cent. of

oint.'

the dullest children had six or more

The curve represented by the solid line brothers and sisters. Only 4 per cent. of

hows the centages, of only children the brightest children had as many as

ailing within different limits of itelligence. this.

he other curvessheows the percentages in the The marked association between intelli-

ase of children having 3,6,. and 9 or IO sibs. gence and infertility revealed in this investi-

ilthough children w*vith 9 and with. io sibs gation is rather greater than has been found

ave been added together, this group is a in most previous studies. We may conclude

mall one, so the curve is rather egular. therefore that special precautions to secure

rhe shif.It to the left as number of sibs a good sample shows that the association is,

creases is unmistakable, but there is, of if anything, bigger than has usually been

:ourse, 0much: overlapping.

thought. So far from imperfect selection of

Here are,:some figures for two special groups having magnified unduly the rapidity

oupsLtdo ebescibed later, In a group of the decline in intelligence in the popula-

omposed of the brightest children, 25 per tion, such imperfections have obscured its

ent. were only children; but in a group of full extent.

a -weTHE EUGENICS REVIE.:

Possf&6 EpSe~omn R t of the Nature of

TABLDE I

thd Test Empoed

SUs*DzVIszON ACCORDING TO TYPEs oW SCHOOL

Let us turn -to another criticism of some

previous resuilts. Verbal group tests have nearly always been used. Might this have

NO. Oti No. of |Correlatio
I.B. sibs coefficiet

introduced an extra social bias and so
exaggerated the association? We have a result that meets this criticism also. 1,271 of the children were retested upon the individual Binet Scale; this sub-sample was neither representative nor random, but

Secondary scho.II
scholarship (8PeCialPlaCe) ... 396 144 COetral school .... 307 126 Private school ... 292 xI8 Senior school, etc. 2,292 86 Unclasified ... I8 _

xz,82
2117
I *43 2.92

Oe.O6
O*'072
-.
- I30
_

examination of the figures shows that it can safely be used for a comparison of the two

Total ... 3305 OO 2. *58 | -o0 |

kinds of tests. I have not time to give the justification for this; it is fully explained in The general trend is unmistakabl. It

the detailed parer in the Annals- of Eugenics. be noted that all the smaller Subgro

The correlation coefficients, using the two show far smaller correlationis than lihe grc

tests on the same group of children, were as as a whole; in fact the frst three cdefficie

follows:

are not significant. This illustrates in ano

Otis I.B. and No. of sibs -o* 23

way the fact that unrepresentative sam

Binet I.Q. and No. of sibs-o* 234

would ilmost certainly indicate too low

The closer association with Binet I.Q. is association; impefect sampling could e

amply significant, so it may- be concluded lead to too low an estinate for the ass.

that so far from group tests artificially tion, but could hardly, in any conceiva

magnifying the estimates for the association, case, yield too high an estimate.

their lower accuracy as measures of general It is easy to see that a teacher at a se'

intelligence yield estimates that are slightly elementary school might well conclude

too low. So, once again, it is likely that the association was not particularly strik

criticisms of previous results are only valid but a teacher at a junior elementary sch

in the sense that the association between containing children of grades of inte

intelligence and infertility may have been gence, would have no illusions. Teachers

underestimated.

secondary schools, who were thinking

Later in this lecture I will give some their own pupils only, might well conci

results showing that there is another con- that. there was no association at al. In
sideration making it certain that the real. same way the personal contacts of

association is considerably greater than can people are limited and reflection about t

be revealed in any studies of the type so far small circle only would be .misleading;

discussed.

would~be very twlikely to giv e anything

A point of interest in passing is that a true picture cf th}e variation: in the wb

Americanl studlies show that in the Uniited population, or what is-happeig to

States differential fertility is more maked populato owing to difrnilfertility.l

ta in this country. Here th.e correlation is The private school group shown in Ta

foulnd to be 0-2 or rather higher, there O-.3 or
rather higher, So that the decline in fertility

fIuiisrtrhaetrhideirvhiesitoen.oeeus, so table I; shon

as intelligence increases is even more marked The numbers are very small ad could ox

under American cond1itions.

justify tentative conclusions. TheX fee-pay

Sub-division of the Group according to Type

at the secondary schools come from
smallest fmlies of al, show1ing one of 1

of School

economic advantages of beoging to a st

A sub-division according to type of school

shlows the results,given in Table I.

Secondary 'and central school cliii

Th~TELIGENCE AN1 AIFAILY, SIZE24

FUJRT~3

_P~~Ip1~ C~O Ru

CorroaORM i_ ;.,.

i .,

:{-*.1 C 8 1no of cellidient

0~~peia pQI;IQ..b

j~~~~a ~ ~ ib

|f 36 no2|0I*8 +023

cnhoitlsdirteeneo-.4did 5

rade ApubliC and

private SCh

I4

rae B pi

schoOlS *** ^,.

private schoo01

children... .. 292

children 1-... 3O5

0i18.07 1226 7 97 i68
II8 143 zoo 2 58

-0o r33 -0 032 -o*i66 -ooo96
0 224

concer, tbrm grueDps selected from the main
group :as, follows:.
(o . TThe 35 children securing the
highest'truslts on the Otis Scale,'being 4
per cent. of the whole group. (Retested later on the Biet Scale.)
Oup 2. mAedianI group of I35 cii-
dren. (Also retested later on the Binet Scale.)
Group 3. A quarter of the whole group,
those securing the lowest results on the Otis Scale; were retested on- the Binet Scale. The 270 children with the lowest Biet LQ's, being 8 per cent. of the whole group, form this sub-group.

ave fewer *saitbhsan the average child, rivale schoolcildren far fewer. IS this ducedmmm erb just wbat would be expected
om the.,assoQiaton between intelligence and rtility,. because, of course, if we select
levrer childre 'weshallautomati9ally select
ose with fewer sibs on the' average? A omparison is gi.en in Table III.

Much more detailed information is available about these children and their families than for the whole group of 3,400. It is only some of it that I am able to present to you, because 'these records have only just been completed. Actually some of the analyses
were only made last week, so the results are
almost as new to me as to you. And I must
admit that I am surprised by some of them.

*WABLE III
COMPARISON BWEEN OBSBRVED AND EXPECTED MAN NUMBER OF SIBS

O3wing to the very short time available for preparation I trust that you will forgive the
preliminary form in which the figures are

given.

Observed Expected Difference

First of all, it can be said at once that for

ondary school.
specialplace) 82 I *96 .-O*I40*'Il
ntralschooi... 2 17 2*21 -0*04±0* I2

our present purpose it did not prove helpful to sub-divide these groups further according
to intelligence. In the case of the group

*vateschools ; I43 2*33 _ o* 09 composed of the dullest children this may

seem surpising, because the lowest 8 per

The results show that the number of sibs
f the schqtlarhip and central school children ust about wh.at would be expecte.d if they ere sele,ctd on .ability alone. They are
oups of redu,ced fertility, but only to the
tent that .'se,lection~ ,of clever childen
evitably. implies' selection of children with
w sibs. In this case of the private school
Idren, ho ,e,ver, .th,e n.umb,er of sibs is far wer than-would be expected owing to their upeioitin ineligence to the average for
ae wh, ole p,opul.i.*on.

cent. of Binet I.Q's includes a considerable -range of variation- irom the mentally defective and very backward to those a good deal
less backward. Actually, however, the num-
ber of sibs is the same throughout this group. This raises a point of importance. Does
fertility go on increasinlg right, down to the
lowest levels of intelligence, or does it cease
to do so. after reaching a certain point?
Fig. 2 almost suggested that it falls off, but our numbers are insufficient for a definite
statement to be made. It is often asserted
that mental defectives, or those upon the

hreSepialSubgrus
The furher results I. ,want .to.'present

border-line of mental deficiency, form a
group of specially h:igh fertility as con-
trasted with the rest of the population.' This

244 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is true in a sense, but is a misleading state.' ascertained owing to having a child witbi

ment. The increase of fertility, or the certain age limits, a better comparison

decrease of fertility, is quite even from one end of the distribution of intelligence to the

be secured if .brought the

ftamhielyc.hitlodrneontitcheemasreelvoemisttWehdo,

other. Or actually, if we accept the sugges-. tion just put forward, the rate of icrease of

The death-rate amongst the sibs of the dullest children is much greater th4

fertility may fall off at very low levels of amongst the sibs of the brightest. If, there

intelligence. Thus the- high fertility of the fore, we took the nimber of children.born as

dullest may not exceed the average for the the measure of fertility, we should exaggerate

population by quite as much as the ver low somewhat our estimate of diferential fer.

fertility of the most gifted falls short of it. tility, for what is most important practically

In view of the imminent decline in the is the recriiitment into the adult population,

population of this country, it would be fairer This is the one factor which might lead to too

to emphasize the infertility at one extreme high an estimate for differential fertility in

even more than the high fertility at the the population. Actually, however, i studies

other.

such as this, in which the families are brought

to light through children of fairly advanced

Fertility of Mothers of Children of the Three Groups
Let me give you first a general comparison between the three groups, the brightest, the average and the dullest. The information is much more detailed than for the whole group discussed hitherto, and it is now possible to take as the measure of fertility the number of children born to the mothers, including stillborn children and those who died prior
to the collection of the infornation. Step-
sibs on the mother's side are now, therefore,

age, in this case about I2, the higher
death-rate has to a large extent already pro. duced its effect. The remaIning effect will not be very great, and will be small com.
pared with other factors operating in the opposite way, for example one that will be
mentioned in a moment.
I should like to emphasize again that these figures are averages; there is great vanation in all the groups, though the general tendency is clear. Table V will serve to illus-
trate this point.

included. Table IV shows the average number

TABLE V

of children born to mothers of the children falling into each group. As the mothers were

PERCENTAGES OF CHILDREN WITH GIVEN NUMBERS

OF
OF

THE THRzim GROUPS (LIVING) SIBS

TABLE IV
AVERAGE, NUMBER OF OFFSPRING OF MOTHEMRS OF
CHILDREN IN THE3 THREE SPECIAL GROUPS

Group I Group 2 Group 3 (brightest) (median) (dullest)

Living* ..... ... 1.70 2*78 3q-72

Dead ..... ... o- I3 o032 0'.53

Stillborn ..... ... 0.*03

o*10.IO7

Total

... |I *86 |3e20
* Propositi omitted.

4.42

THE ABOVE FIGURES AS PROPORTIONS

Living ...
Stillborn..

Group x Group 2 Group 3 ... x *o I *6 2*2
|. I*O | 3* | 5 6

No. of sibs

Percentages
Group x Group 2 Group 3 (brightest) (median) (dullest)

0 ... .. I ... ...

2 ...

...

3 ... ... 4-5 *. v.

6-8 *..

*.*

g9and more ...

25 9 7
30 23 II
14 I8 15
I6 I6 I7 1V2 17 18
3 12 2 2
I I S I II

Effiects of Incompyleteness of many of the
Families An examination of the figures soon revealed the fact that while the families
contributing the brightest children- were already practically com'plete at the time the
information was' obtained,' the mothers of

INTELLIGENCE AND FAMILY SIZE

245.

neumdbuelrlesotfg-rfouhperwocuhlidldhreanv.e.

a considerable
This expecta-

jion can easily-be deduced from the rela-tion-

p within the three groups between age of

other and number of children. The asso-

jation, expressed in the form of correlation

oeflicients, was as follows:

I must admit, however, that a further result
surprised me. The average ages of the
mothers at the time the information was obtained were as follows:
Group i ... 43 *6 years Group 2 ... 42* 7 years Group 3 ..* 435 years

Group .. O' Io Group 2 ... 0 21

Mothers of children falling into these three

Group 3 ... o038

entirely different groups, and selected simply

It is easy to calculate what the family size because they had a child within given age

will be when the mothxers have passed the limits, show no systematic difference in

age of 50. The results are given in Table VI. average age at the time the survey was made.

TABLE VI AVBRAGE NUMBE:R OF LIVING CHILDREN

I had dullest

expected children,

that the
married,

mothers of the on the average,

several years earlier than the mothers of the

Group x Group 2 Group 3 (brightest) (median) (dullest)

brightest children, would prove to be younger. This was not the case. We must

At present o. 1. 70 Further children

278

372

also remember dullest children

that the are going

mothers to have

of the a con-

who will be born
to mothers .. 0*25
Total when

076

I131

siderable number of just been shown.

further children, The conclusion

as to

has be

mothers have all passed5oyears It *95 | 3 54

drawn seems to be clear enough. It is 5 03 perfectly true that the mothers of the

dullest children commence their reproduc-

We see therefore that the association between
intelligence and fertility is much closer than

tive life much earlier, and this contributes extra children; but they also continue it

would be anticipated if we relied for our much longer, and this contributes even more

estimate upon the numbers of sibs of chil-
dren of school age and known intelligence. Actually when we allow for extra children who will be born later, the correlation coefficient is likely to be increased by, say, roughly a half, which means that the trend
is about twice as strong as it would be thought to be on the basis of the usual unadjusted estimates.

emxatrrraiagcehiilsdraen.partReolfattihveelymeclhataenisamgepraotducing the infertility of the gifted, but cessation of child-bearing at a relatively
youthful age is even more important. It
seems to me that this finding is one indication that the association between intelli-
pgreensceenatntdiminefeirstinloittyjiunstouarspiomppulleaptrioonblaetmthien

Early Marriage and Late Child-bearing It is well known that one of the more
obvious factors, in the infertility of those of
superior ability is a relatively late age at
mamrage. *The records for the three special groups do not include the age of the mother at the time of marrage, but they do include a related measurement.-.- the age of *the mother at the time of the birth- of the first
child. The average ages of the mothers in

economics, to be put right by single or simple administrative remedies. It seems rather to point to complex underlying causes deeply rooted in basic qualities of body and mind.. The mechanism may often be simple, often no more than the practice of contraception, but this is only the way in which the result is brought about; the underlying causes are *far more subtle and will require all the resources of science for their elucidation.

the three groups at this time were as follows :
Grcoup x ... 27*4years
* Group 2 ... 24*8years

Relation of Fertility to Social Status within
the Three Groups

*Group 3 ... 23 g9years

The children composing the three groups

B

246 THE EUGENICS -RiVEWi

have been classified according to the occupas by grea-ter fertility amongst the very

tion of the father as a; measure of social poor. Ulifottunatelyt f. our results a

status. The correlation coefficients between repesetative, the very gifted poor tre the,

fathers' occupation and number of children, selves just asinf&tile.

within the three groups, are as follows:

As you wil have realized, the presea

Group I... +0 05 Group 2 .S.. -o 24

investigation does not sclose any nej information of .a startling character. It -

Group 3 ... -o*21

more a matter of dotting i's and crossing t's

Taking Groups 2 and 3 first, there is a con-

siderable association between the occupation

of the fathers and of the number of children.

The occupations in Group 3 are, on the

average, considerably lower in status than

those in Group 2, but this does not account

for all the difference in fertility by any

means. Suppose the occupations of fathers

of Group 3 children are adjusted to the

average level of fathers of Group 2 children

the result is:

No. oflivisng sibs

Group 2

... ... ... ... 2 78

The results do not suggest that previoul4
conclusions about differential fertility wew unduly alarmist or pessimistic. On the con
trary the process is probably even mor
rapid than has been feared. In the seco4 place the investigation has yelded y further indications of the com.plexity of tb
problem.
Not long ago the Eugenics Society took t
initiative in founding the Population Invest.
gation Committee, under the chairmanship
of Professor Carr-Saunders. I am sure that
it will be generally agreed that -no. molt

Group 3

... ... ... ... 3072

Grnmp 3 (occupation of fathers adjus-

ted to same level as Group 2) ... 3*37

useful activity could have been undertakei I feel sure also that the commnittee wl investigate most thoroughly not only tot

Thus, while the increased fertility in Group trends in population, but trends in diffe

3 may be attributed in a sense and in part ential fertility as well. Detailed and varied

to an association between fertility and researches are needed, and it is to be hoped

occupational status, this only accounts for that there will ultimately emerge knowledge

some of the difference from Group 2. In making it possible to maintain, and even to

other words, at fixed social class there is still increase, the population, not only in quan.

a marked association between intelligence tity but also in quality.

and infertility.

The correlation coefficient in the case of Summnary

Group i is practically zero, so that in this I. An attempt has been made to secure

group there is no association between occu- sample of school children representing a cor

pation of father and size of family. This plete cross-section of the population. T

seems to me to be anotber indication of the group of 3,400 children was composed of

complexity of the problem of differential
fertility. Tvhe occupations of fathers in this

tbhoeundchairlidersenofwthhoescei.t.yh-oomf eBsatw.heroe.n wJiutlhlyin27tthhl

group, by the way, are par-ticularly well 1934, and whose da.ttes of birth fell betwee

assorted, and represent adequately all occu- September ISt, 1921, anld AuguKst31st, 1925

pational classes from the highest to the inclusive. The children were tested on th

lowest. The very bright child whose father Advanlced Otis Scale. 'The :completeniess o

is in the lowest occupational group comes the ascertainment and~of theb mental testin

from just as small a family as does the very is assessed. Th.is lectulre gives an a.ccoun

bright child of prosperous parents. The very of some of the r~esuIts regarding intelligenc

gifted are, on the average, very infertile, and and famnily size obtained ifroni the group.

this is true of all social classes. Apparently 2. The association betwn intelligenc

we cannot hope that the dying out of the and numnber of living .full sibs, expressed as al

very gifted who belong to the higher social correlation coefficet, was- 0* 24. This

categories will be 'at least partially made' up somewhat higSher than has usually been found|

I';N;1tLLIGENCE AND A SIZE

pinretchaiustcioounsi-tttoy.ovbTthaiunsairteipsrleiskeenltyatthivaet
will reveal a liighr A$s6oiation, whilie

special
sample
imper-

fections in this respect will lead to too low

an estimate of the association. The relation

can be ezpressed& bry straight lines; that is,

intelligence falls off, on the average, evenly

and steadily as the number of sibs increases;

and the number of sibs falls off evenly and

steadily as inte.ligence increases.

3. 1,27I children were tested on the

Binet Sca,le s well as on the Otis Scale. The

Bimet results were more closely associated

with number of sibs,' showing that the use of

the verbal group 'test had not introduced an

extra artificial association, but had on the

contrary, being a less efficient measure of

general intelligence, minimized it.

4. The whole group was sub-divided

according ' t,ype of school and the results

for the different sub-groups are compared.

5. Three special groups of children were

selected from the whole sample.; these were

composed of the br,ightest children, average

children and the dullest children. More

detailed particulars were obtained for these

special groups.

6. The. death-rate amongst brothers and

sisters in mongst

the sibs

dullest
of the

bgrrioguhptewstaschhiilgdhreenr.than

maaiTbcmcngneaohohfetfnitt7ee.iosl.rehcridtseierdiaWrlpeebshisanrtsatitahoysleobceedfeliwidseaectfttrlothrinhoehneoosuuenemsntdhpbumotfrbeleafhaulemrcseectiitstwlhbithuoisecesfeaciecuosllrhnafaloildyscrlodeihdefuirnirptnctlertiaeotdnoohdlmhrdnaljpeewuainulinclglsetewlbottnicofreecvhhiu,edseigalclhvdehdtlaestorietnbfhoesiedeanelt-.
beyceesexovottaue8,mrr.nnmaigtenTmhegnihocrshcerfiaeebolgdremdeeiroxmnectttgnhuhhr;ieacalrrnhdecsbsbhtepuilhaolotoerndnfsirgmteineotnbrghth.,leeheyaetthrfdciosuaosrlnolftccsesiooottnnnmhutseeericidhbobeircfurlihtadgitibrhlhnledtge-y-n bgsnatsfaswiieoiisemoavclfbxso9seivtseo.,apnaeedcaasalsdgiIsrntisacmnjothindlttaucenltaitsiresyrootthstelacnkh.elfthccaeeioieurosagrdoIvpemeevnhnieanm,ape;inctrasretfgesiiyetahnhroionhegestftgcnieerhiaiibtnlefatorheasgrdttfi.eioneeyigsdcfdbdoihiianetngasptbdeltgrohbussyewootlectrireoultal,,eugegpltwsrtnrseweateoigoehasogufoctntorefrporheironnearteatsptuitusrhlirhpfemeiedeesectrbesvrtayettreeehnvihannrwaenleebtianmorarlaots-tdy-etefy

Publishers: DAVID NUfIl
NIMCOLAAKADBMISCHE VG
AL~~~~~~~~~~~~~~auvwko -FglLXACNPai1889

TL. ndon G. E.
kHAF
38KG Year

STE3CHERT & Cob, Now York

m.b.

GF. K

IS.NACH

ThEMARZENCOMIPANY To

ZANICHEL, Bologa

ER, Budap

F.

ROUGE &

"SC(IENTA(ech m c0ooo

B anuInvm

ti1lmto to which

r

EdlitorsG Be
o

DOIM-1.

aOTZi-(.MU-A

AAE

18 ONLY

that has a ry rdwide ulati

.e

B e.

[once;6 elg,hstacl,tceeaittceyTbsCotIiafhhuslo-1ecelkhTaomnmagn5oaarTiEhwtsdicHlitancteEllduhOnOphegsossNNesoecw:LaLe.eiYl(Ymo-tcameRsBshpqciVEebutuItVlns6eINEsoeEeWknWtp.,tnIihnaa"oatattonhmp~hydhbsteymhtphylesseal,aAiwsiltgh%iISailctgtesnahotdltaorojlnoufshbe0oyc,i1toooattrfhutMounfsserltc-l-(sferaxeOetnoslfrteaforntscfoicavltsnlinc,htgioeetybena,oonwotaohdlslnsnotilzalecttohtehtaftwvhetothapdchreehhoaimlnidsogvgtauhnynlodb,rfuekalotttmnedneioanvuwucassounninlfmalpe;yelceeonmPeatiozsnrdfentensaoccdhfailoed.hr(namc(otnedWtediliieemcatntelet,tigarefoeowstisrht;eiacoorfPoslroens;evnetwoioottOryPtaPdltnYrhisesnommlSc.uot,SosinemndelupadohmSesncaetndaueyhnsos.l

,<d~~~~~~~~P~~;oXPM*mi

SBUBSCVRIPTION.
wanttodUm~e wh ~k
P,S'Ili!& i

4SUhlDdgP4oft,

up .D

oretha oui

n ymeas 8*Nlm

shupl
Iy

EugeiogRve,Vl.XX o4

