HEALTH AND PROSPERITY
In EnBland in the Early Nineteenth Century By M. C. BUER, D.Sc.

T HE subject of this paper has perhaps little direct bearing upon eugenic problems, but it has some indirect
relation to them and, further, the sources indicated almost certainly contain material
for the investigator upon more direct lines.

history of mankind in proper perspective,
and realize how economic and social arrangements which had existed for hundreds and, in some cases, thousands of years were
superseded in the course of two or three generations, then the term seems not only

I suppose that I interpret the eugenic posi- striking but correct.

tion correctly in stating that it attaches more In the middle of the eighteenth century

importance to the heredity of the individual the majority of the population of England than to his environment, and holds that the were rural workers. In the towns the death

chief importance of environment lies in its rate exceeded the birth rate, and the

selective effect upon breeding. The anti- majority of town dwellers were either eugenic position, on the other hand, is that country-born or the children of country-born

the environment of the individual is of paramount importance. No one but a fanatic denies that both heredity and environment count in the well-being of the individual.
The question is which is the more important for the individual and the race. The contro-

parents. In the nineteenth century the urban dwellers rapidly became the majority of the population and, even more significant, a large proportion of the population was
town-born. This population lived in different kinds of dwellings from its rural an-

versy is complicated by the fact that very cestors, ate different food, did different work

often a bad environment accompanies a bad amid totally different surroundings both

heredity, and vice versa. Another difficulty material and moral. It is extremely difficult

is that it is not possible in the case of human to say, however, what has been the result of

beings to make observations extending over these changes upon human physique. Very

many generations.

extreme statements are often made, based

Further, the environment of civilized man upon little more than preconceived opinions.

is very complicated. It consists not only of The only thing that can be stated with cer-

the natural environment of climate and so tainty is that the changes are relatively

on, but also of food, clothing, housing, sani- small compared with the magnitude of the

tation, medical and nursing attention, and changes in environment. We have to re-

specialized occupation, not to mention social member, however, that the new environment

environment such as charity and Poor Law. has existed for only a very short time, and

The material and social environment of small changes may be very significant for

the peoples of this island and of Western the future.

Europe was changed, to an extent which it The period of environmental change may

is almost impossible to exaggerate, by the be divided into three. (The actual dates

Industrial Revolution. This term has been are, of course, somewhat arbitrary.)

much criticized in recent years, as having I760-i820.-Broadly, a period of falling

a too catastrophic implication. If by revo- death rate, and a stationary or slightly

lution we mean a change which is complete rising birth rate. Economically, a period of

in a few weeks or months or even in one or experiment and change, of the re-organiza-

two decades, then indeed the term is hope- tion of agriculture. Politically and socially,

lessly misleading. But if we view the long a period of war and unrest.

I89

Igo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The second period, I820-I870, is marked work, home environment associated with

by a stationary death rate and (possibly) a work, e.g., the necessity of living in a large

slightly fluctuating birth rate, the two rates town, and finally the standard of living

being such that a large natural increase of which the occupational wage makes possible.

population took place throughout the period. All these subjects were canvassed during

The period was one of most rapid change in the mid-nineteenth-century controversy over

industry; it saw the coming of the railway the Factory Acts. (Factories at this period

age, and in it took place a very rapid growth meant textile factories in general, and cotton

of towns and the mechanization of a large factories in particular.) During this con-

part of industry. Politically the period was troversy one school of thought represented

one of consolidation and reform.

the factories as pest houses, and the other

The last period, 1870 to I9I4, is marked extreme as health resorts. These protagon-

by continued industrialization, a growing ists are too biased for their opinions to be

dependence upon food and raw materials of any value, but from the reports of the

produced overseas, and by effective improve- early factory inspectors much valuable

ments in social administration. During this material may be drawn. One thing is clear

period both the death and birth rates were from these, that it was impossible to gener-

falling, and the natural increase of popula- alize about factory work. There were some

tion remained large.

unhealthy processes, but these processes had

The first period has already been worked often been equally or more unhealthy when

upon to a considerable extent both by the carried on in the worker's home (by hand).

writer of this article and by others. The Factories themselves could be divided into

last period belongs rather to the statistician town and country, and into large and small.

and the medical writer than to the historian, The conditions were totally different in

and, indeed, the ground has been largely these different classes. There is a con-

covered by Sir Arthur Newsholme and siderable amount of evidence that the

others. The middle period was one of most workers in well-managed rural factories

rapid change in industry, and yet it was enjoyed good health. The inspectors always

one of stability in birth and death rates. It vigorously defended the factory owners and

is the problem of that stability which is the industry against the wholesale charges

engaging my attention at present. This brought against them, and contended that

paper is concerned with that part of environ- the conditions were better rather than worse

mental change which was due to the chang- in factory as compared with home industry.

ing occupations and the effect of that change Even the evil of long hours was found to the

upon health and upon birth and death rates. same or greater extent in employments such

It had, of course, long been known that as tailoring, printing, boot and shoe

certain diseases were associated with certain making, and shop keeping. As to the

specialized occupations, but interesting as standard of life of the workers, here again

the facts were to medical science and impor- the evidence is very conflicting. Since the

tant as they were to individuals, occupational textile industries gave work to men, women,

disease was of little national importance and children, earnings were on a family

since the majority of the people were non- basis, and wage statistics tell us little of the

specialized rural workers. With the coming well-being of families. In families with

of modern industry, however, large numbers several earners, the standard must have been

became specialized workers and, since some fairly high. Another difficulty is that the

of the industries were highly localized, occu- cotton trade then, as now, was subject to

pation tended to become hereditary. The alternating periods of boom and depression,

question of occupation and disease is, of and since the industry was highly localized

course, a wider one than that of unhealthy whole families suffered together in bad

processes. It includes occupational environ- times. There is also evidence that the

ment-e.g., factory as opposed to home country workers were a better type than the

HEALTH AND PROSPERITY

I9I

town workers. The cotton towns, especially disproves some of the wilder statements as

Manchester, were flooded with low-grade, to the bad effect of industrialism upon

slum-dwelling Irish labour in the forties. health. But while I believe it to be true that

big changes in mortality will generally be

THE IRISH IMMIGRATION

accompanied by changes in morbidity in the same direction (not by any means neces-

Contemporary writers on social subjects sarily of the same magnitude), it is not

were agreed that the Irish immigrants were always true of small changes: still less will

less healthy than the English poor. They a stationary death rate necessarily mean

invariably lived in conditions of greater stationary health conditions. It is, how-

overcrowding and dirt, and were subject to ever, an indication in that direction,

constant re-infection from new immigrants especially when we remember that the death

with the fever that was rampant in the home rate fell considerably in the succeeding

country. Generally they entered unskilled period. There are certain other lines of

employments, and often struggled to send inquiry which the writer is pursuing, but is

money to members of the family in Ireland, not yet in a position to say with what result.

and so were less well fed than the English We have, of course, the opinions of con-

workers. It was generally believed that temporaries. Most of these are of little

their constitutions were less resistant to scientific value, being in conformity with

disease, but whether this was an inborn the general views of the observer as to the

characteristic or was due to bad environ- good or evil of the industrial system. But

ment it is difficult to say. The large Irish in I83I Thackrah published his well-known

immigration into the north of England book upon the Effects of the Arts, Trades,

manufacturing towns was a factor of very and Professions upon Health, the first Eng-

great social and racial significance. Mr. lish work to attempt to deal fully with the

Redford, in his book Labour Migration in subject of industrial disease. He dealt with

England i8oo-I 85o, deals with the facts over i2o occupations, most of them of the

very fully; but this migration has never handicraft type. His treatment over such

been given due weight in any general history a large field was necessarily somewhat cur-

of the time.

sory and second-hand, but, nevertheless, the

Of course, one of the chief difficulties in book shows evidence of much keen, sensible,

attempting to gauge the effects of indus- and first-hand observation. Thackrah's

trialism on physique is that of measurement. book attracted considerable attention-it

At the present time we have available the went into a second edition almost immedi-

criteria of height, weight, and so on, but it ately-and it was undoubtedly a great

is not safe to measure the effects of indus- stimulus to the scientific study of the rela-

trialism by comparing the existing rural tionship of health and occupation.

population with the existing town popula- Various writers published studies of par-

tion. The existing rural population has ticular occupations or of the incidence of

been subjected to the effects of heavy migra- particular diseases in different occupations.

tional losses, and industrialism has affected Some of these writers tended to attach too

its environment to a considerable extent, much importance to casual appearance-for

particularly in the matter of food. We have instance, the pallid complexion of the town

also to distinguish between the effects of the worker-or to statements of the worker him-

early industrialism and of the very different self " that he enjoyed pretty good health."

industrialism of the present time. For the In some cases such statements may have

former we must rely on contemporary in- been made under the influence of the fear

formation. To some extent the death rate of dismissal if ill-health were owned to.

is a guide, and the fact that the death rate Another measuring rod used was that of the

remained stationary during the period of age composition of the workers in an em-

most rapid industrial change, at any rate ployment, a large number of old or elderly

192 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

workers being held to indicate that the em- million entries remained to be dealt with.

plovment was healthy. The investigators Finlaison adopted a card system. The cards

sometimes failed to realize that many new were cut into slips and were assembled and

occupations would have been unlikely to re-assembled in special frames according to

recruit elderly workers, and that ageing the observation to be made. The published

workers would leave the heavy trades, not results showed the different incidence of

necessarily to die. Also, age composition is sickness among Friendly Society members

partly a function of the degree of division according to residence in small or large

of labour. In agriculture, where there was towns or the country, according to light

little division of labour, there were plenty occupations or heavy. Some of the more

of jobs suitable to elderly workers, while in important occupations were also given

many more specialized employments there separately. In all cases figures were given

would be none. But while we criticize some for different age groups.

of their methods, we must remember that these early inquirers were breaking new THE RATE OF SICKNESS

ground; and if their statistics are often of The final calculation showed an average

doubtful value, the importance of their amount of sickness for the whole country of

general impressions remains. A good num- ten days per member per annum, while the

ber of the results of these special studies will average duration of sickness per case was

be found in the early numbers of the Journal 40.5 days. The mortality was I2 per

of Statistics.

thousand members. To the surprise of the

The fundamental difficulty in dealing investigators, the rural districts showed a

with questions of health is, of course, higher number of sick cases in proportion

that there is no sharp line between good to membership than the towns, but the sick-

and bad health. We have to accept the ness was of shorter duration. The returns

rough-and-ready criterion as to whether the showed a correlation between length of sick-

worker is ill enough to be away from work, ness and mortality, but not between sickness

and obviously the outlook of both the em- per member and mortality. German figures

ployer and the worker will affect this for about the same period show a similar

criterion. But if the worker is entitled to result.

any form of sick benefit a rather more uni- The theory that death-dealing illness

form gauge is introduced. It is, of course, kills off a number of people quickly, leaving

by no means a perfect one, but it remains healthy survivors, is not borne out by these

extremely important. By I850 the Friendly figures. In some cases death comes slowly;

Society movement had attained considerable in others, where the victims are killed

importance in this country. The movement, quickly, the recovery of the survivors is

however, was much hampered by the con- slow. It is also true that the conditions

stant failure of societies, due mainly to loose which lead to high death rates are also likely

actuarial calculation or, in many cases, to to lead to a large amount of serious sickness.

the absence of any such calculation at all. In regard to the inverse proportion of short-

It was to aid in remedying this defect that duration sickness, the explanation is prob-

in I850 the Registrar-General of Friendly ably that societies with a low incidence of

Societies, by the direction of the Home serious sickness would be likely to be more

Secretary, called for returns from the generous in respect of claims for slight

societies for the preceding five years. The sickness. In regard to the particular case

results filled forty folio volumes, 6-7 inches of high incidence of short-duration sickness

thick. After some discussion as to what in the agricultural Friendly Societies, it was

was to be done with this mass of material, pointed out that there was less difference

it was handed to Finlaison, the Actuary to between sick pay and earnings in rural dis-

the National Debt Office. After excluding tricts than there was in towns. Supervision

300,000 doubtful cases, over three and a half also is more difficult in rural districts than

HEALTH AND PROSPERITY

in towns; and there is evidence that the Further, members of Friendly Societies,

rural societies were often under the patron- particularly in towns, were somewhat picked

age of the parson and the squire, and there members of their class, the more thrifty and

may have been a tendency to save poor the more temperate. Again, there seems

relief in periods of slack work at the expense reason to believe that a good part of the ex-

of the societies.

cessive mortality of the poor occurred in

The average duration of sickness was infancy and early childhood; and infant and

longer in the small towns than in the large, child mortality would not, of course, affect

possibly due to less good medical attention. the Friendly Society figures, nor, normally,

The returns also showed a heavy incidence the life insurance ones.

of sickness in the heavy trades, especially in

mining. This was probably due to the inclusion of illness following accidents. There

DIFFERENTIAL RATES OF INCREASE

was the same heavy incidence in the special The question of the differential infant

societies catering for railway workers and mortality rate is closely related to that of

for the Metropolitan Police. In the former the differential rate of increase among

case the explanation as to accidents may different classes. It was generally believed

apply; the latter is somewhat mysterious, in mid-nineteenth-century England that the

but one reason would doubtless be that the birth rate among the well-to-do was con-

standard of health for active police duty siderably lower than among the poor. Cer-

would he very high.

tainly, the proportion of children was rela-

At the time of publication much attention tively low in the residential districts of

was attracted to the fact that the mortality London, but those districts have never been

figures of the Friendly Societies were better typical: the large proportion of resident

than those shown by the Life Insurance servants accounts for a considerable number

Companies which catered for the upper and of the excess of adults. The belief at the

middle classes. This result appeared to be time was that town life increased fertility

in direct opposition to some figures pub- and that the growing urbanization was

lished by Chadwick, which showed a very necessarily leading to a higher birth rate

much lower average age at death in poor among the working classes. This belief,-

districts of London than in the well-to-do which was held by Chadwick, was mainly

ones. From this Chadwick argued that the due to a failure to allow for the age com-

death rate among the poor was very much position of the mid-nineteenth-century towns

higher than among the rich. He had, how- which were growing rapidly by the immi-

ever, failed to allow for the differing age gration of young adults of both sexes. As

composition of the rich and poor districts, a matter of fact, the Report of the Registrar-

which to a great extent, though by no means General for I840 shows that the greatest

entirely, accounted for the difference in age proportionate number of marriages of minors

at death. But neither was the comparison was in the purely agricultural counties and

between the Friendly Societies and the Life the least proportionate number in the Metro-

Insurance Companies convincing. The In- polis and the manufacturing districts.

surance Companies figures were for policies The growing localization of industry

and not for lives, and it was very common must have been some check on marriage.

to effect more than one insurance upon the The mining and metal industry districts

same life-as many as twenty are recorded; showed a large excess of males, while the

the reason for this being that a life insur- residential and textile districts attracted

ance policy was a common security for loans. women and children. The much-discussed

In regard to the Friendly Society figures, cotton industry was the subject of contro-

the membership was so transitory that versy in this, as in every conceivable matter.

mortality figures were not very reliable for Some writers held that factory work tended

comparison with the rest of the community. to early marriage, and fecundity and/or im-

194 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

morality. -Other writers said that the factory worker had fewer children than the wife of the agricultural labourer. Some
writers defended the factory worker by
pointing to the relatively small number of
bastardy orders in manufacturing districts. The detractors of the system replied that this was no proof of morality, since the factory worker either resorted to abortion or
supported her illegitimate child from her own earnings without help from the Poor
Law. It is very difficult to extract anything
from this welter-of conflicting opinion. My
own belief, for what it is worth, is that the
line between respectability and the reverse
tends to be drawn more sharply in towns. It seems likely that in a well-managed factory, for obvious reasons of discipline,
women with loose moral records would not
have been employed; but this was not necessarily true of all factories. The immoral would tend to be segregated and so to fall
to lower depths and to attract attention from the charitable and from reformers. Rescue societies, however, reported that very few of those with whom they had to deal came from the ranks of the factory operatives. Domes-
tic service held the unenviable distinction of supplying the greatest number of the un-
happy inmates of rescue homes.
With regard to legitimate birth rates, again we are mainly dealing with mere opinion, not necessarily well-informed. A return as to the vital statistics of a group of spinners and piecers was, however, made for presentation to the Factory Commission of i832. It was not ready in time for the Commission, and was finally published in the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society in I842. This return was based upon state-
ments made by the operatives and was, of course, subject to a wide margin of error.
At the time of the inquiry the average duration of the married life of the married operatives was eleven years, and the average age of the wives at marriage was 2I. They had had an average of 4.5 children per marriage, and 40 per cent. of these children were dead. Farr had calculated the fertility of marriage for England and Wales as 4.2 for the ten

years ending I830, but this was very likely an under-estimate.
On the other hand, the marriages of the spinners and piecers were not all completed; there is the possibility therefore of a fertility higher, though not markedly higher, than that for the whole country. This, however, need not be ascribed to increased fecundity due to the conditions of work, but to the simple fact that the opportunities for child employment tended to attract migrants with large or growing families to the textile districts. There is direct evidence that widows with young children migrated to the textile districts to find work for themselves and their offspring. It is possible that some of the children enumerated in the above inquiry may have been step-children. The high mortality among the children will be noted. There is not very likely to have been over-statement here, nor is the figure out of harmony with the known statistics of the time. If the working-class birth rate at this time was slightly higher than that of the upper and middle classes, its effect was probably more than balanced by the high infant and child mortality rates among the children of the workers. I should feel inclined to hazard the opinion that the natural increase of the better-off was at a higher rate at this time than that of the manual workers. Further research may enable me to confirm this opinion or the reverse.
INDICATIONS OF HEALTH
Returning to the question of the effect of industrialism upon health, there is a considerable amount of evidence, which there is not the space to quote here, that factory work was not in itself more unhealthy than other indoor urban occupations. Industrialism, however, led to a rapid urbanization which common sense would lead us to believe must have been an unfavourable factor in national health, especially in view of the then conditions in towns. There must have been some favourable factor which led to the stationary death rate in spite of urbanization and the depressed state of the agricul-
[Continued on page x96.]

x96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tural labourer. This factor was probably the increased earning power which the new technique brought to many workers, and the consequent better feeding. At any rate, the output of the workers of industrialized England was generally held to be superior to those of the far less industrialized continent. It is well known that Brassey held the English navvy to be well worth the high wages which he could command. The pessimistic
Report on the Sanitary Condition of the
Working Classes, published in 1842, quotes the fact that English navvys employed on railway construction at Hamburg earned double the wages of the Germans and were
worth more to the contractors at double wages. Employers of labour are quoted as
saying that it was strength of body com-

bined with strength of will which gave
steadiness and value to the artisan and common labourer of England. The majority of these may have been country bred, but an
English cotton manufacturer also spoke of English labour being twice as effective as French, and spoke of the " superior persevering energy of the English workman, whose enduring, untiring, savage industry
surpasses that of every other manufacturing country I have visited, Belgium, Germany, and Switzerland not excepted." The terms of this tribute may be exaggerated in expression, but the general superiority of the English workman at this period is well attested, and hardly bears out the contention that the race was suffering rapid deterioration.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 3.

