THE TREATMENT OF THE
CONGENITALLY UNFIT AND OF
CONVICTS BY STERILIZATION.
By R. A. GIBBONS, AI.D., F.R.C.S.E.,
(GvN7aecologist to the Grosvenor Hospital for WVomiecn.)
FROAI A PAPER READ BEFORE THE HUNTERIAN SOCIETY
ON MONDAY, MARCHI 22ND, 1926.
It is certaini that the subject of Sterilization of the unfit is beconiiig of inereasing interest. The fact that it has been for loIng in use in America and that it is nlow being considered by other countries, shews how nmuchl more seriously it is thought of as a means of permanently diminishing propagation. As evidence of this interest in London, I mav mentioni that recentlv a Board of Guardians sent out a memorandum to all (Guardians of England and Wales, asking their support to a resolutioni urging Parliamiient to consider seriously the urgent
question of sterilization of the mientallv unfit. In addition, there
lhave been somewhat similar resolutions from public bodies.
In the first place, I should like to sav that the word ''uifit,' wlheii read in nmedical literature, is generally nmeant to convey that the inidividual is unisuitable as to behaviour and eonduct for the every day
duties of life, and carries with it the impression of mental deficieney. In this paper, I use the word as implyiing an individual wlho does not
coinform to thie ordinary coiiveniainces of society, whether the acts be due to genuinie in ntal weakness or to moral delinquency.
According to the last Annual Reports of the Board of Control for England and Wales,(1) and the Gieneral Board of Control for Scotland, there were 201,179 inldividuals mentallv affected. and of these, 51,23( were mental defectives. (2)
During the four years 1921 to 1924, there were 143,326 males, and 41,219 female prisoners, some of these having been convicted from 1 to 5 times, from 6 to 10 times, from 11 to 20 times, and others actually over 20 times, as the accompanying table will shew. (3)
Abstract fronm Report of Commissioners of Prisons and Director of Convict Prisons for years endinig 31st March, 1921, 1922. 1923, and
1924.

THE TREATMENT OF THE CONGENITALLY UNFIT. 101

PARTICULARS.

1921 1922 1923 1924 Totals for 4
years.

Total number of male prisoners
Total number Fem'iale

32,869 11,043

35,787 11,340

37.336 10,035

:37,334 8,801

14:3,326 40,419

Previouzts Convictions
Convicted I to ) timiles:
AMales..
Femlales

43,912
11, (681 .3,, .361

47,127
13,292 3, (666

47,371
14,550 3, 004

46.,135-, 1 83, 74.5
14,508 54,031 2,391 12,42'2

Convicted 6(to 10 t imses:
Males.. Femiiales .

2,463 970

2,873 1.129

3,1:34 1,120

3,694 948

($6. 4.53
12, 1I(;6 4.167-

Convicted 11 to 20 timiies: AMales..
Females

1,943 1,121

2,101 1,41(6

2), 332 1,186

2,608 1,033

1 6 1ssi'a
9,004
4,75(6

Convicted over 20 timiies: 1I1Ales..
FHeiia les . .

1,802 2, 648

2,140 2,860

2,082 ,3, 127

2.224 2,886

-3,760()
8,258 11,521

19,779

Average annual hclarge

per iinmate

£121 7 10 1137 2185 190 85 12 3

Totatl cost of prisollers pcr annum for 1921- £.5,328,847
(10. 1922- £t5,339,881 16 4
(10. 1923- --t4,071,537 9) 0 do. 1924- -,947, 732 13 9

'T'ota I for 4 years .

£18,687,998 19 1

Fromi the tables of nmenital deficiency it is evident that it is iniereas-
inig. The niumber of mentally deficien;t unlder statutory supervision
on the 1st January 1925 was 13,547, an increase of 2,722. In addi-
tioin, there was a large increase in the nunmber under voluntary superviSiOln, the figure being 14,156, as compared withl 6,744 in the prev-ious
year. (4)
Fronm the reports of the Commiissioniers of Prisonis, the niumiiber of
prisoiers, botlh nmale and female, averages 46,136 anniiually.
HEREDITY.

In this paper, I suggest a method of diminiishlinlg in the future, not onlv the mentallv deficient, but the iiumber of individuals in ouir prisonis. It is tlherefore onlv right I should adduce such statistics as
will prove it to be logically sound that such means of treatment ought to be adopted in the best interests of the State. It can be shewn that
the main cause of this iniereasing number of tile mentally affected is heredity, and that this also aecounits for the large number of coinfirmed criniilals.

102 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Ill an interesting paper oni the work of the special schools in Londoni
for mentally (lefective chlildren, MIr. Arthur Hill states that the traininig aims at teaching habits of obedience and cleainliness, improvinig emlotional stability, and nmakinig children employable; but he
does not conisi(ler that ''tleir final prodlLicts are of eugenic v-alue to
the race. '(5) Dr. Goddard states that no less thani two thirds of our feeble-
mindedness is due to heredity. (6) From personal examination of nmore thani 5000 prisoners, Dr. Paul Bowers has shewn that the antecedents of 44 per cent. of these conv-icts were psychopathic individuals
Whlo were eitlher inisane, feeble-minded, epileptic, criminal, or suffered
with organic or fuinictional disease of the nervous system. (7) Of couirse heredity and environment must be considered together, because, however excelleint mav be the hereditary tendencies in a child, the influLence of a pernicious environment may be the cause of criminial coniduct.
In the initeresting presidential address of Dr. Ochsner, delivered before the American Surgical Association, advocating -the sterilizatioIn of habitual criminals &c., lie states that it has been proved by statistics collected in the State of Indiana, that 100 families have added more thani one half to the crimes done to native born citizens during the past generation. The offspring of the respectable members of society are constantlv exposed to the harmful influence of contact witl these degenerate classes and their offspring. He also mentions that a noted crinminal lawyer who lhas been active constantly in the criminal court of a great city for many year, states that he has many times encountered sonis of criminals guilty of the identical crimes for which their fathers were prosecuted many years before. (8)
It is important in criminology to collect and classify the data. It is true that environment and evil education have a marked effect in the productioni of criminals, but a largeproportionioftlhem have sprung from unsound parents. (9) Sichart gives the proportion of pathlological inhleritanice as 36 per cent; Mlarro makes it 90 per cent.(10) Frequentlv vicious education and vicious hereditv are combined in
producing criminals. Of 104 criminals whose heredity was investi-
gated, 71 shewed some hereditary influences. Marro investigated deaths by alcoholism, suicide, insanity and cerebral disease, and founid that among 230 parents of criminals, these causes constituted 32 -1 per cent., wlhilst in the case of the parents of normal persons they are only 16-1 per cent.,-almost exactly half. Sichart studied 3881 subjects in prison in Wurtemberg for theft, rape and fraud. In comparison witlh the general population he found that anomalies or crimes existed in the case of the parents of the variouis classes in the following proport ions:
Tlhieves, 32 per cent; Incendiaries, 36-8 per cenit; Sexual offenders, 38-7 per cenit; Perjurers, 20 5 per cent; Swiiudlers, 23-6 per cent.M)

THE TREATMENT OF THE CONGENITALLY UNFIT. 103
In Dr. Barr's individual study of 4050 cases of imbecility, lhe
found 2651, or 65 45 per cent. caused by malign heredities, and of these, 1030, or 25-43 per cent. were due to a direct inheritance of idiocy, and 280, or 6 e 91 per cent. to insanity. (12)
The coursc of criminality commences early. In 37 cases out of 100, the first conviction took place under the age of 20; in many instances at 15 or 17 years of age, and even earlier. (13) In spite of the excellent work done for the Borstal lads, about 35 per cent. who have passed through the Borstal training lhave again come into conflict with the law. (14) Dr. Parkes Wilsoni said that in PentonvTille about 100 persons a year were so far mentally deficient as to be quite unfit for
prisoni discipline, and that, besides these, no less than 20 per cent.
of the prisoners shew signs of mental inefficiency. Of 100 feeble-minded convicts, it is judged that only four might be discharged to the care of relatives, or iincollditioiallv, with reasoniable prospect of leading an honest life.(15)
Dr. Tredgold, from an exhaustive study of the antecedents of
mental defectives, states that over 80 per cent. of the cases are coni-
nected with neuropathic inheritance. (16)
It is apparenitly a sinmple explanation of the foregoinig coniditiolns
to say that there must be some fault in the development of the brain, but it is extremely difficuilt to say what is the actual cerebral change occurrinlg in the mentally deficient child or in the confirme(l convict. Mental deficiency is associated with and proportional to the arrest of
development of the supra granular layer of pyramidal cells of tlhe cerebral cortex.(17) Normal development is undoubtedly depenident upon various parts of the organism being gradually formed in physio--
logically healthy relationi to each other. It may be that the necessary stimiuli for the developmenit of certain parts of the brain nmay beinhibited, or that there mav be too mnuch stimulationi, witlh the result that there may be an atroplhic conditioni of the part affected, or the reverse. It may also be borne in mind in dealing with development, that the nutritive or atrophic relations existing between the different parts of the mass undergoing growth, is of the highest importance. It may be pointed out that enviromimental changes acting upoIn the fertilised ovum, or upon the embryo, may produce an almost infinite variety of abnormal types, although, so far as is knowni, these modifications do not beconme hereditary. If the fertilised egg be placed in a centrifugal machine, the heavier particles are thrown to one side of theegg, and the entire substance of the egg becomes stratified into layers and zones, which may lead to serious changes in development. (18)
ENVIRONMENT.
It is interestinig to note that in the 17tlh and 18th centuries, miiainv
plhilosophers taught that all men were born equal, and later, becamne uinequal through unequal opportunities.
There can be no doubt about the influenice of environment upoIn the yotung, both for good and for evil, and there are many who regard enivironment as the greatest contributory cause of crime, and who
lplace lheredity in a subordiniate positioIn. The eInvironlmeIntal comndi--

101 EUGENICS REVIEW.
tionis act on the mind througlh the medium of the nervous nmechanism, and we are therefore able to trace innumerable modifications in the nervous system which mav correspond to the growing adaptation to external relations. But the physical organism must possess certain fundamental capacities whiicl determinie its adaptability from birth. (19)
We can see, from what has already been said, that neither heredity nor environment should be considered alone, but that they must be combined in bringinig up a child, for both are necessary to development, and the latter can often do much when the former is at fault. According to an interesting memoir on "The relative value of the factors which influenec infant welfare" -a study of the data provided by the Medical Officers of Health of certain townls, leads to the conclusioni that purely environmental factors are, as a whole, far less influential upon infant welfare than factors whicl are presumably inborn. (20)
A germ cell wouild remain the same if it were not for some external stimulant. Experiments on dlevelopinig aniimals shew what mllay be relatively importanit, botlh as regards environment and heredity, and the modifications wlhich may be produced by chaniges in envrironmental conditions.
From the foregoing, it is quite evident how great is the responsibilitv of heredity in producing mental defectives and criminals. But althouglh this is readily aecepted in the case of mental defectives, it is hard to make the vast majority of people grasp the connection between heredity and criminal offences; and yet we are certain, from the statistics already mentioned, that prisoners convicted more than twice are likely to be found guilty on future occasions, and that this conduct
may be really due to a neuropathic strain.
It is right however, to point out that all mentallv defective children are not the result of hereditary tendencies; thev may originate from three additional sources:-
(a) It may happen that the first born child of parents who mav lhave an excellent mental and physical history, may have the brain injured, and become defieient mentally owing to some compression of the head by a slightly narrow pelvis, or to the use of forceps in delivery. VWe know from the post-mortem examination of infants what may take place in the way of intra-cranial haemorrhage, laceration, depression, and depressed fracture of the cranial bones. Statistics seem to prove however, that a long labour is more prone to interfere with mental development late in life than forceps extraction. (21)
(b) A second source is, strangely enough, the last child delivered in a large family of otherwise perfectly normal infants. This is difficult to explain; it may have something to do with the exhaustion of a woman who has borne many children.
(c) The third source is injury to the head inl an infant who up to the momiient of the accident has been perfectlv bright and apparently intelligent. I need only refer to the mental weakness following specific fevers, or to an attack of encephalitis lethargica, for at present
we do not know enough about the latter disease to predicate whether the condition may be permanent or pass off.
I lhave (Iwelt thus long upoil heredity and eivirollmellt because

THE TREATMENT OF THE CONGENITALLY UNFIT. 10o
the former is the prime factor, in the vast majority of cases, of
mentally deficient children and confirmed criminals.
TREATMENT.
Unider this will be considered the best method, having regard to the future, of dealing with the mientally deficient and criminals. With reference to the former, this must be divided into the treatment of those mentally dieficient by segregation and by sterilization.
WTith regard to segregation, it must be at onlce admitted that if it could be thoroughlv and efficiently carried out, and if it could inielude all the menitallv deficienit, no treatment could be better. But we know that all mentally deficient individuials are not under control. There are maniy girls and boys who are quite well enough to be kept at honme, ancd who can do a certain amount of housework with advanitage to the parents. It is impossible to segregate these. For those who are bad enougl. the best metlhod of treatmenit is doubtless that which they receive at schools or colonies.
Accordinig to the Board of Control, large inistitutionis are to be preferred, not only on the ground of econonmv in initial cost of maintenance, but also of efficient organisation and classification. It is the high grade menltally deficients who give rise to so much anxiety, not only on accounit of the future, but because of the harm thev may do to others. If all could be segregated. it would obviously be a great advantage. We know that the mentally deficient are well cared for in the State institutions and certified houses, and there is of course, less likelihood of promiscuous intercourse, but according to the Report of 1924, there were many hundreds of urgent cases for which there were no vacancies in existing institutions. These will have to remain for long periods without the training, care, and protection they need. Lack of accomnmodation meanis degradation, crime, pauperism, and disease to individual defectives, with additional expense to the community. (22) Needless to say it is from the latter that, from the point of view of propagation, harm is apt to arise.
It is oni account of the rapidity with which propagation occurs that this matter becomes so serious and inicreasiiigly urgent. They propagate from two to six times more rapidly than niormal individuals. (23) The higher grades of feeble-minded persons (who are the most numerous and dangerous) tend to have very large families, as can be proved from the detailed records of 1000 cases. It is important, with re-ference to the above, to point out that after the infinite care and trouble exercised by the Royal Commission on the Care and Control of the Feeble-minided, one of the conclusions was that "In view of the evidence concerning fertility, the prevention of mentally deficient persons becoming parents would tend largely to diminish the number of such persons in the population."
According to the Royal Commission, the figures and statements support the opinion that during the vears of procreation and child-
bearing, there should be control and supervision in the case of mentally defective men or women. Mly contention- is that at present, such control except by segregationi, which is ouit of the question, is impos-

106 EUGENICS REVIEW.
sible, and that the only nmetlhod of diminishing propagatioIn is by sterilization.
The operation of sterilization by modern methods is simple, and in nio way interferes with the metabolism of the individual or with
sexual feeling, so that there can be no shadow of doubt that it ought to be carried out on all the mentally deficient if we are really in earnest in endeavouring to lessen their numbers. The mere fact of sterilization
would release large numbers from the necessity of segregation. My owni
view is that, should it not be done earlier, the limit of age be set down at 16, for if by then there be no evidence of such improvement as would lead to the belief that permanent benefit or cure could take place, it is in the highest degree improbable that there will be any hopeful outlook. When a child is mentally deficient and is pronounced by
alienists to be beyond the prospect of recovery or improvement, then
sterilization ought to be performed. Every possible care would be exercised beforc a decision is given, and that would only be arrived at after consultation witlh an alienist and the Medical Officer in charge of the patient. For those in institutions, these operations could be carried out by the Medical Officer in charge, or, if thought advisable, by a surgeon appointed to the Institutioni-whatever course would be the most economical.
Some who lhave had much experience in dealing with the mentallv deficient, are of the opinion that sterilization would have but little effect in the prevention of mental deficiency, but, considering that it lhas never been tried in this country, and that they acknowledge
the statement that over 80 per cent. of the cases are connected witlh
neuropathic inheritance, one cannot accept such logic; for, givenl a mentally deficient individual, the descendant of a mentally deficient
)arent, it is in the highest degree improbable that the offspring will
be anything but a mental defective. I know it is advanced by some that when- onice sterilizationi took
place, it would be an excuse for promiscuous intercourse, and that it would lead to the increase of venereal disease. I do not believe that anvthinig of the kind would happen. Sterilization would make no difference as to promiscuous intercourse, which will always occur, nio matter what is done to prevent it. The ideas of morality will not act as a deterrent, and if the gonococcus or sphirochaeta pallida should be present, suclh conditions cannot be put down to sterilization. In the event of either, sterilization would certainly prevent the birth of illegitimate syplhilitic chidren, or of those who become blind from the gonococcus. In rescue work, about 27 per cent. of the cases received into the Rescue Home were decidedly deficient in moral responsibility and will power, and, to a marked degree, in mental capacity, an(l were unfit to be trusted without supervision. Certain points recorded seem to prove the fact that irresponsibility increases witl a ge(24).
TREATMENT OF CRIMINALS.
I have alreadly mentioned the percentage of neuropathic straini in the familv histories of criminals, and that some of these prisoners have beeen conivicted over 20 times. Mv strong opinion, and that of many

THE TREATMENT OF THE CONGENITALLY UNFIT. 107
others, is that stuchi prisoniers slhould be sterilized. I do niot suiggest for a io)iment that such treatmenit would have the smallest effect as a deterrenit, althloughl in tlhe State of Nevada, the law is pulnitive. I believe that sterilization slhould be purely eugeniical, but we slhouild kniow that it wouild be the miieanis of )reventing a prisonier becominig the )arent of any futu1re chiild. This treatment however, wants careftul consideration in the case of certaini eriminia's, for it is obvious that
it wouild be uiseless in confirmlied old criminials, or in womeni past tlle
clhild bearing age, who spend m11ost of their time in gaol, for tlleir time of pro)agationi is over. Butt in the case of the younig or middle aged criniinal whlo had beeni convicted more than twice, it should be carried
olut.
Althiouiglh wve kniow that the operation is a simple onie, anid in nio
wav initerferes witlh the fiunctions of the body, it wouild doubtless ini
timiie be lookedi uponi as ani adde(d p)unlishlmlent, anid altlhouighi this miglht
be an advantage, we kniow that it woulkl probably have no effeet in
the sul)ressioni of crime. In fifteeni states of Amierica experiments have been mlade witl
steriilizationl. Of tlhcse, ninlCe are still in force, five have been declared
un(constituitional, and(i one0 repea led. (25) In 1922 the law had been carried out in 3233 cases, of whlielh 2558 lhad been operated oni in the
State of Californi-a Dr. H. C. Shairp, who has applied vasectomy
siice 1899, says that lhe hias hia(d Iiii(ler lhis post-operative observation 2:36 of thiese cases, and lhas seen1 nio unfavourable symptoms in anv case. There has beeni no atrophy or cystic degenierationi, and no disturbed menclital or nervous coiditions. (26)
Sterilizatioii nmight be brouglht about by X rays, but it is lpossible
that this mav initerfere witlh the funcetionis of the interstitial cells. Dr. M1artindale states that working unider (lefinite standard conditions ill womeln, the dose of initenisiv-e X rays should be so accuratc that
anuienniiolrlroea for a ccrtain- definiite time. or permainently, should be guarainteed, but that witlh our preselit knowled(Tc of the possible
idiosvneracies of the p)atielnt, this is difficult. Needless to say that if
X ray therapy cani be relied utpon, it would be an eniormous benefit in the case of woiiieii whio liad to be sterilized permaneiitly.(27)
Dr. Irvinie, Plhysiciani to the Sing Sing prison, considers that criminial character depenids in the first inistanice oni heredity, anid that it woul(d be ani econoniy alnd a great benefit if all habitual criminials were deprived of the power to produce offspring, ancd lie would class crimiie as one of the l)reventable (liseases.(28)
To enisure sterilizationi in the male, the operationi of vasectomy is (lonie, anid in the femla-le, division of the Fallopiani tubes in a manniier to rendler fuiture imnperviousness. It is uiinnecessary to describe these
olperationis niow, but it certainily is important that it slhould be generally
kniowni that there is niothling cruel about thie operation itself, anid under
modlern methods of operating, the danigcr is iiifiniitesimal. Perlhaps
witlh the advanice of scienice, sonme new method nmay be discovered w'hichl mav be equally effective as vasectonmy anid salpinigectomyiv.
It is of course obvious that to carry out sterilization in this country, legislationi would bc required, an(d therefore it is no part ol this

108 EUGENICS REVIEW.
paper to center inito the dletails nlow as to how it is to be effected. Suffice it to say that in the case of the mentallv deficienit, it would be done in each individual onlv after careful investigationi. As regards prisoners, the matter would be simple. for it would follow immediately after the number of convictions, wvhiclh would be finally decided
upon after legislation had been lpassed.
COSTI TO THE STATE.
Now if the statistics I lhave collected be accepted, theni it Imlust be evident that sterilization would be the meanis not only of lessening
the numbers of the mentally deficient, but would also in time, have a most salutary effect uponl the number of convicts. This would diminish enormously the cost to the State, because the care and mallagement of the mentally deficient, ancd of the housing and control of prisoners average together a very large ainnual sum. Any suggestion which,
if adopted, would lesseni this cost to the State would be gratefully accepted at the present time, wheni taxation is so excessive. The
total expenditure on the upkeep of County and Borough Mental Hospitals in England and W'ales, and on the maintenianice, supervision and treatment of the patients in them durinig the financial year ending 31st March 1924, amounted to £6,953,804. In the case of prisoniers for the year 1923 the cost was £4,071,537, so that, for this one year, the total cost came to £11,037,690. Surely such figures ought to stimulate all who take an interest in the welfare of our countrv to do everything in their power to lessen such eniormous expenditure. By so doing, they will be helping to increase the standard of health of the nation by lessening the number of the miieintally deficient, anld of the convicts in our prisons. We know that neither can ever be actuLally arrested at the source, but by doing our' utmost to abolish prejudice and sentiment, to secure legislation for fhe elimination of the unsound, and to mitigate the incidence of both mental deficiency and crime, we shall be helping to build up a State composed of a people physically
and morally healtlhv.
1 . Eleventh Annual Report of the Board of Control for 1924. Pp. 3 and 62. 2. Eleventh Annual Report of the Board of Control for Scotland. :3. Abstract from Report of Commissioners of Prisons and Directory of Convict
Prisons for 1921, '22, '23 anid '24. 4. Eleventh Annual Report of the Board of Control, Page 68. 5. Eugenics Review, April 1925. 6. International Cliniques, 1920, Page 160. 7. Sterilization. International Cliniques, 1920. 8. Annals of Surgery, September 1925.-Surgical treatment of Habitual Criiim-
inals, Inebriates, Perverts, Paupers. Morons, Epileptics and Degenerates. Albert J. Ochsnier, M.D., Chicago. 9. Studies in MIental Inefficiency. Biological Factor in Criminal Conduct. By W. E. Sullivan M.D., Medical Superintendent of H.M. Criminal Asylum, Broadmoor. 10. Crime, Its Causes and Remedies. Caesare Lombroso, M.D. 1911. Translation by Henry P. Horton, NI.A. 11. Caesare Lombroso, Op. Cit. Page 152. 12. Chief Physician for Feeble-minded Childreni, Pennsylvaniia. Elwyn. 13. Royal Commission on the Care anid Control of the Feeble-minlded, Vol. VIII,
Page 394.

THE TREATMENT OF THE CONGENITALLY UNFIT. 109
14. The Borstal Lads. TIMES, August 1923. 15. Royal Commission oni the Care and Control of the Feeble-minded, Vol. VIII,
Page 123. 16. Royal Commission, Vol. VI, Page 181.-Tredgold. 17. Psychology and MIedicine. Sir Frederick MIott, British Medical Journal,
March, 1923. 18. Heredity anid Environmenit in the Development of MIan. By Edwin Grant
Conklini, 19155. 19. The Borderland. By J. Bulkley Hyslop, M.1.D., Page 13. 20. Annals of Eugenics, October, 1925. Miss E. M. Elderton. 21. Birth Injuries of the Child. Hugo Ehrenbert, Page 29. 22. Eleventh Annual Report, Board of Control, Page 63. 23. Dr. Barr. Sterilization of the Unfit. International Cliniques. 24. Royal Commission on the care and Control of the Feeble-miinided. Vol. 6,
Page 1351. Evidence of President of Rescue work. 25. Eugenical Sterilization in the United State-. By hlarry H. Laughlin,
Page 6. Introduction by Chief Justice Olson, Clhicago. 26. Annals of Surgery, September, 1925. 27. Fibro-Myomata of the Uterus. A series of 252 cases, treated eitlher by
Surgical operation or Intensive X ray Therapy. The Journal of Obstericst and Gynaecology of the British Empire Vol. 32. No. 4. By L. Martindale, M.D., B.Sc. 28. The Congenital Criminal. By Robert Irvine, Ml.1). Medical Times, April, 1903.

