EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM
Debate at Members' Meeting
AT a Members' meeting of the Eugenics the beneficence of Nature was mistaken, that Society, held on Tuesday, June i8th, the fundamental cause of poverty was overat the rooms of the Linnean Society, population, and that there had never been
Burlington House, with Dr. C. J. Bond in the and could never be plenty for all unless births chair, a debate on whether the principles of were considerably restricted. Darwin exeugenics are " most favoured by a socialist tended the principle of Malthus to all living or a capitalist state of society" was opened creatures, and showed that there had always by Dr. C. V. Drysdale and Dr. Stella Churchill, been a severe struggle for existence among and followed by an animated discussion from them, owing to their high rate of reproducthe large audience gathered in the body of the tion, which had led to the improvement of hall. Dr. T. Drummond Shiels, who was to each species by the early death of all who were have opened the socialist case, was unfortu- incapable of obtaining sufficient food and nately indisposed and Dr. Churchill, at very protecting themselves in the struggle, while short notice, kindly consented to fill his place. those who were able to survive to reproduce
In his introductory remarks the chairman and rear their offspring handed on their stressed the fact that, whatever views indi- superior qualities to the next generation by vidual Members might hold on the subject to the operation of heredity. Applying this be debated, the Eugenics Society itself was principle to mankind, he found in it the committed to no opinion or policy in the chief moulding agency by which man had matter. The Council would be glad to have risen from the ape to his present stage of before it the relevant facts and the views of development. Members of the Society, and on the basis of Eugenists, following Darwin, are consuch information it would, when the proper vinced of the great importance of heredity, time came, consider the whole problem. and contend that there are great differ-
Opening the debate, Dr. DRYSDALE said: ences in the innate capability and value of In my view socialism and eugenics have been individual human beings, which improveand must remain almost totally opposed, ment in environment cannot greatly affect. owing to their fundamental difference of out- Accordingly they hold that race improvement look and estimation of human values. The cannot continue unless future generations famous controversy between Godwin and are recruited chiefly from the more capable Malthus at the commencement of the last stocks, and that if they are recruited mainly century clearly revealed this difference, which from the less capable, racial degeneration has persisted to this day. Socialism ascribes must follow. If this is true, it is of the poverty and social evils to the tyranny and highest importance that we should have rapacity of the rich and powerful; it some means of judging the relative values of assumes or asserts that Nature is beneficent individuals to the community and seek to and that " there would be plenty for all if it encourage the reproduction of the more were only properly distributed." It sym- valuable and especially to discourage the pathizes with or even glorifies the " under reproduction of the less valuable types. dog," the "have-nots" or the " prole- In the severe struggle for existence which tariat," and concentrates chiefly on securing was the rule before family limitation was a more uniform distribution of wealth, with adopted, and before socialistic measures for little regard to individual capabilities or the the protection and maintenance of the need for greater total production. Malthus, weaker had made such headway, this judgon the other hand, showed that the belief in ment was automatic, as more children were
lO9

o T H THE EUGENICS REVIEW

born than could possibly survive, and com- All this is so opposed to the doctrines and

petition ensured that only those endowed spirit of socialism, with its fostering of the

with superior vitality and capability were " have-nots," denial of the superionrty of the

able to rear many descendants. But this rich and powerful, and denunciation of com-

selective agency has now been arrested and petition, that it seems impossible to believe

even reversed by modern humanitarian legis- that a sound eugenic policy can ever be

lation, so that the self-supporting classes are adopted by a socialist State. Only one or two

now restricting their families to an extent socialists, notably Dr. Eden Paul and Mr.

which must bring about their rapid extinc- H. G. Wells, have shown any appreciation of

tion, under the pressure of the taxation and the importance of eugenics, and even they

other demands for the maintenance of the have mainly confined it to the importance of

non-self-supporting individuals, who are still restricting the reproduction of obviously

having relatively large families. Unless this defective types such as the mentally deficient,

state of affairs is changed by the reduction of which is good so far as it goes, but only

the fertility of the latter and their burden on touches the fringe of the subject. Any idea

the former classes, our race in a few genera- that the poor on the average are biologically

tions will be mainly composed of the descen- inferior is contrary to their most cherished

dants of those who have been unable to main- ideals.

tain themselves, i.e. to render such services The true ideal of a democratic community

to the community as will compensate it for should not be the protection of the weak, and

their support.

an alteration of the social system in their

The value of services to the community, favour, but the breeding of strong individuals

and therefore of the individual who performs who need no protection. This may be effected

them, can only be gauged by competition. without any hardship by retaining the in-

Each individual must discover for himself dividualistic competitive system, and con-

what services he can best render and offer tinuing our relief to the unsuccessful on con-

them to the highest bidder. No other judg- dition that they do not have children while

ment is safe, as it is subject to the bias of in receipt of relief, instructing them in the

the judges, as has been strikingly shown by best measures of birth-control for that pur-

the German National Socialist eugenic pro- pose. By this means we can reconcile

posals. In an individualistic democratic humanitarian sympathy and democracy with

community, each person buys the goods and race-improvement, which are otherwise irre-

services he feels he needs most, and the vocably opposed, and competition in life will

remuneration each person receives is really a be a pleasure as it is in sport, when we have

democratic vote as to his value. Competi- the right number and right quality of people,

tion was the deciding factor in Darwinian so that every effort raises their standard of

selection, and it has been the law of life under existence.

which our race has developed. Unless or until Dr. STELLA CHURCHILL: I want to explain

we can find some other safe means of judg- that I am here merely as a stop-gap. This is

ment, which our present knowledge certainly the second time within the last few months

does not provide, competition must and ought that I have found myself in this unfortunate

to remain the basis on which fitness for position. If a personal appeal had not been

parenthood is decided. However great our made to me over the telephone, I should not

sympathy for the poor and weak may be, and have submitted to this. If I cannot convert

whatever measures we may take to relieve you to the socialist point of view in the

them, we must accept the view that those twenty minutes at my disposal, it will be my

who are unable to support themselves and fault and not the fault of the cause I have at

their children in a competitive state by their heart.

unaided exertions are biologically unfit, and First of all, I wish to pay tribute to Dr.

that we should do all in our power to dis- Drysdale's careful exposition of what went

courage their reproduction.

on in I794. I am used to hearing " What did

EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM

III

Gladstone say in I884 ? " but I did not think a little tired of-sterilization, birth-control,

we should be reduced to finding a reason for and even destruction at birth. There is a

it because various people wrote about freedom case for compulsory sterilization amongst

and competition in I794.

certain families, perhaps. On the question of

We are living in a changed world. In the mentally defectives, it is very interesting to

world to-day we have a complete breakdown know, as most of us do, that in old families,

of the capitalist system because it is failing the mental defective is by no means un-

to deliver the goods to those who deserve common. I know of a public school where

them. Dr. Drysdale says in fact that if you there were two mentally defective sons of

see a very distinguished-looking old man earls. They were only admitted at that

selling flowers in the street, a man older than school because they were in that social

Dr. Drysdale, obviously an intelligent and position and had plenty of money. I main-

educated person, and you assume that that tain, and can prove to you, that there are

man has done something in his life which thousands of slum children whose intellig-

condemns him to the scrap-heap, he may ence, whose character, whose heredity, are

receive public assistance but may not breed. infinitely superior to that of the sons of an

Like many of those in this room, he may be earl, or even a duke-I do not know which is

past the reproductive age. Are we, for that the higher, really-but those children are

reason, to say that people whose economic condemned, by the capitalist state of society,

circumstances are less happy than our own to be wage slaves; they are condemned to

are, for that reason alone, unfitted to breed go to Dr. Drysdale on their bended knees and

and shall be deprived of the right of parent- say: " We will work for you at any wages;

hood? That is the position of Dr. Drysdale if we work, we shall prove that we are better

and his sympathizers.

than our neighbours round the corner who

In the short time at my disposal, I have to belong to trade unions."

put before you the reasons why competition Now what is positive eugenics? Positive

produces not only not the best bu't the very eugenics is, I admit, not sufficiently en-

worst in society, why competition, .as we see couraged perhaps by the Eugenics Society,

it to-day, gives us a moneyed and rich class, and one of the things with which I have the

whose vices are to control others, according happiness to be associated is an endeavour to

to their tastes; whose financial disasters draw up a health certificate before people can

expose thousands and perhaps millions of marry and breed. We are up against an

people all over the world to poverty. One enormous difficulty. Really, apart from a

can think of Kreuger and Hatry, and others, few rare diseases of the eye, or of the blood,

whose financial power in a capitalist society and certain gross diseases, we do not know

may shatter at one blow the position of many what is inherited and what is not. Positive

thousands. Dr. Drysdale may see a young eugenics may seem to be a vast and very

married couple whose income is in one of difficult subject, but I maintain that what

those concerns reduced to poverty overnight, socialists aim at will give those people

reduced to seeking help from the Public who are of sound stock and of sound

Assistance Committee, as many of us know heredity a chance to prove their worth,

from experience. Such a couple, regardless of apart from economic conditions. We social-

their heredity, their intelligence, their charac- ists-and I am very happy to state that

ters, are to be told by Public Assistance Com- I am allied with a distinguished body of men

mittees: " Live you shall, but breed you and women all over the world-maintain

must not." That is an impossible position to that there should be equal opportunity from

take up.

birth for all members of the community.

But let us continue with eugenics for a That is a very stable and, I think, a very

moment, because I do not feel that we have shrewd form of competition. There are a

learned a lot from Dr. Drysdale as to what number of jobs to be done in the world for

eugenics may be. Negative eugenics you are which some people may be more suitable

I12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

than others, and if everybody had equality characters of profiteers and exploiters and

of opportunity from birth, to be educated, to users of child labour in mines, and so on, of

be fed-not, I mean, as a free gift, but work which you all know a good deal better than

would be provided for their talents-then I do?

you will know who were the geniuses, who We have to-day a certain degree of social-

were the distinguished people, who should be ism-you can call it what you like-in water,

condemned to road sweeping and who should gas and electricity. You have a number of

be Prime Minister, and it will not be a ques- salaried workers, I have been one myself,

tion of having, shall we say, nine-tenths of the and you have those people who have what we

Cabinet coming from one famous public socialists want to have for everybody. We

school, because they have the money and want to do away with casual labour; we

choose their parents very wisely, in order to want to do away with exploiting the workers;

get an education, and the money to go to a we want people to be able to bring up their

university. The worst effect of civilization, as families under the best possible conditions,

I see it, is the waste of human material; and those who are not fit to have families

human lives are wasted and malformed. It will have to be so educated that they will

is nothing short of impertinence to go to a understand it. Among your salaried workers

young man or woman who is out of work and you have a number of people who are em-

to say: " You are out of work; you are not ployed at a secure rate, which may not

worth anything "-that is what in effect Dr. appear to be very large to those who are used

Drysdale has said. He said distinctly that to thinking in millions; but £400 or £500 a

if they could not get work they should, in year is riches to some of us doctors to-day.

effect, be sterilized. Perhaps Dr. Drysdale We know that we shall have a pension which

will be good enough in his reply to say what will at least enable us not to go begging from

he did mean by his statement, which I inter- Public Assistance Committees, and to bring

preted like that.

up such children as Nature allows us to have

You may have heard the speech by a in comparative comfort and security and

working man which was broadcast the other with independence. I maintain that it is the

day. He said he wanted " freedom to play spread of that system which will evolve the

his part as a useful and respected member of best type of human being. You are assuming

the community, freedom to raise his family that because parents in slum areas, earning,

according to the best traditions of our say, £2 or £3 a week at the outside, have

country; liberty to educate his children children, all those children in themselves are

without the fear of their being unwanted inferior to those better off. You know as well

when they appear in the labour market; as I do that that is not the case. As a matter

freedom in the last analysis to live what of fact, I maintain, as a medical woman who

Aristotle called the 'good life,' that he may has done child welfare work for twenty years,

hand on to posterity a brighter and a better that there are mothers of the well-to-do and

heritage than he himself has known." It rich classes whose children would have died

seems to me it is nothing short of nonsense but for the services of nurses recruited from

to talk of the ways of Nature as necessarily that very class that is despised. I have

producing either best breeding in animals or weighed 200 children born in Bermondsey

in anything. Are we so sure that we are between I920 and I922, who came to the

developing, by the natural process of the clinic at birth, and there were 70 per cent.

capacity for killing, the type of animal that above the average. By the end of a year,

we want to perpetuate; are we so confident those same children were in number only

that by encouraging those characteristics- 30 per cent. above the average weight. I am

because that is what it amounts to-in human not pretending that weight is the only thing,

beings we are going to evolve the qualities but they were beginning to deteriorate

which we all know exist in the race, but because of the effects of their environment.

which are not, I think, outstanding in the I have anxiously waited to hear from Dr.

EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM

Drysdale what effect he thinks environment development of mind which will enable

has on the eugenic situation of the race, people, on a voluntary basis, to refrain from

because a person may be perfectly healthy having offspring when they themselves are

and robust at birth, but after ten or fifteen not healthy. I do not entirely believe in

years of exposure to a number of infectious equality of pay for all jobs. I do not think

diseases, and want of sleep and malnutrition, I can deal with it at greater length.

may be ready to join what some of us have, Mrs. DRESCHFIELD said that in the colonies

I think, misnamed the Social Problem group, the so-called reactionary and wealthy people

whose very existence I begin to doubt. I find did all kinds of menial work, such as breaking

nothing in modem competition to show that stones, whilst the people who had been

the best man gets the job, and I find every- brought up to do so-called menial work

thing in favour of giving equality of oppor- would not do anything. In Canada, she had

tunity to all human beings.

seen in advertisements for workpeople the

As a last word, may I point out that I think phrase " No Englishmen need apply," be-

the socialist party of this country is the only cause English people upset everybody, and

one which has definitely tried to put birth- would not do the little bit more for a little bit

control measures into its programme. less.

Another instance of what I maintain is dif- Professor HUXLEY: The point which is

ferentiation is that whilst the rich woman or raised surely concerns the whole question of

the middle-class woman can get information, the relation of heredity and environment.

until a year or so ago the mother who could The great point at issue, to my mind, is this.

not pay could not get knowledge of how to It seems clear to-day that the point of view

restrict her family.

that environment directly affects the germ

What I wish to deplore is the assumption, is quite erroneous; that is to say, we cannot

which I think is wrong in fact, that wealth is expect to improve the inbom qualities of the

any criterion of intelligence or the right to race merely by changing environment. We

breed.

can, however, endeavour to do two things.

Mrs. HODSON: I should like, if I may, to We can alter the expression of those inborn

ask Dr. Churchill, before the discussion qualities which exist, and we can alter the

begins, to clarify for us what the practical selection which presses differently on dif-

scheme would be. Is it proposed to give large ferent genetic types in different environ-

family allowances to certain groups ? I want ments. The white man in the hottest part of

to ask her what the practical measures would the tropics is at a disadvantage as against the

be which would differentiate between, let us black man. There, environment encourages

take, healthy and unhealthy constitutions, a different physical type. When you come to

because that gets rid for the moment of the the social environment, the matter is far

difficult question of the value of their more complicated, because, first of all, man's

temperamental qualities.

mental plasticity is so great, and then your

Dr. CHURCHILL: If I reply to this ques- social environment is, in all developed socie-

tion, I shall keep you here for the rest of the ties, intensely complicated in itself because

day. I thought I made it clear that, under of class structure. The social environment

socialism, there would be equality of oppor- for a man in one class of society is different

tunity, that is to say, educational equality. I from that for another in a different class.

do not think that, in any form of relief, Dr. Drysdale said that the first thing to do

whether you call it family allowances or -and there I entirely agree with him-is to

public assistance, you are going to be able to determine the eugenic values of different

discriminate between the child of the London stocks. Speaking as a biologist who has had

University and the child of the slum. With to deal in that type of problem, I can see no

regard to pre-marital or pre-natal examina- other way of doing this scientifically save

tion, you must trust to the healthy develop- by equalization of the environment. Unless

ment of conscience and a still more healthy you equalize the environment of people of

I14 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

different classes, you cannot know what their was a Roman Catholic and opposed to birth-

genetic qualities are.

control.

Dr. Drysdale spoke of a man deciding for Dr. AIKMAN: I was very interested in Dr.

himself what he wanted to do when offering Churchill's remarks. I understood that the

his services. Quite apart from the whole determination of the social problem group

question of unemployment in general, it is was considered a most admirable bit of work,

obviously much more difficult for a man in the and if a socialist of Dr. Churchill's eminence

lowest social stratum to offer his services, or cannot accept such work as a basis for a

even to think of so doing, as a scientist, say, eugenic programme, I think it stultifies the

or a poet, than it is for a man from a middle- whole of the socialist movement, and I do

or upper-class home.

not think we can expect anything practical

Finally, on the question of the free play of from the eugenic point of view from any

competition, let us remember that the free socialist government.

play of competition takes place inside the When we come to consider conservatism, it

social environment. This may not be is based essentially upon the idea of aristoc-

deliberately controlled (although already racy and that some people are superior to

there is in many countries a considerable others. That is entirely contrary to socialism.

amount of conscious control) but it is un- Therefore, theoretically we should expect

consciously very much controlled and deter- conservatism to be better from the eugenic

mined by the prevalent type of economic and point of view. One idea of the superiority of

social system. One type of social environ- certain people certainly supports the con-

ment will encourage one type of man, and servative-the idea of family pride and

another, a different type.

affection-whereas if anyone believed that

On the broadest biological lines, the one his children were equal to the very worst type

real distinction which exists between man of children he saw in the country, he would

and the lower organisms is in the power of have no family pride at all, and would not

consciously envisaging a situation and mak- take the trouble to have children to support

ing a decision; in other words, the power of the family pride. To equalize environment,

deliberate knowledge and conscious control. children would have to be removed from

It seems to me, on the whole, that a deliber- their parents at the earliest moment, that

ate control of social environment, instead of is at birth. I believe that the removal of

leaving it to the free play of an unconsciously such children from their parents at a very

biased type of competition, is the ideal that early moment will destroy the parents' pride

we should aim at.

and interest in the family to a very large

Mrs. HORACE FARQUHARSON: I should
like to ask Dr. Churchill if she was not
making a mis-statement when she said,that the socialists were the people who had done
the most on the question of birth-control? Mr. Wheatley was a most retrogressive person, because he made it impossible for the workers, both voluntary and paid, at the various baby clinics, to give information which was desirable to mothers in certain
conditions. Mr. Wheatley absolutely forbade

extent, and therefore would be extremely detrimental to that family pride which is essential really for practical eugenics.
I think it is just possible that the con-
servative party might support a practical eugenics scheme with family allowances, which would definitely be a help to positive eugenics, but I cannot imagine any socialist party supporting such a scheme, or even introducing it, because it would be entirely

it. It was not until I93I that the prohibition contrary to their conception of equality.

was removed.

When we come to negative eugenics, I think

Dr. CHURCHILL: What I was referring to that the conservatives are more likely to put

was the great agitation going on within the a policy into practice than are the socialists,

Labour Party itself to have birth-control for the reason that the socialist refuses to

taught to mothers at clinics. Mr. Wheatley envisage the idea that some people are

EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM

II5

inferior and that therefore a scheme of conservative do not realize what socialism

negative eugenics is necessary.

really is.

Another thing in socialism is that it Captain PITT RIVERS: I feel very tempted

preaches class hatred, and I believe that class to recall that William Cobbett died a hun-

hatred makes it impossible to carry out any dred years ago. I think if there was one thing

logical, scientific scheme of positive eugenics. he stood for, it was for a vigorous denuncia-

And I am afraid the socialists will avoid any tion and contempt for labels which were

real scheme of negative eugenics because meaningless. He has been described as a

there are no votes in it.

tory; he has been described as a radical; he

I believe, from the results of the last has been described as a socialist. I think one

socialist government, that yet another would thing that was conspicuous about him was his

lead to a deterioration of the standard of almost equal contempt for people who

living throughout the country. We saw, flourished all those labels.

during the War, that restriction on food had Looking at the countryside to-day, and

a very detrimental effect on those who were living in the countryside and studying the

delicate and weakly. Many people in institu- problems of the agricultural worker and the

tions who would have survived in peace-time farmer, as to some extent I am privileged

undoubtedly met what might be considered to do, and to represent their problems, I feel,

an untimely end. I believe that a socialist as William Cobbett felt one hundred years

government coming in in that way would ago, that the real social and political division

practise a certain amount of negative in this country and in most other European

eugenics, and destroy many of those unfortu- cour.tries is between the country, agricultural

nates in institutions. I am afraid that the interests and the urban, industrial-I will

socialists even when carrying out environ- not say interests, but articulate interests.

mentally a measure of negative eugenics That certainly is a feeling that is increasing

would cause such deterioration in the general among producers in the countryside, that

health of the population as would more than they are largely sacrificed to the urban

counterbalance it. I believe the conservative industrial chaos.

policy is more favourable to eugenics.

I can say dogmatically that the true

Dr. CAROLINE MAULE: I think Professor countryman has an equal contempt for the

Huxley mentioned that fundamentally urban politician, whether he calls himself

eugenics depends upon what is in the cell conservative or whether he calls himself

itself; environment affects the ability to socialist. The socialist represents to them

express what is there.

the glib-speaking young man from Oxford

I feel that socialism is the form of society who lately has been touring the countryside

under which we will get the very best people and the best brains, because, unlike the last speaker, socialists want equal opportunity for everybody. There will be competition: we have an official socialist state in Russia; yet there is competition there. How can you
tell, as Professor Huxley said in a much better way than I can state it, whether a person has the values and the qualities under

in the vacations, preaching the gospel of socialism. It does not touch their problems; it has no meaning to them, and the speaker
usually gets a rough house. That, I suggest, is the real division, which is not represented in
the political party labels which are bandied
about. That recalls what was once saidChristianity, equality of rights, liberty, democracy have no meaning in reality whatsoever, but are only used as weapons, as

this particular system if you only associate catch-cries in a fight.

with people who have had all the opportuni- Dr. DUNLOP: This is a very involved

ties that a good economic condition gives? question. In the first place, to hear Dr.

You have no idea when you never really Drysdale, some would say he was a hard-

meet the others who have not the like oppor- hearted man. Remember, if he is right, it

tunities. I fear that many of those who are means that in the long run he is going to

C

x16 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

leave a better condition of affairs in the dale agree that would be possible, and would

world than those who at present may be Dr. Drysdale agree that you must work in a

regarded as noble and kind-hearted people. socialist State on that principle? We may

We have to look ahead. Those who are tak- be having socialism, and I am concemed

ing stem, strict views, to the best of their with the question: Can we have a socialist

ability, and facing what they consider are the State always working on eugenic selection?

facts, may be bringing about a far better It is not a question merely of eliminating a

condition in the future.

handful of gross defectives; it is a question

We have Russia and Japan side by side. of the sub-normal, below-average people.

Russia is a great socialist country, but, so far Mrs. TYSSEN-GEE: I should like to ask Dr.

as I know, paying no attention whatever to Churchill if she considered it a very great

eugenics. There is no restriction of families; kindness not to allow the poorest classes to

that is to say, there is no suggestion that the have the privilege of practising what the

less efficient should have smaller families, so middle classes have practised for genera-

I feel that the probability is that there is tions ?

deterioration going on in Russia. Stern, hard Dr. CHURCHILL: I tried to make it clear

Japan, alongside, is probably having the that socialists are very anxious to limit fam-

eugenic selection that Dr. Drysdale spoke of, ilies where the members of the families wish

and if that is so, they will, in the long run, it and where there are any reasons why it is

spread over Russia and wipe out an inferior undesirable to have more children. You will

race, owing to their stronger mental and find a more eugenic frame of mind among

physical qualities. That is a sort of example. socialists to-day than you found some years

I want you to realize that you have not ago.

simply got kind-hearted people on the one With regard to the question about Russia,

side and hard-hearted people on the other. I have not been there, and I am loath to

It is not that. I am concerned about eugenics. express any opinion about the population.

I feel that it is a fundamental question. One Everybody agrees on one thing, that in

feels that socialism may be coming, and I say Russia prostitution is abolished, and I think

to my socialist friends: What are you going that is one of the signs of a eugenic ideal in

to do about it ? One thing I have discovered sex relations. Once you start ithat, you are

is that there is nothing the socialist hates going to have a very much better state of

more than the word " eugenics."

affairs with regard to heredity.

The birth-rate must be limited-some get The CHAIRMAN: I am going to speak a few

as far as that, but " eugenics " does stick in words from the point of view of a plague on

their throats. I am thrown back to thinking both of your houses! It seems to me that

out for myself: How would you manage what really matters is the attitude of the

eugenics in a socialist State? It seems to me citizens and the State towards the interest of

that you must base your society on the future generations.

principle that your lowest grade has the Both the upholders of socialism and of

smallest family. It seems to me that you capitalism, as we see them to-day, are mainly

must build. I always start off on the two- concerned with the welfare of the present

child basis. I do not mind people having generation, that is with their own interests,

children provided they do not have more than our own interests, to the exclusion of the

two at the bottom, and then your other welfare of posterity. Thus the question for

grades would have larger families. Would us is: Which form of State organization is

that not mean that you would have a eugenic the most likely to foster in the minds of the

selection always going on ? There is an idea citizens interest in future-i.e. racial-

for both of the openers. Would Dr. Churchill welfare. If we believe (as eugenists) that

concede that it might be done, although eugenics, or, as I like to put it, changing

there is no suggestion of it in Russia? human nature for the better on biological

Would that be possible? Would Dr. Drys- lines, is the great problem of our time, then

EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM

we must try to find out what type of society, why? Our pioneer British economists who

or social organization, is the most likely to advocated this system were under no filu-

promote such eugenic practice, first, by sions concerning its limitations. They were

including adequate biological instruction in convinced of the importance of the Mal-

its scheme of national education, and thusian doctrine, and John Stuart Mill

secondly, by arousing and fostering a " racial expressly stated that no advance in the

conscience " in the minds of its citizens. The condition of the mass of the people could be

great need, as it seems to me, is for eugeni- hoped for from any advances in production

cally-minded leaders and a eugenically- until restriction of births was adopted. Our

minded public. But this does not neces- great Professor Huxley declared even more

sarily, or mainly, depend on the political or emphatically that no " fiddle faddling "

economic questions which form the main with the distribution of wealth would do

distinctions between a capitalist and a anything but intensify the disparities between

socialist society.

the rich and poor, without limitation of

Dr. DRYSDALE: I had hoped to follow Dr. births. The following simple facts will at

Churchill rather than to lead in this debate, least help to show the matter in its true light.

as I have not kept in touch with socialist After the Norman Conquest of io66, King

thought during the last few years, and was William compiled the famous Domesday

anxious to know if there had been any Book which contained the first enumeration

advance in its attitude. But, after following of the population of this country, and which

her remarks attentively, I have been quite gave it as about two and three-quarter

unable to detect any such advance, and I can millions. From that time to the beginning of

abate nothing from my opening contentions. the nineteenth century it rose to only about

She has simply reiterated the old diatribes nine millions, or by roughly six millions in

against the competitive industrial system, seven centuries. Then came the industrial

alleging that it favours the worst types and revolution and in the single century which

causes huge waste of human material, and followed, the population of England and

that it has completely broken down. She Wales rose from nine to thirty-two millions,

asserts that the majority of the children of so that this much decried capitalist industrial

the poor are sound and healthy at birth and system provided the means of existence for

that their later deficiencies are due to poor twenty-three additional millions in one cen-

environment; and she calls at least for tury, and the average standard of existence

equality of opportunity for all who are born. was materially improved, as shown by the

May I say that I heartily agree with our fall of the death-rate from about twenty-two

chairman in deploring any importation of to eighteen per thousand. It should especi-

party or class spirit into questions which ally be noted, however, that the fall of the

vitally affect the welfare of the community death-rate did not become definitely estab-

and of future generations. But we must have lished until the fall of the birth-rate com-

a sound scientific foundation for directing our menced from I876.

practical policy, and if I oppose socialism, it Nothing can do away with the fact that

is in no partisan spirit, but because a careful the competitive industrial system did provide

study of its principles and policy has con- for the twenty-three million additional

vinced me that it is totally destitute of such mouths, and the simple reason why it could

a foundation; and that, owing to its dis- not provide comfort and security was because

regard of the doctrines of Malthus and Dar- even this was far short of the needs of un-

win, it is perpetuating and must perpetuate restricted reproduction. We now know from

the very evils which it seeks to cure.

the actual records of different countries that

A word first about the breakdown of the an unrestricted birth-rate would be at least

capitalist industrial system. Certainly it has fifty per thousand, and that the death-rate

broken down in the sense that it has failed to of a well-fed community would be less than

bring about comfort and security for all, but ten per thousand, leaving an excess of births

II8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

over deaths of over forty per thousand, or should be favoured, it is obvious that they

4 per cent. per annum, which would cause should be those which tend to increase the

the population to double in every seventeen available necessaries and comforts of exist-

and a half years, or increase fiftyfold in each ence of the community. In these days of

century.

cheap power, mere physical health and

To cope with unrestricted population, strength is of little social value. The total

therefore, the social system would have muscular effort of a strong man working for

needed to provide for an increase of numbers ten hours a day is only one horse-power hour,

from nine to 450 millions during last century. which an oil engine will provide for one penny.

Of course it failed as every other system Hence we may say that the whole value of an

must have failed; but because we totally individual in modern society lies in his in-

ignored the economists who told us that we tellectual powers, and it is in these that such

could only realize its benefits by restricting enormous inherent and hereditary differences

births, its wonderful achievement in pro- exist, not only as tested by examinations, but

viding for such an enormous number has been in capacity for leadership and seizing oppor-

completely disregarded, and we are now tunities, which only freedom in a competitive

denouncing and doing our best to overthrow social system can develop and appraise. Dr.

the system which effected such a remarkable Churchill truly claims that such capacity is

advance, and which did improve the stan- often exercised anti-socially, and instances

dard of existence as soon as restriction of the ruin caused by dishonest financiers; but

births commenced.

the social service rendered by many great

This may not seem germane to the ques- captains of finance and industry is immense,

tion of eugenics, but it is fundamental, as we and if the mass of the people had higher

cannot come to any rational conclusions con- intelligence they would not rush to invest in

cerning eugenics or any other large social bubble schemes. If we attempt to protect all

problems, as Darwin has told us with respect fools from their folly by curbing all initiative,

to all biological problems, unless we keep the we shall breed a race of fools. Dr. J. A.

principle of the constant struggle for exist- Hobson, who is the only socialist writer I

ence which inevitably follows unrestricted know of who has frankly faced this difficulty,

reproduction constantly in mind. The Mal- wrote a book entitled Incentives in the New

thusian and Darwinian doctrines are as essen- Industrial Order in which he was forced to

tial for the proper understanding of social end with the pious but not too sanguine hope

phenomena as Newton's law of gravitation is that some solution would arise.

for astronomy, and the opinions of those who Lastly, as regards equality of opportunity

betray ignorance of- or hostility to those for the coming generation, this is an ideal

doctrines are valueless.

which all humanitarians must ardently

First, as regards the wastage of life. This desire, and none more than myself, but even

is not the result of a particular social system, such approach to it as we have already

but is inherent in all Nature. If there is one attained, together with all the other costly

thing Nature is prodigal of it is life. Millions " social services," has only been rendered

of eggs are produced by many fish for every possible by the reduction of the birth-rate

one which reaches maturity. There is not a which the individualist economists advo-

single type of plant or animal which does not cated; and it cannot be realised without a

reproduce far more rapidly than its means of considerable reduction of the reproduction of

subsistence. Although the preservation and the less successful types. There is no equality

comfort of all human beings who are born of opportunity in Nature between the child

should be the highest aim of society, it is a who is born in the frozen steppes of Siberia

hopelessly unattainable one if the birth-rate and the one who is born in the fertile plains

is not controlled to about a third of its of New Zealand. If our birth-rate of thirty-

unrestricted value.

six per thousand, which existed before i876,

Secondly, as regards the types which had been maintained to the present day it

EUGENICS, SOCIALISM AND CAPITALISM

would mean nearly a million and a half the guidance and incentive of competition is

additional children each year, and the only indispensable, and we can only make a reason-

equality of opportunity we could give them ably rapid advance towards race improve-

would be equality of misery. Even as it is, ment by reversing our present policy of

the efforts which have been made for the stifling it, and by reviving our old British

preservation and fostering of the weakly individualistic doctrines of liberty, efficient

children are having disastrous results, as the work and thrift, and parental responsibility.

medical authorities are being forced to Dr. STELLA CHURCHILL: I find it difficult

recognize. Dr. Gifford, the Deputy Medical to follow Dr. Drysdale over the wide field of

Superintendent of the Lancashire County his summing-up. I will deal briefly with two

Hospital, has just reported that the halving points only. He said he admitted the

of the infantile mortality has been accom- capitalist system had broken down because,

panied with an alarming increase in physical I take it, the natural methods of birth-control

and mental defect. " Mental deficiency, had not been sufficient-if objection outside

bronchitis, and dyspepsia are increasing." is Nature, and contraception is Nature, too-

" One in every ten of our people is too dull or therefore Nature is producing too many

too sickly to earn a living unaided. One in people at the present time.

200 iS, or has been, mentally afflicted. One Industrialism has increased production, in

in I20 is feeble-minded." This is the direct many respects a thousandfold. We all know

and inevitable result of socialistic and senti- that milk is poured into the gutters, fish put

mental care for the weak, and it is our boun- back into the sea, coffee burned and wheat

den duty as eugenists who care for posterity burned and ships sunk so that we shall not

to point out the evil of this course, and to get food. It is not a question of under-

insist that such types should be discouraged production, but a question of bad distribu-

from reproduction.

tion.

The one and only feature of Dr. Churchill's I end on a most cheerful note for all who

remarks which gives any encouragement, is sympathize with him. If Nature, or what-

her statement that the Labour Party is now ever is the force, continues to work at the

the only party which is demanding due present rate, the population in England and

provision of birth-control instruction at all Wales in I975 will be halved, and if it con-

Public Health Centres (although she made no tinues on at the present rate, in 2oo years it

allusion to the vote of the House of Lords in will be reduced again to the number of six

its favour some years ago). In my opinion, millions. Those are not my own views, but

as I have repeatedly urged to this Society, based on the work of Dr. Kuczynski, of the

this is the most important of all eugenic London School of Economics.

measures, and I am devoutly thankful to I should like to thank you all for bearing so

hear of it, after my painful past experience of patiently with me in what I know is an

the strong opposition of practically all the inadequate presentation of a very good

socialists to it. Fortunately, birth-control can cause.

be exercised by individuals according to their The CHAIRMAN: I am sure you wish me

own common sense and self-interest, irre- to thank Dr. Drysdale and Dr. Churchill for

spective of political dogmas; and we still have their kindness in coming here this afternoon

a sufficient remnant of individual competition and presenting the case from each point of

left to guide them in the right direction. But view. (Applause.)

Eugenics Review, Vol. ZVH1 No. 2

