EUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS AND THE WORLD'S RESOURCES*

By G. C. L. BERTRAM, M.A., Ph.D.

Introduction

axiomatic that for all supplies derived from

N this paper I propose to cover such a
wide field of inter-related facts and effects
that you must, please, excuse a certain abruptness in the description of present trends. In a paper read to the Royal Geographical Societyt about eighteen months ago I described population trends relative to the world's biological resources. I stressed that the field was dynamic and that the answer, measured in terms of human wellbeing, depended on the relative rates of the trends involved. In concluding I mentioned that, "eventually active and voluntary adjustment of populations will be as inevitable as it is already desirable." This afternoon I want to present briefly that same dynamic field of numbers relative to re-
sources, and then carry the argument further, into the special realm which is the concern of the eugenist.

living organisms there is a particular annual
cropping rate which will give the maximum harvest on a sustained yield basis. This is the rational rate of cropping, and departure from it in either direction results, over a period of years, in reduced yields. This principle is of primary importance, whether we are considering fishing, grazing, lumbering, or the fertility of the soil itself. Area is the most important single factor in production, and
the total area available obviously has an upper limit.
The biological resources with which we are concerned supply the whole of our food (with such minor exceptions as salt and saccharine) and a large part of our industrial raw materials. Usually food and industrial crops are in competition for the same areas of land. This competition will continue to be inevitable. Sometimes the calls of food and industry compete for the same commodity-for ex-

Biological Resources

ample, fats and vegetable oils. There is now

Needs, determined by population, are met a moderately well-agreed level of nutrition

over a wide field by biological resources. The which is deemed necessary for the individual. supply of these biological resources is de- There is no similarly agreed level of supply pendent upon a whole host of factors, some of rubber, timber, fibres, paper, soap, and so of them favourable, some of them un- on. Present shortages of food have shocked

favourable. Some of these factors are con- us all. But the avoidance of actual starvastant, some of them dynamic in their in- tion is very far from being enough. We have

cidence ; some are under our control and some begun to realize in recent years just how

are not. Frequently factors on the biological large is the gap between a diet sufficient to plane are both accelerative in action and maintain life and one adequate for full health

accumulative in result. I shall deliberately and vigour. Here it is worth noting one

leave aside the problems set by our economic respect in which our species seem to differ

system, in which individual and national from most other animals, certainly most

need and purchasing power so often seem mammals and birds. On a badly deficient

almost to be in inverse ratio.

diet, humans continue to reproduce at a rate

Biological resources derive from the which is only slightly reduced. This is a

present growth and reproduction of living point of leading importance in world affairs.

organisms, both vegetable and animal. It is Inadequacy of Supply is Normal

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on
November i8th, 1947. t Gaographical Journal, 107, pp. 194-210, 1946.

It is evident that a very large proportion of the 2,000 million people of the world, even

136

EUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS AND THE WORLD'S RESOURCES I37

in " normal" times, exist on an inadequate questions as an integrated and dynamic

diet. The present near-famine conditions in whole. In presenting the background one

large areas of the world are not something needs to integrate, first, changes of real need

novel but simply an intensification of the as measured by changes in human numbers

pre-existing lack of adjustment between and standards; secondly, a group of factors

supplies and numbers, between availability helpful in increasing supplies, for example the

and need. There has been and is far from cultivation of new lands, irrigation works,

true world sufficiency of any biologically the use of new crop varieties and cultivation

produced material, whether for food or practices; and, thirdly, a host of factors

industry, if we hold total need as our cri- tending to diminish supplies, including land

terion. The gap between need and supply is degradation and irrational exploitation.

immense, though largely unmeasured. Occa- First, what in our days is happening to the

sional temporary gluts have been spurious, total population of our species ? This is the

arising from lack of purchasing power and central factor which measures our total

not from real sufficiency.

needs. The answer is well known to members

The problem of inadequacy is of especial of this Society. We live in days of very rapid

significance within the British Common- increase of population.

wealth and Empire, a sample of the whole

world which contains abnormally great Population Changes and Decrease of

inter-territorial goodwill. Here, in the Mortality

Mother Country, some forty-five millions of Outside specialist societies there is a re-

us import about half our total sustenance. markable lack of appreciation of the great

Highly industrialized, we support a relatively increases which are taking place in the

high standard of living. The vigorous numbers of our own species, and indeed of

Dominions overseas, totalling less than population affairs in general. The usual

twenty-five millions of European origin, have assumption is that, because we reproduce so

an even higher standard of living but are much more slowly than our domestic animals,

among the world's greatest food-exporting and the length of each generation is so long,

countries. The new Dominions of India and our own numbers cannot increase rapidly.

Pakistan, with their 400 millions, import To you the falsity of that assumption needs

only a fraction of their food and have an no stressing. Mankind takes such peculiar

extremely low average standard of living. care of its relatively few young that actual

The Colonies, so diverse in their evolution, increases in man's numbers can be rapid. In

character, people and appearance, are scat- these islands we have increased our numbers

tered along the path which has India and approximately eightfold in the dozen genera-

Canada at its two extremes. The United tions since the middle of the seventeenth

Kingdom imports the largest quantity of century. In the four generations of the

food of any country in the world. India and nineteenth century we quadrupled our popu-

Pakistan, with nearly ten times our popula- lation, and this despite heavy emigration.

tion and one-fifth of the world's total, Carr-Saunders* points out that this modern

import relatively little to meet their immense trend towards much increased numbers must

and swelling need.

be unprecedented in human history. It

follows that we live in a time when total

Population the Measure of Need

human needs, and total human pressure on

What we need to know, on the world scale, the biological resources of the world, are

is whether the land is potentially capable of rising at an unprecedented rate. This pres-

producing enough to meet present and future sure is made all the greater because, in the

needs ahd, if capable, how soon ? The last few decades, world opinion has begun

present answer is, " We do not know, but we to recognize that human needs should be met

hope so." The reason lies partly in our by adequacy for full individual develop-

inability to view the background to these

* World Population, I936. Clarendon Press.

138 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ment, and not only by sufficiency for sur- He remarks that, " There are over 400 mil-

vival and reproduction. At the present time lion in India to-day-more than eight times

it is doubtful whether we are in a position to the population of Great Britain; and they

provide, on a world basis, even enough for are increasing now by fifteen per thousand

the survival of many. It is the relative annually, about six millions every year. The

rates of increase of population and supply mortality is very high; at every age up to

which are of leading importance.

fifty-five it is four to eight times ours....

The present unprecedented increase in Only half the people born reach the age of

human numbers is, of course, not a process 22, with us, two-thirds reach 6o. Of Indian

which is going on equally all over the world. girl babies born, only 57 per cent reach child-

In general, the fourfold increase of world bearing age, compared with 88 per cent of

population in the last three hundred years ours; and although in India only about half

has been the result of decreased mortality-a the girls who reach that age survive to the

decline in the death-rate and not an increase normal end of the child-bearing period, as

in reproduction. Because we value the compared with 89 per cent in England, they

individual human life and are philanthropic nevertheless produce on the average twice

in sentiment and in action, we must expect as many babies as English women do. As

an extension of the process of removing public health measures and nutrition im-

causes of mortality. Therefore we must prove, the mortality will diminish and the

expect, and budget for, substantial further population will increase still faster.... The

increases of world population in the coming present rapid increase of population is a sign

decades. That is inevitable, unless the that conditions have substantially improved

former causes of mortality are to be allowed in recent years.... The first of all India's

to re-assert themselves or unless we assume, requirements, if she is to be happy, efficient,

as we have no -right to do, that fertility will and prosperous, is better health, and that

fall rapidly.

implies beyond everything more and better

In particular it is the English-speaking food. But the immediate consequence of

peoples, on both sides of the Atlantic and better health and better food is a lowering of

elsewhere, who now have a replacement rate mortality, which means a further increase of

which falls below unity. But these groups population... ." Members of this Society

with a replacement rate near unity or know well the arguments, that industrialisa-

below are not typical of the world as a tion may lower birth-rates, that education

whole.* We have no good grounds for leads to contraception, and so on. The time

expecting that certain other populations factor is involved. There will be general

of the world, now quickly increasing in agreement here with Hill's conclusion with

numbers, will shortly reach the condition of regard to India-a population increase from

the English-speaking peoples. Their fall in 400 to over 700 million within a few decades,

replacement rate may come, but it is likely and a real requirement of food three times

to take several decades if not generations. what it is now. The increased quantities of

If we are successful in our efforts to promote food which must be made available are

the well-being of all peoples, we must expect enormous. As a rough measure it may be

that for a while there will be an increased said that I oz. per day extra for everyGne in

rapidity of population growth on the world India involves, at present, a total of roughly

scale. 4,000,000 tons per year. Over a million tons

A single example is enough. I quote from of extra food is needed each year to feed the

a recent pamphlet by Professor A. V. Hill.t present annual increase of between five and

* For example, see Dr. C. P. Blacker's " Stages in Population Growth, EUGENICS REVIEW, 39, 3,"

six million people. India is not however an isolated example

October 1947.

of present trends. A parallel course will

t India: scientific development or disaster? India-
Burma Association, 1944. (The text of an address to the East India Association on July 4th, I944.)

probably be run by China if conditions improve. She holds another fifth of world

EUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS AND THE WORLD'S RESOURCES I39

population, with a mortality rate probably exceeding that of India. Indeed there is doubt whether her population has risen at all in recent decades. The same pressure on the means of subsistence, the same low standard of lving, the same high mortality at all ages, is very evident too in such geographically circumscribed areas as Egypt and the West Indies, Ceylon, Java, and so on. The rate of increase of the availability of food seems, at least in some instances, not to have kept pace. Exertions in the fields of agriculture, engineering, and public health continue.
Fortunately, there are in the world a number of great countries which have huge exportable surpluses of food and other biological materials, so that in recent times, despite the real and unreal problems set by transport and finance, major famines have been infrequent.
Migration
Migration is considered by some to offer a solution to many problems. Successful and desirable migration involves two processes, one physical and one largely psychological. The physical aspect is that of transport and organization. If it is hoped that India's problem may be met by draining off the annual population increase in planned migration, that hope is set too high. India's net increase daily totals fifteen thousand. Sufficient shipping could scarcely be provided, quite apart from all other considerations. From the psychological aspect, it is evident that no acceptor country will want to receive immigrants at a rate faster than that at which they can be absorbed culturally and politically.
Future Population and Future Food
We must then, at this stage in our consideration, conclude that if we are successful in our plans for bettering the lot of the individual, and probably even if we are not, the population of the world will increase substantially in the next few decades and probably generations. Equally we must conclude that during this period we must increase the availability of food and other organic materials in much greater propor-

tion. Is this increase in fact possible, are we capable of achieving it, and are our present efforts yielding results at the rate required to meet increasing need ? It has already been stated that some factors in the environment are helpful and some the reverse. Here, too, relative rates of action are of great importance. Let us first consider some of those factors or trends which appear to help towards important increases in the production of organic matter for man's use.
Trends and Factors: Increased Areas of Cultivation
There are certain areas of the world where the land is properly cultivable, but in fact is not cultivated, because there are not enough people available on the spot to do the job. The Amazon basin, parts of Burma, New Guinea, and Sumatra are examples. I remind you here of the new East African groundnut scheme. Additional areas may be brought into agricultural production by means of new irrigation systems and by the extension of old ones. The Nile system affords the most widely known example. Already for some months each year no Nile water enters the sea direct. The sea receives only the water pumped from the main drains after passage through the soil of the irrigated lands. India's problem in particular has been stressed, so it should be realized that the irrigated area of the old India, some 70 million acres, is already more than three times
the irrigated area of the U.S.A. (the second on the list of countries with irrigation), and more than the combined total of the ten countries with most irrigation after India.* Yet presumably, the greater the dependence on irrigation, the greater the danger in times of periodic or abnormal drought.
Another way in which the crop-bearing lands of the world may be increased is illustrated by the northward push of the wheatbelt in Eurasia and North America during the last fifty years. This has been made possible by the use of faster-growing and earlier-ripening varieties of wheat, and the process of vernalization of the seed grain.
* The Times, November 27th, I945, reporting a Viceregal statement.

I40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

improvements in Technique
There is still much to be done all over the world, in the advancement of agricultural technique and animal husbandry and pest control. Great advances have been made, and can continue to be made, in the actual productive efficiency of the living organisms which are our means of subsistence. But the distribution of these improvements over the world is extremely uneven. There is far to go before we can reap the full benefits, even of the improvements already known torus.
Fisheries
Similarly, there are great strides to be made in the development of fisheries, and considerable efforts are being made to that end, both in the fresh waters and in the sea. Fisheries have the advantage that we can reap where we have not sown, and we can reap in the open, little hampered by the habits and the habitations of men.
Hindering Factors: The Individual Outlook in Hot Lands
Let us now look on the other side of the picture, at those factors and trends which are unhelpful.
Stockdale,* speaking in particular of the West Indies, has pointed out that " Most people in moist, hot tropical climates do not want to work very energetically for long hours: they seem to prefer to be satisfied with a lower standard of living and more leisure and they would, it appears, rather take life easily than add to their material comforts. This is an outlook which no one has a right to condemn, but it carries with it the corollary that the standard of living of most workers in such areas cannot be expected to rise enough to be comparable with western standards." That is a point which is too often overlooked.
Land Degradation Processes of land degradation are now
world-wide in their distribution, but vary greatly in cause and local importance. Local decreasing fertility and crop yields are often
* Development and Welfare in the West Indies,
Colonial, No. i89, 1945, p. 12, para. 6i.

early symptoms of that disease which may
develop into gross land degradation. Such degradation and erosion is now recognized as being ancient in local but recent in widespread incidence. The immediate agencies of erosion are wind and water, following removal or damage to the pre-existing plant cover. The causes of this damage are usually associated with improper exploitation in grazing, ploughing, firing, felling, or the collection of domestic fuel. This improper or too violent exploitation is itself the result of pressures, financial, biological, or otherwise.
In the United Kingdom our gentle and tolerant climate, together with the peculiar consistency of most of our soils, allows us to behave in a way which elsewhere in the world would rapidly lead to extensive erosion. The steepness of slope which can be safely ploughed is one example. There are now few countries in the world where land degradation, in one form or another, is not of major importance. In aggregate, the result of land degradation is that great areas of the world are producing less organic matter for man's use each year than those areas should properly produce. This process of degradation tends to be both accelerative in action and accumulative in result. The necessary counter-measures are usually obvious. But these take time, often at the cost of still further reduced production, before their cumulative effect can be seen and felt. Frequently, the degradation itself is a result of the rapid growth of the local population, whose pressing needs retard the necessary counter-measures.
Irrational Exploitation
Allied to this problem of land degradation is that of the irrational, over-exploitation of biological stocks. Each one, whether it be whales, wood, wheat, or wool, has a rational cropping rate, determined by the natural rate of growth and increase, and the local environment. Exploitation, at a rate which exceeds the rational, results in reduced yields later: it is stealing from the future. Yet over a wide range of biological production, living stocks, both of plants and animals, are being over-cropped to our own present and

EUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS AND THE WORLD'S RESOURCES I4I

future detriment. This process, too, tends to The rapid development of biological pro-

be accelerative in action and accumulative duction involves two chief processes: one

in effect.

the knowledge of what should be done, the

A large proportion of the forest lands of other the doing of it. At present, in most

the world are still being over-cut, the yearly areas, knowledge is far ahead of practice.

fell exceeding the annual increment of Practice, consequently production, is very

woody substance. Likewise, it is regrettably largely dependent on the actions of a

true that a large proportion of the most great diversity of individuals all over the

important fisheries in the world, particularly world who have in common one particular

the trawl fisheries of north-west Europe, attribute-conservatism. Education and

are being over-fished. Similarly, many areas largely dependent on the actions of a great

of the world are at present being over-grazed. diversity of individuals all over the world

who have in common one particular attri-

Tradition

bute: conservatism. Education and

Conservatism and the continued use of demonstration are the standard and the

obsolete varieties, techniques, or customs desirable methods of overcoming conservat-

also account for a less than rational produc- ism and so leading on to improved tech-

tion from many areas of cultivated land. niques and larger production. Fortunately,

Unnecessarily low yields are also frequently education and its results are accelerative and

to be attributed to unsatisfactory systems of accumulative. But it may well be, when

land tenure. Excessive fragmentation, shar- quantitative assessment of the factors has

ing, frequent redistribution of village lands, been carried out, that instances will occur in

strip cultivation up and down the slope, and which the results of education are demon-

other anachronisms are common examples. strably insufficient. If this is so, it may,

All of them are a particular hindrance to the however regrettably, be necessary for a time

planting of trees and any form of conserva- to resort to coercion. An unpleasant doc-

tion cultivation.

trine, indeed; yet what is the alternative ?

The quantitative data, relating to numbers,

Integration of the Trends

needs, and the environmental factors in-

These then are the circumstances. Par- volved in production, must be obtained and

ticular areas of the world, and the world as a action taken in accordance with the results.

whole, have populations which are rapidly There must then, in this matter of popula-

increasing, a process which is likely to go on tion trends relative to the world shortage of

for several generations. The people have to biological resources, be appreciation that the

be supplied with organic materials which can background is dynamic, that the relative

only be obtained by the cropping of living rates of the factors is of immense importance,

plants and animals. The amount properly and that eventually active and, let us hope,

needed by each individual is much more than, voluntary, adjustment of populations will

on the average, has ever been available .5o be as inevitable as it is already desirable.

far: the deficiency is measured in misery.

There are certain processes at work which are Conclusions Rightly Drawn by Malthus

favourable to increased availability for the That, I suggest, is a fair picture of the

individual, and there are other processes and present interaction of population trends and

circumstances which are unfavourable. the world's biological resources. We cannot

Many believe that service to others is a escape the conclusion which a great man

constant duty, and that therefore we should reached long ago. Dr. Malthus was indeed

press forward in our efforts to provide health essentially right. The truth of his principles

and adequacy for every individual. The for over a century has been blurred and

question is whether adequacy is possible now neglected. We need not to-day discuss the

and in the future, and whether we are acting reasons for that neglect. Certain aspects

with vigour enough to attain it.

have been revealingly set out recently by

142 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Flugel in his small but very helpful book, the main limitation on world numbers will

Pop,ulation, Psychology and Peace,* in a be from famine, disease and strife which are

chapter headed " Why Malthus is so hard directly or indirectly density-dependent in

to swallow." There is no gainsaying the fact, their incidence. All populations of animals

whatever the theoretical possibilities, that are in fact believed necessarily to be limited

there are alive in the world to-day more by such factors.* The use of contraception

people than there is food enough to supply itself is probably dependent upon density,

them adequately. Even supposing the rate though often indirectly through economic

of improvement of productive efficiency was influences. When eventually man limits

accelerated to run parallel with population populations deliberately in the common

increase (and suitable administrative and interest, that limitation, too, will in fact be

other arrangements were made) still there directly dependent upon density. Surely

must be a limit to the total of people who such controlled limitation must be more

can be adequately nourished on the surface acceptable to the sentiment of a thinking

of a globe of fixed size. C. B. Fawcett, in a world than the present uncontrolled and

recent paper,t has concluded, " It is clear painful factors of limitation.

from the estimates here given that the world

as a whole is capable of supporting a popula- The Possible Effect of Population Density on

tion much more numerous than that which the Individual

it carries to-day. The immediate problems of
over-population are limited to some few
areas; and the present-day ' pressure of
population' is not against the limited resources of the earth but against the various
barriers, natural and artificial, which hinder access to those resources. Yet the fact that
the size and natural resources of the earth are
fixed and limited ensures that its human population cannot increase indefinitely.
With our present powers of production the world may be able to support three times its present population in reasonable comfort. But if the present rates of increase are maintained that number will be reached in less
than a century from now." In fact of course, even our present population of two thousand millions is not supported in reasonable

I should like to digress here for a few
moments on the subject of the reactions of dense populations limited by the usual dis-
tasteful factors. Take, for example, the extremely dense and poverty-stricken populations of the poorer parts of Cairo or Calcutta -populations living in squalor, with a
dietary far below what is nutritionally desirable, and scourged by disease-populations of great density in which the environ-
ment presses very severely on the individual. I suggest that in such populations there is observable something similar to what is well known in populations of lemmings, locusts and certain other species when the
density has risen above a particular threshold level. The lemming, normally a timid, nocturnal animal, becomes aggressive, excitable

comfort.

and active in the daytime and moves in

limitation of Population There can indeed be very little doubt that,
despite all our efforts, during the coming century world population will continue chiefly to be limited, as it has been in general in the past, by factors which are painful to the individual and distasteful to educated sentiment. The Punjab and Egypt are woeful recent reminders. Floods, fires and earthquakes will take their usual toll, but
* C. A. Watts, I947: The Thinker's Library, No. I17.

swarms when density becomes high and food supplies scarce. The locust under similar conditions passes from the solitary to the gregarious or migratory phase, anatomical changes taking place in addition to changes in individual psychology or reactions. In densely populated cities of men, burdened by excessive environmental pressure, do we not observe similar and comparable changes, an increase of individual excitability com-
* For example see summary provided by A. C.
Crombie, " Interspecific Competition," J. of Anim.

t The Advancement of Science, 4, No. I4, June 1947. Ecol., 16, No. i, May I947, p. 44-73.

EUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS AND THE WORLD'S RESOURCES I43

monly leading, under the influence of quite development, or the greatest spiritual well-

minor stimuli, to banding together, mass being, or what is it ? We are forced to con-

violence, mob hysteria, or call it what you sider these possibilities. Most, I think, of

will ? A rumour, a broken shop window, a whatever persuasion, will approve a goal

child run over by a car, may stimulate a defined as a state of affairs in which every

sudden riot bearing no relation in its violence individual shall have the opportunity to

to the trifling stimulus.

develop to the full all the talents with which

Thinking along these lines is important. he is endowed, physical, mental and spiritual,

Certainly such ideas, I believe, throw a use- in the service of his fellows. We must then

ful light upon what has been happening in appreciate that if this is the goal it will be

India, and what to expect there and elsewhere. necessary to limit populations in accordance

with it. The optimum in fact will probably

Conscious Limitation of Populations to

be very different from an optimum deter-

Optimal Sizes

mined on a basis only of food or economic

I return from the digression to our main advantage. For example, it may well be

theme. Limitation of populations by con- that individual mental and spiritual develop-

scious control must come. Let us hope, let us ment will always demand opportunity of

strive to arrange, that in the long run the solitude in surroundings unchanged by man.

individuals which make up populations will That might require considerable areas of

be sufficiently tolerant and educated to use land not being given over to production or

their personal free wills in the common ser- cultivation.

vice, both in limitation via contraception,

and in reproduction.

The Eugenic Content of Limited Populations

When limitation of numbers in the com- So far in speaking of populations there has

mon interest approaches, a whole host of new been the tacit assumption that each indivi-

problems will arise. Now is not too early to dual is the equivalent of every other. That,

begin facing them. Many have already of course, is very far from being so. On

realized that for any particular standard of whatever basis optimal populations are

nutrition and material well-being, which sought by deliberate limitation of numbers,

may be chosen as desirable, there must be an it will be of paramount importance to arrange

optimal population. The optimum may be that those populations shall be composed of

assessed on a world or on a regional basis, suitable individuals. In fact, to approach the

and it will vary in time with changes in ultimate goal, there must not only be

environmental factors, technical skills, optimal populations but those populations

mutual trusts, and so on. But the existence must have optimal contents in terms of

of an optimal population is a reality, and heritable individual qualities.

departure from it will inevitably be accom-

panied by some degree of misery, or reduced Conclusion

well being. So far, however, those who I have tried to focus to-day's discussion on

appreciate the reality of an optimum in the major physical and biological factors

populations have, in general, thought of the whose influence seems to be inescapable.

optimum only in terms of food or economic Political, emotional and other factors I have

advantage. But in fact there must be an excluded. The difficulties before us are

optimal population corresponding to what- clearly immense. The first requisite of all is

ever feature may be chosen as especially that there should be wide appreciation of our

desirable. Thus we are forced to seek to present state and future course, then the

decide our ultimate goal and purpose as reasons, both physical and philosophical.

men on earth. Do we seek a world in which Once there is appreciation we may begin to

the main criterion is that each individual move, but the obstacles can scarcely be

shall have the best possible diet, or the most over-estimated. But, on the other hand, lack

luxurious surroundings, or the best physical of wide appreciation now is no reason for

144 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

present inactivity. Anything which can be lightened and beneficent method of taxation

done at this stage by the few to improve the introduced at the beginning of our regime.

average quality, the gene content, of the In discussing population trends now, as

individuals making up populations in the happened round about 125 years ago, I am

near future, will have an accelerative in- always sickened when the name of Malthus

fluence in the pace of future advance. That, is mentioned because almost invariably a

I suggest, is the background against which harping back occurs to his theories on the

our present eugenic effort must be viewed. Principles of Population, theories now largely

The whole problem is o-ne of urgency and exploded, and no reference is made to his

importance. It exists because we strive to chief contribution to the betterment of

control mortality and yet possess a sense of society. He and his friend Ricardo did more

values.

than anyone else to influence rule in India.

This benefited its inhabitants and enhanced

the renown of the British. It should never

Discussion

be forgotten that for twenty-nine years he was Professor of Political Economy at

Dr. S. Vere Pearson: My arguments are Haileybury College, where all those going to

going to revolve around two texts, viz.: India, under the East India Company, were

i. For every mouth born into the world there is a pair of hands.
2. Nature ordains that, since knowledge and skill advance, man is able to live comfortably on smaller areas.

trained; and in particular that he elucidated
the law of rent and enabled those responsible to prescribe a great improvement of the land system in India; and that increase of food production and of population resulted. Previously the laws and practices of the rulers

Therefore it is possible for a full personal of India had taken for revenue a share of the

development and the enjoyment of a higher gross produce of the land, thereby penalizing

standard of living to be attained without all improvements by the tenant and actually

"active regulation of population sizes " if preventing a good deal of industry. But

these two statements are accepted and through Malthus's and Ricardo's teachings a

sensible action be founded upon them. For I crop share tenure was based on the net pro-

believe procedures under man's control could duce, consequently waste land was redeemed,

increase food production and distribution to and poor cultivation was replaced by a vast

an enormous extent if only we should awake growth of food production. Not only so, but

to the possibilities, and overcome the the servants of the Indian Civil Service

obstacles which thwart us from using our through the wise start given by Lord Clive

opportunities.

during the two years of his rule in India,

This is a big subject impossible to cover in " the most glorious years in his life " (J. R.

the course of a discussion. I shall therefore Green), were not allowed the least personal

confine my attention to two points, (a) The interest in land (which was declared to be the

population and resources of India, and (b) A property of the State and the source of its

brief reference to the present-day obstacles revenue) or in any other business in India.

to improved food supplies for the masses. In Bombay Presidency (excluding Sind)

As far as we can tell the vast majority of there were, according to the first reliable

the people of India have always been poverty survey of i850-I, only i42 milion acres

stricken. But the evidence seems to prove cultivated (and about I827 far less) whereas

that, up to about thirty or forty years seventy-five years later nearly three times

ago (and I shall not attempt to travel this amount was under cultivation; and

beyond that date), British rule there im- during this period a great increase of the

proved matters materially by comparison population occurred.

with previous ages. How was this accom- Unfortunately for the people of India,

plished ? It was largely by means of the en- cultivators have slipped back into the pre-

EUGENICS, POPULATION TRENDS AND THE WORLD'S RESOURCES I45

British condition of economic bondage, not better food supplies in these days when the

to the State, but to the landlord, who was people of many parts of the world easily

squeezed in between the State and the produce surpluses and when transport facili-

worker; and not only the cultivator of the ties are so well developed is their poverty;

soil but also the workers who live in the and that is not unconnected with the mishaps

cities. In ancient days urban land hardly and mistakes governments have made and

existed. At the outset of British rule, largely continue to make, in particular those con-

through mishaps, large areas of town and nected with taxation. I have just given some

village sites remained outside the beneficent obvious hints in my references to systems of

action of the just system of raising revenue, levying revenue in India and cannot elabor-

and the unfortunate mistake of the " Per- ate them now. Beyond these hints, however,

manent Settlement " was made covering the let me say: Are there not too many inter-

very large area called Bengal (a larger one ferences by the governments of the world,

than the present), more than half of which not only upon the freedom of exchange-I

area was at that time waste or unused. Con-
sequently, whereas about the time of the
Settlement (introduced in I793) the rights of the Zemindar was only one year's revenue,
twenty years later when this settlement that
was to be permanent was still in its infancy land sold at about twenty-eight years' purchase. And since those days the mistake has become more disastrous still owing to an increase of urbanization and the exemption

am a life-long and unrepentant Free Trader -but also upon the freedom of production through the restrictions and regulations that are imposed upon individual enterprise and
through the heavy burdens of taxation? These restrictions and burdens seem to me to bring also, amongst other things, currency troubles and public debts, and conflicts of all sorts which tend to breed war. I

in urban areas of " unimproved " site values am not one of those people who try and

for assessment for revenue.

imagine that wars have a eugenic effect on

The chief obstacle to the masses obtaining population trends.

Eugenica Review, Vol. XX3XIX No. 4

