THE PERSONALITY CHARACTERISTICS OF PARENTS OF PROMISING CHILDREN*

Miss MILDRED CREAK, M.D., F.R.C.P., D.P.M.:

I WAS recently held up in a traffic block, a most usual occurrence these days, and I had a margin of time in which to look
around. Two lanes of cars were held in a complete *impasse because a G.P.O. van (unloading) and a parked car were opposite each other. The block lay ahead of me and there was nothing I could do, and it seemed hopeless and likely to last all day. Very soon, however, a policeman sauntered down the narrow lane between the two lines of cars. There was an instant change in the feeling of tension. With a humorous look he queried could I move to within two inches of the car in front instead of perhaps a couple of feet; he indicated the space with his hands and nodded approval when I'd done all I could. By doing the same for all of us, he succeeded in getting the van out and the opposite line flowed once more. Ours was
still held up by a red light, and I reflected on the quality of my feelings owing to this, saying to myself (and the Eugenics Society) "That is the sort of thing children want in a parent." Firstly, I reflected, as a group those of us in cars accepted his rule. Secondly, we assumed that he would know what to do, and it was obvious that he did so. Had he come along shouting and scolding, throwing blame
K-about, officiously taking numbers, my
:reactions would have soon changed to a defensive obstinacy. Had he pulled me so 1close to the next car that I had smashed my
headlight I might have panicked. Thirdly,
we had to suppose him incorruptible. Had he been bribed by the G.P.O. to favour their tvan at the expense of our cars, should we not ihave pushed in to insist on making our
.advance before it was threatened. He must
4not be what children often call "unfair." 3iut note that all his qualities were taken on
* A syn&posium held at a Members' Meeting of the
'Eugenics Society on January i8th, I956....

trust-for all we actually knew he might have been a gangster in disguise.
As I drove on, it seemed to me that as a "promising child" in that context, I owed much to that parental figure, or rather that he succ'eeded because of our readiness to use him as a parental figure; but also that his obligations, in order to deserve such investiture, were very considerable.
In thinking about this paper, however, I soon realized that a child psychiatrist is the last person ever likely to know about successful and contented parents, for he never meets them. He may count them among his friends and colleagues, perhaps, but without knowing much behind the scenes. His patients will all be children whose promise, as the parents see it, has been blighted. I put it that way because while some parents feel guilty, often unnecessarily blaming themselves for failure, others blame an illness or the school, or any other convenient object, and yet others fail to give due weight to the child's quality of basic endowment. How often I have to remember not to comfort parents by the homely proverb " You can't make a silk purse out of a sow's ea;.
Parental Expectation
This raises a question in my mind as to what is meant by "promising." I once treated a near-psychotic child whose anxiety was so great that she never uttered a word outside her own home, neither in the streets, shopping, nor in school. But her teacher reported on her, " a nice quiet child who gives no trouble." She had a good intelligence and quite possibly to that teacher she appeared full of " promise." At least the very great threat which menaced her stability was not apparent to a busy,

79 THlE EUGENICS REVIEW, July, 1956. 48, 2.

8o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

perhaps inexperienced, girl coping with a class of near fifty.
Some parents may demand nothing more than scholastic prowess-reaching a certain place by a certain time-losing sight of education as a process which should challenge and draw out from the child his highest potential. Yet we have in our former Prime Minister an example of a richly fulfilled promise preceded by a disappointing scholastic record. Finally, I think we have to think very carefully about what our society demands from its citizens. The diligent and docile taxpayer seems far removed from the skilled saboteur in wartime, yet some of our " promising " citizens seem to have been able to play this dual role. One might therefore want to put high on the list of " promising'" traits those of adaptability and resourcefulness.
It was while I was trying to clarify for myself what qualities I would link with promise that I came across a paragraph in an article by Marian Miller (from the New Era) which seemed to focus these ideas. The article, which many of you will have read, is a study of Blake's Job from the standpoint of a Freudian. In it she says, " I have come to look on Blake's Job as the story of what goes on in all of us, when we become sterile and doubt our creative capacities, doubt our powers to love and to work; and also a story of the battle we all have to go through, to a greater or less degree, and whether we know it or not, in learning how, to become able to love and to work." I think we might regard the consummation of pare- thood as those qualities which enable their children " to love and to work" to full capacity.
The Role of Anxiety
Of all the factors which prevent a full maturity of this kind, none is so ubiquitous as anxiety. I use the term here in the Freudian sense, indicating tension, closely allied with inhibition, and deriving from stress and conflict which is unresolved because its roots lie in the Unconscious and therefore the dynamics remain hidden. (I realize this is a sweeping assumption, but I do not propose to defend it in a sentence or

two, and inadequately. At least you will all
be aware of the arguments for and against
such an assumption and can read them at
leisure. But it would be unrealistic not to
put it to you as my own personal standpoint,
from which I argue.) Do not suppose,
however, that I condemn anxiety in the sense that I would regard it as a noxious
symptom to be avoided at all costs, and removed whenever possible. Far from that, I would see it, particularly in children, as inseparable from growth and the achievement of maturity. Every child who learns to
walk thereby increases a hundredfold the range of his vulnerability; and we do see
infants who are " put off " walking for
months by some deep-seated fear. I have in mind a child who subsequently suffered a
complete mental breakdown and who would not walk, although his mother felt sure he could do so. He would, however, ride everywhere on a tricycle. So she hid the tricycle, whereupon he walked quite easily, but I think at that point took his first steps
away into mental isolation. One can imagine that it would not be
difficult to produce children far freer of
anxiety than ours commonly are, but one
can only imagine doing so on a sort of production line. They would need to be very securely nurtured in early infancy and brought up in a uniform and non-demanding environment in early childhood. They would at all times be sheltered from adult conflict, and competition would be reduced to a minimum by grouping the same age together. In later childhood and adulthood, well infused with a uniform pattern of thought and practice, they would be likely to operate efficiently and very happily, provided they lived under an umbrella wide enough to afford them plenty of freedom, and impervious enough to prevent them comparing their lot with others, whether we think of others in the present tense or in terms of history. It has been seriously suggested by people better qualified to observe these things than I am that neurotic anxiety has been eliminated by means of a totalitarian upbringing. Even in our own culture we can see how far a group, say, of senior secondary

PERSONALITY CHARACTERISTICS OF PARENTS OF PROMISING CHILDREN Si

modern boys is at ease or otherwise with a similar group from a conventional public school. If we all had everything in common, surely there would be a loosening of many tensions which are socially derived?
Successful Parenthood
I may seem to have laboured this point, but it is relevant to this problem of upbringing and successful parenthood; for
surely it is the job of a parent to produce
something of this serenity in family life, but, in our way of thinking, not to eliminate conflict and competition, but to be there when needed in order to buffer the resultant stress, and to restore the child's faith in the world as a loving place, with plenty of room for him in it.
You will remember that the policeman showed me I really had plenty of room, and perhaps we could now return to him, seeing where he embodied qualities that I would look for in the parents of happy, stable and intelligent children.
To be happy one must be able to effect good relationships, and to tolerate bad ones
now and then, to be able to work, that is to
say to create, and to find an outlet for that creative activity. That means that a child in infancy must have long enough of a secure nurture to enjoy it, and to enjoy and be enjoyed by those who engage in his nurture, and perhaps it means that he must have this for long enough for it to endure in his experience as a reality and not just as a fantasy. Thus when bad times come, as they must do, and he is separated from the provider of good things, he is not inconsolable. He may even, with luck, be intelligent enough to find something new for himself. But if this happens too often, too soon or too severely, we may find that he becomes what Bowlby has so aptly called the " affectionless psychopath," beholden to no one. When the time for a less completely cushioned environment arrives, a good parent is prepared for emotional storms, and we all know how

common these are in early childhood. This is a trying time for parents, when their maturity is really put to the test. If there are too many unresolved conflicts in the hinterland of their own childhood, they may be threatened and peculiarly vulnerable to difficulties at this stage. For they are -not yet very experienced parents, and it is dangerous for them if they become unable to pull together. When that happens, the rhild wields a two-edged sword, and they may hate him for doing so. It is at this stage when they are inevitably (in my view) involved in imposing a number of frustrations that they are so apt to feel guilty, for the sins of one generation are too often visited on to the next. Even so, conflict cannot be sidetracked nor resolved by a reasonable and too logical approach. I am always reminded of the passage " charity suffereth long and is kind," not forgetting that farther on it "rejoiceth in the truth." Psychiatric help can sometimes prove timely in preventing a hostile pattern of relationships from becoming a fixed one.
Finally, I would say one word about the question of intelligence. I think it is probably a mistake to think of native endowment as a quantum. If you can't make a silk purse out of a sow's ear, you might be able to make a very nice pigskin one, and find it a more enduring kind to have. But in some families, and this was so with the boy who would only get around on a tricycle, a complete turning away from progress in early childhood can result in a state often confused with severe mental defect. To all intents and purposes it is a form of mental defect, as Professor Penrose pointed out in a recent address to the psychiatric section of the Royal Society of Medicine. Perhaps\ the human and creative miracle is that so many of us grow 'up and function moderately well with no more than ordinary endowment and little help from our parents. This being so, I hope many of my remarks may be hotly disputed.

Mr. S. G. SINGLETON:
It is unfortunate that the majority of the cals have persuaded most parents that a popular daily newspapers and weekly periodi- child's selection for grammar school

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

education means that:

school examinations and particularly that of

(a) they have fulfilled their main purpose as the S.S.E.E.

parents;

Thus the honours board would be full and

(b) the child deserves praise and reward for a the headmaster's room would be clear of

great achievement; (c) all neighbours and relatives should be
required to join in a chorus of adulation in public, whilst being sick with envy in private.
So strongly is this opinion held by parents that enormous pressure is brought to bear on edifcation authorities to provide more grammar school places and upon headmasters to coach or cram more children to fill these places.
Some politicians who know full well that the number of children suitable for grammar school education is limited to quite a small

importunate parents. I would at this stage, though, wish to make it quite clear that despite all I have said I am second to none in my determination as a primary school headmaster to spare no effort to ensure that the children in my care who show grammar school aptitude and ability shall go to that school.
From the point of view of the nation,
however, academic ability is not enough, and
when I think of the promising child I use not one but several yardsticks.

percentage in each age group follow the line

of least resistance by proposing either:

An Experiment in Assessing Abilities

(a) to eliminate the grammar schools, or

and Aptitudes

(b) to fix arbitrarily such a high minimum proportion of selection over the country as a

In my own school of over 6oo children I

whole that practically any child with any have for many years grouped the pupils

pretension to academic ability over the according to age and ability. There are thus

average would be admitted to a grammar school.

four age groups in four streams plus two small special classes for the dull, backward

The effect of this concentration of atten- or retarded.

tion on academic promise and ability is I am fortunate in having for my admission

extremely harmful. Some L.E.A.s and some special class an outstanding teacher who has

H.M.I.s tend to judge the success or failure of been trained at London University and has a

a school and its head according to the diploma for the teaching of E.S.N. children.

number of grammar school places gained, She is also qualified in the testing of children

and it has been not unusual for the opening for I.Q. purposes. Some five years ago I had

sentences of Ministry reports on a primary a teacher extra to requirements and, by

school to deal solely with this subject.

arrangement with the head of my con-

My own authority, I am glad to say, will tributory infants' school, I arranged for the

have none of this and no mention whatever testing of all my admission group of I20

is made in reports of the number or propor- children. These were tested by a specialist

tion of children going to a grammar school. teacher both to establish I.Q. and to make

Over the country as a whole, however, I individual reports on their qualities such as

am quite sure that if parents or teachers were potential leadership, interest in other

asked to define a promising child they would children, home circumstances, attitude of

immediately think in terms of academic parents, etc. The children were then placed

ability and grammar school selection.

in their appropriate classes but mainly

An ideal parent would also conjure up in according to attainment. Those children

the minds of most teachers the picture of a who showed potential promise but whose

couple of adults who having produced their actual performance appeared to be above or

children, fed and clothed them suitably, below expected attainment were made the

presented them at school punctually and 'subject of special inquiry. Thus we had

regularly, showed a reasonable interest in children who were doing better work than

school reports and school functions and their I.Q. suggested likely and we also had

accepted without question the results of children doing worse.

PERSONALITY CHARACTERISTICS OF PARENTS OF PROMISING CHILDREN 83

The Importance of Home Influence
I should imagine that all would agree that whether we like it or not, home plays the dominant part in a child's development, and the relationships between parents and other members of the family exert an influence of profound importance throughout childhood and adolescence. I therefore encourage the closest co-operation between parents and school, though not by a, P.T.A., for which there has never been a demand. Parents are encouraged to visit school and they have priority over all other visitors. In the cases such as I have mentioned I write to the parents and ask them to come and see me. I may also add that I take the same action in any case of what is generally called delinquency, for such delinquency is quite often. not due to a fault in the child but to its exposure to undesirable influences at home or elsewhere.
The Value of Parental Interest
In my experience of over thirty years as a teacher and over twenty years as a head teacher I have found that the attitude of parents to school and to children has changed profoundly.
When I was a young teacher there were, generally speaking, two kinds of parentsone said, " If you were punished you must have deserved it, so here is some more to go on with "; the other said, " I'll see that ,teacher," with appropriate actions to lend weight to his words. Beyond this, there was little interest in the child except that, with some exceptions, the gaining of a scholarship was looked upon with disfavour by the poorer parents. There was, however, a small group of parents who, though their children failed the scholarship examination, were prepared to pay grammar school fees and to make any other sacrifice in the interests of their children who had showed near-scholarship ability. Quite often, this type of child, brought up in a good home, possessed those very remarkable qualities of industry and pride in a task so well performed, because all work is meticulously checked and re-checked before presentation, that it brings about its

own failure nowadays in an examination where the emphasis is on speed and still more speed.
To this extent the country is the poorer, because of the almost complete elimination of fee-paying grammar school pupils.
Parental Attitudes
The parents of to-day have a very different attitude from that of the first two groups. They have been encouraged to let the Press, cinema and the radio make opinions for them, and the State to shoulder their main responsibilities.
They are, in the main, generally concerned for the welfare of their children, but they are confused by the multitude of counsellors and by the outpourings of the popular Press. They do not realise that every child has its own personality and its own problems and they follow eagerly the advice given over the radio or in the Press without realizing that the most dogmatic adviser is usually the least informed.
Most of the parents are familiar with terms such as complex and neurosis and they speak with awe of frustrations and repressions. It is most difficult to persuade parents to understand that discipline in conduct and speech is still a virtue, that discord in the home will produce anxiety in the child and that a child should not be asked to give more than it can.
Some Results of the Experimental Survey
As a result of the survey of the I20 children to which I have referred previously, I interviewed many parents and I add, as a confidential appendix, the reason for my inquiry, the action taken, and the result of such action in six cases of special interest.
Of the twenty children I had estimated five years ago as likely to reach grammar school standard by I955, according to their then estimated I.Q., seventeen qualified, three did not qualify, whilst a further seven -making a total of twenty-four selectedreached the required standard and were transferred to a grammar school. Lest there should be any misconception about the

84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

percentage of children selected in this case, i.e. 20 per cent, the National Council of Educational Research estimate that between 5 per cent and I0 per cent of children are suitable for grammar school education, whilst the proportion of children selected over the whole of Hampshire county is round about i6 per cent.
Of the children whose performance had exceeded their early promise it can generally be said that home influence was the deciding factor. There were other children who had not shown the estimated ability in their eighth year who reached the " interview ' stage, but most of these and some of the seven are now the disappointed children of disappointed parents because of this grammar school " at any price " obsession.
Possibly I should explain that when I say some of the seven are now disappointed I mean that they have already found the pace of the grammar school beyond them and they will be among the alarmingly large numbers of children who leave the grammar schools at fifteen or at sixteen without taking the G.C.E. or training for the professions.
Changes in Parental Attitudes
In my own period of training some thirty-five years ago at University College, Southampton, I found that the lectures in psychology were the most interesting and useful. I do not, however, pretend to be a psychologist in the professional sense, but I have tried to draw conclusions which can be justified by evidence, from my observation and experience of many thousands of parents and children.
As a young teacher I was quite convinced that many parents should have been sterilized before puberty, and though my experience in the teaching of children of large families brought into the world without any thought or desire for the children has shown me that occasionally a worth-while child may emerge, I still think I was not entirely wrong.
At the same time I must confess that I have been greatly impressed by the change that often takes place when a large family, formerly housed in an inadequate or otherwise unsuitable house, is rehoused.

I am also greatly impressed by the changed outlook of the younger parents and the late teenagers because of what they have learned- during their period of National Service.
Just as the multiple stores with their cheap and attractive children's dresses and other clothing have effected a revolution in
the clothing of children over the last quartercentury, so National Service has given the present generation of young parents standards of home order and cleanliness that are all to the good and far beyond those of their parents.
Parents of Promising Children
We have many more promising pupils and have many more parents who really want to
be good parents. The best parents in my opinion have these characteristics:
(i) They should have reasonable standards of intelligence, and, though I shall no doubt be accused of sex bias, the father should be at least as intelligent as the mother but probably more so.
(2) Any children were born because they are wanted.
(3) The number is limited only according to family income or other good reason.
(4) The parents face the obligation to exercise authority from infancy onwards, wisely,
fully and together. " Divide and conquer " may have been a motto of Caesar, but it is innate in every child.
(5) Close interest - without interference - is
taken in the children's play, their friends, their occupations, particularly their reading. (6) Similarly close interest is taken in the activities of any organization to which the children may belong whether it be kindergarten, school, Scouts or youth club. (7) These parents distinguish between ambition for themselves and ambition for their children, for it happens so frequently that when the oldest child wins a scholarship each successive child becomes burdened with the duty of " doing as well " as his or her brother or sister. Just as frequently this anxiety is quite unnecessary but can defeat its own purpose whilst doing irreparable harm to the children. (8) Similarly these parents disting,uish between generosity to their children and overindulgence. More trouble is caused by excessive pocket money than by the lack of it and it is astonishing in how many cases excessive pocket money and broken homes are coincident.

PERSONALITY CHARACTERISTICS OF PARENTS OF PROMISING CHILDREN 85

(g) From the point of view of the school one of the worst faults in a parent is possessiveness. Sooner or later there comes the tug of war between parent and the outside world, whether it be school, college or workshop and, later on, the girl or boy friend.
(io) I have not mentioned, so far, religion or the Church, but in a scientific world there is still the need for religious instruction and moral teaching both in and out of home and school.
(ii) Finally, the parent who takes an active part in local or national organizations may, and often does, transmit qualities of leadership to his or her child, and this child tends to take the lead or be given the lead in school. This is sometimes a mixed blessing for child and school.
NOTES ON CASES OF INTEREST
A showed at 7 years an I.Q. of I28. Attainment only reached B standard.- The child was unhappy and worried. Both parents had attended grammar school with reasonable success and were so anxious for grammar school selection that the child was given homework by them every evening. The parents were advised to drop homework altogether. Result: (Fortunately) The child has transferred to " A " stream one year later and qualified for grammar school as a "straight through " candidate.
B showed at 7 years an I.Q. of 125. Attainment average. The child was hostile to school, particularly to women teachers. Parents: Father-negative. Motherextremely possessive and maliciously verbose. The father was advised to assert himself, the mother to moderate her attitude to child and school. Result: No improvement in the mother's attitude, increasing difficulty with the child, especially with behaviour to smaller children, particularly girls. The county psychologist was called in and the child transferred at IO plus to a grammar school for intelligent maladjusted children.
C showed at 7 years an I.Q. io8. Attainment average. Child anxious and worried. Parents: Father was active in local affairs, the mother determined that their only child should go to a grammar school. Both parents, but from different viewpoints, were exerting the utmost pressure on child and school. They were advised to allow the child

to lead a normal life as a child, and let grammar school take its normal course. Result: Father continued pressure on the school but not on the child so much, the mother relaxed pressure. The child reached " interview " stage but showed extreme nervousness and reticence during the interview. Not selected.
D showed 1.Q. I15 at 7 plus. Attainment
was slightly above average but a very slow worker. There was a high standard of personal neatness. An extremely meticulous but worried scholar. Parents: Father was not interested, but the mother extremely so. The father was advised to take interest in the child, and the mother to be less exacting. Result: Slight improvement in parents' attitude. The child a border-line case at S.S.E.E. stage, but was not selected because too slow a worker.
E showed I.Q. I24 at 7 plus. Attainment between A and B. Parents: Father physically handicapped, received a low wage, and had been convicted of shoplifting; the mother went out to work. There was a poor atmosphere in the home, partly owing to money troubles and the family being under constant threat of eviction from their council house. The parents were interviewed and with the co-operation of her employer, it was arranged for a deduction from the mother's wages (before paid) to cover rent. There were frequent talks with the child throughout school life. Result: Selected for grammar school.
F showed I.Q. I3i at 7 plus. Attainment:
B plus. Parents: The father was very interested and most anxious that child should do " as well as I did," the mother was reasonably but not greatly interested. The father was advised to show less anxiety for himself and more interest in the child and the mother to show more interest. The result was most helpful co-operation. The child's attainment on leaving was equal to his I.Q. promise, and he was selected for grammar school.
Two Family cases of Special Interest. Case 1.
Parents: Mother intelligent and

86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

co-operative, very practical. Father intelligent, but less practical. Greatly interested in children. Good income.
Child i. Born I936. Girl. Great promise
at 7 plus. Qualities of leadership, determination and complete frankness. Grammar
school at ii. G.C.E. in eight subjects at i6. Course at Southampton, now radiographer.
Child 2. Born I937. Boy. Great promise at 7 plus. Quieter than girl but more mature at early age. Grammar school at ii. G.C.E. seven subjects at i6. National Service in Navy. Now Sub-Lieut, in Royal Navy as
regular officer. The next two children were planned well
in advance. Mother said that when her husband returned from the Forces she intended having two more at least.
Child 3. Born I945. Girl. Most promising child, Selected grammar school.

Child 4. Born I947. Boy. Shows considerable promise, but not so industrious. Good place in " A " stream.
Case 2.
Parents: Mother intelligent and wants children. Father intelligent, takes part in local affairs, very sure of himself.
Child i. Girl. Qualities of leadership and
industry. High I.Q. Grammar school.
Child 2. Boy. Equally good. High I.Q. Grammar school.
Child 3. Girl. Slightly better than others. High I.Q. Grammar school.
Child 4. Boy. High I.Q. not so industrious, but works in spasms. Keenly disappointed and quite angry if not top of form. The idol of the family. Fair position in " A " form. Grammar school selection-doubtful.

DISCUSSION

The Chairman, DR. C. P. BLACKER, in
opening the discussion, reminded the meeting that the Society's definition of a promising child was based on the qualities suggested by Cecil Rhodes when he established his Rhodes Scholarships to Oxford. These were literary and scholastic attainments; qualities of truth, courage, devotion to duty, unselfishness, fellowship, the exhibition during schooldays of moral force of character and of instincts to lead and take an interest in
schoolmates; fondness for sport. SIR WILLIAM FYFE made the points that
in individual cases the promise of a boy was
little guide to that of his younger brothers and sisters, also that promising boys might come from the most unlikely homes, and stressed the difficulty of breeding for a complex of moral qualities until something was learnt about the physical basis of
"character." SIR CHARLES DARWIN said that anything
might happen in individual cases; the Society was concerned with probabilities. If

it could find a method of selecting families such that there was a 70 per cent probability that any further child born into that family would be promising, that would be satisfactory.
DR. HILDA LEWIS said that something might be learnt about the personality characteristics in parents which lead to the production of promising children by the experience gained by placing children for adoption. Certain couples were found to be able to care for and later adopt quite
unpromising children (shy, backward, physically handicapped or even delinquent
children) and to transform them into happy and socially satisfactory persons. Such couples surely had the qualities of " promising parents." They were almost invariably of good intelligence; they had broad interests (socially in their neighbourhood, in simple hobbies and crafts); they took life as it came and they were invariably happy in their marital life.

