MENTAL DEFICIENCY
A Discussion of the Genetic Back.,round By Professor F. A. E. CREW, M.D., D.Sc., Ph.D., F.R.S.E.
Address to Section J of the Centenary Meeting (1931) of the British Association.

T is necessary that I should preface my new to be transmitted by the mechanism of

contribution to this symposium by organic inheritance. I recognize that it

stating that I personally find the modern would be rash to assert that such toxic

'Theory of the Gene ' both satisfying and agents are incapable of inducing mutation:

exceedingly helpful. I accept the view that in my opinion it has not been shown that

if a character-a detail of structure or they can, and the onus of proof is upon

behaviour-is inherited, then corresponding those who assert that they can.

to it there is a gene (or genes) resident in Unless mental defect is a character that

the chromosomes.

is inherited, the geneticist has nothing to

To me, such vague terms as germ-plasm contribute to this discussion. If it can be

or idioplasm possess an interest that is shown that in its distribution among suc-

merely historical. I accept the evidence, cessive generations living in the same

which has emerged from experimentation environment there is a certain significant

with certain plant and animal forms, not orderliness, then we can assume that it is

including man, that mutation-modification indeed a genetic character, and that corre-

of or alteration in, the organization of a sponding to it there is a gene (or genes)

discrete region of the chromatin material, resident in the chromosomes. It would be

of a specific kind and associated with a unnecessary to postulate a special type of

specific and heritable alteration in charac- hereditary mechanism for the transmission

terization-occurs infrequently for reasons of mental defect; and therefore, if we can

as yet unknown, and that when once such persuade ourselves that it is inherited, we

a mutant gene has appeared, it persists until are entitled to assume that in its trans-

a reverse mutation takes place, and so long mission from generation to generation it will

as individuals carrying it in their heredi- obey the rules that have been shown to have

tary constitutions propagate. I am pre- a universal validity.

pared to assume that there is no such thing as ' spontaneous variation,' that mutation STRUCTURE AND BEHAVIOUR

is always a peculiar reaction to the stimulus In our approach to this question we must

of some environmental force, and that the exhibit the greatest caution. The human

same mutation can occur and re-occur in subject is surely the least convenient of

succeeding generations if the mutation- materials for genetical study. Furthermore,

provoking agencies continue to operate. I almost all that we know of hereditary

accept the evidence that mutation can be characters refers to details of structure

induced by X-rays and by radium, and which are easily recognized and readily

that disturbances in chromosome division measured, and which, save by such com-

and distribution can be caused experi- pletely devastating agencies as severe mal-

mentally by such agents as CO2 and high nutrition and grossly unfavourable physical

temperature. But I am not convinced that conditions, are apparently uninfluenced by

injury of the egg or sperm or embryo of a environmental factors acting upon the

general kind, e.g. poisoning by lead or individual during growth and differentia-

alcohol, can produce mutation; and in the tion. The expression of such characters, it

absence of mutation there can be nothing can be said, is predetermined solely or

299

oo THTE EUGENICS REVIEW

almost entirely by genetic factors, and this in certain circumstances even overwhelm,

expression occurs in almost any environ- the hereditary impulses and yield an end-

ment in which the individual may live. result which is not in accord with the

But we know of a multitude of heritable genetic constitution of the individual

characters the actual expression of which concerned.

is conditioned by environmental agencies. Such a view is demanded of any one who

Take stature for example. Though a man sets out to study the genetics of mental

may be equipped with an hereditary endow- defect. At the very start we can assume

ment which will permit him ultimately to that there may be three kinds of mental

top six feet, his final height will be deter- deficiency: (i) the type in which the

mined not by his genetic constitution, but character is the direct expression of genetic

by the interaction of this with all sorts of factors unaffected, in their action, by

environmental agencies, especially those of environmental forces; (2) the type in which

nutrition and disease. In such a case the the character for its expression requires the

limits of his development-of the expres- interaction of genetic constitution and

sion of a particular developmental impulse environmental factors; and (3) the type

-may be fixed by organic inheritance, but which is a non-inherited acquisition.

what is expressed is determined by post- There is plentiful evidence which shows

conceptional experience.

that mental defect can result from accident

Moreover, we know that a detail of and infection-e.g. birth injury and

structure may arise solely from the action syphilis-to constitute an acquired non-

of environmental agencies, being an heritable character. There is also plentiful

' acquired character,' an imposition upon evidence which shows that mental defect

the individual during development by can be one of a group of defects in such

environmental forces too strong to be conditions as mongolism, microcephaly, or

resisted. Manifestly, the longer the period amaurotic family idiocy, which affect the

of development and differentiation, the individual as a whole, yielding malforma-

greater is the opportunity for interference tion and malfunctioning of mind and body.

by such environmental forces.

Of these, certain are definitely genetic in

Now, when we turn from structure to origin-amaurotic family idiocy is a simple

behaviour we find that there is little or no autosomal recessive character, for example.

information of a precise nature as to the way In addition, there is a mental deficiency

in which the responses of an individual which cannot be ascribed to injury and

living in a given environment differ from which is not a part of some general defect or

those of its relatives living in the same derangement, but which alone distinguishes

environment. We are certainly justified its exhibitor from the accepted standard of

in the assumptions that a particular type of normality. It is with this that I propose

behaviour can be characteristic of a species, to deal.

that there exists a close relation between structure and behaviour, and that, there- THE PROBLEM OF CLASSIFICATION

fore, the laws of organic inheritance which I do not propose to describe or define

apply to structural characters apply, though mental deficiency. This is not the task of

perhaps with certain modifications, to a geneticist, who studies the mode of

details of behaviour also. But, even if this inheritance of characters described by

be so, we are forced to anticipate that, others. Blue sclerotics, diabetes, and a

though genetic factors provide the, impulse hundred other less popular terms may or

to the development of such characters, a may not mean much to me: it is for me to

great variety of environmental agencies, interpret, in terms of the laws of organic

operating during the prolonged ante- inheritance, pedigrees compiled by the

and post-natal course of this develop- clinician. Obviously, unless the informa-

ment, can and do profoundly affect, modify, tion in a pedigree is correct, the interpreta-

GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFECT

301

tion cannot possess much value. In a character. I agree that if we but knew

pedigree, mental deficiency must always whether or not mutation is being induced in

be mental deficiency, a discrete and con- every generation by such environmental

stant entity. Unfortunately, quite commonly agencies which, it is to be noted, are under

this cannot have been the case, and even our control, we could hope to check the

now the Law, Medicine, and Psychology are incidence of mental deficiency by controlling

not agreed upon their definitions and classi- personal and public hygiene. But an in-

fications of the mentally abnormal. It is a crease even of startling proportions in the

thousand pities that the classification of number of mental defectives in a population

law, precise and definite as it is, has no may mean nothing more than that mental

relation to realities, for if only idiocy, deficiency is a genetic character which first

imbecility, and mental deficiency, as defined appeared long ago, and that mental defec-

by the lawyer, would obey the laws' of the tives freely propagate their kind. There is

land, remaining constant in their expression no reason to suppose that normality is being

and showing no grading and overlapping, transformed into abnormality in each

they might perhaps also obey the simpler generation if it can be shown that it is the

laws of inheritance.

genetically abnormal individuals of one

Medicine attempts to create order out of generation which are responsible for the

chaos by classifying amentia into primary production of the genetically abnormal of

and secondary. Tredgold, whose views on the next.

this subject seem to meet with wide accep- It is quite clear that in medicine mental

tance, is of opinion that amentia is the deficiency is not one thing but many.

result of an impairment of developmental Differential diagnosis in the case of mental

potentiality consequent upon damage by defect is difficult, and it is probable that

chemical and physical agencies present in a number of clinical entities presently

the environment to the germ cells (primary grouped together will later be separated by

amentia), or to the individual at some further research. The recognized range of

time subsequent to conception (secondary mental abnormality is a long one, and it is

amentia). According to Tredgold, secondary most unlikely that all the grades have the

amentia is an acquired, non-heritable same genetical basis. Furthermore, the real

character, whereas primary amentia is difficulty is that of deciding whether genetic

inherited. Now, as a geneticist, I am fully or environmental factors (or both) are

aware that mutation can be induced, or I operating in any given case. It is manifest

should say, that the tendency to mutate can that in the case of mental defect we are con-

be very considerably exaggerated in certain fronted with a difference between abnor-

experimental material by appropriate mality and normality which can easily be

means: in fact, it can be stated that in magnified by environmental agencies. It

almost every genetical laboratory in the has to be assumed, indeed, that in most, if

world this induction of mutation is the not in all, cases of hereditary mental defect,

commonest activity to-day. But nothing both genetic and environmental factors have

that has so far emerged from this work per- been operating and therefore it cannot be

mits me to share Tredgold's views that expected that the results of matings will

systematic poisons can cause specific yield such simple numerical ratios as are

changes in the genetic constitution of the obtained in the Mendelian analysis of

gametes.

clear-cut structural characters, the expres-

However, the problem of the cause of the sion of which is not affected by external

origin of a mutation is distinct from the agencies. So long as we disregard the

problem of the mode of inheritance of a demonstrable significance of environmental

mutant character after this has appeared, agencies in the etiology of mental defi-

and it is the study of the second problem ciency, so long as we set out to find a single

which reveals the genetic basis of the constant basis for a chara-cter which can be

302 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the end-result of so many different develop- reliable indication of simple recessivity. In

mental happenings, there can be no hope of the case of this type of inheritance, the

assessing the roles of whatever genetic incidence of defect within a family may be

factors enter into its determination.

very low, so low, in fact, that a case mav

Nowadays mental deficiency is detected be regarded as an instance of secondary

by psychological tests, but I am not sure amentia for the reason that the pedigree

that the classification of the psychologist is fails to reveal another case. The pedigree

much more helpful to the geneticist than is not a very useful instrument of research

is that of the clinician. In so far as in such cases: far better are studies of

classification according to performance in consanguinity in marriage.

such tests is behaviouristic, it meets with Simple autosomal dominance is easily

the requirements of genetical investigation, recognized in pedigrees. Certain pedigrees

but there is one very real danger in this of mental deficiency demand this explana-

method of assessment. It is too easily tion. If simple dominance is involved, we

assumed that by drawing a line at some may expect a high incidence of mental

arbitrarily chosen I. Q. figure we are defect within the family group. Multiple

separating two distinct genetic types within factors yielding dominance would give the

a population, on one side the normal, on suggestion of a blending type of inheritance,

the other the abnormal. But, in view of each factor reinforcing the action of the

what we know of the grades of mental others. Here, again, there should be a con-

defect, this point, so arbitrarily selected to centration of defect within the family group.

suit social convenience, cannot possibly cut Other pedigrees demand other types of

off one genetic type. We need to know the factor interaction-in some cjses multiple

distribution of the Intelligence Quotient recessives, in others a dominant gene for

among the general population, whether the defect together with a dominant inhibitor

resulting curve is a normal curve of varia- yielding normality.

bility, or whether the curve is askew, and Since defect of mind is no more of a bio-

many more things besides before we can logical unity than is defect of body, and

form an estimate of the probable number of since it may be assumed that quite a number

distinct genetic types the mentally defective of different abnormalities of the brain can

segment includes. All that can be said at yield the same abnormality of the mind,

the moment is that the group of defectives there is no reason whatsoever why different

as distinguished from the group of normals kinds of genetic factors and factor combina-

by reference to intelligence tests probably tions should not yield the same character-

includes more than one genetic type, and mental deficiency. If mental processes are

that it is most unlikely that normality and expressions of the functions of the brain,

abnormality differ one from the other in and if the brain is subject to numerous

respect of a single gene.

hereditary abnormalities, then the charac-

DIFFERENT GENETIC TYPES

ter, mental deficiency, can be genetically many different things-in some instances

The evidence derived from the study of an autosomal recessive, in others an auto-

pedigrees reinforces this view. It leaves no somal dominant, sex-linked, a multiple

doubt whatsoever that in many instances factor character, or even a step-allelomorph,

hereditary transmission is operating. It since this interpretation can accommodate

seems very probable that in certain cases the fact that two mentally deficient parents

amentia behaves as a monogenic autosomal can produce a normal child, as sometimes

recessive character. This type should be seems to happen.

remarkable in that there should be a higher I wish to suggest that not only does the

incidence of cousin marriages among the evidence point to this conclusion, but also

parents of such aments than in the popula- that the view that there is not one genetic

tion as a whole, since this is the most basis for mental deficiency, but several, is

GENETICS OF MENTAL DEFECT

303

much more helpful in an analysis of the etiology of this condition than that which insists that there is a single constant genetic origin for a character which can be the endresult of so many different developmental abnormalities. That genetic factors play a prominent part in the etiology of mental deficiency is certain, but as to their nature or number we have no precise knowledge. This information can be secured, however, if we but choose to use in our investigation modern statistical techniques which allow the relative effects of heredity and environment to be measured.
INFLUENCE OF UTERINE ENVIRONMENT
Studies of the incidence of consanguineous matings among the parents of the mentally deficient can yield unequivocal evidence of the significance of the genetic factors involved, if, as is probable, the difference between normality and abnormality is determined by a small number of genes. Studies of the order of birth in relation to mental deficiency can yield equally important evidence of the significance of the uterine environment, a factor all too commonly neglected in discussions of this subject. Pearson drew attention to the high incidence of mental defect amongst first children, whilst Shrubsall has further shown that the incidence is also high in late members of large families. Dayton's conclusions do not agree with those of Shrubsall, but the reason for this, as Professor Hogben, who deals fully with this subject in his latest book, Genetic Principles in Medicine and Social Science, has pointed out to me, lies in Dayton's methods of dealing with his data: Shrubsall's families ranged from I to 20; Dayton's from i to io. Now, in the 9 and io children families of Dayton there is a high incidence toward the higher end, whilst in the less than five children families, the high incidence is at the beginning. Naturally, therefore, these two opposing facts cancel each other. The genetic constitution of an individual cannot be affected by the order of birth, but this is a factor of considerable importance in the determination of mental quality. The

environmental factors which operate before birth and during the first few months immediately after, whilst the rudiments of social behaviour are being acquired, must be recognized and defined before we can easily accept the view that so large a proportion of mental deficiency is genetic in origin.*
SCIENCE-AND PRACTICAL POLITICS
Data relating to the incidence of mental deficiency among the progeny of the general population and among the progeny or relatives of aments, when critically collected and even more critically analyzed, will undoubtedly reinforce the view that there are several genetic types of mental deficiency, whilst biochemical researches may be expected to distinguish different clinical types which can then be related to the genetic types thus indicated.
Then and only then can policies relating to the control of mental deficiency through controlled breeding be franied which will command the unqualified endorsement of the geneticist. The effect of selection varies, among other things, with the genetic basis of the character against which such selection is being practised: it makes all the difference in the world whether the character is a monogenic autosomal recessive, a dominant, or a polygenic, and until we know this genetic basis, how can we hope to predict what the effects of selection will be?
But action quietens disturbing anxiety, and if the scientist in the man delays action until he possesses all the pertinent data, the politician in him does not. It is to the latter that we turn: not knowing the genetic basis of mental deficiency, but knowing that much of it is hereditary, we are eager, and I, as a private citizen, think rightly so, to take any action which is not in violent discord with genetic principles and which gives us the feeling of satisfaction that we are doing our best to safeguard the biological excellence of mankind.
* The Note " The Cause of Mongolism," on p. 333
is also relevant to this discussion.-ED.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 4.

