FAMILY ENDOWMENT IN ITS BEARING ION THE QUESTION OF
POPULATION.
BY ELEANOR F. RATHBONE. *
By Family Endowment, we mean providing for the maintenance of children and possibly of the mothers directly instead of (as at present) indirectly on the assumption that by the interplay of economic forces and the rough and tumble of wage negotiations, men' s earnings will be somehow sufficient for the support of families.
Direct provision could be made either by the State, through taxation, or by employers through the "equalization pool" system, or by the combined action of the State, employers and workers, through an extension of contributory insurance.
Family Endowment is not an untried system. The Separation Allowances paid during the war for the wives and children of soldiers and sailors gave this country a sample of its working. In most European countries during and since the war, the payment of children' s allowances supplementary to wages and salaries has become established, to a greater or lesser extent, in civilian occupations as well as military. It is most widely extended in the Public Services. In the Australian Commonwealth, and in every European country except Great Britain, Spain, Portugal and Italy, allowances in some form are paid for the children of employees of the State and Local Authorities. In private industry, children's allowances have been established to a great extent in France, Belgium, Austria and Germany. In order to meet the fear that the system may cause employers to avoid employing men with children, the plan has been devised and widely adopted in France, Belgium and Austria, less widely in Germany, of paying the allowances out of a pool or "equalization fund" to which each employer agrees to contribute in proportion either to his total wages bill or the total number of his employees. These funds are usually local, being sometimes confined to the employers within a single industry, more frequently open to all employers within a given area. Including the public services, the mines, and the railways, which usually pay allowances directly, and the employers who have adopted the pool system, it is reckoned that over three-fifths of the industrial workers of France, and over one-fifth of those of Belgium are now covered by the Family Allowance system. In Austria family allowances are universal and compulsory, though on an exceedingly low scale. In Germany, the payment of family allowances (for children and sometimes wives) is stipulated in most wage agreements in most of the large staple industries, especially the mining, engineering, metallurgic, chemical and
* Paper read before the Society on November 12th, 1924.

FAMILY ENDOWMENT.

271

textile industries. The system prevails also to a lesser extent in Holland, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and to a very small extent in the Scandinavian countries.
The case for Family Endowment in this country rests upon the
failure of the present system to secure an adequate standard of life for the workers. It is usually assumed that these should under normal conditions be able to secure as a working minimum, a "living wage" adequate to the needs of a supposed "normal family" of five persons. It can be demonstrated that such a minimum
(a) Has never been yet achieved throughout the whole or the greater part of industry.
-(b) Could not be so achieved out of the present resources of the nation, however re-distributed as between classes.
(c) If it were achieved, would result in making provision for over 16 million phantom children, while leaving over half the real children inadequately provided for during over a third of their childhood.
I have elsewhere set forth the proof of these three statements.* They rest upon statistical estimates drawn from the writings of Dr. Bowley, Sir Josiah Stamp, Mr. S. Rowntree and Mr. Sidney Webb, and they cannot, I think, be challenged by anyone who has examined the
figures. Other objections to the present system are:1. That by depriving mothers and children of any direct claim of
their own on the nation's wealth, and by treating them as a form of luxury to be paid for like other luxuries out of men's pocket money, it misrepresents their value to the nation. It thus affects not only the material well-being of the family, but also the status of the mother. It discourages the abler and more ambitious women from marriage and motherhood.
2. That by concentrating an unfairly large proportion of the nation's wealth in the hands of men without dependent families, it is responsible for a great part of the present excessive expenditure on drink, betting, tobacco and amusements.
3. That it throws the greater part of the cost of providing for the future labour supply, which is necessary to all industries, upon those industries which employ chiefly adult males.
4. That it is the main obstacle to the achievement of "equalpay for equal work" as between men and women workers, and that until this is achieved, women will continue to be regarded by Trades Unions as a form of black-leg labour; their productive capacity will be unduly restricted and an unpleasant form of sex rivalry fostered.
Of the objections urged against Familv Endowment, perhaps the most general and the one which specially concerns members of the Eugenic Society, is the fear that it would lead to a large increase in the birth-rate, especially among the more undesirable parents. No dogmatic answer is possible, but the following considerations seem
relevant:Opinions may differ whether an absolute increase of population is

* Chap. II. "The Disinherited Family," by E. F. Rathbone (Edward
Arnold and Co., 7/6, 1924).

272 EUGENICS REVIEW.

to be feared or desired. Those who fear it may be referred to Dr. Bowley's recent calculation, shewing that as far as the war future is concerned
"at most there will be 180,000 additional applicants for work (male and female) annually from 1921 to 1931, unless the age of
retirement is raised, or the relative number of women occupied4 is
increased, and this is being reduced to 120,000 by emigration.
From 1931 to 1941 the most to be expected is 47,000 which will also
be reduced by emigration. So far from there being an excessive working population, the annual rate of growth after 1931, will only
be 0.2 per cent. The growth after 1941 depends on the birth-rate after 1925, as to which no judgment can be formed. " * But all schools ofopinion agree in dreading an increase of population of the wrong kind.
The facts as to this are well known. In his paper "The Declining Birth-rate" Dr. Stevenson shews that whereas in 1851-61 there was
comparatively little difference in the fertility of different social
classes, from that date onwards the difference has steadily increa ed. Arranging the population in five classes, fertility becomes steadily higher as one goes downwards in the social scale. He illustrates this by the following table:
BiTrths per 1000 married
males aged undar 55.

Upper and Middle .. Intermediate .. Skilled workers ..
Intermediate .. Unskilled workers..

.. .. .. .. .. ..
.. .. ... .

119 132
158 158 213

While there may be room for some difference of opinion as to the complete explanation of this, there can be no doubt that one of the main reasons is the deliberate restriction of parenthood by those classes who have a high standard of life for themselves and their children.
To assume that this is a misfortune is not to assume that the higher social strata are of necessity eugenically the best stock. But it will
hardly be disputed that, speaking generally, the brainworkers and the skilled manual workers are likely to produce a higher proportion of children of good physical and intellectual calibre than the unskilled workers and the "submerged tenth." They are also likely tc give those children a better environment. Further, there is little doubt
that in the wage-earning classes it tends to be the more self-controlled, far-sighted, able and ambitious parents who restrict their families and those who display the opposite of all these qualities who breed most freely. For evidence of this we may refer to the facts collected by Miss
Elderton in her Report on the English Birthrate,t shewing how closely
a high birth-rate is connected with extreme poverty, casual labour, overcrowding and drunkenness.
The facts as to overcrowding are specially significant. The

* "Is Unemployment inevitable." Macmillan & Co., 1924.
t Published on behalf of the Galton Laboratory, Dulan and Co., 1914.

FAMILY ENDOWMENT.

273

Census of 1911 shewed that "fertility decreases regularly as the size of the tenement increases till 6 or 7 rooms are reached and thereafter remains constant." * Doubtless large families are partly the cause but partly also the effect of overcrowding. On the one hand the need of adequate housing accommodation among wage-earners is usually in inverse ratio to the ability to pay for it, since the fathers of large families have usually to spend so much of their income on food and clothing that very little is left for rent. On the other hand, those who live in overcrowded and sordid dwellings tend to lose heart and hope; they depend more on sexual satisfaction and plan less for the future than the more happily placed. Hence a high birth-rate and overcrowding act and react on each other. A system of Family Endowment by making it more possible for families to obtain accommodation proportionate to their size, might then be expected to reduce the birth-rate among the slum dwellers.
Again, there is a close association between drink and an excessive birth-rate. Family Endowment, by diverting some of the money now available for luxury expenditure to the maintenance of children, might be expected to reduce the drink bill and hence to diminish a particularly dysgenic stimulus to parenthood.
Again, there is no doubt that there is a strong revolt among all sections of women who have leisure to think and sufficient independence of mind to plan for themselves, against the excessive physical strain placed on them by too frequent child-bearing. Family Endowment, by relieving women from their present complete dependance on the goodwill as well as the ability of their husbands to support them, would make them better able to regulate their own destinies in this respect.
On these points I am glad ta be able to claim the support of Professor Carr-Saunders, author of the most extensive and thorough work on the problem of the population question during recent years. In a review of "The Disinherited Family" he says:
"Miss Rathbone makes out a very strong case in her reply to the objection most often raised, namely, that any form of Family Endowment will encourage an increase of population among the less desirable class. We are in complete agreement. It will on the contrary probably tend to lower the birth-rate among those who now have the largest families, because it is the raising of the standard of living and of the dignity and status of the mother, which more than anything else helps to stem the devastating torrent of children."
It has been argued by Prof. Pigout and others that as the birth-rate of the lowest group of wage-earners has not apparently in the past been influenced at all by prudential considerations, it could not at all events be increased by Family Endowment since it is as large already as nature permits. But until the results of the 1921 Census are fully available, it will not be possible to judge how far this argument still holds good. In any case it is clearly only a matter of time before the knowledge of contraceptive methods penetrates the lower social strata, and it may

* Evidence of Dr. Sevenson in "The Declining Birth-rate," Pp. 855.
t EUGENICS REVIEW, April, 1923.

274 EUGENICS REVIEW.
therefore be argued that ifFamily Allowances could not actually increase their present birth-rate, 'they might prevent its decline. To this it may be replied that all the experience of the higher social strata goes to shew that when the desire for smaller families takes possession of parents, the motive of it is partly, but only partly, economic. The desire is not only for a lessening of financial stringency, but also for a lessening of the strain on the health of the mother, and more leisure for her to develop not only her own personality, but that of her existing children. Hence the grant of Family Allowances would be very unlikely to stimulate the birth-rate of these lower strata, or even to prevent its decline to a more reasonable level, unless the scale of allowances were so high as to serve as an actual bribe to child-bearing and source of profit to the parents. This view is borne out to some slight extent by contemplating the effect, or rather the entire lack of effect, of Family Allowances on the French birth-rate. The system there has been prevalent to a considerable and rapidly increasing extent for five years. Among the motives which influence its promoters has been a desire to stimulate the birth-rate; it has been accompanied by an energetic propaganda to that end and the scale of the allowances is usually steeply graded upwards from the first to subsequent children. But the amounts (which generally include a birth bonus and extra grants during breast-feeding as well as monthly payments up to 14 or later) are never really adequate to the full cost of child maintenance. Figures for the ten largest French towns, in all of which the system is well developed, shew a steady decrease of births throughout the five
years. What effect would Family Endowment have on the birthrate of the
brain-workers and skilled manual workers? Obviously the answer depends on how far the present restriction is deliberate and based on economic motives. That is a question which nobody can conclusively answer except the whole group of parents concerned-possibly not even they, since few people thoroughly understand their own motives. But as a result of much discussion with women of the artisan and middle classes, one may hazard a pretty confident guess that family allowances -provided that the amounts were fairly or nearly adequate to the cost of maintenance, would result in many (but by no means all) of them having slightly larger families than they at present permit themselves, though nothing would induce them to return to the really large families that were so common a generation ago. Those who fear that they would result in a "devastating torrent of children" must we unaware of the passionate feeling, almost amounting to an obsession, against excessive child-bearing which is common among women, especially of the upper working classes.
The above considerations point to the importance of introducing Family Endowment into this country in a form which permits the allowances to be so graded as to bear a reasonable relation to the standard of life of the parents. Otherwise a scale which might act as an actual bribe to parenthood to one class of parents would altogether fail to remove the barrier in the minds of another. However much one may deplore the exaggerated differences in the standard of life of different occupational classes, so long as it exists, it is impossible to

FAMILY ENDOWMENT.

275

separate the standard of the child altogether from that of its parents,*
and the attempt to rectify the inequality through Family Endowment would be to sacrifice many of the main advantages of the system.
A graded system of allowances would obviously be very much easier to achieve under an occupational system of endowment than under a State scheme, paid for out of taxation. But the difficulty is not insuperable. An ingenious plan for getting over it, by grading the rate of taxation as well as of benefits, was devised by Mr. Emile
Burns and will be found in "Equal Pay and the Family" (Headley Bros. , Is.). Under the method of social insurance, it might be arranged that while the contribution of the State was always the same, that of the employer and the worker should vary to some extent either with the wages of the latter, or with the industrial or occupationalgroup to which he belonged, the exact scale of contributions and benefits adopted for different groups being settled by collective agreement. The same
method would be the natural one to adopt under a system of equalization funds provided by the employer.
Probably however the easiest scheme of all to begin with would be, as in other countries, one applying to the public services, national and
municipal. The case for its application here is especially strong for two reasons, first, to meet the difficult question of the relation between
men and women employees and the demand by the latter for equal pay for equal work; secondly, the exceptionally low birth-rate among these carefully selected, yet democratically recruited groups of brain workers. For example, unpublished but accessible returns from the Census of 1921 show that among male teachers between 20 and 65, the proportion of children under 16 is roughly 66i children per hundred
men.
Or again a beginning might be made, as Prof. MacDougall proposed as long ago as 1908,t with the Universities. It has been suggested that a suitable scheme for these might be organised on the principle already adopted for the Federated system of Superannuation
for University teachers. It was no doubt with some such possibilities as these in
their mind that at a recent meeting at Toronto, Sir Wm. Beveridge and Prof. Wm. MacDougall, while differing otherwise in their views of the population issue, were found agreeing that in an adequate system of Family Endowment, applied to the brain workers as well as to the manual workers, would be found the best security against racial decay. At any rate, the manipulation of such a system would at least give to the community something which it has never yet possessed, an effective instrument for influencing the birth-rate and guiding its flow, without violating the privacies or interfering with the liberties of individual citizens.

* Lest this argument appear undemocratic I may point out that an exactly analogous argument is used in the Report issued on behalf of the Trades Union Congress on Unemployment insurance by industry, to justify graded rates of unemploynent insurance.
t "In a paper read before the Royal Statistical Society.

