EUGENICS IN GERMANY

By C. P. BLACKER, M.A.. M.D., M.R.C.P.

ELSEWHERE in this issue will be interpretation is justified. Essentially the

found a translation of the German situation appears to be that in Clause 3 it is

Sterilization Act, which was made stated that sterilization may be proposed for

public on July 25th, I933, and which will the inmates of punitive institutions and

come into operation on January Ist of next reformatories by the Superintendents of

year. The implications of this Act will best these places. Taken by itself, this passage

be appreciated if it is compared with the points to the conclusion that compulsory

Bills which have been drawn up by this sterilization would be possible on penal

Society-i.e. the shorter Bill, limited to men- grounds. In Clause i of the Act, however, it

tal defectives, which was introduced into the will be seen that eight hereditary diseases and

House of Commons by Major Church on hereditary alcoholism are specified as condi-

July 2ISt, I93I, and the wider Bill, set forth tions justifying sterilization. It will also be

at the end of the Society's buff pamphlet seen that crime is not included in the list.

Eugenic Sterilization, which applies, in addi- If, therefore, this clause governs the rest of

tion to mental defectives, to mental con- the Act, it would seem that the superinten-

valescents and sufferers from hereditary dents of punitive institutions would only be

diseases and defects other than mental justified in recommending the sterilization of

deficiency and insanity.

inmates provided that they suffered from

The German Act differs from our Bills in one of the nine conditions specified in the

one important respect, which dominates its first clause. It would presumably be possible

whole intention and sense. In Section I2 it that inmates of punitive institutions might

gives legal sanction to compulsory steriliza- exhibit symptoms of feeble-mindedness, early

tion. This implies that the initiative in schizophrenia, hereditary epilepsy, hereditary

applying for sterilization can be taken by physical deformities, or severe alcoholism,

persons other than the candidate for and that these would constitute grounds for

sterilization himself, such as a Medical recommending their sterilization.

Officer of Health or a Superintendent of an The crux of the matter appears to be in the

Institution. The compulsory nature of the opening words of Sections i and 2 of Clause

Bill further necessitates the provision of i. These read as follows: "Whoever is

Eugenic Courts, to which applications for hereditarily ailing can be made barren by

sterilization have to be made, and which are surgical operation . . .", and " hereditarily

empowered to authorize the operation, and ailing in the sense of this law is anyone who

also of Higher Eugenic Courts, to which can suffers from one of the following diseases . . ."

be addressed appeals by refractory subjects Do these two sentences imply that no one

against the decisions of the lower Courts. can be regarded as hereditarily diseased

By many English newspapers, the German in the sense of this Act who does not

Act was also represented as differing from exhibit one of the nine specified condi-

ours in another very important respect- tions ? If this is the case, it would be

namely, that sterilization can be applied on impossible to sterilize a person with

penal grounds. In view of the fact that many haemophilia or with polycystic disease of the

of the occupants of German prisons have kidney. The Act says that sufferers from

been sentenced for political reasons, this any of the nine specified conditions can be

possibility gives obvious grounds for dis- regarded as hereditarily diseased. It does not

quiet. But careful perusal of the Bill does say that only such persons can be so regarded,

not make it by any means certain that this and it might be inferred that the list of

'57 B

I58 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

hereditary conditions which justify steriliza- tell what attitude it will adopt in its final

tion is not necessarily exhausted by the nine report. Should the committee pronounce a

specifications which follow. It is, in fact, not cautiously favourable verdict that voluntary

quite clear whether the German Act is, in this sterilization has a limited application to care-

connection, carelessly phrased, or whether it fully selected persons within certain general

is very carefully and subtly phrased to admit groups, it is to be hoped that public opinion

extensions of the principle of sterilization. I will not run away with the idea that the

have written to Germany asking for informa- adoption of such a policy will be the logical

tion on this subject.

prelude to its misuse as an instrument of

It will also be seen that the German Act con- tyranny by racial or social majorities. No

tains none of the provisions which the Society biological innovation of social significance

has been at pains to elaborate in its Bills to is free from possibilities of abuse; and all

safeguard the individual against abuses of his such innovations are likely to find different

liberty. Thus, in addition to the consent of legal expressions in different countries. If

the subject concerned, our Bills require that the principle of sterilization is, with appropri-

the consent of the spouse or, if the patient ate safeguards, adopted in this country, it

be unmarried, of his parent or guardian, be can be taken as certain that it will be applied

obtained. No such provisions are to be in a way that expresses the social conscious-

found in the German Act. Reports of the ness which prevails in England rather than

German Act reached this country in the last that which is now sweeping through Ger-

few days of July. It was not surprising that many."

they constituted an important news item and In view of the publicity which is being given

that they were given much publicity in most to the German Sterilization Act and of the

of our newspapers. But these announce- misconceptions to which it has given rise in

ments had more than an ephemeral news the Press, it is essential that Fellows and

value, for they have provoked a number of Members of this Society should do their best

signed and unsigned articles which have given to dissipate the view that to legalize steriliza-

rise to correspondence. It would appear that tion necessarily implies compulsion or even

several of the authors of these articles have the smallest infringement of individual

failed to grasp the essential differences liberty. The Report of the Departmental

between the aims of the eugenic movements Committee now considering sterilization is

of Germany and of this country, since they due to appear in the late autumn. It is

assume that if sterilization were legalized in extremely unlikely that the Report will be

England it would be made compulsory, as it influenced by recent happenings in Germany;

has been in Germany.

but it is probable that its reception by the

The Council of the Society has not, at the public may be so influenced, especially if the

time of writing, had the opportunity of con- public has been led to suppose that Nazi

sidering the German Bill. It has, however, eugenics is the only kind of eugenics.

passed a resolution, bearing indirectly upon One of the most frequently repeated and

Nazi eugenics, which runs as follows: " This rhetorically effective ciiticisms of steriliza-

Society deprecates the use of the term tion is the one directed in the House of

Eugenics to justify racial animosities." In Commons by Dr. Hyacinth Morgan against

my capacity of General Secretary of the Major Church's Bill-that its logical fufil-

Society, I was, moreover, authorized to write ment would be the installation of a body of

to The Lancet a letter commenting upon a so-called eugenists at the apex of the social

draft Bill published in the issue of June ioth pyramid, which would dictate to the British

of that journal. My letter ended with the working woman how many children, if any,

following paragraph: " At present a depart- she was to have. Dr. Morgan's body of

mental committee is in this country giving eugenists sitting on the apex of the social

detailed consideration to the problem of pyramid has something in common with the

sterilization. It is as yet impossible to fore- Nazi Higher Eugenic Court. That Nazi

EUGENICS IN GERMANY

I59

eugenics is the logical fulfilment of the
Society's eugenics is doubtless sincerely believed by many people who, on religious or other grounds, hate eugenics. Such per-
sons will feel it their duty to give the widest publicity to such beliefs. From pulpit and platform, in the Press and doubtless also in Parliament, they will warn the trustful British public that in supporting the Society's

policy it will, in fact, -be unwittingly taking the first step down the slippery declivity that leads to compulsion, bureaucracy and the tyranny of racial or social majorities. Fellows and Members of this Society would therefore do well to seize all available opportunities of pointing out what this Society
does, in fact, stand for.

Current and Standard ENGLISB, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature in Chemical, BioloNical, Medical, and Physical Science supplied from
stock, or obtained promptly to order.
A visit to this Department is respectfully sugaested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioninA interests.

H. K. LE

IS

&

Co.

Ltd.,1.1L13O6NGDOOWNE,R

STREET
W.C. 1

Eugenics Beview, Vol. XXV, No. 3.

