THE EUGENICS SOCIETY

T HE Annual General Meeting was held at 69 Eccleston Square, S.W.i, on Tuesday, June I7th, I94I, at 4.30 p.m.
In the absence of the President, Mr. B. S. Bramwell occupied the Chair. The Business Secretary read the notice convening the Meeting.
MINUTES. The Minutes of the Annual General Meeting held on Tuesday, May 28th, I940, which were contained in the Annual Report, and included in the April issue of the EUGENICS REVIEW (copies of which were distributed at the Meeting), were taken as read and signed as correct.
ANNUAL REPORT. The Chairman presented the Annual Report, briefly outlining the main activities of the Society during the past year. The formal adoption was seconded by Mr. Titmuss and was carried unanimously.
STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS AND BALANCE SHEET. The Honorary Treasurer presented the Statement of Accounts and Balance Sheet for the year ended December 3ISt, I940. These were unanimously adopted.
APPOINTMENT OF HONORARY OFFICERS

AND COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR I94I-2. Following the procedure of I940-I, it was agreed that the Honorary Officers and Council should remain as appointed at the Annual
General Meeting held on May i6th, I939,
with the exception of Sir Charles ArdenClose, whose resignation had already been reported and accepted, and that the Emergency Committee for the ensuing year should consist of the following: The Lord Horder, Mr. Cecil Binney, Mr. B. S. Bramwell, Mr. C. F. Chance, Miss E. Corry, Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff, Mr. W. T. J. Gun, Mrs. E. M. Hubback, Dr. A. J. Lewis, Mr. R. Martin, Mr. R. M. Titmuss.
ELECTION OF AUDITORS FOR THE YEAR I94I-2. It was proposed by Mr. Gun, seconded by Mr. Martin and carried unanimously, that Messrs. West and Drake be re-elected.
A vote of thanks, proposed by Mr. Martin to Mrs. Grant Duff for her work in connection with the informal luncheons which she was organizing, and congratulations upon the success of the speakers whose services she had been able to secure, was carried unanimously.

ANNUAL REPORT, 1941-2

In this Report the accounts relate to the period December 3Ist, I940, to Deceniber 3ISt, I94I. The rest of the Report covers the period from March 3ISt, I94I, to March 3Ist,
I942.
The Report has deliberately been made as brief as possible owing to the present difficult conditions, but the work of the Society has been carried on, and is epitomized as follows:
Problems of Population.-During the year I940-I Dr. R. R. Kuczynski continued his work on Colonial Population problems. The book, which is expected to run to about

one million words, is to be published soonprobably in America. The demographic problems of the Colonies have never before been studied, and Dr. Kuczynski's work will therefore be of great value and importance. It will be recalled that this investigation has been made possible by a grant from the Carnegie Corporation of America.
Dr. Elsas, who has been investigating the relationship between Population problems and Housing, is shortly to have a book published (based on the first part of his work) by Messrs. P. S. King. Publication has been
made possible by a guarantee from the

39

40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Carnegie United Kingdom Trust. Dr. Elsas July 22nd, I94I: "The Work of the

is continuing with his investigations into Central Council for the Care of Cripples"

these problems which will have an important (with consideration as to how far deformities

bearing on reconstruction.

are hereditary), by H. Jackson Burrows, Esq.,

Dr. Pearl Moshinsky who, we regret to F.R.C.S.

record, died in the autumn of I94I, had com- August 26th, I94I: "The Work of the pleted her Report on housing experiments in Family Planning Association in War-time," foreign countries. It is hoped that Dr. by Miss H. Holland. Moshinsky's husband will arrange for the

publication of the work in America.

September 24th, I94I: "Some Eugenic

Education Department. - Comparatively few lectures have been asked for during the

Aspects of Family Allowances," by Fransois Lafitte, Esq.

past year, but Mrs. Grant Duff, Mrs. Tamplin, November 25th, I94I: "Nature and

Mrs. Poole and Mrs. Eve have given talks in Nurture in Mental Health," by H. Crichton-

various. parts of the country. The Society's Miller, Esq., M.D., F.R.C.P.

film-From Generation to Generation-has been out on loan six times.
Family Planning Association.-The work of the Association has been carried on from its temporary headquarters at I90 Old Christchurch Road, Bournemouth. The Eugenics Society continues to allow' the

Finance.-The usual statement of Income and Expenditure, and Balance Sheet, will be found at the end of this Report,-with corre-
sponding figures for the previous year. It will be seen that last year there was an excess
of income over expenditure of £1,536 6s. 6d.

Association the use of premises at 69 Library.-Only seventeen new books have

Eccleston Square, S.W.i, rent free. The been added during the year. Improvements

Association reports that the great majority have been made in classifying, and additions

of the birth control clinics continue to made to the pamphlet cases. Press cuttings

function, and most of those out of London are now dealt with in the library. Miss Corry

report increased.-attendances. A statistical carries on one day in the week.

enquiry is being planned by the Association
in conjunction with the Eugenics Society into
the comparative clinical results obtained from certain chemical contraceptives which
have passed tests for spermicidal value and harmlessness.

EUGENICS REVIEW.-The REVIEW has
been able to retain its characteristic features
and maintain its war-time size. The circula-
tion has, however, dropped during the year,
owing partly to the discontinuance by the American Eugenics Society, whereby it

Galton Celebration.-A luncheon took place received 6oo copies of each issue at cost

on February I7th, I942. This was attended price, and to the cancelling of a number of

by forty-three persons, and was followed by foreign subscriptions and exchanges. In

a discussion on " The Need for a Social September c194I it was learned with regret
Sciences Research Council," opened by that Dr. Newfield's poor health would force Professor J. D. Bernal, F.R.S., with Lord him temporarily to relinquish the editorship

Horder in the Chair.

of the REVIEW. The Society was fortunate,

Luncheon Lectures.-April 29th, I94I: however, in enlisting the help of Mr.

"The Work of the Howard League for Penal Richard M. Titmuss, who was appointed

Reform," by George Benson, Esq., M.P. Acting Editor pending Dr. Newfield's re-

May 27th, I94I : "Are Talents Heredi- covery.

tary ?," by Dr. N. A. B. Wilson.

Obituary.-We regret to record the deaths

June 24th, I94I: " Eugenics and the New of the following: Mr. Jeffery East, Mr.

World Order,4' by Brian Goddard, Esq., of S. M. Fox, Mr. C. G. Montefiore, Mrs.

the New Commonwealth.

Nettlefold, Lord Salvesen, Professor Selig-

ANNUAL REPORT, I941-42

4I

man, Lord Stamp, Mr. W. A. Tennant, and the Very Reverend Sir George Adam Smith.
Register of Fellows and Members .-An analysis is presented of the Society's Register for the period April Ist, 1941, to March 3ISt,
I942:
Life Fellows Fellows Mbrs. Total Total, March 3Ist, I941 ... ... 68 2II 266 545

Life

Fellows Fellows Mbrs. Total

Elections, 1941/2 ... -

I i6 I7

LessDeceased... ... - 5 3 8
Resigned... ... - 8 20 28
Lapsed or suspended i 14 40 55

Total, March 3ISt,

1942 ... ... 67 I85 219 47I

Affiliated Societies...

--3

