MENTAL DEFICIENCY ON MERSEYSIDE*

Its Connection with the Social Problem Group

By D. CARADOG JONES
(From the University of Liverpool School of Social Scienices and Administration)

F all the social and biological ques- to become a social burden, are largely
tions which urgently await solution, recruited.
one of the most important is how to

identify those persons who outwardly are normal but who inwardly carry defective
genes. Until such identification is possible
the prevention of undesirable parenthood by
sterilization or any similar method, even though it were legalized, would only be effective over a small part of the field.
A considerable step forward was taken
towards the solution of this problem by the careful investigations which were carried out by Dr. E. 0. Lewis for the Committee
set up by the Board of Education and the Board of Control to inquire into the iifcidence of mental deficiency. His conclusions can be briefly summarized as follows:

These are facts which were probably well known to all who have been working for any length of time among the mentally deficient, but to Dr. Lewis belongs the credit of formulating them and emphasizing their importance. To those who are concerned to stop the flow of mental defect at the source their immediate value is selfevident. If a part, and possibly a large part, of mental defect is localized in certain patches and, more particularly, in certain social classes, it becomes considerably easier to identify the carriers of the defective genes. The area in which we must search for them is to that extent limited and we

i. Mental defect can be conveniently are saved the labour of traversing much

separated into three grades which shade into ground where they are less frequently found.

one another and become indistinguishable The purpose of this paper is to describe

at the boundaries; idiocy, -imbecility, and an investigation which has some bearing

feeblemindedness. The more serious grades, upon these same questions. The Social

idiocy and imbecility, are sporadic; they are liable to appear in any class of the community and at any time without apparent cause.
ii. Feeblemindedness, on the other hand, is less the sport of chance; it is not evenly

Science Department of the University of Liverpool during the last three years has been making a survey of social conditions on Merseyside, similar in character to the Booth Survey of London, which is being

spread throughout any area but lies thick in certain patches; there are ' pockets ' of the

repeated after an interval of some forty years. The desire is to present a picture

feebleminded, as Dr. Lewis expressed it. of the social conditions under which the

iii. Moreover this higher-grade defect is great mass of people are living.

not evenly spread throughout the popula- Now it occurred to me when we began

tion, but is relatively conspicuous in certain classes. These classes constitute what has been termed the ' Social Problem Group,' because it is from this group that criminals, paupers, unemployables, and all types of that kind who are likely sooner or later

our survey that many of our so-called social problems arise because certain classes in the community start life handicapped in one way or another, and never catch up with their fellows in the race. Some are born blind or deaf, epileptic, mentally deficient,

physically deformed. Others-it may be

J The substance of this paper was delivered as an address at the Annual Conference of Mental Health Workers in Liverpool in April of this year.

due to their initial endowment or their early environment-are persistently addicted to

97

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

drink, crime, immorality. Others again are must be treated as confidential; otherwise

chronic sufferers from ill-health or unem- the friendly relations which are so desirable

ployment, or they are constantly coming to between the body that is helping and the

the Public Assistance Authority or some family that is helped are difficult to main-

charitable agency for relief. In all these tain. Even the fact that a particular family

cases there is some lack of physical, mental, or individual has applied for help should

or moral balance, or some failure of social not be made public if it can be avoided. We

and economic adjustment which makes them got over the difficulty in this way. In

a burden upon the community. I thought Liverpool we are fortunate in the possession

that if, in the early stages of our survey, of a general Registration Office, controlled

the various official and voluntary agencies by the Council of Voluntary Aid, which was

which are concerned with the welfare of set up to prevent the overlapping of

these sub-normal types could supply us assistance granted by different agencies in

with certain information on parallel lines the district. Each agency that was to co-

about all their current cases, or a random operate in our inquiry was given a code

sample of them, we might in course of time letter, and every family concerning which

accumulate data of some interest. I there- that agency reported to us was given a

fore designed a card of printed questions number. Arrangements were then made for

which, if adequately answered, would, I the letter and number to be sent to the

hoped, throw additional light on matters Registration Officer, along with the name

such as those which engaged the attention and address of the family concerned, but no

of Dr. Lewis in regard to mental defect. other information of any kind. At the same

In this way independent confirmation-or, time the particulars we required about the

as the case might be, contradiction-of family were sent to us along with the code

some of his conclusions might be obtained. letter and number but no name and address.

Moreover, his exceedingly important con- To us, therefore, each family remained

ception of a Social Problem Group would quite impersonal, a mere number; but with

be approached from a number of different the help of the data in the possession of the

angles, in that it would be broken up into Registration Officer, who was able to locate

its constituent elements, each of which each case but knew nothing else about it,

would be discussed independently, yet in we can throw some light on the important

relation to the rest.

question of the spread of different types of

Clearly, to accomplish all that we had in defect throughout the district.

mind would have meant co-operation on an Another difficulty must be mentioned.

ideal scale between a large number of For the information we required we were

different bodies-which could scarcely be dependent upon the case-paper records kept

expected. But I should like to register here by each association or authority concerning

our deep appreciation of the interest shown the cases they assisted. In general we

in our inquiries by the various agencies could not, and we did not, expect any direct

we approached and of the generous manner inquiries to be made about their cases on our

in which they placed their records at our behalf. Sometimes, therefore, the informa-

disposal. Without such aid from the West tion we sought was not available because it

Lancashire Association for Mental Wel- was of no immediate interest to the agency

fare and the Special Schools Department of concerned to collect it in the prosecution of

the Local Education Authority, the inquiry their work. At other times, though it

into mental deficien%y in this area would might be of interest, it was not essential to

have been impossible.

them and consequently, if not readily acces-

One rather serious difficulty we had to sible, no effort had been made to obtain or

face at the outset. Any information coming confirm it. It follows that the particulars

to the knowledge of a society concerning a inserted on our cards are not always as

particular family that applies for assistance complete as we should have liked them to be.

MENTAL DEFICIENCY ON MERSEYSIDE

QQ

On this point I should like to make a plea bouring urban districts. All of them were

in pa7ssing, and what I say has reference to (or had been) attending special schools for

all areas, not to Merseyside in particular. mental defectives or were under the super-

Many of the agencies that look after the vision of the local Mental Welfare Associa-

interests of the blind, the deaf, the mentally tion. We did not set out to discover cases

deficient, and other sub-normal types are that were confined in institutions. The

understaffed. They are consequently so particulars about each case are recorded on

busy in running their machinery efficiently a card, so that we have an equal number

that they cannot spare the time to stop to of cards giving for each mentally deficient

inquire into the value of the work they are person the sex, age, occupation (if any),

doing and whither it all leads. The and husband's or father's occupation, class

majority of them, though they may have of home, age of wife or mother, and the

the interest, simply have not the leisure for number of children, or brothers and sisters,

research into the root causes of the defects alive and dead. Also, on the back of the

with which they deal: they are compelled card is recorded any history of near rela-

to live from hand to mouth in an attempt to tives known to be mentally deficient, blind,

cope with each fresh crop of cases as they deaf, or sub-normal in some other respect.

arise. The result is that we do not get the In addition to this material that was col-

full advantage of the valuable experience lected directly, we obtained indirectly par-

they acquire in the process. Since they ticulars concerning a small number of cases,

alone are in the position to obtain the sort said to be mentally deficient, in the course

of data which can unravel the mysteries of another investigation which might be

relating to the transmission of mental described as a kind of household census.

defect from one generation to the next, my Every thirtieth house in every street

plea is that they should try to discover what throughout Merseyside-which this time

precise data are likely to throw most light embraced Birkenhead and Wallasey, as well

on these questions, and then see to it that as Liverpool, Bootle, and certain urban

the data are accurately and fully recorded districts on both sides of the river-was

in their case papers.

visited if it was believed to contain a work-

I am not suggesting something which will ing-class family. The criterion was the

add enormously to their work-I ask only occupation or the probable income of

that an effort should be made to record the head of the household. The visitor

certain facts which can quite readily be endeavoured to get particulars as to the size

acquired in the ordinary routine visits to and constitution of each family, the occupa-

the homes of those who are assisted. The tions of those earning, their economic posi-

facts thus accumulated should in due course tion, housing conditions, and so on. Fairly

be of real value to students of these subjects detailed information has been obtained in

and they might indeed help towards a solu- this way concerning nearly 7,000 families,

tion of some of the difficult problems of representing a large random sample of the

human heredity.

normal population. In making their rounds

the investigators found thirty-seven persons

THE PEOPLE INVESTIGATED

alleged to be mentally deficient and it is therefore possible to compare in certain

The remainder of this article will be con- respects the families in which these sub-

fined to a brief account of some of the normals appeared with the normal families

material collected concerning one type only that were sampled.

of defect, namely mental defect. It relates I need hardly say that the number of

to 1,755 persons notified as mentally defi- mentally deficient persons discovered by this

cient under the appropriate Mental Defi- second method will give an under-estimate of

ciency or Education Acts and resident in the proportion of such persons in the

Liverpool, Bootle, and two or three neigh- sampled population because, in the first

ioo THE EUGENICS REVIEW.

place, the investigators did not set out to statutory supervision. In addition, there

discover them-they only came across them were 2I,990 defectives under voluntary

incidentally; and because, in the second supervision, 9,47I " subject to be dealt

place, relatives would tend to hide, rather with " but in respect of whom no action had

than to disclose, their existence. Also, been taken, and 3,8I9 known to the Local

defectives in institutions as well as those Authorities but not as yet " subject to be

under fourteen would only be recorded by dealt with." Finally, from Dr. Newman's

chance, since the investigators were in Report on the Health of the School Child

general only seeking to account for poten- we learn that there were, in 1930, 32,I30

tial earners in the household who were over educable mentally defective children. When

fourteen but were not earning. Though the all these numbers are put together they total

number may seem to be small, however, I 122,474, or 3 per i,ooo of the population, as

do not think the estimate is altogether un- against Dr. Lewis' estimate of about

reasonable. The figure for Liverpool alone 320,000 certifiable defectives, or 8 per I,000

is equivalent to I.44 per i,ooo of the of the population. Much as we already do

sampled population, which may be com- for mental defectives the gap between these

pared, though the comparison is not a strict two figures is some measure of how far short

one, with a proportion of I.76 notified we still fall in our machinery for their

mental defectives per i,ooo of the general notification and care.

population discovered in our direct investi- The analysis of this material has been a

gation when we included all defectives of laborious task and is not yet complete. The

the classes already defined.

greater part of it has been undertaken,

under direction, by Miss Phyllis M. Perrott,

THE VARIATIONS IN PROPORTIONS

a member of our research staff. Her care and diligence throughout have been beyond

Those who have studied with any care the praise. The patient amassing of the Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee material, upon which we have built, from may be puzzled as to why the proportions widely divergent sources has been the work just quoted should differ rather widely from of Miss J. E. McCrindell, to whom I should the proportion for the country as a whole, like to make warm acknowledgment. Her as estimated by that Committee. There are keen and never-failing interest in the invesat least three reasons for the deficiency: tigation combined with her long experience (i) certain classes of defectives, as already as a social worker have been extremely explained, are omitted from the Liverpool valuable.

figures; (2) the incidence of defect is known

to be appreciably lower in urban than in
rural areas; and, most important of all, (3)

THE RELATIONSHIP TO SEX

the number of defectives officially notified It may be of interest if I mention one or

is considerably below the number ascertain- two results that emerge from our work so

able as defective. It was the latter figure far as it has gone. First, consider the

which Dr. Lewis set out to discover in his relation of mental defect to sex. Although

investigations for the Committee, whereas we cannot claim to have caught up in the

we were concerned with the former.

net of our inquiries every mentally deficient

Confirmatory evidence of the last-men- person in the district, I do not think our

tioned deficiency can be obtained from the methods have been such as to give either

Report of the Board of Control for I930. sex a better chance of inclusion than the

The number of mentally defective patients other. The household census returns gave

under care on January Ist, I93I, is there a proportion of 57 males to 43 females

given as 55,o64. This number includes all mentally deficient. The direct inquiry gave

in approved institutions of various kinds, a proportion of 55 males to 45 females. The

those under guardianship, and those under Liverpool figures alone for mentally defi-

MENTAL DEFICIENCY ON MERSEYSIDE

IoI

cient children in special schools between the on Merseyside, only 2 per cent. were over

ages of 5 and i6, which were likely to be forty and less than 20 per cent. were over

more complete, gave exactly the same pro- twenty-five, whereas in the general popula-

portion. These results are in agreement tion over sixteen sampled in Liverpool, 76

with those of the Government Mental per cent. were over twenty-five.

Deficiency Committee. I calculate from Whichever figures we take, it is clear that

their figures that the proportion of males the mentally deficient disappear from sight

to females was 55 to 45 among children or die young as compared with the normal

under i6, and 52 to 48 for all ages com- population. The figures for Merseyside are

bined.

more extreme in this sense than those of

The proportions are of course affected by the numbers of normal persons of each sex

Dr. Lewis. included in

'As
our

already survey

stated, we have not the mentally defi-

living in the area of inquiry, but it is well cient who are in institutions. Also, we

known that in the general population should be more likely than he to miss the

females are in excess of males. For older defectives; for he counted all he could

instance, at the last census in the area of discover, whether they were notified or not,

our inquiry the proportion of males to whereas we only included those who were

females was 47 to 53. In our Liverpool definitely under supervision. In this area,

sampled population we have not yet as in most others, the machinery for search-

analyzed the figures under fourteen, but for ing out feeble-minded persons of mature

those above that age the proportion of males years is non-existent: they only come to

to females was 48 to 52. We are driven to light in general when by some open act they

the conclusion that males are more prone to prove their lack of social adaptation. It

mental defect than females. Some words follows that comparatively few of them are

which I wrote elsewhere on this point are under supervision. It would be a great gain

relevant here:

if close and friendly touch could be main-

The complacent male sometimes claims
that most of the world's geniuses, whether in science or art, have been of his own sex. If these figures are to be accepted as repre-
sentative the female may with justice retort that at least her sex produces relatively fewer of the mentally deficient class. In

tained with all those who have in their earlier years attended special schools for the
mentally defective. Mind and body are closely related and
other defects or some constitutional weakness are not infrequently associated with feebleness of mind. This partly accounts

other words the male would appear to be for a high death rate in early years among

the more variable of the two, downwards as the mentally deficient. Were it not, indeed,

well as upwards from the normal.

for the attention and care that is now given

to them by doctors, nurses, and trained

THE RELATIONSHIP TO AGE

workers, many of them would not live as long as they do.

Let us next consider how mental defect

is related to age, confining ourselves to persons over sixteen years of age, since the

THE DEFECTIVE-PRODUCING CLASS

definition of mental defect varies when we From what class do the mentally deficient

pass from children of school age to adults. spring? Dr. Lewis, as we have seen, found The Mental Deficiency Committee found about the same frequency of low-grade

that, while in the general population in the mental defectives-idiots and imbeciles-in

area of their investigation 54 per cent. were all classes of the community, but the feeble-

under forty as compared with 46 per cent. minded were far more prevalent in what he

of forty and over, among the mental defec- called the ' Social Problem ' class than in

tives the proportion over forty fell to 33 per any other. What do the Merseyside figures

cent. In the mental defective group studied show.?

Io2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

In the household census that was taken his employability, the economic status of

of Liverpool and Bootle, particulars were the family, or the home conditions.

obtained concerning a random sample of

over 4,000 families from the general working-class population. All the families con- FERTILITY OF THE FAMILIES

taining adult males were then classified according to the grade of occupation of the
head of the household, with the following
result: 39 per cent. were engaged in un-
skilled occupations, 26 per cent. in semiskilled, and the remainder in skilled and in non-manual occupations. Nearly I,200 families each containing one young mentally deficient person between the ages of five and twenty-two were similarly classified according to the father's occupation. Of these 57
per cent. were unskilled and only 23 per cent. were in skilled or non-manual occupa-
tions. The small random sample of families
found to contain mentally deficient persons in the household census was also analyzed,
with the following result:

From the standpoint of eugenics there is another vitally important question upon
which our figures have a direct bearing-
that is, the contribution which these families
make to future generations. We endeavoured to find, when possible, the number
of brothers and sisters, alive and dead, of all young mental defectives between the ages of five and twenty-two. Those that were living at home were usually recorded in the case papers, but information would not always be available concerning those living away from home or dead. The estimate we get of the size of family may therefore
be regarded as a conservative one. Particulars of the same kind were obtained for the random sample of families investigated in our household census.

In 63 per cent. of them the head of the family was unskilled and in only 7 per cent. was he recorded as skilled.
In one-quarter of these families the head was unemployed, as compared with only one in ten of families in general at the same period of time.
Over 40 per cent. were below a defined poverty line, as compared with i6 per cent. of all the families sampled in the same area.
Eighteen per cent. were living in overcrowded conditions, as compared with ii per cent. of all the homes sampled.

For families in general the number of children born per family was 3.92; for
families containing one or more young mental defectives the number of children born per family was 7.i6, almost double the
previous figure. As we have already seen, there is a ten-
dency for those who are mentally deficient to die young, and it is highly probable that they come from a stock that is constitutionally, as well as mentally, below the average.
Evidence of this is found in the number of children recorded as dead per family in the M.D. group of families, which is 2.47 as

compared with o.95 in the group of working-

"LARGELY FROM THE SUB-NORMAL"

class families sampled from the general population. The net contribution of families

The last-mentioned group of families is in general to future generations is thus 2.97

admittedly small, and I should not put much children per family, while that of the

trust in the figures based upon them, taken mentally deficient group of families is 4.69.

by themselves, but they all point in the We carried the analysis of our figures a

same direction. They lend support to the stage further by dividing our main group conclusion that the feeble-minded are of about I,700 families containing mental

largely drawn from a class of the population defectives between the ages of five and sixty-

that is in other respects sub-normal. The five into three groups: those containing

households in which they appear are fre- more than one person classed as mentally

quently below the average, whether we deficient, comprising abo-it a quarter of the

judge them by the occupation of the head, total; those containing, iii addition to the

MENTAL DEFICIENCY ON MERSEYSIDE

I03

mentally deficient individual, one or more others classed as mentally retarded, comprising with the first group a third of the total; those containing no other person recorded as deficient or retarded.
FERTILITY PARALLEL WITH DEFECT

SIZE OF FAMILY IN CERTAIN SOCIAL

GROUPS

Number of

Size of children born

Group of families.

sample. per family.

Random sample of working

class ... ... ... 4,379 3.92 Male head unskilled ... I,452 4.3I

Male head unemployed ... 360 4.35

In receipt of Public Assist-

When the Liverpool families containing children in special schools for the mentally deficient were graded on this basis according

ance

...

...

Below the poverty line

Overcrowded ...

...
... ...

2I6
75I 397

4.54
4.7I 6.o6

to the occupation of the father, it was dis- It is possible also to compare the number

covered that the group of families contain- of living children per family in the I,II5

ing more than one defective recorded the families containing at least one mentally

highest proportion of fathers in the lowest defective member with the corresponding

occupational grade. The same families also figure in 86 families where the defect is

recorded the largest mean number of blindness, in i86 families where the defect

children per family, both living and dead, is deafness, and in 52 families where the

namely 5.o and 2.7 respectively, as com- defect is epilepsy, the defective individual

pared with 4.6 and 2.4 in the group of in each case being between the ages of five

families containing a single recorded and twenty-two. Here we cannot compare

defective.

the number born, because the number of

In view of these figures it may seem that children dead was frequently not recorded

we have a clear case for segregation or and was sometimes unreliable.

sterilization. But whom shall we segregate The mean number of living children per

or sterilize?-The parents of the defective family in the mentally defective group was

child ? But if we wait until a defective 4.69; in the blind group it was 4.88; in the

infant is born before we take action against deaf group it was 4.59; in the epileptic group

the parents, the deed is done and we are it was 4.50. All these results are consider-

too late. Moreover, while mentally defec- ably in excess of the mean number of chil-

tive persons are found with more than dren alive per family in the general work-

average frequency in families which are ing-class population which, as we saw, was

below the normal in occupational grade, 2.97.

economic status, and general home condi- There is one point here which might quite

tions, the great majority of such families easily be overlooked and to which I think

contain no individual who wourd be certi- attention should perhaps be drawn. Since

fiable as mentally deficient. And, as we shall all the families with a defective child must

now show, these families are reproducing have had at least one child, it might with

their kind in numbers larger than families some degree of fairness be argued that such

which are normal. Our figures suggest, families should only be compared with nor-

indeed-I do not claim that they conclusively mal families which have also had at least one

prove-that there is a definite gradation in child: in other words we should exclude

fertility: it is highest in families containing from our normal group all families for which

more than one defective; it is very high in no living or dead children were recorded. If

families with a single defective; it is still that be done, the mean number of living

distinctly high in families which contain no children in the normal group is increased

mentally deficient person but which are by only about one-third of a child per

sub-normal in some other respect.

family, so that it is still definitely less than

The following table provides evidence in the mean number of living children in the

support of the last statement:

defective groups.

I04 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE EUGENIC PROBLEM
We have ventured to class the different types of families we have been considering as all in a sense sub-normal, and it seems
clear from the figures quoted that such families are in general bringing more children into the world than normal families.
Now, just as in mental defect there are
different grades-and possibly different species-so mental defect itself may be regarded, in its social reactions, as only one of a genus of defects and disabilities. If, then, we are to limit the production of children in the mentally defective group, is
there any reason why we should stop there, and if not, where should we draw the line?
In answer to this question it has to be admitted that we cannot be strictly logical. We shall be driven to adopt different methods for different classes by the force of public opinion, if for no other reason.
Sterilization might come to be accepted as suitable for certain types: for others the desired result might be best achieved by a scaling down of social benefits. I will briefly indicate the sort of case which I think would be likely to fall under these two heads, starting with the second.
It is possible that some of the groups we have been discussing may have larger families than the normal because they are naturally and constitutionally more fertile. On that point we have no very definite evidence. But it is certainly the case that such families have not the same inducement as normal families to limit the number of their children. The complaint is continually heard that, at the intelligent end of the scale, where more children would be a decided advantage to the State, we have the well-attested fact of family limitation; at the opposite end, where they become a drag on the rest of the community, the effect of our social services is such as actually to encourage the production of large families. A member of the Survey staff was recently informed on good authority that, in a certain area of Liverpool, which I shall not name, where families have long been suffering from hopeless unemployment, young people from the age of eighteen years

onwards are almost pushed out of the home by their parents, like small birds from their nests; it is not done unkindly: they see the advantage of getting married and setting up for themselves, though it may be only in a sinigle room, because the Public Assistance granted to a young man and his family is on a more generous scale than the allowance which they would receive if they were unmarried and living as dependants upon their parents.
It would be unfair to assume that this alleged practice is universally prevalent, even if it be true of one small patch of Liverpool; I have thought it worth mentioning only because it is indicative of a tendency. Most of us, in these days, believe in the principle underlying the social services, and we realize the benefits which they have brought to the working classes; but I think the time has come when we must exercise more refined methods in selecting the families which are to enjoy these benefits. No humane person would wish to see
anybody destitute, but we cannot afford to give-and indeed we do not at present give -without reasonable inquiry into the means and qualifications of applicants for assistance. In particular, those who have any regard to the future of the race will agree that we should try to avoid giving in such a way as to put a premium on the production of a pauper class. One can see that there are many difficulties in the way of attaining this result. How precisely they should be overcome is a matter upon which we should look for some guidance to those who have had long experience in the administration of relief.
THE REMEDIES SUGGESTED
Turning now to the proposed alternative method of family limitation which, as a supplement to segregation, has received some measure of influential support, we have allowed that it would be neither entirely just nor entirely effective to adopt compulsory sterilization for mentally defective persons alone. With suitable safeguards, however, it is felt that there would

MENTAL DEFICIENCY ON MERSEYSIDE

I05

not be the same injustice-and there should sexual offence against a child under four-

be definite social advantage-if the voluen- teen, and for the mentally retarded young

tarv sterilization of the mentally defective woman who periodically enters a maternity

and certain other classes could be legalized. home to be delivered of an illegitimate baby.

Our first aim should be to prevent, so far The justification for it in these cases would

as possible, the birth of children who are not be on racial grounds but because such

likely to be the victims of some serious here- persons could not be regarded as suitable

ditary disease or defect of mind or body parents. It might be impossible to prove

transmitted by either parent.

that the offspring of any of these particular

With that in view, it is suggested that types would of necessity be defective or

any individual who has been certified by diseased, but it is almost certain that their

one or more qualified medical practitioners home conditions would be most unsatisfac-

as suffering from such a disease or defect tory and that in one way or another the

should be advised to undergo sterilization. children would themselves be likely to

The necessary safeguards proposed are that become a burden upon others.

the operation should only be authorized by All may not be prepared to go to the

a properly qualified board-which, in the lengths which I have indicated, but prob-

case of mental defectives, might be the ably few will dispute the desirability of

Board of Control-and that it should only putting a limit to the burdens which the

be performed with the consent of the person recidivist and the sexually irresponsible are

concerned or, if he should be under age or permitted gratuitously to impose upon the

defective, the consent of his parent, guar- State. When that limit is reached such

dian, or spouse. Although such consent persons should only be given their freedom

would be essential, there is no reason why on condition that they are not able to abuse

moral pressure should not be used to obtain it in a manner injurious to the race, and

it. For instance, a mentally defective or those who cannot accept sterilization as a

.an insane person in an institution might be suitable method of preventing such abuse

perfectly harmless and therefore fit to live should do all in their power to promote the

with relatives, except for the one danger discovery of a better alternative.

that he or she might be capable of producing It is generally acknowledged that to bring

a child suffering from a like defect. It a genius into the world is to confer a lasting

would not be unreasonable, from the point benefit upon mankind. As our knowledge

of view of society, to grant perfect freedom of genetics grows, one hopes the day will

to such an individual on condition that he also come when to produce a child who is

or she were willing first to be sterilized. mentally deficient, who is afflicted with some

The same procedure has been proposed grave disease or deformity, or who is

for the recidivist type of criminal who is branded at birth with the stigma of pauper-

constantly in and out of prison, for the ism, will be considered and treated as a

adult male who has been found guilty of a crime against both the child and society.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 2.

