HEREDITY AND JUVENILE DELINQUENCY.
A PRELIMINARY STUDY OF TWELVE FAMILIES.
By J. HAROLD WILLIAMS, Director of Research, Whittier State School, Whittier,
California.
MUCH attention has been given during the past few years to the study of heredity in relation to many forms of social variation. The following is a brief account of some of the problems connected with the investigation of heredity and juvenile delinquency. Spaulding and Healy" have recently reported on an inquiry into the possibilities of the inheritance of criminality or delinquency as an individual trait. Their conclusions are negative. Inquiry by the present writer has resulted similarly. There is at present no evidence that criminal traits are transmitted as such. It is agreed, however, by all investigators that crime and delinquency are often closely associated with feeblemindedness, insanity, epilepsy, and other traits which are known to be heritable, and that there is much of value for eugenics in the study of these associations.
FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS.-Recent studies of delinquent boys and girls with the use of tests standardised with a sufficiently large number of non-selected children, have repeatedly shown that feeble-mindedness exists in comparatively large proportions among children committed by the Juvenile Courts to correctional institutions. It can be safely said that one-third at least of our delinquent boys are feeble-minded, and the proportion among delinquent girls is still greater. This difference between the sexes is due probably to the fact that the girls are a more highly selected group, owing to the leniency which is usually given before they are committed to an institution. As a rule, only the worst of the female offenders are found in the industrial schools.
' Spaulding, E. R. and Healy. William * Inheritance as a factor in criminality. Bsulletin Americatn Academy of Medicine, Vol. XV., No. x, February, 1914, pp. 24; -also Healey, "The Indlividual Delinqnent," Boston, 1915.

HEREDITY AND JUVENILE DELINQUENCY.

I9

A recent study of delinquent boys in the institution from which the cases here discussed were obtained' showed 32 per cent. definitely feeble-minded; 21 per cent. " border-line" cases; 27 per cent. " dull-normal "; and only 20 per cent. pos-
Isessing a sufficiently high degree of intelligence as to be rated
as absolutely normal. A few of the last-named group were of superior intelligence. TIhe results indicated that feeble-mindedness is probably at least sixteen times as coinmon among delinquent boys as among ordinary children. Other investigations by Goddard, Pintner, Fernald, Healy, Spaulding, Bridgman, and others, have resulted in conclusions not greatly at variance in this respect.
It is now everywhere recognised that feeble-mindedness is the cause of much of our delinquency and crime.- Every feebleminded boy and girl is potentially, if not actually, a social offender. It is not at all difficult to explain many juvenile crimes and offences upon the ground that the offenders had not developed the degree of -intelligence necessary to the comprehension of the wrong involved. It cannot be reasonably expected that a young man 20 years of age with a mentality of a child of nine or ten, as is often found to be the case, has much capacity for comprehending the social damage he does in stealing bicycles, burning buildings, using knives and guns pro. miscuously, breaking into houses, or committing a sex offence. It is further quite obvious that in such a case there can be very little hope for " reform." We know that his mental development has practically ceased; that at the very best he can never develop an intelligence level beyond that of an average child of I2 years; that he will never be able to " compete on equal terms with his fellows," and that if allowed to go upon his own responsibility he will not oply continue to commit crimes, but will probably produce feeble-minded children who are likely to follow in his footsteps. In view of our understanding of these probabilities, it seems that the significance for eugenics in the study of feeble-mindedness in delinquents cannot be overemphasised.
1 Whittier State School. The results are published in the 1914 Biennial report of this Institution.

20 EUGENICS REVIEW.
In the institution to which reference has been made, of 200 inmates there are 64 feeble-minded boys. A number of these are of illegitimate birth. In some cases the mothers and sisters are prostitutes. Very often the father is a degenerate, socially and morally. Almost without exception there is feeble-mindedness in other members of the family. These feeble-minded boys, however, have been sent to the institution because they are delinquent. They are committed on equal terms with normal children, and under the same regulations concerning parole and discharge. The institution, then, must undertake the task of " reforming " them. It is further necessary to attempt to make them industrially self-supporting by the time they reach the age of 21. The former undertaking involves an impossibility; the latter, even if accomplished, is seriously dysgenic.
ALCOHOLISM.-It has long been known that alcoholism bears an important relation to delinquency and crime. To what extent this may be due to the direct effect of alcohol upon the germ-plasm, we do not know. Stockard, in his recent experimentation with animals, shows that alcohol can, and does, affect the offspring of parents whose offspring would otherwise be normal. Mjoen, the Norwegian investigator, has evidence that alcohol affects human offspring, not directly, but anti-regeneratively, i.e., interferes with the natural tendency for defective stock to revert toward the normal average. This seems to be the most reasonable explanation as yet offered. Thus excessive alcoholism in a family where feeble-mindedness is common would tend to increase the proportion of unfit offspring, and possibly produce results other than would be expected according to the Mendelian laws of inheritance. We have some findings which apparently accord with Mjoen's conclusions. Regardless of what its hereditary influentes may be, alcoholism is probably more important as a consequence than a cause of degeneracy. There is no doubt, however, that it is a direct causal factor in crime and delinquent conduct. It is often associated with delinquency, and many times in its excessive degrees. Of 350 delinquent boys examined by the writer, 28 per cent. are known definitely to have had drunken fathers. The proportion will doubtless be found to be much greater.

HEREDITY AND JUVENILE DELINQUENCY.

21

Moderate or occasional drinkers are not included in this group. There is no doubt that the use of alcohol is much more common among the parents and relatives of delinquents than in the general population. Not infrequently both parents are heavy drinkers. In many cases drinking has been the cause of divorce or separation of the parents, and thus has indirectly influenced delinquency. A few cases fairly representative of those in which alcoholism exists in a marked degree in the family history will be briefly described.
A.-Youngest of five children. Committed for larceny. Both parents alcoholic. Mother is feeble-minded and immoral. Father dead; mentality not known. Oldest brother of boy committed married a feeble-minded girl. Older sister married and divorced.
B.-Feeble-minded and tubercular. Father alcoholic; mother died of tuberculosis. Three other children in family, condition not known.
C.-Feeble-minded. Illegitimate. Father alcoholic and died of tuberculosis. Mother feeble-minded and died of tuberculosis. No other children.
D.-Feeble-minded; said to be " wild when drunk." Both parents defective. Father alcoholic.
E.-Father alcoholic. Mother feeble-minded, alcoholic and immoral. Four children; one feeble-minded, and all committed to institutions for delinquents.
F.-Feeble-minded. Father and grandfather alcoholic and feeble-minded. Mother normal mentally, but died of tuberculosis.
G.-Father alcoholic. Mother probably defective. Four children. One feeble-minded, alcoholic and delinquent. Has speech impediment. Two epileptic, one being also a " dope fiend.' Fourth child died in infancy.
H.-An extremely alcoholic man, from a family of heavy drinkers, produced, by his epileptic wife, four alcoholic, three feeble-minded, and six delinquent children. Five were prostitutes, and two boys were sex perverts.

22 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Insanity, epilepsy, syphilis, and physical defects are also closely associated with the study of heredity and delinquency. Although often accompanied by mental deficiency, these traits not infrequently occur with normal intelligence in families having delinquent children. The inheritance of weak volitional powers, feeble inhibition, etc., is no doubt of still greater importance.
In the accompanying family charts, the following symbols are used

EXPLANAT ION OF -SYMBOLS:

MARRIED
----- NOT MARRIED

MALE FEMALE

C CRIMINAL

U

§ FEEBLE-MINDED

A IALCOHOLIC

PROBABLY F.M.

Sx IMMORAL

INSANE

T B TUBERCULAR
E DIED IN INFANCY

L[I1 di NORMRALMiAL .

~C~O~IMNMSITTITEUDTITOON AN

FAMILY I.-This group illustrates a very common occur-
rence-hereditary transmission of feeble-mindedness and the developing of delinquent conduct in one of the children (the
only living boy, (8) in this case). The father (3) is a stone
cutter, when employed, and a heavy drinker. His father (I) was
also feeble-minded and alcoholic. The mother (4) of the six
children was feeble-minded and died from an unknown cause. The boy (8) is a high-grade moron, very near the border-line level. His undoing has been caused by running away from
school, although it is hardly to be expected that he could have greatly profited from instruction.

HEREDITY AND JUVENILE DELINQUENCY.

23-

FAMILY II.-Another totally defective family. An alcoholic feeble-minded man and an insane woman have produced six

I2

13 +

b6i66i ~~~~I
FAMILY II. children, of whom at least one, and probably all, are mentally defective. All the children have been committed to institutions as delinquents or dependents.

24 EUGENICS REVIEW.

FAMILY III.-An alcoholic, feeble-minded father, and a mother whose mental and physical condition was at the very best unsuited to produce a normal environment. Of the six children,

A

.VULGARt

0^Rc 0r 04951t
AN

.

]~~~

FAMILY I 1.

I %^b&/Eg

l. -

,
-

FAMILY IV.

the oldest, a boy, is probably feeble-minded. The daughter is a prostitute. The three youngest boys have been committed to an institution for delinquents. The youngest has been com-

HEREDITY AND JUVENILE DELINQUENCY.

25

mitted to three different institutions. He belongs to the borderline intelligence group, being slightly superior to those classified as feeble-minded.
FAMILY IV.-Another example of hereditary feeble-mindedness. The boy, who was committed as delinquent, was the off-
CA
gf~ ~

FAMILY V.

FAMILY VI.
spring of an alcoholic, feeble-minded father and a feeble-minded mother. His brother and sister were feeble-minded. The mother and her two sisters were immoral, and the worst possible home conditions were the inevitable result. The boy is a highgrade moron. He is a truant, a thief, and unmanageable, both at home or by the officers of the Court. He is a " moral

26 EUGENICS REVIEW.
degenerate." His father is a " worthless drunkard," and the mother is " weak " and uneducated. The three children, aged 14, I3, and IO years, have had immoral relations for more than two years. The feeble-minded girl has had illicit relations with her cousin and others outside of the family.
FAMILY V.-The father is now serving a term in prison, having been convicted of murder. The mother is, meanwhile, living illegally with another man. Of the two children, one is delinquent, and the other, a girl, died of tuberculosis.
FAMILY VI.-The father, feeble-minded, has produced three feeble-minded children by his third wife, who is insane, and probably also feeble-minded. Previously he had married two
I II I
FAMILY VII.
other women, both feeble-minded, and in each case there were a number of children born. The whole family is said to be "vicious and immoral," and the home conditions are exceedingly bad. The boy who has been committed is a moron of a very low grade. He is 15 years of age, and is mentally slightly above eight. He is ignorant, stupid and unimpressionable, and is clearly a case for an institution or colony for the feeble-minded. A perpetuation of the degenerate stock from which he came will most surely follow if he is placed entirely upon his own responsibility.
FAMILY VII.-The father of these eight children is dead, and we have no information concerning him. Two of the chil-

HEREDITY AND JUVENILE DELINQUENCY.

27

dren are feeble-minded, delinquent boys. Their cousin is also feeble-minded, and has been committed to another reformatory. There is undoubtedly much more mental deficiency in this family.
FAMILY VIII.-A defective family in which the two boys have become delinquent. The feeble-minded mother, once divorced from the father, married another man who is now
serving a term in prison. She is now living illegally with her former husband. Probably all the surviving children are
defective.

FAMILY VIII.
FAMILY IX.-Of the two boys who have been committed from this family, one is a high-grade moron, and one is of normal intelligence. Their father is feeble-minded and sexually loose. Their mother is probably defective also. In the father's family there is mental defectiveness, these boys having two feeble-minded cousins. It is interesting to note that in the commitment papers of the older boy, the delinquency was entirely explained on the grounds of poor environment. " R. lived in a bad neighbourhood. He steals money to get it to spend, not saving any. He is a nervous wreck with no control when angry. Has a fighting disposition. Sweet-natured in many ways, but stubborn. Is very lazy and has been arrested for vagrancy.
Cause of delinquency, bad environmnent; the boy never had a
chance."

28 EUGENICS REVIEW. FAMILY X.-The father is a labourer. Feeble-minded. All
of the children are mentally defective. The condition of the mother is not known. The oldest child, a girl, is an employee
A So
FAMILY X.
in a laundry. The second daughter, a helper in a restaurant. The older boy, who was first examined while under the supervision of the Juvenile Court, has since been committed to the

HEREDITY AND JUVENILE DELINQUENCY.

29

State School. He is a middle-grade moron and very irresponsible. The youngest child, a boy, is io years of age, and has been in the first grade in school for three years.

FAMILY XI.
N~~~~~~~~
FAMILY XI.
FAMILY XI.-The father of this family is now a charity case
in a public hospital. IHis mental condition is not known. He
has always been indigent and is probably feeble-minded. The

30 EUGENICS REVIEW.
mother is of low grade, and it is stated that she has never been able to earn more than three dollars a month. She receives pecuniary assistance from the county. The two boys, who are now in an industrial school, were found running wild in the country.
FAMILY XII.-The mother of the committed boy is feebleminded, as are all of her children. She has been married twice and each time deserted by her husband. She is of very low mentality, and in her oldest son are slight traces of insanity.
The foregoing family histories, briefly sketched, indicate the extreme importance of heredity in delinquency. There can be no doubt that much of our delinquency may be directly accounted for by the perpetuation of degenerate and tainted stock. Dr. H. H. Goddard, in his recent book on " The Criminal Imbecile,"L says: "If it is true-and there is every evidence that it is-that children are daily being born of such a mentality that it requires the attention and thought of an army of normal people to prevent their growing up into criminal lives and that all of the best efforts can never make them able to take their place in society as useful citizens, then it is certainly our duty to see that such children are not born." The same obligation rests upon society in regard to children who are being born with any other traits or defects which lead to juvenile delinquency, which is often the forerunner, if not checked, of more serious crime.
It must not be overlooked, however, that even in feebleminded children, delinquency is directly a product of environment. It would be impossible for a feeble-minded boy to steal or commit any other offence if the conditions around him were not such that his purpose could be accomplished. In fact, it is found that the conditions are often extremely suitable to the act. To be allowed to play on the streets; to associate with bad companions; to grow up in a neighbourhood where the moral standards are very low, or almost altogether lacking-these are just as truly producers of delinquency as is feeble-mindedness.
Unfortunately, however, these two conditions-defective native endowment and defective environment-too often occur
' New York, 1914, pp. I06-107.

HEREDITY AND JUVENILE DELINQUENCY.

31

together. In this case the probability of delinquency is doubled. There is much to be done in the improvement of the nurture of growing boys and girls to prevent the development of their potentialities for unsocial conduct. This is especially necessary for those who by nature are most likely to become victims of their environment.
The study of delinquency indicates, as has been repeatedly shown in the case of other problems, that in nature and nurture, not separately, but collectively, must we look for an improved social being.

