THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE
OF THE WAR.1
By PROFESSOR J. A. LINDSAY, M.D., F.R.C.P.
Two theories are possible regarding the eugenic and social influence of war in general. The first theory maintains that war is, i,n the main, profoundly dysgeonic and anti-social, wasteful of the best life of nations, deestructive of capital and of the fruits of industry, a. propagator of disease, hurtful to the stock, a well-spring of international hatred and ali-enation. The alternative theory is the view that wax is a tonic, though admittedly a severe ton.ic, to the naition.s; that it promotes the virile vixtues-courage, endurance, self-sacrifice; that it imposes a wholesome discipline; tha,t it is a great school of patriotism, efficiency, -and national solidarity; that prolonged peface leads to softness of manners and racial decadenice.
Before we seek to d-etermine which of thes.e sh'arply-contrasted theories should be approved, it may be well to remind ourselves that the que -tions at issue are extremely complex. The influence of war cannot be compressed into a, single, simple and unambiguous formula. Its influence varies arccording to the economic and cultural level of the combatants, according to its duration and results, according to whether it is waged by conscript o,r professional armies. The psychical influence of wair, upon, which so much stres.s i.s lai,d'by militarist writers, is one thing for -the victors; another, and very diff'erent thing for the vanquished. War with the simpler weapons o'f fo,rmer ages is not comparable to war waged wiith all the formidable and sinister panoply of modeirn science.
But still greateTr difficulties remain. There are certain large and fundamen-tal generalisations relating to wa!r which are generally accepted, but. which are not free from challenge. Let me indicate a few of these. It i's commonly a,ssumed as self-evident that war is wa.steful of the best life o'f nations-young men of robust physique in their early prime, the best possible potential husbands and fathers. But so eminent an authority as Prolfessor Arthur Keith will not subscribe to this do-ctrine. In -his opinion the bravest a,re not also the best, and' the brave man, as such, is
1 An Address delivered in the University Museum, Oxford, to the Oxford
Summer School of Civics and Eugenics, August 27th, I9i8.

I34 EUGENICS REVIEW.

relatively valueless in an industrial age, and in an industrial community.

Again, it is generally assumed as needing no argum-ent that militaTry

training, with its regular life, its open-air existence, its systematic drill

and ordered discipline-in a word, its cult of the physical, is eminently

conducive to health. But Professor Sergi, one of our most eminent

anthropologists, holds that if young me-n are recruited ait the age of I8

or 19, before the arterial and muscular systems are hardened and

matured, the effect of military training is iin. many cases injurious. Once

more, it is assumed by militarist writers, as an historical, incontrovertible

fact that prolonged peace is a cause of racial degeneracy and that soome

of the ancient Empires owed their extinction to the absence of the

stimulus of war. It is well to remember that this doctrine is a pure

assumption, and in no sense an accepted datum of history or of biology.

Finally, it is generally assumed that any cause, such as war, which

diminishes the birth-rate must necessarily be evil, but an important school

of thinkers asks us -to reconsider this opinion, and to enquire whether we

have sufficient evidence to determine if a high birth-rate is indicative of

national vigour and vitality, or only of reckless and improvident

propagation.

I put forwaird these four problems, which are closely linked up with

the eugenic and social influence of war, not with the view of attempting

to pronounce upon them, but simply as a suggestion th-a-t in our thinking

about war we must avoid premature generalisations, an.d not too rea,dily

accept as proved dogmas what may turn out to be only more or less

probable, or improbable, theoTries.

Let us deal with the general question before us as far as possible i-n

the light of assured facts, and as little as possible in the temper of

hypothesis or p.rophecy. The literature of the subject is very extensive,

and the materia.ls for forming a judgment are varied and ample.

To begin with the mo-st fundamental question of all-what will be

the wastage of man-power in this war, and wha.t will be the effect of

that wastage? It is impossible, while war still rages, to calculate with

any approximation to accuracy the loss of life involved in the present

conflict. Dr. Louis C. Parkes reckoned the number of males in the five

chief combatant nations to the end of -the year 1915 killed or unable to

support a family at nine millions. It would hardly be rash to assume

that this figure has been trebled since the above date. A more detailed

calculation is that of F. Savorgna'n, contributed to a recent issue of

Scientia. In this able article he calculates the number of males of znili-

tary age in the belligerent nations, the average annual increase of this

cl.ass in normal times, the pirobable losses in war, and the time which

the vaTious nations will require to recoup these losses. The figures work

out as follows

A. GERMANY.

Men of military age ... ... ... ... I3 millions

Annual i-ncrement of this class

... i68,000

Probable losses in war ... ... ... . I 5 per cent.

Period necessary for recoupment

... 12 years

THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE OF THE WAR. I35

B. FRANCE.

Men of military age

...... ... 7 millions

Annual increment of this class ... ... 19,000

Probable losses in war ... ... ...... I 7 per cent. Period necessiary for recoupment ... ... 66 years

C. ENGLAND.

Men of military age ... ... ... ... 9 million.s

Annual increment of this class ... ... 83,000
Probable losses in war ... ... ... ... 9 per ceint.

Period necessary for recoupment

... io years

D. ITALY.

Men of military age ... ... ... ... 52 millions

Annual increment of this class ... ... 13,000

Probable losses in war ... ...

... 9 per cent.

Period necessary for recoupment ... ... 38 years

The data iinvolved in the above calculations are somewhat precarious

and were based ton the assumption that the war would not last longer

than four years. It is probable that the views here expressed do not -err

on. the side of optimism, and they serve to bring out in lurid light the va.st holocaust of the nations which is now in progress. There has been

nothing like It since the Black Death of the 14th century, whi'ch is

believed to have carried off twenty-five million victims. F. Savorgnan's

general conclusion is that about the year 1930 Germany and England will

have made good their losses in man-power, but that Italy will require much longer, and that the pro.spect before France is very grave, as her

populaition before the war was practically stationary. He thinks the

difficulty of France will be partially met by a large immigration of

Italians and Spaniards, who are traditionally prolific, and who will ally

themselves with FTench women, the tendency being towards the forma-

tion of a solid Latin block.

The loss of life in war is a question 'not only of quantity, but of quality. The casualties amongst officers have been exceptionally heavy,

many only sons have fallen, and many old families have become extinct.

The loss to literature, science, politics, and administration has been

very grave. Poiets, writers, artists, thinkers and -statesmen-the Intelli-

gentsia of the Nations -have fallen in large numbers. The universities have in some cases been practically emptied, with the inevitable result
that the supply of trained intelligence will hereafter tend to run shot.

The nation is spending in this gireat conflict not only its blood but its

brain, and the latter can be replaced much more slowly than the former.

One of the most obvious xesults of the slaughter of youn.g men in this waT will .be an accen-tuation of the disproportion between the sexes,

which was already marked in the pre-war period. On a moderate

calculation, there will be three million more women than men i.n these isltands i,n the.not distant futuTe. The social effects of this disproportion

are likely to be intricate and far-reaching, and are not to be judged
exclusively from the standpoint of matriemony. We must not deal witth this question simply a:s if the cry of the nation will p'resently be for

136 EUGENICS REVIEW.
" moxe babies," independent of their quality. It is rumoured that ouT principal enemy is already arranging for " secondary marriages," wiith the view of promptly reple.nishing the stock so sorely wasted at Ypres and Verdun, on the Somme and on the Marne. Germaniy wants more men, espiecially more soldiers, so that she may son be ready to fight aiga,in, forgetful of the fact that the rapid growth of her population since I870 was one of the principal causes which launched her on her present disastrous career. BefoDre we begin to tamper with the marriage laws we should caTefully enquire whether an increase of population, as such, should be one of the aims of the enlightened legislator.
The population of England and Wales, accordiing to the usual compulta,tion, increased a little m-ore than -a million in the course of the I7,th century, nearly three millions in the course of the i8th cenitury, and
no less itha;n 23 millions in the course of the ioth century. If this rate oif
increase should continue, it is reckoned that 300 ye.ars hence England and Wales would have a population of I,400,000,000! There is evi!denitly here matter for serious thought.
The disproportion between the sexes has olther issues than those of which Hymen is ithe custodian. It is intimnatedly related to the industrial employment of women and the eco-noin-c value of fema.le labour. One of the most certain results of the present wair will be a vast extenfsion oif female employment, 'not alone 'because there will be fewer men, but also. because women have fully established their capacity to do work, atnd to do it well, which was formerly thought to be naturally reserved for men. Onie becomnes a shade less impatient of the miserable waste and wreckage of war when one reflects how the exigencies of war have tapped unknown oir,forgotten reservoirs of national energy and naltional wnrkiing poiwer. Women will continue many of their present activities affter the war, partly because they have learnt to like thei;r work, partly because ,they have learnt to like their pay, partly because the enormously enhanced cost of liviing will render some increment -to the household exchequer wvelcome or even imperative. Education, it may be inferred, will tend to fall more and more into the hands of women, as it has already done in America. The whole ques-tion of woman's work and woman's sphere will call for revision. Women have already maide their way into the medical profession and jusitified itheir status there. It is not easy to understand on what principle they can continue to be dnied access to other professions. The policy of the open door and a free career to taflent are the lines upon which the practice of the future must be guid-ed. Women must be allowed ito do whatever experience shows that they can do, well.
Closely re'lated to the quesition olf inan-power, as affeateed by the war, are the questions of marriage-rates, birth-raftes, and death-raltes. As rega.rds the m.arriage-rate, it is welil known ithait in ea;rly days of t.he war " war marriages " were numerous and popular, the marriage-rate for the quarter ending September 3ath, I9I5, being the highest ever recoTrded for England and Wales, viz., 21.8 per I,000, and for ithe whole year 19.4 per i,ooo, as oompared with I5.4 per i,ooo, the average figure for the

THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE OF THE WAR. 137
previous ten years. Sir BernaTrd Mallet has calculated tha,t between August, 1914, and June, I917, theree were in England and Wales 200,000
people married' who, but for the war, would have remained ,ingle, and in Scotland 8,ooo such persons. In Ireland there was no increase in the mariage-rate. The motives for war marrpi.ages are various and of vaxr-
ing degrees of validity. Sentiment, the outflow of female sympathy for men risking their lives in the defence of their country, accounted for some. Parental caution regarding financial security was naturally less stringent in warxtime. But motives more definitely eugenic were also at wocrk. The desire for heirs, feats for the extinction of ancient familiessuch motives operated and were worthy of respect. Naturally, the high
marriage-rate could not be maintained and soon tended to fall. The rate for i9i6 was 14.9 per i,ooo, being 4.5 per I,ooo below the phenomenally high rate of i9i5, and 'the figures for 1917, SO far ais they have been ascertained, indicate a further decline.
The question of birth-aates has attracted much attention in recent years, not only in this country, but in France, Germany, and elsewhere. As is well known, a rapid and progressive fall in the birth-rate has been
in operation in most civilised countries during the past hallf-century. The decline began first in France in the early years of the Igth century, but was nu.t manifest in England and Germany until the last quarter of
the century. The facts a-re striking and significant. The birth-rate in England and Wales was 33 per I,ooo in the year i850. In the year 1876 it had risen and stood at the figure of 36 per i,ooo. Therea'fter a rapid and progressive fall .set in, and in 1914 the rate had sunk to 24 per I,000. The experience of Germany was similar. The birith-rate in that country was 39 per i,ooo iIn the year i850. It rose to 4I per i,ooo in I875, and then. fell steadily tol 27.5 per I,000 in, I9I3. You a,re pTrolbably aware that the cause of this general deZine in the birth-rate has been much debated. The general opinion of experts-there are some disse;ntientsis that artificial restrictioin has played the largest part.
War, for obvious reasons, tends to depress the birth-rate. In invaded and devastated regions the whole machinery of family life is disorganised, and the birth-rate falls to one-half or even. less of the normal figure. This has been the case in parts of Fxance, Poland, anad elsewhere. In Bavaria the birth-rate of 20.7 per i,ooo in 1913 fell to 15.8 per 1,ooo in 1915. In England and Wales the rate for the ilast quarter of 1915 wa's 19.5 per i,000, the lowest on reocord. Thereafter there was a rise in, the ra,te, we may presume as the consequence of " war manriages," which for the quarter ending September 3oth, I916, stood at 21.7 per I,000. For the whole year 19I6 the ratte was 20.9 per 1,000, being 4.6 per I,000 below
the average of the decennium 1905-14, and I.0 per i,ooo bealow khe rate
for I915. Sir Bernard Mallet calculates the reduction of natality in, this country due to the war at 12 per cent. in I9I6, -as compared with I914, and points out that most of the .belligerent countries have suffered much more severely. Whether the progressive decline in the bitrth-rate which has been operative in this country for half a century wiLl continue after the war cannot be affirmed with certainty, but probability points in that

138 EUGENICS REVIEW.
diTection. How far this tendency is evil is a question upon which there is at present mauch difference of opinion. Some of our leading authorities hold the view that a low birth-rate, coupled with a low death-rate, represents the desired optimum. It is well known thait the birth-rate is highest in the le.ast progressive countries. The raite in Russia is 48.I per 1,000, in Roumania 43 per I,OOO, and in Spain 33 per i,ooo; while in Holland i,t is 28 per I,ooo, in Australia 26 per i,ooo, in England 2I per I,OOO, and in France I9 per i,ooo. In all c.ases a high bik*h-rate is associated with a; high death-rate. Thus in Russia the death-rate is 28 per I,ooo, and in Roumania 23 per i,ooo, while in Great Baitain, it is 13 per i,ooo, and in Australia II per I,ooo. New Zealand affords a good example of a nuioderate birth-rate, viz., 26 per I,ooo, and a very low
dealth-rate, viz., 9 per I,0OO, and consequently a high rate of natural increase. We have no accurate statistical information regarding India
and China, but we know that both countries have an enormous bir;th-rate and a correspondimgly high dealth-rate. The infant mortality in these countries rises to' an appalling figure-3oo or 400 per I,ooo. Compaxe
thi,s with the figure for London, viz., gi per i,ooo. So far as I am aware,
no country presents the association of a high birth-rate and a low deathrate. The wastage of nature in all forms of sentient life is, we know, enoirmous. Man is no exception to ithis, rule, bu,t it is probable that humnan. wisdom and foresight will be less anxious in future to stimulate birth-production th.an to improve the quality of the breed, and to secure that every individual born into -the world shall have a fair chanice of health, usefulness, and happiness.
Infanit mortality has shown a. remarkable decline in England and \Wales during the war. The rate for I9I6 was 9I per I,OOO births, being I9 per I,Ooo below the rate for the precedi,ng year, and 22 per 1,ooo below the aiverage of the decennium I906-15. Until we see whether this &dcline will be maint-ained it is somewhalt premature to specula;te on' its causes, which are not clear.
Let us turn -to the large question of the influence of war upon. health and disease. We must separate two questions which are fundamentally diistinct, viz., the health of armies in the field, and the influence of war upon the health of civil populatins. Before the epoch of the present war there ha,d been an immense and. ,progressive improvement in military hygiene and in the health of armies. Some of the figures in this connection are very impressive. The mortality 'rate of our armies in Great Britain, which in the period I817-21 was 21 per I,ooo, had fa.llen in the period 1907-II to 2.6 per i,ooo. For our armies in Indi.a tthe figures foYr these two periods were 87 per I,ooo and 6.7,per 1,OOO, respedtively. In Gibradltar the corresponding figures were i8 per I,OOO and 3.4 per I,Ooo, an'd in South Africa I2 per i,ooo and 3.8 per I,OOO. Theirecords for sotne of the most unhealthy stations are even more striking. Ceylon in the earlier period had a death-roll of III per I,OOO, i'n the later period one
of 7.4 per I,OOO. The figure for Jamaica had fallen from I85 per i,ooo to 9.9 per I,OOO, while that for West Africa, formerly the white manSs
grave, the murderous figure of 362 per i,ooo of the earlier epoch had been

THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE OF THE WAR. I39
reduced to I1.9 per x,ooo f,or the later. These figures represent at notaible ,triumph for medica;l science and military organisaticin.. The improvement .in the hygiene and health of armies iln the field has been no't less noteworthy. It is well known that in many of the wars of former days for one victim claimed by the bullet, four, five, perhaps nine or ten, were claimed by jthe microbe. The lamentable reards of ;the Crimean War and the great Boer War are mnafters of commion knowledge. Typhus fever, typhoid fever, smnallpox, dytsentery and malaria have at various times decima.ted armies in the field. It is believed that the RussoJapanese War was the first war on record in which the casualties from wou.nds exceeded in number the casualties from disea-se. The present war has borne eloquent testimony to ¢the efficiency of medical science. Smallpox, typhus fever, andd typhoid fever have ceased to be factors of importance. Dysentery has proved troublesome in; 'the Eastern areas, but modern treatment has robbed it of much of its terror. Malaria has beetn an important faictocr a,t Salonica and elserwhere, but the methods for its prevention are now well understood and piractised with increasing success. We may say broadly that the health of armies in the field is to-day as good as, or better than, that of the civil popula,tion at home.
When we turn to the influence of war upo.n the health of the civil
population at home we are confronted with an entirely different set of problems. The army is composed of adult males presumably healthy on
enlistment. Health is the first condition of efficiency. Discipline is strict. The first symptoms of incipient disease receive prompit attention. Medical science is adequate and generally available. Food is abundant and of good quality. None of these conditions apply without qualification to the civil population. For them war is apt to involve factoxs which make foTrdisease-privation, deficient food, unaccustomed labour, the
interruptio-n of *the normal rhythms of domnestic life. There is a constant
stream, of broken-down men from the front returning to civil life, and constituting a g,rave dysgenic factor. Disease in some of its forms becomes more rife. The tendency is towards the lowering of the general
biological level. It has been affirmed by some good observers that the long French waars from I792 to I8i5 caused an appreciable diminution in height amongst -the population of France. Thi.s statement has been con-
tested and cannot be said to be definitely confirmed, but thezre is conclusive evidence that, comparing the years I815 and I835, exemptions from mi;litary service due to physical de.fect had liargely increa-sed in. France. There is, also, evidence to suggest -that the recruits in France of I892-3, the " children of the war " of 1870, were inferior in physique to the children of other years.
Two disea-ses deserve special consideration in connection with the
question of the influence of war upon civil populations, viiz., tuberculosis
and venereal disease. Tuberculosis is a disease of lotwered nutrition.
Bad fbod, bad air, and overcrowding are the chief predisposing oondi*tions. At the present time there is a serious shortage of food in most of the belligerent countries, and food rationing has become one of the most urgent of national questions. In some countries the shortage is especially

140 EUGENICS REVIEW.
acute as regard's fats and sugars-two of the most essential of foodstuffs. How far the food regulations iin focrce in various countries are ;afecting the healthoyf th'e people is a question which cannot at present be answerd wi,th certainty. In this connection we may recall the remark of Benjas,in, Franklin, " W.ars are not paid for at th-e time. The bill comes afterwards." Food Controllers have a difficult task set to them. Physiologists
and sanitariass :are not yet agreed as to the best diet for persons of different ages, sexes, and occupations. Under {the influence of Chittenden and his schooll it has come to be generaally accepted that the usual cnsumption of proteids is vastly in excess of the real needs of the organism. Thiis dbetrine, however, has not yet had a isufficiently long trial t justify us in accepting it as a physiological axiom. The minimum of food necessary to preserve health and working power may not, also', be the optimum. The effect of a reduced diet upon the stock is still undetermined. Our food habits are cof great antiquity and are the result of a long evolution. It is by no means certain that they can be altered i,n essential particulars with impunity. Food aationing is more thian an economic question or a matter of patriotism. It is, also, a problem in
physiology and dietetics. The results of the present great experiment of the compulsory regulation of the 'food of .the peoples of the various
nations have s9till to be tabulated. A reduction in the average weight of
schoolt children in Germany 'has taken place. From Germany there is also reipoirted a' large increase in dro.psical affections attributed to; the shortage of fats. From many of the Cohtinen'tal cities a lar;ge increase in the incidence of tuberculbsis is reported, and there can be little doubt that bad and insufficient food, and a consequent lowering of ithe general
standard of nutrition, is in the main accountable 'for this increase. Pro-
fessor Sergi has repeatedly warned hi.s countrymen of this danger and suggested measures for obviating its effects. To, get at the faots as regards England and Wales, Sir Bernard Mallet its of opinion sthat it i,s advisable, owing tb war conditions, to restrict our comparisons to the
female sex, a's we know that the curves of mortality for 'the Vwo sexes
normally run nearly parallel in their yearly fluctuations. In 1913 the deaths from tuberculosis per million femalres living was 1,I154. In 1915 the figure was 1,235, an-d in I9I6 it was 1,234-ia rise of 7 per cent. It is probable that woXrkshop conditions account for the larger partoKftAbis increase, but in some countries 'food shortage has played a large pa-rt in
tthe rise -of the tulberculoss rate. Nature will not be denied, and a
underfed nation is likely to fail an easy prey to tuberculosis. It shiould
Inot be forgotten. that the rapid fall in the tuberculoisis rate in Great Britain ibegan shortly after the repeal of the Corn Lajws had inaugurated' the era of cheap food. The fall in the tuberculosis rate was hardly perceptible i'n Ireland, a relatively ill-fed country.
As regards venereal disease., an increase in the prevalence of these
affections seems an inevitable concomitant of war, and constitutes one
of its mosit seriotts dysgenic factors. Stalti;stics on this subject are
notoriously untrustworthy, buit the Registrar-General's returns point tO a
large increase in the number of deaths from this acause at ages oter 45.

THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE OF THE WAR. I141
Let us turn to another subject of great interest and importance-viz., the relation of war to crime. In brief, the war has witnessed a rapid diminution of crime and of convictions, except among youthful delinquents. Before the war crime in England was rapidly diminishing. The convictions per ioo,ooo of the population had fallen from 586 in 1904-5 to 369 per iOo,ooo in 1913-14. Since the war the decline has been much more rapid, the rate falling to 28I per IOO,OCO in I914-15, to 159 per Ioo,oOO in 1915-i6, and to ii8 per ioo,o in I9I6-17. In their report for I9I5-I6 the Commissioners of Prisons for England and Wales assign three causes for the decrease in crime, viz.:-
(i) The enlistment of many habitual petty offenders.
(2) The restrictive orders issued by the Central Control Board (Liquor Traffic), and those made by the justices and the military authoraities.
(3) The great demand for labour, rendering employment easy and well-paid, and resulting in ability to pay fines, this ability being
also aided by Section I. of the Criminal Justice Administration Act of 1914, which made it mandatory upon the courts to give time for the paymeint of fines, and requiring the courts, in imposing fines, to take into account the means of the offender, and not to reckon the payment of court fees and police fees.
The report fuTther states that since the war the receptions to prisons are for the most part confin-ed to the physically and mentally weak. Amongst the most notable features in recent criminal statistics, is the marked reduction in the convictions for drunkenness. Thus, in 1913 the convictions were 153,II2 males, and' 35,765 females-total I88,877; while in I9I6 the figures were 62,946 males and 21,245 females-total 84,I9I, a reduction of 55 per cent. It is to be noted that the decline is marked amongst women as well as amongst men. The Commissioners are of opinion that these improved figures are attributable mainly to the early closing of public-houses, and the general restrictions upon the sale of liquor-a conclusion which affords an important suggestion for temperance reformers. It is probable that the increased cost of alcoholic beverages has also been a factor. The war has emptied the prisons not only of England and Wales, but also of Scotland and Ireland. The Prison Commissioners for Scotland adduce reasons for this improvement similar to those suggested by the English Commissioners, but add the remark:
"There has also' been a quickening of the sense of citizenship which has had its effect amongst those who at ordinary times pay little regard to
the law." France has a similar tale to tell. M. Roux, professor of Criminal Law in the University of Dijon, reports that the war has emptied the prisons of France, and "liquidated the criminality of the past."
This question has another and very different phase. Experience in France after the war of I870, and in America after the Civil War, shows that the diminution in crime in time of war is followed by a large recrudescence of crime in the after-war period. The causes of this increase are sufficiently obvious. The relaxation of military discipline, the reaction from the privations of war, the breaking up of homes, the uncertainty of employment, impatience with the monotony of industrial life-such factors are obvious and must be reckoned with as tending to crime. War is a good

142 EUGENICS REVIEW.
school of the virile virtues, but it is hardly a school to inculcate increased respect for the lives, property and rights of others. The delinquent soldier will exist, and he will raise problems of peculiar delicacy and difficulty. How to deal fairly with him in the light of his past services and sufferings, without lowering the sanctions of private and social morality, will require all our wisdom and forethought. To take one example-it will not conduce to social stability to condone bigamy, because the offender can display his wounds or boast his medals.
While crime generally has notably declined during the war, it is disquieting to find that there has been an inc-rease of juvenile delinquency. From England, Scotland, and France, there is the same report of an increase in the number of first offenders. The causes of this increase are
believed to be mainly two, viz.:
(z) The lack of a father's supervision, and
(2) the employment of children and youths in adult occupations, owing to the shortage of labour. This increase of juvenile crime will raise difficult problems in the future, and for these problems we must be prepared.
A very unexpected feature of war-time has bt-:i the decline of insanity. That this decline is real and not merely statistical seems to be the opinion of those best qualified to judge. Robertson of Edinburgh is of opinion that the war has acted as a mental tonic. He could trace no increase in insanity due to the war, but regarded dabbling in Spiritualism as dangerous to certain mental types. Easterbrook of Crichton Royal found only I9 cases of insanity due to "grief," and was of opinion that war had "only exposed and accentuated inherent weakness." Carre of Glasgow reported only nine cases of insanity due to the war. Robertson thought that the fall in the female statistics was due to women not being so "shut in" as before. Graham of Belfast reported a decrease in the number of insane and expressed the view that "it is not the great tragedies of life that sap the force of the brain and wreck the psychic organism. On the contrary, it is the small worries, the deadly monotony of a narrow and circumscribed existence." In i91i the report of the Irish Inspectors of Lunatics showed that for the first time since i865, there was no increase in the numbers of the insane in Ireland; there was, in fact, a decrease of 77. The war was.assigned as a cause in 1.32 per cent. of cases. Of I5o cases of insanity
in the Navy, reported in I9I6, only I5 had occurred since the outbreak
of war.
The above facts admit of only one interpretation-viz., that war, fruitful though it is in shock cases and neurasthenia, does not increase, but may even tend to diminish, insanity. The factors of this result are probably complex. Better employment, higher wages, increased sobriety, a larger life for women, the general quickening of the national pulse in response to the stimulus of war may well be presumed to have played a part. The suggestion that one of the causes of insanity is monotony and full routine will probably be generally accepted by alienists. Morbid excitement, on the one hand, and the absence of wholesome stimulation on the other hand, are inimical to the preservation of the due balance of the psychic life. In this connection it is interesting to note that the Officer of Health for London, in his report for the year I917, finds that, contrary

THE EUGENIC AND SOCIAL INFLUENCE OF THE WAR.

143

to expectation, air-raids have nc?t led to any increase of nervous diseases amongst childTren. A limited number of children have suffered, but there has been no general increase of nervous diseases amongst the young. The British stock is evidently not easily thrown off its normal balance.
A remarkable and unexpected result of the war has been a decided decline in the rate of suicide. In the ten years Igoi-io, the average number of male suicides was 157 per million living. In 1914 the figure was I5 per million, while in 1915 the figure fell to I04 (civilians only), and in i9i6 it stood at iII. Amongst females, as might be expected, the fluctuations
were much less marked. The female rate in the decennium I9oI-Io was 47 per million living, in 1914 and 1915 it was 45, and in I9I6 it was 38.
These figures are a further indication that the effect of the war upon the mental stability of the nation has been tonic, rather than depressant.
The social changes wrought by the war are sure to be immense and far-reaching. Some of these, such as the increased disproportion amongst the sexes, and the larger industrial employment of women, have been already adverted to. The increased cost of living, which will probably prevail for a considerable period, will operate in various ways. It will tend to increase national thrift-a lesson which our nation needs to learn
and to practise. It will probably tend to depress still further the birthrate. We shall have increased taxation, a greater burden of poor relief, and a heavy charge for pensions. There will almost certainly be a large increase in emigration, and the nation, which has been somewhat neglectful of this subject, would do well to consider betimes the large questions which it raises. Who should be encouraged to emigrate? Who should be discouraged from emigrating? What can b-e done to facilitate his career in the land of his adoption? Can anything be done to secure that the men aind the women lost to England by emigration shall not also be lost to the Empire ? Our past happy-go-lucky policy in relation to emigration-laissez-faire at one stage, at another stage the dumping 4of our criminals and social failures upon our coloonies-will call for drastic amendment. Emigration was active in the three or four decades before the war, and reached its maximum, so far as Great Britain is concerned, about the year 1912. The case of Ireland is different. The tide of emigration from that country which flowed so strongly in the years succeeding the great Irish famine of 1847, slackened towards the close of the last century, and it is now relatively weak. Emigration is sure to increase after the war for reasons which are sufficiently obvious. Many soldiers will have lost their job. Others will have become unsettled by the conditions of war service, and will be indisposed to resume the drudgery of office or shopi Others, again, will have formed new ties which beckon them away from their native country. The tide of emigration will flow strongly, and it is
a matter of much national concern that it should be guided into the right channels.
Perhaps the most fundamental gain from the war will be the increased interest in education, and the larger measure of attention devoted to it. The nation has awakened to the consciousness that all is not well with it in this all-important field. It is in a mood to look for grievances and to be favouTably inclined towards proposals for reform. Mr. R. L. Livingstone has reminded us that "what is really wrong with us, is that as a

I44 EUGENICS REVIEW.
nation we do not value intellect." This is a serious reproach, and, I fear, a just one, but we are beginning to recognise our deficiencies, and to feel our way to a better state of things. We know that we need better organisation, a fuller co-ordination of the various educational grades, the provision of natural stepping-stones from one grade to a higheT one; better tests for efficiency amongst teachers; better pay and more social recognition for the educator. The study of the psychology of th-e child and the youth is becoming general and cannot fail to be fruitful. The nation must learn to respect intellect and trained efficiency, and to give due honour to th-e things of the mind. I have but little sympathy with the conflict between the old learning and the new, between the ancient languages and the modern, between linguistics and science. All thes-e things are good, but not equally good for everybody. To some extent the developing intelligence must be left to find its own pabulum. Huxley once said: "I care not what you teach, provided it be well taught." This is a paradox, but a paradox which veils a truth.
When we come to count up the gains and losses of the war, there can be little doubt to which side the balance will incline. The nation will
have lost heavily in man power, in brain power, in capital, and inIndustrial
resources. But there will be some not inconsiderable compensations. The nation will have been through the fire, and will, we may hope, emerge from the great ordeal purged of some of its defects. Luxury will diminish, thrift will increase. Food production at home will have received a great stimulus. Education will be on sounder lines. We shall be more teachable, less self-satisfied, readier to profit by example and by experience. The national spirit will be newly attuned to high issues. A new epoch will have been born. War, like the other great scourges of humanityfamine, tempest and pestilence--is not wholly mischievous. When the storm is over, and the sky has cleared again, we may be able to say, in the words of our great poet:
"There is some soul of goodness in things evil, " Would men observingly distil it out."

