T. J. SAMUEL, M.A.
Department of Political Economy, University of Toronto
Social Factors Affecting Fertility in India*

SUMMARY

III. Social Characteristics: Urbanization,

FERTILITY BEING the crucial demographic education, occupational distribution and the

variable in India, the factors affecting fertility need careful examination. The social factors

religious, regional and linguistic composition of the population.

believed to have a bearing on fertility are the

social institutions of marriage and joint family, attitudes such as the status accorded to women, the motivation for having children, the habits of sexual behaviour, and social characteristics such as education, urbanization, occupational

I. SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
Among the social institutions pertinent to our purpose are marriage and the extended or joint family system.

distribution and the religious, regional and

linguistic composition of the population. The Marriage

effect of the changes likely to be experienced by Since practically all births in India at present

these factors on fertility during the period occur within the institution of marriage, it is

1961-1981 is discussed here.

assumed that there is little chance of illegitimate

Among the demographic variables affecting the growth of population in India, the birth rate is of obvious importance owing to the. potential possibility it holds for lowering the rate of population growth. Therefore, the major burden of a student of Indian demography is to understand and evaluate the role of this crucial demographic variable which is determined by biological, psychological, economic and social factors. The social factors likely to be of importance in the determination of fertility in India during the period 1961-1981 are examined in this paper.
These factors may be considered under three heads:
I. Social Institutions: Marriage, joint family.

births causing any change in total fertility during the short run (1961-81) under consideration.
A discussion of the institution of marriage and its capacity to influence fertility rates may be considered under three subheads:
1. The Prevalence of Marriage. Since marriage is considered to be a duty of a quasi-religious nature by the two dominant religious groups, Hindus and Muslims, marriage is universal in India. In other words, practically, every Indian has, sooner or later, to marry. In the Hindu scriptures (Manusamhita and Mahabharata) it is seen that the word putra, son, is derived from the word put, hell, the connection between them being that the birth of a son saves the father from going to hell.15 Thus marriage is almost a

II. Social Attitudes: The status accorded to religious duty. Regarding the Muslims, Moham-

women, the motivation for having children, and med is recorded as saying, "marry and generate",

the habits of sexual behaviour.

and "marry a woman . . . who is richly

* I am indebted to Professor S. G. Triantis of the University of Toronto for his most valuable comments on this paper.

fruitful".22 The minority religious groups copied the practice of "marriage for all" from the two major religious communities.

5
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, March 1965, 57, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The ubiquity of marriage in India is borne before any scope for suspicion regarding the

out by statistical evidence as well. In 1931, 98 per virginity of a girl presented itself". 15 The

cent of the females had been married by the age Muslim invasions of India after A.D. 1000 are

of thirty. 3 The percentage of the total population also believed to have promoted pre-puberty

of women who remained single in the age group marriages since the Muslim invaders were not

thirty-five to forty-four was only 01 per cent keen on taking with them married women as

in 1951.4 The following table compares the part of the loot. Because of all these reasons,

percentage of never-married females aged age at marriage became very low.

fifteen and over in India with those of some of Efforts have been made, in modern times, to

the developed countries of the world.

raise the age at marriage by legislation. The

reform movement, started towards the close

TABLE 1

of the nineteenth century, for the abolition of

Percentage of never-married females agedfifteen and over childhood marriages resulted in legislative action

in selected countries for the years specified

against child marriages in several states of India.

Country India, 1951 Canada, 1951 France, 1954

Percentage
6-4 25-7 23-2

In 1929 after prolonged discussion, controversy and protest, the Child Marriage Restraint Act was passed. The Act prohibited "child" marriages, the term "child" being defined as a male

Japan, 1950 U.K., 1951 U.S.A., 1950

25 7
25-5 18-5

under eighteen or a female under fourteen years of age. This piece of statute has, for a long time,

W. Germany, 1950 27-1

been honoured more in the breach than the

(Source: United Nations, Demographic Year Book, 1958, pp. 155, 161, 172, 173, 182, 190.)

observance, though lately the age at marriage has been going up.

The question to be examined here is, what

Since marriage, as an institution, is deeply would be the impact on fertility of a rising age

entrenched in the Indian culture, it is unlikely at marriage? However, before we enter into a

that there would be such drastic changes in a discussion of this aspect, it is necessary to

short time as to increase considerably the pause a moment to examine the meaning of the

percentage of never-married females aged fifteen word "marriage" as used in India. In certain

and over before the country attains a fairly high parts of India the performance of the ceremony

degree of economic and social development. of marriage, especially pre-puberty marriages,

Therefore, a decline in fertility from a change in is not invariably followed by cohabitation of the

the social institution of marriage, as once couple and consummation of the marriage.

happened in Ireland, is ruled out.

The term "marriage" here means nothing more

2. Age at Marriage. Marriage is not only than a betrothal difficult to discard later and is

universal in India but it takes place at an early not immediately followed by the ceremony of

age. The Hindu scriptures urged the parents to gauna after which the couple enter into effective

give away their daughter in marriage "while she conjugal relations. In order to avoid confusion,

goes still naked" and warned not to keep the a distinction is drawn between the ceremony

maiden in their home after she has attained of marriage, hereafter referred to as marriage

puberty because "the father or guardian [of the and the ceremony of gauna hereafter referred to

maiden] incurs the sin of destroying an embryo as effective marriage. A rise in the age at

at each appearance of menses as long as the girl marriage does not mean a rise in the age at

is unmarried after puberty".'5 Society expected effective marriage and when the age at marriage

the girl to be married early because the correct goes up, marriage and effective marriage come

ideal of chastity required that "the maiden closer to each other and even coincide. In places

should not feel love for a man other than where there is no separate ceremony of gauna,

the one to whom she might eventually get marriage and effective marriage coincide.

married".17 Since virginity was a badge of Though, primafacie, it might appear that every

respectability, "marriage would be desired increase in the age at effective marriage would

6

SOCIAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY IN INDIA

cause a reduction in fertility, the relationship Among the married women who have completed

between fertility and age at marriage has not their reproductive period (age forty-five or

been found to be so simple and direct. The more) it was found that women married at

concept of "adolescent sterility"-as enunciated under thirteen years of age gave birth to 6-5

by Clellan S. Ford,14 and supported by evidence children while 6-9 children were born to those

from samples studied from populations as who married between the ages of thirteen and

culturally dissimilar as those of Africa on the seventeen.11

one hand and Scotland and the Western United In the urban areas of Lucknow and Kanpur

States on the other 18-claims that marital of Uttar Pradesh, for women with thirty-one

unions in the very early reproductive period of years of married life, 7-8 children were born to

women, to be more specific, before the age of those married before the age of thirteen as

sixteen, are relatively sterile as compared with compared to 8 4 children for those married

marital unions in a later reproductive period. between sixteen and eighteen.25 A rural sample

This theory casts doubt on a negative correlation from the same state showed that for women

between age at effective marriage and fertility with the same duration of marriage, gross

when age at marriage is very low.

fertility was 6-3 for those married below the

It may be asked: What accounts for this age of twelve as compared to 7-8 for those

rather paradoxical phenomenon of a lower married between sixteen and seventeen.23

fertility for women married at lower ages of Finally, there is the evidence from the fourth

marriage?

round of the National Sample Survey * regard-

A plausible answer seems to be that for girls ing the fertility performance of India's rural

entering effective marriage at low ages, fecundity marriage cohorts married at ages below and

and fertility are lower for reasons of health or above fifteen. Only rural marriage cohorts are

of lower frequency of coitus. At low ages of considered since more than 80 per cent of

effective marriage the fecundity of girls is India's population live in rural areas. The

prematurely and permanently impaired by early table below presents the average number of

cohabitation and pregnancy. This could be so, children born to these couples at different

particularly in an underdeveloped country stages of marriage.

which has a low average consumption of food The data overleaf do not support the conten-

per capita and which lacks even the essential tion that completed gross fertility is lower for

medical facilities for maternity and after-care those married at a lower age, as suggested by the

of the mother.

theory of "adolescent sterility". Nevertheless,

Secondly, the young couple, especially in a this does not contradict the probability of a

traditional joint family (as will be explained general increase in fertility due to increasing age

later) do not have sufficient opportunities for at marriage because:

frequent coitus during the early years of effective (1) The period under consideration is only

marriage because of certain traditional norms twenty years (1961-81).

of behaviour. This would reduce the chances (2) For durations of marriage (in years) 2,7,12

of conception.

and 22, the fertility of those married over age

Some empirical investigations conducted in fifteen is higher than for those married before

India during the period 1950-60 throw some fifteen.

light on the phenomenon of "adolescent

sterility". Supporting data are available from rural and urban samples in Uttar Pradesh, two samples in Maharashtra and one sample from

* The National Sample Survey (NSS) was started in
1950-51 by the Ministry of Finance of the Government of India, in co-operation with the Indian Statistical Institute,

Kerala. An all-India sample has also produced evidence. Four of them may be briefly examined

to collect socio-economic data. With the whole of India under its geographical coverage, the NSS conducts a continuing series of surveys in the form of two or more

here. "rounds" a year-each round coveringabout 1,000 villages

A sample of 2,314 couples were included in the Central India Study from Maharashtra.11

and 500 sample blocks in towns and cities. In 1956, it had a whole time staff of 600. Information is collected by the interview method.

7

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(3) The differential fertility between those married for the "maximum period after twentytwo years" is much less than the differential fertility for the shorter durations of marriage in the opposite direction.
The studies cited show that with increasing age at marriage, the interval between marriage and first delivery decreases. Gross fertility is positively correlated with an increase in age at marriage till a certain age at marriage or a certain duration of marriage is reached. After

TABLE 2

Total number of children born per couple to rural couples at years after marriage stages 2, 7, 12, 22 and the maximum after 22: all India rural couples, NSS 4th round, 1952

Number of children Increase in number

born to couple of children born

Years after with wife's marriage to those married

marriage

(years)

above 15

2 7
12 22 Maximum after 22

Below 15 0X04 0-80 1-99 4.49
6-01

15-above 0X22 1-66 3-00 4.96
5 69

±+018
+0-86 +1-01 +047 -0-32

(Source: Gupta Ajit Das, Som Ranjan Kumar, Majumdar Murari and Mitra Samarendra Nath. 1955. Couple Fertility, The National Sample Theory, No. 7, in Sankhya: Ind. J. Statist., 16, 273.)

this level has been reached, fertility falls for all higher ages and durations of marriage. The point of maximum fertility was reached in Central India for the women married between ages thirteen and seventeen and in Uttar Pradesh between sixteen and eighteen.
In the short period under discussion, the age at marriage is not likely to go up above the crucial age after which fertility is expected to
register a fall. It may be assumed that, in circumstances favourable to an increase in the
age at marriage, by 1981 the age at marriage of females, for the whole of India, would remain near that reported for urban cohorts in the period 1946-51, that is, around sixteen years.
An age at effective marriage around sixteen, according to the studies we have reviewed, is not favourable for a reduction in the levels of
fertility. On the other hand, fertility is likely

to rise during this period when age at effective
marriage is reaching the crucial age of around
sixteen. 3. Length of Marriage. The influence of
marriage on fertility also depends upon the length of married life, or to be more specific, the
period during which the couple remain in fertile union which, given the age at marriage, is determined by the dissolution of marriage
caused by the death of one of the spouses or by their separation and the prevalence of remarriage. Since divorces are not of much importance in India the effect of divorces on
fertility is left out of the discussion. However, the age at widowhood is a factor
that has a great influence on the level of fertility. The age at widowhood in India, during the last few decades has been going up consistently and its rise has been more spectacular during the decade 1951-61 because of the greater success in the reduction of mortality during that decade. The crude mortality rate fell from 36-3 in 1921-31 to 309 in 1941-51 and to 24 in 1951-61.10 This decline in mortality and the consequent increase in age at widowhood of women is estimated to have produced the effect
of increasing fertility by 15 per cent during the last two decades.6 The crude mortality rate in 1971 is expected to be around 16 and in 1981 around 15.8 Such a fall in mortality would prolong the length of married life in India and further increase the fertility rate.
However, age specific fertility of women reaches its maximum between the ages of twenty and thirty and afterwards it shows a tendency to decline with increasing age. Therefore, it is not to be expected that a further reduction of mortality which would have the result of increasing the average life span, would have the same magnitude of effect on fertility as it had in the earlier stages of the reproductive period. Nevertheless, it is quite clear that fertility in India would increase because of the lengthening of the span of life of men and women who continue to remain in
fertile union. In determining the length of married life the
prevalence or absence of the practice of widow re-marriage must be taken into account. The percentage of widows to all females decreased

8

SOCIAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY IN INDIA

from 16-1 in 1931 to 12-8 in 1951 4 most pro- Secondly, when total available sleeping space

bably due to a decrease in the incidence of in the house is limited the young couple are

widowhood. And there is no way of finding not even likely to have a room for themselves.

out the rate of re-marriage for the widowed This reduces the frequency of sexual unions.

women of India as widow re-marriage is, as it The unwarned, frequent, and prolonged visits

always was, to a large extent taboo in India, of relations would, sometimes, necessitate the

particularly among the upper social classes. sleeping of all the women in one room and all

The social ban on widow re-marriage is likely the men in another.

to get weaker, though very slowly, with in- Thirdly, in some joint families there is a

creasing education and urbanization, and there- nuptial room and the couples have to take

fore the rate of their re-marriage would show turns in reserving it. Since too frequent reserva-

an increase in future. This, however, is likely to tions, particularly by the younger couples,

be of very little demographic significance in the would be frowned upon by the head of the

next two decades.

family, the frequency of sexual intercourse

would be reduced. (The newly-married couple

Joint Family

described by Taya Zinkin 27 had access to the room five nights a month.) Such practices lower

Another social institution, believed to be of fertility of couples in joint families.

significance in the determination of fertility in If prudential reasons influence fertility, they

India is the joint family system once widely are probably nullified by the conditions des-

prevalent there, though breaking up into cribed above. Therefore, it may be inferred that

nuclear families in recent years. It has been held joint family life does not bring about increased

by some sociologists that the joint family fertility.

system promotes higher fertility rates by (1) Nor is the argument corroborated by empirical

arranging marriages early and by (2) providing evidence. None of the studies in India that

for the married couple and the children born probed into the question of family structure and

into the family since the young couple do not its relation to fertility have revealed a higher

have to restrict reproduction for prudential fertility for joint families as compared to nuclear

reasons. The validity of the first assumption families. The results of some of the studies are

seems doubtful in the light of the foregoing cited below:

discussion on the effect of age at marriage on Fertility levels and differentials between joint

fertility. The second assumption is also question- and nuclear families in two Bengali villages

able because it is more plausible that children were studied by J. S. Aird in 1957. He came to

are born in Indian families, irrespective of the the conclusion that "Bengali joint families do

type of the family, as a matter of chance and not not appear to lead to higher than average

of choice. Since the assumptions behind the fertility". 1

argument seem questionable, its soundness is In the Central India Study, Edwin Driver

open to serious doubt.

compared couples living in a nuclear family with

In fact, there are several norms of behaviour those living in a joint family, according to

that reduce the frequency of intimate marital wife's present age, and found that there was no

relationship in an extended family. Firstly, the difference in the fertility behaviour between

freedom of the young couple even to talk to these two groups. He observed: ". . . family

each other, much less to have sexual intercourse structure has little bearing on the fertility of

at their will, is to a large extent restricted by couples". 1 1

the traditional pattern of behaviour expected In Kerala in South India, an urban study

and enforced by the older members of the joint reported that among the couples living in joint

family. In particular, the young wife is always families 113 per cent had no parturition before

under the vigilant eyes of the mother-in-law the period of the survey as compared to 7 -6

and "too free" a behaviour with her husband per cent in nuclear families. 16 However, the value

is bound to bring prompt and open rebuke. of this data is limited because no information

9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is available on the age of the couples in of activity, as in most traditional societies, was

either group. It is probable that the couples in held to be the kitchen and the best that life

joint families belong to a lower age group than could offer women was marriage and mother-

those in the nuclear families.

hood. The general emphasis on dharma, duty,

Also, the gross fertility was found to be and the belief in Karma, fate, in Indian culture

higher for nuclear families in Kerala. While the generated in her a spirit of resignation and she

fourth or higher order births amounted to 48 found contentment in faithfully fulfilling the

per cent of total births reported (1958) from all duties assigned to her-the duties of looking

joint families, it was 58 per cent for nuclear after her husband and bearing and rearing

families. Again, without the age composition children for him.

of the couples no definite conclusions can be The restriction of women to the role of

arrived at.

producer of children has, in other countries,

Though empirical investigations are few in been found to be comparable with an increase

number, on the basis of the theoretical reasoning in fertility. And India was no exception. When

coupled with what little empirical evidence is women in developed countries started taking

available, it may be concluded that the sup- up productive employment outside their homes,

posedly higher fertility of joint families is their career very often conflicted with their role

difficult to establish. This conclusion is relevant as wives and mothers. At the same time, outside

and important to our discussion in the sense that employment of women undermined the all-

it removes the belief that a change from the pervasive, dominating role of the husband and

institution of joint families to nuclear families enabled her to rise in economic and social

would automatically lower birth rates in India. status as a member of the family and of society.

On the opportunities for Indian women to

enter a career, the Indian constitution dis-

IL. SOCIAL ATTITUDES

approves discrimination, among other things,

Among the social attitudes of the people of in employment on the basis of sex. In practice

India, the status accorded to women, the too, little discrimination against women is

motivation for having children and the habits noticeable in employment and the number of

of sexual behaviour, have an important influence women who accept employment outside their

on fertility.

homes is increasing. However, the fertility-

depressing effect of this factor has been circum-

The Status of Women

scribed by the small percentage of women taking up a career, the abundance in the supply

Among the social attitudes that have a bearing of domestic labour, the social security laws and

on fertility, directly or indirectly, is the status the lack of opportunities for social activities.

accorded to women in the society. Though it is Firstly, though the number of women who

believed, on good evidence, that the women of enter a career would increase in future their

India in the very early days (Vedic period- number as a percentage of total women in the

towards the close of the B.C. era) and in places reproductive age group would continue to be

where the matriarchial system of kinship small in the period 1961-81 under consideration.

existed, had a relatively high status, Indian Their influence on the reduction of fertility

society in later years had not bestowed on its would therefore be limited.

women a status comparable to that enjoyed Secondly, it is usually assumed that the duties

by the women in developed countries. The of a wife and mother and those of a career

women were assigned a submissive and secon- inevitably clash and, therefore, the mothers will

dary role in society and it was considered that be motivated to postpone and limit the birth

women do not deserve independence. "At every of children. But the abundant supply of cheap

stage in her life", it was believed, "she should domestic labour leaves the mother to pursue

be under the domination of someone, her father, her career without any difficulty.

her husband or son".15 Their honourable field Thirdly, the social security laws introduced

10

SOCIAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY IN INDIA

in India to make the country a welfare state However, despite all the legislative measures

offer no incentives to employed women to for improving the status of women in India, for

lower their fertility. On the other hand, the the vast majority of them these legislative

existing social security laws, copied from some statutes are virtually a dead letter. It has been

of the developed countries, provide induce- correctly observed that "various legislative

ments to the employed women to raise a large measures . . . permit contractural marriage,

family.

prevent bigamy, child marriage and forced

For instance, Maternity Benefits Acts guaran- widowhood, foster education and entry into

teeing certain facilities to women employees gainful occupations, and furnish opportunities

of the Central and State governments, as well to women of a certain class20 (italics mine).

as of industrial and other organizations, have Therefore, it cannot be assumed that the

been passed in all the states. The rules provide changes observed in the status of Indian women

for women two months leave with pay and in in recent years are widespread enough to cause

addition they are eligible for a maximum of any significant change in fertility. Though more

thirty days further leave with pay if they are changes are bound to come in the next few

ill due to ailments arising out of pregnancy. decades, it is problematical how far and how

Perhaps with some exaggeration a doctor fast such changes would contribute towards a

reported from a plantation that "because of reduction of fertility.

these facilities, many of these women labourers

are actually anxious to become pregnant almost every one and a half years with clock-like

Desire for Children

regularity".19 The problem was also raised at Among the social attitudes affecting fertility in

the Ninth Meeting of the Family Planning India the desire for children is of no less

Board of the Government of India in 1960 and importance than any other relevant social

it has been suggested that "the present practice attitude. Among the motives for having children

of giving maternity leave needed revision". 12 there are the ones like to "make the home

Fourthly, a principal motive for women to happier", which is common to human beings

limit their families in developed countries has everywhere, in developed or in underdeveloped

been the desire to participate with men in social countries. But in India this is not the only or

activities outside the home. The evidence culled even the principal reason for wanting children.

from young housewives in the U.K. makes it The following motives have been found equally

clear that ". . . a desire not only to have a or more important.

share in life's social pleasures, but to participate 1. The Desire for a Son. The religious motive

in activities outside their homes, has been an of the Hindus for having a son has already been

influential factor in the limitation of families".13 mentioned. In a country where the death rate,

This motivation is very weak among the women until recently, has been very high, the prompt

of India, however educated and well-placed arrival of a son after marriage is eagerly

they are financially and otherwise, because the welcomed, so as to ensure the future of the

women have few opportunities of participating parents in the other world and to perpetuate

in activities outside their homes, except perhaps their name in this one. Moreover, since there

in the major cities of India.

has for so long been a high infant mortality

The status and role of Indian women are rate, this longing would not be satisfied by the

undergoing changes, though only gradually. birth of a single son. Though the mortality

The legal imposition of monogamy and the situation has improved this motivation is likely

legalization of divorce have made Indian women to remain strong for some time. Also, even those

more independent and less submissive. Accord- who want to have planned families would con-

ing to the Hindu Succession Act of 1956, the tinue to have more babies if they had only girls

Hindu woman has a claim to as equal a in the beginning.

share of her father's property as any male Very often such attitudes spread to other

child. religious communities who live in the midst of

11

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the larger Hindu community with whom they Habits of Sexual Behaviour

have close cultural contacts.
Statistical evidence for the existence of this incentive is available from the Mysore Popula-

The habits of sexual behaviour ceteris paribus, would have a direct effect on fertility. Apart from the practices noted in the joint family

tion Study which found that 84 per cent of rural wives and 93 per cent of rural husbands had,

incidentally restricting the frequency of sexual unions, there are a few more reasons why the

primarily, this motive in mind. In urban areas
71 per cent of the women and 73 per cent of the men considered this as one of the motives for having children.26
2. The Concern for Care in Old Age. The wish to be cared for in old age by one's children is a very powerful one among average Indians. This is particularly so in a society in which the average parents can hardly save anything for

frequency of coitus among the Hindus is lower in general.
In the traditional Indian culture, there are certain customs that reduce the average frequency of sexual unions. They are founded on religious or health grounds and have been mentioned in religious books, "scientific" books on sex, or in books on medicine. The Dharma Sdstrds of Manu (600 B.C.), a religious book,

a retired life because of the low level of their incomes and the absence of institutions that help saving. Nor has this motive been affected by the welfare activities of the State because, except in the case of civil servants, no old age pensions or allowances worth mentioning have been started in India. The Mysore Study shows

and the Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana (4th century A.D.) a "scientific" book on sex, lay down the time when a husband should meet his wife physically. A Short History of Aryan Medical Science describes as follows the time when sexual intercourse should be avoided:

that 82-86 per cent of the rural couples and 68 per cent of the urban couples considered this an important reason for having a large family.26

Sexual intercourse is prohibited for the first four days after the appearance of the menstrual flow, as well as on the 8th, 14th and 15th days of both the fortnights-light and dark; on the anniversary days of dead parents, nights previous to the anni-

3. The Need to Follow the Community Pattern. versary, on vyatipta [the seventeenth of the astro-

Public approval or disapproval is one of the logical yogas], varidhrata [the twenty-seventh of the

means of social control in a traditional society astrological yogas], sanskranti [the passage of the

in which the average individual or family finds sun or planetary bodies from one sign of the zodiac

it difficult to go against the pattern of social to the other], in the daytime, at sunset, at midnight

behaviour set and dictated by the society. Such and during an eclipse.24

individuals or families are goaded back to the The above injunctions lower the frequency of

set pattern of behaviour by community criticism, coitus. This has been borne out by investigations.

or the fear of it.

Religious reasons were cited in Ramanagaram,

In a modern type of society, on the other hand, a rural area in Mysore and in Lodi Colony, an

these social controls do not apply and, therefore, urban area in New Delhi, by the married

such motives are necessarily weak. In the couples who reported avoidance of coitus during

urbanized sector of Indian society, which is specific periods; ranging from 1-79 days in

relatively modernized as well, this form of social Lodi Colony and 2-120 days in Ramanagaram,

control is becoming ineffective, thereby weaken- the median being nineteen days in the former

ing the motive under discussion.

and twenty-four in the latter.2

Though it is difficult to predict to what For reasons ofhealth, abstinence for six months

degree the motives suggested would be or more during lactation was reported for 80 per

weakened, it would be safe to assume that, in cent of the cases interviewed in Ramanagaram,

general, they would lose their present impor- while in Lodi Colony the period of abstinence

tance. Any modification of these motives for seldom exceeded three months.

having children would largely depend on the Avoidance of coitus because of religious or

impact of urbanization, economic progress and health reasons has been less common in urban

education.

areas, as seen in Lodi Colony, as compared

12

SOCIAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY IN INDIA

with rural areas represented by Ramanagaram. females was not accompanied by a lower

Increasing urbanization or the spread of urban fertility. This conclusion is refuted by evidence

values to rural areas would also, in all likelihood, gathered from several surveys in the fifties.

increase the frequency of coitus for the reasons In Central India, fertility of wives was found to

quoted above and would, thereby, serve to decline with education. Mean fertility of

increase fertility.

illiterate wives was 4-7, with primary education

4 3 and with high school education or above

3 2.11 In the Mysore Study, according to

II. SOCIAL CHARACTERISTICS

Chandrasekharan, as quoted by Coale and

The degree of urbanization, the rate of Hoover, the size of completed family for

literacy, the occupational pattern and the unbroken marriages with age of wife not less

religious, regional and linguistic composition than forty-five was six or more for illiterate

of the population affects fertility rates.

women as well as for women with primary

Urbanization has not, so far, had the effect and middle school education, five for women

of lowering fertility in India. Evidence on with high school education and two for college

differential fertility, according to residence, was educated.8

collected in the 1951 census for Travancore- The above studies show that fertility

Cochin and Madhya Pradesh which demon- differences are of importance only when the

strated that in the former State and in areas fertility of the illiterate couple and the fertility

excluding Eastern Madhya Pradhesh in the of couple with high school education or more

latter, the number of children ever born to are compared. In the short run, therefore, no

women of forty-five and over, still married, significant fall in fertility can be expected because

was 6-6 in rural and 6&4 in urban areas-a of increasing literacy.

difference which is not very significant. Eastern Finally, differential fertility according to

Madhya Pradesh shows a fertility of 6-3 for occupation may be examined. The data supplied

urban women, in the same age group and in the by Kingsley Davis based on the 1931 census are

same period, as against 6-1 for rural women.5 of doubtful dependability since he assigns a

A study by the Gokhale Institute in Poona in particular occupation to each caste. Nor does

the early fifties showed no difference in fertility his analysis suggest any definite conclusions

between urban and rural areas.7 The Mysore on this aspect. Though traders and those in

Population Study of the United Nations professions belonging to the tertiary sector of

reported that the average number of children the economy report a lower child/woman ratio,

born to women with unbroken marriages until than that for agriculturists-usually assigned to

they were forty-five years of age was 5 9 for the primary sector of the economy-the child/

Bangalore city and 5 8 for rural areas.7 The woman ratio for servants and scavengers is

Central India Study in the late fifties does not found to be high. They are also in the tertiary

reveal any notable difference in the fertility sector and their combined total in the sample

between urban and rural population.1 1

exceeds the combined total of the traders and

Information collected by the Indian Statistical those in other professions.

Institute on a nation-wide scale during the The Mysore Study failed to lend support to

second and fourth "rounds" of the National any suggestion of the appearance of differential

Sample Surveys showed a higher fertility for fertility on the basis of occupation. Married

urban couples within twelve years of marriage women in the same age group belonging to

as compared to rural couples of the same agricultural and non-agricultural occupations

marriage duration.9

showed little difference in fertility.26 The

Regarding differential fertility according to Central India Study suggested a slightly lower

literacy, Kingsley Davis 10 observed a negative fertility for the traders, clerks and professional

correlation between general literacy and fertility classes as compared to agriculturists and

which has been supported by later investigations. artisans. 1 1

However, he found that a higher literacy of According to the studies reviewed, differential

13

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

fertility on the basis of occupation is also largely non-existent in India as a whole. Therefore, no reduction in fertility, in the short run could be
achieved by any social movement up to the secondary and tertiary sectors of the economy.
Social characteristics such as the religious, regional and linguistic composition of the
population, with political undertones, would perpetuate conditions facilitating a high level of fertility. It would hardly be correct to say that religious, regional or linguistic feelings

TABLE 3
Probable effect of social factors on fertility in India during the period 1961-1981

Social factors
I. Social institutions (a) Marriage 1. Prevalence of marriage 2. Age at marriage 3. Length of marriage (b) Joint family

Change in fertility
0 +? + 0

attitude that would prove resistant to reduction in fertility. How far these forces, that are largely imperceptible but nevertheless potentially powerful, would remain effective during the next few years is hard to predict. It is improbable, though not impossible, that changes of a significant nature are likely to appear in the fertility pattern of India's population because of religious, regional or linguistic forces at work.
Table 3 presents in summarized form the expected results of social factors on fertility in India in the next two decades.
From the social factors we have examined, it is quite evident that they are of cardinal importance in the determination of fertility and they are not likely to change in the desired direction during 1961-81, to reduce fertility in India. Most probably, these social factors would not only perpetuate the existing high fertility, but would also tend to increase it in the short run.

II. Social attitudes (a) Status of women (b) The motivation for children (c) Habits of sexual behaviour

0 or 0 or +

III. Social characteristics

(a) Urbanization

0 or +

(b) Literacy

(c) Occupational distribution

0 or +

(d) Religious, regional or linguistic factors O or +

O = no change. - = negative change. + = positive change. ? =doubtful.

have initiated a competition to outdo rival groups in fertility performance. However, these rivalries must have, subconsciously at least, discouraged many of the leaders of these groups from becoming social examples to be emulated in fertility reduction. Even if birth control techniques are known, the political significance of a larger percentage of one's own group against other groups-religious, regional or linguistic-would be too obvious to be overlooked in deciding the size of one's family. Newspaper reports like, "Fall in Growth of Hindu Population",* reminding the Hindus
that their percentage has gone down, however slightly, might foster the formation of an

* The Mail, Madras, April 8, 1963.

REFERENCES 1. Aird, J. S. 1958. Fertility differential in two Bengali
villages. Dissertation Abstr., 18, 1528. 2. Blacker, C. P. 1955. The rhythm method: two
Indian experiments, Eugen. Rev., 47, 93. 3. Census of India, 1931. 1933. Part I-Report, Delhi. 4. Census of India, 1951. 1953. Vol. 1, India. Part I-A.
Delhi. 5. Census of India, 1951. 1953. Maternity data. Delhi. 6. Chandrasekharan, C. 1962. Indian fertility in a
changing economic and social setting. Family Planning News, 3, 236. 7. Chandrasekharan, C. 1954. Fertility trends in India. Proceedings of the World Population Conference, 1, 829. 8. Coale, Ansley J., and Hoover, Edgar M. 1958. Population Growth and Economic Development in Low-Income Countries. Princeton U. Press. 9. Das, Gupta Ajit et al. 1955. Couple fertility. Sankhya: The Indian Journal of Statistics, 16, Parts 3 and 4. 10. Davis, Kingsley. 1951. Population of India and Pakistan. Princeton U. Press. 11. Driver, Edwin. 1963. Differential Fertility in Central India. Princeton U. Press. 12. Family Planning News. 1960. Ninth meeting of the family planning board, 1, 11. 13. Florence, Lella Secor. 1946. Britain and her birth rate. Econ. J., 56, 287.
14. Ford, Clellan S. 1945. A Comparative Study ofHuman
Reproduction. New Haven, Yale U. Press.
15. Kapadia, K. M. 1958. Marriage and Family in India.
Oxford U. Press. 16. Kerala, The Demographic Research Centre. 1961.
Attitude to Family Planning. Pt. 1, Govt. of Kerala. 17. Ketkar, S. V. 1909. History of Caste in India. Araoti,
India.

14

SOCIAL FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILITY IN INDIA

18. Lorimer, Frank. 1954. Culture and Human Fertility. Paris, UNESCO.
19. Mahadevan, R. 1962. Social security and family planning. J. Ind. med. Assn., 38, 439.
20. Mukerji, D. P. 1951. The status of Indian women. Internat. soc. Sci. Bull., 3, 798.
21. Planning Commission. 1961. Third Five Year Plan. New Delhi.
22. Population Council. 1958. Population: An International Dilemma. New York.

23. Saxena, G. B. 1962. Age at marriage and fertilityA sample study in the rural Madhya Pradesh. Artha Vijnana, 4, 53.
24. Sinh Jee, Sir Bharat. 1896. A Short History ofAryan Medical Science. London, Macmillan.
25. Sinha, J. N. 1951. Fertility and age at marriage. Document No. 16. International Statistical Institute, New Delhi.
26. United Nations. 1961. The Mysore Population Study. 27. Zinkin, Taya. 1958. India Changes. Oxford U. Press.

15

