MARRIAGE REGULATION
AND
NATIONAL FAMILY RECORDS
By A. F. TREDGOLD, L.R.C.P. LOND., M.R.C.S. ENG.
IT iS sometimes stated that since we cannot foresee the ultimate form of human development, it is impossible to say which particular attributes now present may or may not conduce to that development, and that consequently Eugenics, which has for its object the improvement of the race mainly by birth selection, is founded upon a fallacy. This argument seems very plausible; but a little consideration will show that it is based upon very imperfect, even erroneous, ideas regarding the science of Eugenics, and in order that the utility of, indeed the necessity for some such system of Family Records as I am about to suggest may be appreciated, it seems desirable that the aim of Eugenics in this matter should be made clear.
It is, of course, perfectly true that we can no more foretell the final form of human evolution than we can the date of the millennium; but we have historic and prehistoric records of man extending back for some hundreds of thousands of years, we know the essential factors which have brought about evolution so far and have made man what he is, and we cannot doubt, whatever the end may be, that it will be reached by means of the same fundamental processes, namely, Variation and Selection.
Variation still occurs, it is a phenomenon which has hitherto eluded the control of man, although indications are not wanting that the days of man's powerlessness in this respect are coming to an end. Natural selection, however, inevitably tends to become less and less operative with each advance of civilisation. Inferior variations which were eliminated under primitive con-

MARRIAGE REGULATION

75

ditions now thrive and multiply. The growth of humanitarian sentiment and of medical and surgical science encourages, not merely the survival, but the propagation of the weakly and diseased. The net result is that evolution has received a check, progress beyond a certain point no longer takes place, and one nation after another reaches a certain stage of civilisation, decays
and often becomes extinct. Yet to return to natural selection is clearly impossible, even
were it desirable, for the present condition is the result of man having eaten of the tree of knowledge and is an essential phase of his developmental history. I find it impossible to agree with those who, deploring this feature of civilisation, advocate a return to Nature's methods, but still less can I agree with those well intentioned but unthinking individuals who look upon man's attempt to work out his destiny by the application of scientific knowledge as impious and irreligious. This control over nature is an essential part of man's being. It is inseparable from, indeed it constitutes, human advance. As in the evolution of each individual a time arrives at which parental care must cease and the future course be shaped entirely by his own knowledge and capacity, as the child gradually develops into the man and acquires the power and responsibility of directing his own affairs, so is it in the evolution of the race. The dawn of civilisation indicates the beginning of this stage and shows that man has passed beyond the condition of infancy and has begun to assume the management of his affairs. And each step of civilisation connotes a further assumption of the power until a stage is at length reached at which
" Man is man and Master of his Fate." But the power of influencing his destiny may be present without the knowledge of how to use that power aright. Ignorance of the fundamental principles which govern progress will do no harm to the race so long as Nature is not interfered
with, but as soon as this interference takes place such knowledge becomes of vital importance. When man takes the helm from Nature it is essential for the safety of the vessel that he should be provided with a chart and understand the principles of navigation. It is un uestionably this combination of power

76

EUCxENICS REVIEWl

A. F. Tredgold :

with ignorance, or with neglect, which has stood so much in the way of racial progress during the past several thousand years, which has caused National retrogression and extinction, and the advance of the race must remain in abeyance so long as man's power of interference is directed against, instead of in the line of, Nature's fundamental laws. To particularise, Natural selection, a fundamental principle of all evolution, has been interfered with; until it is replaced by some other form of selection no advance of the race can take place. This replacement is the object of Eugenics.
It is quite a mistake to imagine that the method of Eugenics consists in the mere breeding of an arbitrarily selected catalogue of human " faculties." As a matter of fact it is, in my opinion, extremely doubtful whether many of the special " qualities " or " faculties " which characterise mankind at the present day can, as such, be bred. There are examples, it is true, where some particular and especial talent has been present in a family for several generations. The family of Bach, in regard to music, is a case in point. But such instances are not common; it is always extremely difficult to say how much the accomplishment was due to the early environment; and what is usually transmitted is not a special accomplishment, or even a tendency to the acquirement of it, but a tendency to the acquirement of a certain type or group. In other words, it is a general temperament or type of brain constitution which is inherited, the precise form it takes being in large measure determined by the environment.
I have no doubt that in most, if not in all individuals, there exists a proclivity towards some particular type of brain aotion, and consequently towards the development of certain qualities and the following of certain occupations. Such inherited mental bias may be in the direction of keenness of observation and reasoning, and if with this there goes imagination it will produce the scientist or the inventor. Or the type of mind may be active and aggressive, giving rise to the soldier, explorer or colonist. Or it may be argumentative, resulting in the lawyer, and so on. I have equally no doubt that these types could be fixed, and probably even accentuated by selective breeding.

MARRIAGE REGULATION

77

But the antecedents of the ordinary individual are usually so complex that the mental bias is not particularly pronounced, and in the great majority of instances the inheritance takes the form of
a general capacity or incapacity, and of a power, or want of power, of adaptation to the ever varying social environment. Thus a stock which at one period of social evolution produced successful warriors may, at another, give rise to organisers and administrators. The explorers and colonists produce the successful manufacturers and men of business. The eminent divine gives rise, at a period when divinity is somewhat less esteemed, to descendants who follow medicine and the law. Even the successful tiller of the land becomes transmuted, in an industrial age, into the skilled artisan. The qualities which render these individuals successful in their various walks of life are not
particular and special accomplishments or even tendencies towards the acquirement of such special accomplishments, they lie rather in a general quality of the brain tissue which causes them to be industrious, enterprising, vigorous, capable and, above all, I think, adaptable and able to take advantage and make the most of the social environment of their time. The sum of these characteristics constitutes what is well expressed as " civic worth," and individuals possessing them are essential to national prosperity and advance.
On the other hand there are families in which, whilst there may be tendencies to the development of particular talents, the above-mentioned essentials to success are lacking. The individuals are either so deficient in enterprise, initiative, industry and adaptability that they make no headway at all, or else they are so lacking in capacity and resistance that they readily break down under the stress and strain of life. They can only take the line of least resistance, and at all stages of social evolution they are failures. At the best they merely mark time, at the worst they are social parasites, and they are well named the " unfit." The unfitness is variously manifested and the group comprises
the feeble-minded, the insane, chronic paupers, habitual criminals, unemployables and many other forms of social incompetence. The fact, if it be a fact, that such families occasionally produce a genius, is no compensation for the multitude of individuals they

78

EUGENICS REVIEW

A. F. Tredgold:

give rise to who do nothing to aid but are a serious impediment
to racial progress. Now it cannot be denied that the environment has a
considerable influence upon the development of the individual. During the plastic stage of early life the general surroundings may be so unsatisfactory as to impede development and thereby seriously handicap the whole future career. On the other hand, a favourable environment will materially aid the evolution of the child's inherent potentiality. But there is a limit to the effect producible by the environment, it can assist or it can retard the evolution of innate capacity, but it cannot create that capacity; and I have no hesitation in saying, as the result of a very considerable experience of family histories, that in an overwhelming preponderance of individuals the cause of the differences which I have just described-of " fitness " and " unfitness "-lies not in environment, but in heredity. In proof of this I may refer to two well-marked examples of unfitness, namely, insanity and mental defect. There is not the slightest doubt that these are just as prevalent amongst the classes and " upper ten," where the individual environment is good, as they are amongst the masses and " submerged tenth," where the surroundings are about as adverse as they could possibly be. The grosser forms of mental defect, i.e., idiocy and imbecility, are even more frequent in rural districts than they are in the vilest city slums. Again, the infantile mortality rate is naturally greater amongst the squalid poor than amid the well-to-do, but even amongst children born in the lap of luxury, and surrounded by every advantage known to science, we find thousands of children dying each year almost as soon as they are born simply because they have not the strength to live. And amongst those who survive we still find a proportion who are morally, mentally, and physically unfit. These facts can only mean that it is the seed and not the soil which is primarily at fault; in other words, that " unfitness " in the great majority of instances is the expression of a pathological germinal variation-it is inherited and transmissible. And the same is undoubtedly true, not only of the insane and mentally defective, but also of very many instances of pauperism and criminality.

MARRIAGE REGULATION

79

As to the ultimate cause, the fons et origo, of such germinal variations, we know very little, and research in this direction is urgently needed. The suggestion has been made that strains exist which have been defective from the very beginning, but this is a view against Fwhich several .objections may be urged. My own opinion is that unfitness -s no mere survival of an original defect, but that it has appeared as something new, as a true variation, and I believe that such pathological germinal variations have been produced in the ancestors of existing degenerate stocks by a pernicious environment. Even now I think there are probably deleterious conditions at work, of which we may not fully be aware, initiating slight germinal changes, which, if unchecked, will eventually culminate in civic unfitness. It follows that improvement of the environment must be an essential factor in racial hygiene; it will prevent unfitness in the future; but the point I desire to insist upon is, that in the case of the majority of the unfit who now exist, environment is a matter of ancient history, the defect is innate and too pronounced to be eradicated by any conceivable attention to nurture, and the only possible means of preventing its spread is by restricting its propagation. It is this which Eugenics proposes to do, not, however, by the selection of particular accomplishments, but by the selection, or rejection, of the seed of which certain mental, physical and social qualities are the outward and visible manifestation. Far from being founded upon a fallacy, therefore, Eugenics may even be regarded as the science of sciences.
Plainly the only remedy is that of birth selection-the encouragement of the propagation of the fit, the prohibition of that of the unfit. The necessity for this probably exists in every civilised country, for, as I have already stated, the tendency of civilisation is towards the increased survival of the unfit. In our own country the need is particularly great, as I have attempted to show in a former article. The demands of the local and Imperial Exchequers are increasing every year, and no small amount of this increase is due to the ever multiplying army of the unfit and incapable. Already these classes have multiplied to such an extent that the shoulders of the industrious, thrifty and capable members of the community, particularly of the

80

EUGENICS REVIEW

A. F. Tredgold:

middle and working classes, are groaning under the double burden they have to bear. Revenues which should go to improve the surroundings, aid the progress and encourage the propagation of the classes upon whom the development and advance of the Nation must depend, are largely applied to bolster up and make easy the propagation of those who can only hamper and thwart this development. Already want of capacity, lack of initiative, diminution of enterprise, and a steady deterioration of character are apparent on every side. In the recent Report of the Royal Commission on the Poor Laws there occurs a statement which is so apposite to this matter and which at the same time so completely accords with my own experience that I venture to quote it.
The Commissioners say
" It is very unpleasant to record that, notwithstanding our assumed moral and material progress, and notwithstanding the enormous annual expenditure, amounting to nearly sixty millions a year, upon poor relief, education, and public health, we still have a vast army of persons quartered upon us unable to support themselves, and an army which in numbers has recently shown signs of increase rather than decrease. To what is the retrogression due ? It cannot be attributed to lack of expenditure. Is this costly and elaborate machinery we have established defective, and if so, where does it fail to accomplish its end ? Is the material upon which this machinery operates becoming less amenable to the remedies applied? The statistical review of the expenditure incurred and of the results attained by it prove that something in our social organisation is seriously wrong, and that whatever may be the evils, they are not of such a nature as to be improved or removed by the mere signing of cheques or the outpouring of public funds."
I venture to assert that the cause lies in the utterly unrestricted and relatively increased propagation of the unfit, and that until the remedy of birth selection is applied the evil will not only continue, but will spread by leaps and bounds until the Nation stands face to face with unavoidable degeneracy and extinction.
The restriction of the procreation of the unfit may be secured by several methods, such, for instance, as segregation and sterilisation. Each of these methods has its own particular use, and is applicable to certain types of degeneracy. Segregation is indicated where, in addition to the production of degenerate off-

MARRIAGE REGULATIION

8r

spring, the individual possesses personal habits and characteristics. which are a menace to the State, or where he is so socially incapable that some form of continuous care and supervision is needed.. Sterilisation is indicated where the only danger lies in propagation, such, for instance, as the hereditarily insane upon their discharge from asylums. In such cases its adoption has already been seriously
considered by no less a public body than the London County Council. But although public sentiment is certainly becoming more tolerant towards the idea of sterilisation, it is still a method
which is decidedly repugnant to a very large number of people, and Qne which is not likely to be generally applied for some considerable time to come. There is, however, another method which is practicable, which might be applied to the whole nation, and which does not give rise to such feelings of repulsion,
namely, the State control of marriage, and this I believe to be
the great desideratum of the present day. Certain objections to the State regulation of marriage may
be urged which it is necessary to consider. Firstly, it may be said that it wouild lead to an increase of illicit intercourse. This might or might not happen, but I think that the infliction of severe penalties, as is done in several countries, would certainly suffice to prevent any offspring coming from such intercourse,, and this is the matter with which we are primarily concerned. Immorality, as at present, and as it can only be, would still have to be dealt with by moral means. Secondly, it may be urged that we do not yet know what constitutes Eugenic fitness. I fully admit that our knowledge on this point is incomplete.. There are borderland cases in which at present the issue cannot be definitely predicted. These would be given the benefit of the
doubt until more precise data were available. But in a very large number of cases there is no such doubt and it is quite possible for the expert in these matters to predict, with a very high degree of certainty, whether the progeny will be healthy or degenerate. Thirdly, it may be objected that although the restriction of the marriage of the unfit might check their propagation, the granting of a marriage permit to the fit would not necessarily be accompanied by an increase of the fit birth-rate. In other words, that marriage and propagation are by no means
6

8:2

EUGENICS REVIEW

A. F. Tredgold:

synonymous terms. This is perfectly true. Constructive Eugenics requires something more in the way of direct encouragement than the mere permission to marry, but this is no argument against marriage regulations, and it cannot be doubted that in regard to negative or restrictive Eugenics the effect of such regulations would be very great indeed. If they did not absolutely check, they could not fail to diminish the increasing tide of degreneracy.
What I suggest, therefore, is that no marriage should be allowed to take place without the production of a license, and that such license should only be granted after (a) a medical examination of the individual, and (b) an enquiry into his, or her, family history. The examination of the individual would be similar to that which is now required by any good life assurance office, and would be similarly conducted by specially appointed local referees. The examination of the family history would be made by a Board of Medical experts and the license would be granted, or withheld, by a Central Authority after full consideration of these two reports. It is obvious that the great difficulty, indeed the present impracticability of carrying out this proposal on a National scale, lies in the absence of family histories. An essential prelude is the establishment of a National Compilation of Family Records, and it is with this point that I now desire to deal.
The compilation of the family history of every individual in
the Nation may perhaps, at first sight, appear to present such enormous difficulties as to be an utterly impossible undertaking. But the difficulties are far from being insurmountable, indeed, I shall hope to show that the proposal is perfectly feasible.
Such a scheme would necessitate two things: firstly, a system of notification, secondly, a method of compilation. Now at the present time not only is the principle of notification legally recognised, but much of the machinery is actually in existence, and I believe that an extension and modification of this system, in the manner to be described, together with a somewhat radical change in the department of the Registrar General, whereby the notifications were utilised for personal, and not merely statistical records, would make the scheme an accomplished fact. I will deal with these points more particularly.

MARRIAGE REGULATION

83

Notification would be required regarding the following point<:-
A. Births and Deaths. Notice of every birth and death is already required to be given to the local registrars, by whom it is transmitted to the Registrar General, but to be of use for the purpose of a family record certain alterations would be necessary. With regard to births it is very desirable that not only live but stillborn children should be included, and this has long been felt to be a much-needed reform on many grounds. The present system of death registration is. recognised to be by no means satisfactory. Very many deaths are now registered each year of which the cause has not been certified by a medical man at all, and even where a medical certificate is given, the fact that it is handed to the relatives of the deceased may lead to the true cause being omitted owing to the fear of causing distress. These defects would be overcome if two medical certificates were required in the case of every death, that to the local registrar (which is necessary for burial) merely stating the fact of death, and the cause being furnished as a confidential document direct to the Registrar General. Deaths due to violence or unnatural causes would be notified by the medical practitioner to the coroner, as mo,t of them are at the present time.
B. Defects of Development. Under the Elementary Education Act of I907, every child attending a public elementary school is now examined by a specially appointed medical officer at least twice during its school career. A record is kept regarding the general health and the presence of any physical or mental defect, and statistics are annually supplied to the Board of Education. If these personal records were transmitted to the central record office they would form most valuable data in the compilation of a life history. Medical inspection is at present compulsory only in the case of elementary schools, but there is no reason why it should not be made so, and why similar records should not be transmitted, in the case of children attending private and public schools and all educational establishments. By this means an accurate record would be available regarding the mental and physical condition of every child in the country.
C. Disease. The Public Health Acts and the Infectious

84

EUGENICS REVIEW

A. F. Tredgold :

Diseases Notification Acts impose upon medical men the duty of notifying certain diseases to the Medical Officer of Health. Most of these are of an infectious nature, but lead poisoning is also notifiable and a recent order of the Local Government Board has added Tuberculosis to the Scheaule. The main object is, of course, the stamping out of infection, but it is also a means by which valuable information is afforded regarding the healthiness or otherwise of particular districts and of the country generally. I see no reason why the schedule should not be extended to include all serious diseases, or at all events those which are known to be the result of hereditary tendencies or likely to have a pernicious effect upon offspring, the notification being made, however, not to the local medical officer of health but to the Central Record Office. It can hardly be contended that such a procedure would be any more a breach of professional confidence than that which now occurs under the existing Acts. In the notification of disease I attach great importance to the presence of epilepsy, insanity and the various forms of mental defect. The Lunacy Commissioners already receive detailed particulars of every case which is certified; it would be necessary for similar particulars of all cases, whether certified or not, to be furnished to the Central Record Office.
D. Offences against the Law. In the case of habitual
criminals a very complete system of records is already in existence. It would be an easy matter to place this information, together with particulars of chronic inebriates, persons committed to reformatory schools, etc., at the disposal of the Record Office.
E. Chronic Pauto7s. Similarly the Clerks to the Guardians
would be required to make an annual return of all the chronic paupers within their union districts.
For the purpose of identification it would be necessary for each notification to give, in addition to the full name and address of the individual, the date and place of his birth.
The work of the Central Record Office would consist in the compilation of the various notifications received to form a personal history sheet, and in this way there would be gradually built up a permanent record of every individual from birth to the

MARRIAGE REGULATION

85

grave. By means of a system of cross references and indexing
the relationships of each person would be shown and would enable the family to be traced for any number of generations. Incidentally I may remark that a consideration of the family history for three generations is usually quite sufficient for Eugenic purposes.
In outlining this scheme it will be obvious that there are many points upon which I have not touched, the question of immigrants, for instance; but my object has not been to present a detailed scheme, the time has not yet come for that, but simply to suggest the main principles and to show that the difficulties in the way of such a scheme of National Family Records are by no means insurmountable. I fully realise that the work of the Central Record Office would necessitate a large staff and be very expensive. But the expense would probably be no greater than that of administering the new Insurance Act, whilst the advantages to the nation would be infinitely superior to those now resulting from the purely statistical work carried out in the Registrar General's Office.
The advantages would be indirect as well as direct, scientific as well as practical. Indirectly, such a system would act as a powerful eduicational stimulus and cause far greater attention to be paid by the individual to matters of health, whilst the knowledge that a personal record of this kind was kept could not fail to act as an incentive to increase civic fitness. Scientifically, it would solve many problems regarding the influence of heredity and environment, it would show the factors which make for human progress or decadence, and would throw a flood of light upon the whole evolution of man. Practically, it would supply us with information regarding the causation and incidence of disease, and so materially contribute to an immense improvement of national vigour and efficiency; whilst, after the lapse of a few generations, it would provide the necessary data for the formulation of sound marriage regulations which would inevitably result in a marked racial advance. And these data would not merely be of value in restrictive Eugenics and the prohibition of marriage. There is no reason why favourable as well as unfavourable facts, indications of fitness as well as unfitness, should

86

EUGENICS REVIEW

A. F. Tredgold :

not be recorded, and by this means a way would be made for
some definite attempt at Constructive Eugenics and for giving not merely a license to marry, but if necessary state assistance
to those with a sound constitution and a clean family record. One other point is worthy of mention, namely, the effect
which such a system would have in conducing to human happiness. It is impossible to deny that no little of the misery and wretchedness existing at the present day has its origin in ill-assorted marriages. At times this is due to an incompatibility of temper and disposition; but only too often, as I know from intimate experience of the domestic lives of all sorts and
conditions of people, it arises from the union of a person of high ideals, mental vigour and sound heritage, with one who is enfeebled in constitution, defective in character, and depraved in habits, the result of a neuropathic inheritance. The mental anguish of a noble-minded, high-principled woman who realises, when it is too late, that she is tied for life to a man of this kind, is almost indescribable, and the misery is aggravated by the growing consciousness that each child she is called upon to bear, and to whom she fondly looked for some compensation and solace for her wasted life, is simply one more addition to the stream of degeneracy. Even incompatibility of temper is more often than not due to defective control, itself a symptom of the hereditary psychopathic diathesis. If a system of Family Records served no other purpose than that of revealing the presence of hereditary taint, which is only too often concealed, and so preventing such unions, they would justify their compilation. I cannot help feeling that in this matter, as in so many others, we begin at the wrong end. During the past few months we have seen a Divorce Commission appointed for the purpose of making easier the dissolution of the marriage tie. Undoubtedly many of these ties are a disgrace to the Church and the State, and should be annulled; but surely if greater attention were paid to the responsibility of marriage, and greater care taken in inquiring into the health and antecedents of the contracting parties, we should hear very much less about the need for divorce. From whatever point of view we regard it, whether from that of individual happiness, increased national vigour and

MARRIAGE REGULATION
efficiency or of racial progress, such a scheme could only be productive of good.
I must confess that I am by no means sanguine that it will ever be adopted in this country. The very suggestion will probably raise a storm of frenzied indignation on the part of those persons to whom the liberty of the subject is everything and the well-being of the community nothing. Moreover, it is not a vote-catching measure. It would probably be unpopular with the mass of the people, it would certainly be so with those who fail to realise that the evolution of man must primarily depend upon the breeding of all that is best in man himself. Its inauguration would require a statesman of fixed determination to do his duty to the Nation and Posterity, even at the sacrifice of present popularity. But it is my firm conviction that if any Nation is to advance it must act as would any common-sense breeder of stock. It must breed from its best and restrict the breeding of its worst. This can only be done by some National control over marriage, and the essential prelude to this is some system of National Family Records.
The question now arises, can the Eugenics Education Society take any steps towards initiating this very desirable reform ?
I think there is not the slightest doubt that this Society has already brought about a very great change in public opinion regarding these matters. Ten years ago it was exceedingly rare for the physician to be consulted as to the Eugenic fitness of persons contemplating marriage. During the past few years, however, not only has the number become very considerable, but, what is of still greater importance and significance, I find that there is a far greater disposition to attend to an adverse decision in those cases in which such a decision is necessary. But there is one difficulty which constantly presents itself when advice is sought, namely, the paucity or absence of essential data. This is largely due to the absence of any suitable form for recording the family history, and the provision of this has now become a pressing need.
In order to meet this want the Council of the Society appointed a Research Committee to consider the question and to

88

EUGENICS REVIEW

A. F. Tredgold:

draw up a suitable schedule. It was found by the Committee that a Family Record Schedule was already in use in America, and it was thought that if this could be adopted it would greatly facilitate international comparison. This schedule was, there-
fore, very carefully examined, and its essential principles have been utilised as the basis of the form now published by the Society. I now desire to give a brief account of the manner in which this form should be filled up.
The schedule consists of twelve pages, and contains spaces for particulars of ten children, two parents, and four grandparents, i.e., the direct line. It must not be thought, however, that details regarding the collaterals are of no value; on the contrary, they are of the utmost importance, and should always be supplied. The reason no definite space was allotted to them was because it was felt essential to keep the schedule as simple as possible; it will rarely happen that there will be as many as ten children, and it is intended that information regarding the collaterals should either be given in some of the columns not used for children or on separate sheets, which will be supplied with each form.
The first thing for the informant to do is to decide upon his own place in the family tree, that is, whether he or she should enter themselves as one of the four grandparents, of the two parents, or of the children. The latter course is the ideal one, as it gives the most complete history, and in this case the informant's brothers and sisters will then be entered in their proper order amongst the other children. If the informant, whilst ranking as one of the children, should be married and have children of his own, the fact will be stated, and the number of children given in paragraph 8, but particulars of these children will either be supplied on a separate form or on separate blank sheets. In cases where the informant is past middle age, has a grown up family, and his knowledge of his grandparents is imperfect, he may find it preferable to describe himself as a parent or even grandparent; but whatever his position in the family tree it should be stated in the appropriate space on the first page of the schedule.
In giving particulars of children it is most desirable that

MARRIAGE REGULATION

89

every pregnancy should be recorded in its proper order, even if it only resulted in a miscarriage or still-birth. The spaces devoted to the ten children are therefore to be read as meaning pregnancies.
In all thirty-seven questions are asked. Nine of these relate to general conditions and the answers will be supplied on pages 2 to 9. The remainder relate to more special features and will be answered in the appropriate columns on pages IO and II. Page I2 is reserved for any special details not previously included. It is not anticipated that any difficulty will arise as to how these 37 spaces should be filled up, provided careful attention be first paid to the explanatory footnotes on page 2. The form has been made as self-explanatory as possible, but it is of course essential that it should be thoroughly studied and the explanations read before beginning to fill it in. One point may be noted with regard to the " abilities " (paragraphs i6 to 22, page io). This does not mean merely exceptiontal ability in any of these classes; the object is to ascertain the degree, whether great, medium, or small, to which each particular "ability " was present. Thus, to take paragraph i8, this would be filled up M. I, 2, or 3, indicating Music, poor, fair, or exceptionally good, as the case may be. Drawing would similarly be D. I, 2, or 3, and so on with each kind of ability.
One final point must be emphasised. Many of the particulars supplied will necessarily be of a very private nature. Everyone filling up a schedule may rest assured that this privacy will be strictly respected. Special envelopes are provided for transmitting the completed forms and these will only be opened by a member of the Research Committee, and no information will be published, without consent, except in the form of statistical tables.
It is perfectly obvious that the filling up of one of these schedules will not be an affair of a few minutes. If it is to be accurate, and it will be of little use otherwise, it will necessitate a considerable expenditure of thought and time, consultation with other members of the family, and probably some little special research into family antecedents. I cannot but think, however, that if members of the Society will only take this

90

EUGENICS REVIEW

A. F. Tredgold:

trouble they will be amply repaid, not only in the fact that they will be contributing largely to our knowledge of heredity and laying the foundation of a Scientific Eugenic Record of their own family, but in that they will be initiating a system which must be an essential prelude to any scheme of practical Eugenics and which may, in due time, even lead to the establishment of a National System of Family Records.

