DISCUSSION.
MATERNITY ASSISTANCE IN FRANCE.
WE are indebted to Monsieur Michel Huber, Statistician to the Statistique Ge'nerale of France, and a member of the French Ministry of Labour, for the following laws and regulations relating to maternity assistance, which have been enacted in France.
LAW OF NOVEMBER 27TH, I909
Guaranteeing to women in child-bed their work or employment The only clause: Absence from work on the part of a woman for eight weeks consecutively before and after child-birth does not allow her employer to break his contract with her for her services except under a penalty of damages with interest payable to the woman. The woman must give her employer due notice of the cause of her absence. Any private agreement to the contrary is void in law. The woman may claim legal assistance in case of need in a law court of the first degree.
LAW OF MARCH 15TH, I9IO
Granting absence from duty with allowances to school teachers in child-bed
Clause I. Absence for two months with full salary, independent of leave of absence for illness as set forth in the decree
of November gth, i853, is to be allowed to school mistresses,
half before and half after the birth of a child. No schoolmistress may return to work till after a medical
examination and a certificate that she may do so without injury to her health; otherwise extended leave of absence is to be granted her on the same terms as before, till two months have elapsed.

320 DISCUSSION
STATE AID TO ASSOCIATIONS FOR ,MATERNITY ASSISTANCE
Budget of I9IO. Ministry of the Interior Cap. 37. Grants to associations for maternity assistance
and the protection of young infants, 5oo,ooofrs.=- 20,0o0.
This grant is to provide State aid, in proportion to their efforts and to the results shown, to such associations for maternity assistance as afford pecuniary help to enable women to rest before and after child-birth.
MINISTRY OF LABOUR
Statistique Generale de la France Every workman receives at marriage a gift of ioo francs. Married workmen receive a gift of IOO francs each at the birth of a child. The mother, if she is in work or in service, has a right to six weeks' holiday on full pav. Every workman who has more than three children on his hands under the age of i6 receives the sum of IOO francs per annum for each child after the third.
CIRCULAR ISSUED BY THE MINISTER OF WAR, APRIL 29TH, I910
Prizes for women who suckle their childien and who work in the shops of the War departmenD
Workwomen suckling their own children w/ill be paid at the end of each four months after the date of birth a premium of
io francs.
In the case of twins the premium will be raised to 1o francs
per month for each child, if both are suckled by the mother.
GRANTS TO FAMILIES
Given since Jantuary Ist, I9IO THE CITY OF PARIS gives to all workmen and others employed by the Municipality who are the fathers of at least four
children under the age of 13, 50 francs per annum in respect of each living child after the fourth who is under that age, provided that such fathers' yearly salaries do not amount to 400 francs (£i6) inclusive of bonuses and extra pay, and that they are the
sole support of their families respectively.
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE SEINE gives 50 francs per annum to all workmen who have at least four children on their hands.
THE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL OF PARIS.-It was proposed by
M. A. Rendu, with regard to reorganising the relief of the poor (I'assistance publique) to increase to the widest extent relief to

DISCUSSION

321-

women, mothers, young children, widows with children on
their hands, young workwomen and adults threatened with tuberculosis.
Extract from his introductory statement: "What is needed is in the first instance to assist mothers, young children and adults who may be rescued from disease, and especially large families. The insane and old people, who are the caput mortuum
of Society, are a secondary consideration. A nation's first duty is to protect the productive element of the population.

THE CREIDIT LYONNAIS
Boulevard des Italiens, Paris
Every woman in the employment of this concern has, in the event of child-birth, leave of absence for thirty days with full pay.
Grants for family expenses made to the workmen and widows employed in proportion to their salaries: io francs per month for the second child and I5 francs for the third and others following, or io francs per month for the third and I5 francs for the fourth and others following. The grant is withdrawn for boys at the age of 15 and for girls at the age of i6.
The Association of the Friends of the Cr6dit Lyonnais grants the following assistance to mothers whose husbands do not draw a salary above a certain sum.
Women in child-bed receive during four weeks a sum equal to the grant made by the Mutualite' Maternelle, of Paris.
A premium is given to the mothers who suckle their infants.

GRANDS MAGAZINS DU LOUVRE
Six weeks' absence on full pay is given to mothers in child-bed.

EUGENICS SECTION.
The American Breeders' Association. THE Association, organised in I903, comprises practical breeders, investigators and teachers interested in the theory of breeding, in the methods of improving varieties and breeds, in the production of pedigreed plants and animals and in the application of the laws of heredity to human improvement. It has a Eugenics Section, which deals particularly with human improvement by a better selection of marriage mates and the control of the reproduction of the defective classes. The Chairman of the Section is David Starr Jordan, Stanford University, California. With him have been associated well-known students

3X22 DISCUSSION
of heredity and humanists, such as Alexander Graham Bell, Washington, D.C.; Luther Burbank, Santa Rosa, Cal.; W. E. Castle, Harvard University; C. R. Henderson, University of Chicago; Adolph Meyer, Johns Hopkins University; J. Arthur Thomson, University of Aberdeen; H. J. Webber, Cornell University; Frederick A. Woods, Harvard Medical School.
The work of the Eugenics Section is two-fold, that of the Eugenics Record Office and that of the Committees. The Record Office seeks to accumulate and study the records of physical and mental characteristics of human families, and to educate the public as to classes of fit and of unfit marriages. Its work is done by means of (a) correspondence; (b) the acquisition of family records on special forms ; (c) the inquiries of field workers investigating either in conjunction with institutions or independently.
The Committees serve as centres for special inquiries or for education. Five such are already organised, viz., (a) On Heredity of the Feeble-minded; (b) on Heredity of Insanity; (c) on Heredity of Epilepsy; (d) on Heredity of Criminality; (e) on Heredity of Deaf-mutism.
Dr. C. B. Davenport, the Secretary of the Eugenics Section, has favoured us with the following report of a meeting of the above Committees held at the New Jersey State Village of
Epileptics, Skillman, N.J., on October 14th, I9IO. It will be
read with interest both by our English and our American readers. " The purpose of the meeting was to give the 'field workers'
of the ' Eugenics Record Office' and others an opportunity of exchanging ideas with the directors of the field studies and of comparing notes over common difficulties and methods. Actually the meeting had a far wider scope, both because wellknown alienists, physicians, psychologists and heads of Institutions from different parts of the United States were present and because several scientific papers of importance were read. In the absence of Dr. David Starr Jordan, Chairman of the Section, who had only just arrived in New York from Europe, there was chosen as Chairman of the meeting, Mr. Bleecker van Wagenen, a layman well known for his devotion to the work of public institutions in New Jersey. Professor E. R. Johnstone, Superintendent of the Training School at Vineland, was chosen Secretary of the meeting. Among others present were Dr. George B. Wright, New Jersey Commissioner of Charities and Correction, Trenton; Dr. Henry A. Cotton, Superintendent of the New Jersey State Hospital at Trenton; Dr. Everett Flood, Superintendent, Monson State Hospital for Epileptics, Palmer, Mass.; Dr. William T. Shanahan, Superintendent, Craig Colony for Epileptics, Sonyea, N.Y.; Surgeon George F. Stoner, U.S. Marine Hospital Service, in charge of the immigrant inspection service at Ellis Island; Dr. H. H. Goddard, of Vineland, N.J., Secretary of the A.B.A. Committee on Feeble-minded; Dr. A. J.

DISCUSSION

323

Rosanoff, King's Park, N.Y., Hospital for the Insane; Dr. Madeleine A. Hollowell, Superintendent, Institution for FeebleMinded Women, at Vineland; Dr. P. F. Lange, Institution for
Feeble Minded, Glenwood, Iowa; Ada E. Sheffield, Massachusetts State Board of Charities; F. S. Hammond, State Hospital, Trenton; C. Cromwell, of the State Home for Girls, Trenton;
Benjamin H. Crosby, New Jersey Reformatory, Rahway; and Professor H. H. Laughlin, Superintendent of the Eugenics
Record Office, Cold Spring Harbour. " After invocation and address of welcome by Dr. George B.
Wright, introduced by Dr. Weeks, the following programme was carried out: (I) Demonstration of the Binet-Simon test for mental grading by Dr. H. H. Goddard and assistant. The object of
this test is to determine whether, to what extent, and in what way a person is below (or above) the normal for his age; (2) Inheritance of Insanity, abstract of a paper by Gertrude L. Cannon and Dr. A. J. Rosanoff, given by Dr. Rosanoff. This showed that (excluding certain types) two insane parents will have only insane offspring, and that normal parents, both of whom belong to insane strains, will, in the long run, have one quarter of their offspring defective; (3) Inheritance of Epilepsy, by Drs. David F. Weeks and C. B. Davenport, based on studies made on the ancestry of epileptic patients at Skillman, and showing that epilepsy rarely, if ever, arises in families without trace of the defect in the ancestry, even if the immediate parents are normal. In most cases, if not all, a mental weakness may be discovered on both sides. (4) Inheritance of Feeble-mindedness, by Prof. E. R. Johnstone and Dr. H. H. Goddard, of the Vineland School. This was a report on studies made at their institution into the ancestry of the feeble-minded. These studies have been carried on for nearly two years, and in one case a pedigree comprising more than 6oo individuals has been obtained, the parents of a large proportion of whom, nearly one-half, are defective. There is good reason to believe that this collection is not an exceptional one, and it seems to show why, even on economic grounds, defectives should have at least custodial care for life and be restrained from passing on their condition, whether mental, moral or physical, to the next generation.
" By the courtesy of Dr. Weeks an opportunity was offered for studying the workings of the New Jersey Village for Epileptics, which is considered a model institution of its kind. Special tours of investigation were arranged and conducted personally by Dr. Weeks, entirely covering the 8oo acre plant. One of the most enjoyable features was the concert furnished by the school band, which is the only one in the world entirely composed of epileptics, and which, although it has only been in existence for seven months, rendered a programme requiring accurate knowledge and careful training."

324 DISCUSSION
" NATURE v. NURTURE." To the Editor of THE EUGENICS REVIEW. REFERRING to your paragraph in the current number of the above REVIEW, Nature v Nurture, on page I65, I would like to draw your attention to the following remarks which I take from The Working Faith of the Social Reformer, by Henry Jones, page 57: "The Poor Law Inspector in Glasgow, Mr. J. R. Motion, sends every year to Kirkcudbrightshire, in the south of Scotland, to Ross-shire and Inverness-shire in the north, and to the remote islands of Iona and Islay, numbers of little children found in the streets, 'picked up selling newspapers between the knees of drunkards in public-houses.' On being asked by the writer how far these children, born almost invariably of the worst parents, suffered from their inheritance, his startling reply was: 'Provided you get them young enough they cannot be said to suffer at all from that cause.' He supported his conclusion by statistics which showed that out of some 630 children sent out by him and kept under close observation for years, only some twenty-three turned out bad. . . . Mr. Motion would have the child in his hands earlier (than I3): 'At any age from a fortnight to ten years: after ten, unless the child has had one, at least, decent parent, the results are long in coming and uncertain.'" The matter seems to require further examination.
CHAS. I. R. ANNANDALE.

