THE TREND OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE*

By GODFREY THOMSON, D.C.L., Ph.D., D.Sc.

I HAVE during my lifetime had a great more highly educated people to marry late

deal to do with the selection of children and have few children. They are not greatly

at ii or i2 years of age for higher forms deterred from having children, I think, by

of education, and a good deal to do with any fear of having themselves to give up the further selection which goes on at about some material luxuries. They are somewhat

I7 for entry to universities and colleges. I have however been very much worried by

deterred by the fear that a family of children will take away time and energy from their

the fact that this process has an undesired and undesirable effect. It is intended, in

scholarly or scientific occupations. In the case of women they may indeed know that

all good faith, to be for the good both of they will not as mothers and wives be able

the individual and the community, for it or even allowed to continue these occupa-

endeavours to educate each child in the way tions. Most of all, however, they are

most likely to suit his ability and talents, deterred by the fear of not..being able to

and therefore most likely to make him educate a large number of children well.

happy, and this is also the way most likely My interest in the quantitative connection

to enable those talents to be of use to the community.

between intelligence and fertility dates from I92I, when I tested a large number of

Northumberland children and noted facts

The Educational Sieve

which seemed to suggest such an association.

But actually it has also another and Since then, usually in conjunction with col-

regrettable result, especially in the case of leagues or students working under my

the girls. The children chosen at ii or I2 guidance or in collaboration with me, I have

to enter on a longer and more difficult course made several experimental inquiries planned

of education are likely, on the average, to to elucidate this problem.

marry later (if at all) and to have fewer children (if any) than those who are not

Intelligence and Size of Family

chosen. This is still more the case with My general conviction is that there is a

those chosen later to enter colleges and negative correlation between the "intelli-

universities. The men will marry later than gence " of a child of about eleven years, and

they otherwise would have done, and a large the size of the family of which he or she is

proportion of the women will not marry at a member, and I am fairly sure that the

all. In short, the educational system of the correlation coefficient is approximately
country acts as a sieve to sift out the more -o-25. Of its cause I am much le. certain,
intelligent and destroy their posterity. It but I think it is largely due to the later

is a selection which ensures that their like marriages of intelligent people, their re-

shall not endure.

straint in producing fewer children, and the

It is clear that we nevertheless cannot do inheritance of their intelligence by their

away with this selection of the most intelli- offspring.

gent for the highest kind of education. It Caution is necessary because it is very

would indeed go on in some measure even difficult to disentangle, in the estimate of a

were all our machinery of tests and exami- child's " intelligence," that part which is his nations and interviews to be abolished. inborn potential intelligence, and that due

Somehow we must try to make social changes to his education, his home, his environ-

which will remove the influences causing mental chances. I do not myself think that

* The Galton Lecture delivered before the Eugenics Society on February i4th, 1946.

environment and social inheritance explain more than a fraction, at most half, of the

9

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

negative correlation actually observed, but and above average in intelligence. That is

it is difficult to test this. I shall describe the part of the data, for example, which will

below some attempts I have made to do so. represent the relations, friends, and acquaint-

First however let me expand my statement ances of most of my hearers to-day. If we

that (whatever may be its cause) there is a calculate the correlation between size of

negative correlation of about -o25 between family and intelligence using only such a

intelligence as measured by an intelligence truncated grid, we find that it is, in this or

test and the size of the family to which the any restricted sample of the population, so

tested child belongs.

low as to escape casual notice entirely. Such

This is not a fact obvious to casual notice. selection always hides differences. But in

Indeed the man on the street will usually, a sample of the complete population, taken

in my expenence, deny it and vigorously from slum and from suburb, from clerical

proclaim the many advantages, even the and from manual occupations, from town

intellectual advantages, of belonging to a and country, the negative correlation is

large family. An inverse correlation of unmistakable.

-0o25 between size of family and intell-

gence leaves however plenty of room for An Early Experiment

cases where large families are intelligent and My earliest experimental approaches to

small families dull. It only implies that our problem were indirect, and showed a

about 6o per cent of the families are in negative correlation between the tested

agreement with the tendency, leaving about child's intelligence and the status of the

40 per cent of cases of discrepancy. No father's occupation on a scale such as the

less than 20 per cent of the families, in spite Taussig. Since it was known that there

of the prevailing tendency, would be above existed a differential fertility among occu-

the average both in size and in intelligence, pational groups, a negative correlation

and 20 per cent would be below the average between the child's intelligence and the

in both.

number of his sibs could be anticipated.

If we construct a grid or chequerboard In the years I925-6 I planned, a direct

table, showing along its one edge the size attack on the problem and was assisted by

of family, and along the other edge the my student Dr. H. E. G: Sutherland. Our

grade of intelligence of the child who is subjects were about 2,ooQ elementary school

tested, then although the column of the children (two nearly complete age-groups)

largest families will show many with low in the Isle of Wight, about 400 boys of the

intelligence, it will show some with high in- Royal Grammar School, Newcastle-upon-

telligence, though not so many; and vice Tyne, about 400 pupils of Moray House

versa, some members of small families. will Demonstration School, Edinburgh, and 30

be stupid, though more will be clever. boys from Ryde Grammar School in. the Isle

There are therefore plenity of exceptions to of Wight. The size of family was ascer-

the general tendency.

tained by enquiry from the child tested.

Casual observers moreover, and even Only lving children will, therefore, as a

people like teachers, or journalists, or rule, be included.

clergymen, do not see the whole population, s Taking the elementary school children

but only a selected part of it. They know first, the percentage above average intelli-

secondary school children, or slum children. gence sank steadily, and with only one re-

Their acquaintances tend to belong to a versal, from 66 per cent among the only

class with large (or with small) families, children, to 39 per cent among those belong-

tend to belong to a certain occupational or ing to a family of over seven. The per-

social stratum, and so on. That is to say, centages, as the size of family increased,

they are unacquainted with the whole of the were 66, 64, 56, 54, 49, 4I, 34, 39. The

data. Suppose we take such a part, where *data from the grammar and the demon-

all the families are below average in size stration schools were not in discord with this

THE TREND OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

II

general result, but, owing no doubt to being found in I930 in Edinburgh 123 children

already selected samples, gave in themselves born in I9I6 or 19I7 whose fathers had fallen

much lower correlations.

in war before these children were a year old.

The chief blemishes in this research were Dr. Sutherland gave a group intelligence test

(i) the use of group tests, which are more to these, and also to a control group of iI6

diluted by acquired verbal facility, especially children with living parents, each child being

reading ability, and (ii) the difficulty of the matched by one of the. same sex, samne

(possibly) unfinished families. This second size of family, same age and same school-

difficulty however probably leads to an as far as this proved possible. The correla-

underestimation of the correlation. For if tion of intelligence with size of family was

a child of eleven years is one of a small in the fatherless group -oig, in the control

family it is probable that no more children group -0o26. The difference is however not

will be born. But if he is a member of a statistically significant; the numbers were

large family it may be still further increased too few.

-though clearly much depends on his place If the sole cause of the usual negative

in the family. Since the large families in correlation were the foresight shown by in-

this research are therefore more likely to be telligent parents, and if in our particular

unfinished than are the small families, the group of I23 children the size of family were

negative correlations found are more likely entirely an accident, one would expect no

to be underestimates than overestimates. negative correlation in this group. As it is,

though the correlation is smaller (i.e. nearer

A Socially Homogeneous Group

zero) compared with the control group, the

We were chiefly concerned to test the diminution is not statistically significant.

possible explanation that the phenomenon This experiment therefore fails to give con-

of negative correlation is due to family cir- clusive support to the explanation of here-

cumstances and not to inheritance. Dr. dity though it points in that direction. And

Sutherland and I next therefore measured we must remember that even in the case of

this correlation in a socially very homo- these fatherless children the intelligence of

geneous group, namely coal-miners working the parents may have influenced the number

" at the face." The fathers of this group and the spacing of- the children up to the

all belonged to the rank and file of coal time of the father's death, and produced the

hewers, everyone holding any kind of a negative correlation found.

distinguishing position, even of the lowest At the same time we searched our York-

grade, being excluded. In I926, 6o,ooo shire data and collected 724 fatherless

school children between the ages of ii and children (thoughnot in these cases necessarily

I3, forming two age-groups attending ele- fatherless from birth) and a control group

mentary schools in the West Riding of of 58I with lving parents. The correlations

Yorkshire, were given a group test of intelli- between size of family and intelligence were

gence and were asked about. their father's practically the same as in the Edinburgh

occupation and the number of their brothers groups, i.e. the fatherless children showed

and sisters. In 3,o96 cases the father was a smaller, but not significantly smaller,

a coal-miner. The correlations obtained negative correlation.

were, in spite of the very homogeneous

home conditions, still significantly negative. Shepherd Dawson's Data

After I93I for several years I engaged in

Fatherless Children

no further researches on this question, but

It next occurred to me that I might then Dr. R., R. Rusk, of the Scottish Council

obtain further insight into the problem if I for Research in Education, called my atten-

took a group of fatherless children, in whose tion to data left by the late Dr. Shepherd

case the size of family was at least in part Dawson and suggested that one of my

accidental, due to the father's death. I students might work it over. This was

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

done by Gerard S. A. O'Hanlon. Over I,200 intelligent (though we must remember that

children between the ages of 5 and 8 years, the childless group of adults, unlike the

whose parents were moving. from a slum to groups of parents ascertained through one of

a new housing area, had been given an their offspring, will contain adults incapable

individual Binet intelligence test. From of being parents). If this is so, then a

these -1,239 cases Dawson had found a corre- negative correlation of -0'25 does not fully

lation of -oI9. After some years they indicate the strength of the forces tending

were retested, by which time the number towards a deterioration of intelligence gene-

still traceable was only 293 and it is these ration by generation. It is true that in a

which form the subject of O'Hanlon's paper. very important research Fraser-Roberts,

Other information, in addition to the size R. M. Norman, and Ruth Griffiths found

of family, included room space, nutrition, " only" children a little less intelligent than

income, mother's age at marriage, and years children with one sib, but they attribute

married when this child was born. The raw this largely to the fact that illegitimate

correlation between, I.Q. and size of family children were usually retuned as only

(total number of births) was -0o207. When, children. They felt sure that the decrease

by the mathematical device of partial corre- in average intelligence with size of family

lation, it was estimated what this correlation was really linear. They are further of the

of -o2o7 would be in a group homogeneous opinion that almost all sources of bias or of

i all the other factors mentioned above error, especially sampling error, would lead

(room space, nutrition, etc.) the value found to estimates of the negative correlation that

was -o* 293, that is, the correlation was even would be too low.

more pronounced.

It will be noted that in this research the The Bath Experiment

test used was an individual Binet test. It Their article is in my opinion the best

is therefore less open to the criticism that that has been written on this subject because

educat-ion, and not native intelligence, is of the completeness of the sampling and the

being measured.

excellence of the statistical work. My

If we use these results, and similar results samples were in several cases fairly com-

from other workers, as data from which to plete age-groups; but theirs can be said to

estimate whether the intellectual average of be practically quite complete, all chillren

our race is sinking from generation to gene- (except a mere handful) whose homes were

ration, an important point to remember is in Bath and whose birthdays were between

that in all the experiments quoted so far the September Ist, I92I, and August 3ISt, I925,

families have been ascertaiped through a being ascertained, 3,40I in number, of whom

child of the family, and therefore childless 3,362 were actually tested, most of the

marriages are omitted entirely. Nor are those missing 39 children having meanwhile left

potential parents who have not married in- Bath and some having died. The Advanced

cluded in the sample. It seems possible and Otis group test was used, but I,27I of the

indeed somewhat probable that these mem- children had also been given an individual

bers of a generation-the childless-are, on Binet test, so that a check was possible.

the average, of rather high intelligence (con- The Binet I.Q. indeed " showed a signifi-

sider, for example, the large band of un- cantly higher association with sib number

married women teachers). If- the tendency than did Otis I.B." There was thus, "no

is for intelligence to rise as we go from large suggestion that the verbal group test gave

families to those with few children, with two too high an estimate because of a possible

children, with one child, it seems very pos- social bias."

sible that it will continue to families with The statistical procedures adopted were

no children; that is to say, that the unbom excellent-they were discussed by the

children of the unmarried and the childless authors with Professor R. A. Fisher-and

would have been, on the average, yet more the conclusions are conservative. The corre-

THE TREND OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

lation coefficient in which we are interested a comparison of the average I.Q. of families

here was -0224 (living children only in- (counting each family once only) and the

cluded in the family size).

average. I.Q. of all the children in these

It is clear that if there is a negative corre- families. The former is an unbiased estimnate

lation between size of family and intefli- of the average I.Q. of the parents, the latter

gence, and if the conditions causing this are an unbiased estimate of that of their children.

allowed to continue, then the average in- The difference is the decline.

telligence will sink generation by generation.

There is indeed some direct evidence that Indirect Calculation of the Decline

this is so, for example E. 0. Lewis's investi- It is desirable I think to dwell for a while

gation. Various calculations have been on this calculation, for it may seem at first

made based on correlations such as I have sight to be performing the impossible, since

to-day discussed, calculations which do not it purports to estimate a decline in intelli-

ask whether the cause is to be sought in gence merely from tests administered to one

educational haitdicaps (which can be re- generation. But first let me give an

moved by legislation) or in genetic changes, example, using the data from the Isle of

but estimate the difference in intelligence Wight already referred to. There were in quotient between a parental and a filial all I,924 children tested, 840 in one year

generation due to all causes. These calcu- and I,084 in another. The latter were a 'lations show an alarming decline of at least more nearly complete age-group and I shall

two points of Binet I.Q. per generation, and confine the calculation to them. It is shown

probably more.

in Table I. Column (a) shows the number

The first such calculation, made by a of children actually tested, and since only

method arithmetically somewhat similar to one year-group was concerned, this I,084 is

that about to be described, was, as far as also the number of families. True, there

I have been able to ascertain, published in may have been some twins among the I,084,

the Journal of Educational Psychology for or some siblings born within a twelvemonth

I927, by Lentz, who divided each group of of one another, but such cases must be few.

children by the number in the family, to Column (b) gives the number of children i

obtain a distribution representing the paren- the family, including the tested child, and

tal generation. But the assumptions on column (c) the average I.Q. of each group

which he apparently based his procedure

were, it seems to me, erroneous, for they

TABLE I

implied perfect correlation, between parental AVERAGE I.Q. OF PARENTS AND CHILDREN IN I,o84

and filial intelligence. In his book The

FAMILIES

Fight for our National Intelligence (I936) Raymond Cattell also uses the above method,

(a) (b) (c)
No. of No. in families family I.Q.

(d) (e)

(f

Product No. of Product

ac children co

and further estimates the distribution of intelligence in the next, as yet unborn, generation by multiplying each group of

115 I Io6*2 12,213-0 115 212 2 105.4 22,344.8 424 I85 3 102-3 I8,925-5 555 152 4 IOI5 15,428-0 6o8

X2,213.0 44,689.6
56,776-5 61,712.0

children by the number in the family, assuming in addition, it would seem, a

127 5 99.6 I2,649.2 635 103 6 96-5 9,939.5 6I8 88 7 93.8 8,254.4 6I6

63,246.O 59,637-0 57,780.8

perfect correlation between parental and 102 (8)* 95.8 9,7716 8I6 78,172.8

filial fertility. However, both these assumptions of perfect correlation are unnecessary,

1,084

109,526.0 4,387 434,227^7

and an arithmetical procedure identical with

Mean= ior004

Mean=gS9g8

Cattell's second plan, but with other and much more reasonable assumptions, has to-

* Really " over 7." Using 8 will give a slightly
underestimated figure for the decline. Estimated average I.Q. of the parents ... 101.04

day the support of Professor R. A. Fisher. Estin;ated average I.Q. of all their children... 98-98

I shall describe it in what I believe would be in effect his own words. It depends upon

Decliw ...

I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of children. In column (d) the average I.Q. gence is 3-I points of the units of his test;

of all these children is found to be ioi104. but I deduce from his diagram on page 269

This value is taken as the estimate of the of his article in the British Journal of

average I.Q. of their parents, on the very Psychology for January I936 that- the

reasonable assumption that the average I.Q. standard deviation of these units was about

of all parents wiUl be the same as the average 2I, so that in Binet units his 3-I would

I.Q. of all their children if they each have the become about 2-3 points of decline. The

same number of children. Here each family Fraser-Roberts data give a decline in Otis

is represented by one child, not specially units of 4*I4 points, estimated by Fisher to

selected, and therefore representative.

be equivalent to 2*04 Binet units. These

There is no assumption about the value of estimates make no allowance for the exist-

the correlation coefficient of parental intelli- ence of individuals in the parental generation

gence with filial intelligence. This would who were childless, and are therefore prob-

have to be known if an estimate were re- ably underestimates. Further, they do not

quired of the intelligence of the parents of seem to make any allowance for the fact-

any specified size of family, for in that case and I think it is a fact-that the number of

the phenomenon of regression, which is years between generations is smaller for the

dependent upon the degree of correlation, class of parents who have large families,

would have to be taken into account. But and larger for the parents of small families.

when the average I.Q. of all the parents is If this is so, the values are again under-

estimated, regression plays no part. I have estimates.

to thank Dr. D. N. Lawley for clearing up On the other hand, these estimates lump

this point for me in discussions.

together all the possible causes which may

To return to our table: column (e) shows have created the negative correlation between

the total number of children of those size of family and intelligence, and assume

parents, obtained by multiplying together that these causes will continue to operate,

columns (a) and (b). Then the average I.Q. whether they are social, and remediable by

of all these 4,387 children is obtained by social and environmental change, or are

multiplying the I.Q.'s of colurm (c) by the genetic, and remediable only by selection.

numbers in cmlumn (e), adding, and dividing We however are very interested to know

by 4,387 as is shown in the last column. whether the causes are environmental or

The assumption is again made here that the genetic. It was towards elucidating this

one child tested in a family is a fair sample that I planned my experiment with the

of that family, and his I.Q. an unbiased children fatherless from birth.

estimate of the average I.Q. of the family. The distinction between the two categories

The child tested is in no way specially of cause is not sharp, for the adverse genetic

selected, and is equally likely to be above or selection which we fear to be going on is

below his brethren in intelligence.

itself due to the social environment, at least

The results of such calculations, of which in part. But a clear distinction can be

a number have been reported, are remarkably drawn between an explanation which attri-

in agreement, and with few exceptions give butes the lower intelligence of large families

values for the decline in intelligence ranging to biological inheritance from their parents,

from slightly below 2 points to well over and an explanation which asserts that their

3 points per generation. The most widely lower scores are directly due to the largeness

known are those on the data of Dr. Raymond of the family, due for example to the over-

Cattell, gathered in Leicester, and on the crowded home with no opportunity for study,

data of Dr. Fraser-Roberts and his co- due to the greater poverty when the wage

workers, gathered in Bath. These agree has to support more children, due to the

more closely than I at one time thought. fewer books, the slummier district, the less

The decline given by Cattell on page 42 of well-staffed school in such a place.

his book The Fight for our National Intelli- The kind of social reform which the second

THE TREND OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

I5

class of explanation would call for may differ differences of opinion are honest, and

from the kind of social reform which would although I for my part think that the Iowa

be needed to reverse the deterioration due researches are unreliable, it is clear that we

to actual selection for poor mental inheri- are far from being sure.

tance. A flat rate of family allowance, for Of the 2 or 3 points of decline of I.Q. per

example, might make matters better en- generation which the differential birth-rate

vironmentally, while further increasing the data indicate, we are therefore unable to

adverse selection.

say with confidence how much is due to

heredity and how much to environment.

Heredity or Environment ?

When, in a memorandum to the Royal

Much therefore depends on the answer to Commission, I said that I feared the decline

the question how much of the scatter of in- was one point, I meant one point due to

telligence in our population is due to in- heredity and to selection. It may well be

heritance, and how much to differences in more, but I hardly think it can be less.

schooling and education. About this there Particularly emphatic seems to me the fact

has long raged acute controversy, which has that while the correlation between the in-

recently flared up again in America, after a telligence test scores of siblings is about -5,

period during which it was generally agreed that between all twins is about .7, and

that from 50 to 8o per cent of the scatter between twins after removal of all pairs

was due to heredity. That fairly quiescent where sex, bloodgroup, or other criterion

period followed the appearance of the 27th indicates a double conception, this corre-

Yearbook of the (American) National Society lation rises to about 9.- This last rise in

for the Study of Education, which was devoted particular seems inexplicable except by a

to this problem and contained papers which, genetic explanation, and suggests that a

while conflicting, did so on the whole only considerable part of what we call intelli-

within the above limits.

gence is inherited. Its genetic background

In I940 however there appeared the 39th is probably complex and in all probability

Yearbook of that society, among the articles a large number of genes are concerned.

in which there is much greater disagreement, That the mode of inheritance of intelli-

betweeni (one might say) a Californian school gence is important in considering this matter

headed by Lewis Terman and the late has been illustrated by Professor J. B. S.

Barbara Burks, claiming a very large in- Haldane by the analogy of the " ever-

fluence for heredity, and an Iowa school, sporting" strain of stock. Since about

headed by George Stoddard and Beth Well- Queen Elizabeth's time " double " stocks

man, denying this and making big claims have been known, the doubleness, which is

for schooling. Among the kinds of research recessive, being due to a Mendelian gene (or

which are used in attempts to distinguish perhaps a pair).

between nature and nurture are correlations The doubleness is due to all the sexual

between intelligence scores of identical twins, organs of the flower becoming petals, and

between foster children and foster parents, so double flowers are entirely sterile. The

foster children and true parents, children single flowers, in the ordinary strain, are

brought up in a homogeneous environment either pure singles, which have only single

like an institution, and so on. The Iowa school offspring, or hybrid singles, which throw

base their conclusions mainly on large in- some doubles. In the ordinary strain there-

creases in I.Q. following nursery school and fore the proportion of doubles grows less

infant school education, which are not con- and less as the generations follow one another

firmed by other investigators, and are -as we fear intelligence will grow less and

criticized as being either due to the in- less in human beings.

accuracy and overhigh standard of baby But in the " ever-sporting" strain, each

tests, or to selection and statistical errors in generation is composed of approximately

the treatment of the resulting data. The half singles and half doubles. Though the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

doubles are sterile, the singles of a genera- forms might also assist in equalizing the

tion always produce offspring who are in birth rate, though others, however desirable

half the cases doubles. If mankind were for other reasons, might even accentuate it.

like this, and intelligent people (double It is much more difficult to obtain support

flowers) were quite sterile, still unintelligent for reforms tending to eugenic progress,

people (single flowers) might produce a full partly because the man in the street thinks

quota of the intelligent, generation after them impracticable, but largely because he

generation.

does not believe in the alleged decline in

I am afraid however that mankind is not intelligence. He is very sceptical about

like this. We are not divided sharply into conclusions concerning the difference of in-

intelligent and unintelligent, as stocks into telligence between two generations when

doubles and singles. Intelligence ranges these conclusions are based entirely on

gradually, step by step, from genius, through measurements made on only one generation.

the average man, down to the defective, and He demands a straightforward measurement

the distribution is approximately normal or of two succeeding generations, and I sym-

gaussian, and is therefore probably due not pathize. Actual measurement of two suc-

to one but to many genes. The explanation cessive generations is desirable, indeed essen-

of the ever-sporting phenomenon in stocks tial, and I would urge all who are in a position

is that the " singleness " gene, in that strain, to facilitate such an experiment, or to contri-

is lethal to pollen grains, and so all the bute towards carrying it out, to do so.

surviving pollen bears the doubleness gene. Even when measurements on two succes-

Some human genes concerned with intelli- sive generations are made however, there

gence may possibly act like the gene causing are still difficulties in the way of interpre-

singleness in stocks-which would slow down tation. The testees will probably be school

the drop in I.Q. per generation. But it is children of about the age of eleven, because

surely unlikely that many do, indeed I think that age, before children have scattered into

it unlikely that any do.

different kinds of secondary school, is the

However that may .be, and whether the time when a large random sample can most

decline calculated from the differential birth readily be obtained. The sampling would

rate be genetic or environmental, it is in have to be equally complete in both genera-

either case a serious matter for the nation. tions, if the pedant will allow me to qualify

If the lower intelligence of the members of the word " complete." If, for example,

large families is an educational result due defectives in special schools were included in

to the overcrowding and poverty of the the one case but excluded in the other that

home, it could, with goodwill and suitable would queer the comparison. Then there

legislation, perhaps be cured in half a cen- is the effect of migration. There may have

tury. If it is genetic and inherited, a been an influx of children of a new type or

longer time will be needed to restore the a different race or social class into the district

loss, if indeed it can be restored, for although or country. Further, the children of the

social conditions may alter so as to equalize later generation may have become accus-

the birth rate over the range of intelligence, tomed to intelligence tests, and be thus

it would be necessary to do more than this, enabled by familiarity with the situation to

it would be necessary to create a differential score higher marks than their fathers did

birth rate in the opposite direction, i-n order when children. These. and others are real

to recover what has been lost.

difficulties. They should not however deter

us from making the experiment with such

Need for a Direct Experiment

precautions as we can devise. The question

It is comparatively easy to obtain support awaiting a decisive answer is of such im-

for the kind of reform needed to equalize the portance that it would be worth while to

cultural and educational handicaps of large go to much trouble, and to spend money

versus small f4nilies. Some of these re- freely, in order to settle it. I hope that

THE TREND. OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

this may be done in our time. If the decline is as rapid as Cattell fears, it should be
detected (if the conditions can be equalized) in a, period of even five years if a group of 50,00o children can be tested; and even if it is much less rapid, it should nevertheless be detected by an experiment on groups of IOO,OOO over fifteen years.
Factors of the Mind
I turn now to a different aspect of my subject. In the words of Karl Pearson, " Galton created the subject of correlation," and from correlation has arisen that branch of psychology in which I am most interested, and in which alone I can perhaps claim a certain measure of competence beyond the average-I mean the factorial analysis of human ability. I would like to devote a few minutes to explaining what it is, and how it may turn out to have a bearing on eugenics.
An intelligence quotient measures, more or less reliably, the powers of mind in a kind of linear fashion, as though all minds were alike except in the height of intelligence to which they can rise. But everyone knows that minds differ also in other ways, and that two persons with the same intelligence quotient may have nevertheless very different kinds of mind-the one man may be a poet and the other an engineer. Mathematically speaking, one might say that the mind has not one dimension but many, and that the I.Q. is only a sort of volume of the mind which does not give any indication of its shape. These dimensions or directions of the mind are the " factors " spoken of in factorial analysis, which is based on a table of a large number of correlations between different mental activities.
Before we can have correlations we must have quantitative measures of the qualities to be correlated, and these are provided by the scores in different kinds of tests, some logical in nature, some with mechanical apparatus, some with words and some without, some using geometrical figures, some numbers, some drawings of right and left hands to be identified quickly, some based on codes and cyphers, and so on, an apparent medley of all kinds of tests.

When a number of persons have been
submnitted to say three or four dozen of these
diverse tests, which a priori appear likely
to call upon different powers of the mind,
correlations between the tests can be calculated. There will be a large number of
such correlations which can most conveniently be entered in a square table with
the names of the tests written both along
the top edge and down the side. Certain
regularities then become apparent,or can
be discovered by suitable mathematical
analysis.
In the first place, the correlations are
mainly positive. Desirable qualities tend to be positively correlated in men. If we compare ability to supply the missing conjunctions in a piece of prose with the ability
to say quickly whether the wheel in a mechanical model will turn this way or that when the lever is actuated, we find
that these abilities apparently so different
are positively correlated-perhaps not very highly correlated but still positively.
Clearly we can therefore attribute this tendency, if we like, to a general factor linking all mental activities, and British
psychologists generally do so-the factor is Spearman's g. But it is not necessary to do so, and American psychologists, following the lead of L. L. Thurstone, for the most part
do not use a general factor, but analyze the correlations immediately into group factors, as also the British psychologists must do with the residues of correlation left after the associating effect of the general factor has been removed.
The group factors are more or less the same to whatever school the factorial psychologist may belong. As the Americans at the moment have the lead in this work I shall in illustration mention some of the factors L. L. Thurstone and his co-workers claim to have isolated. The chief are a space factor, a perceptual factor, a number factor, and two different verbal factors. British psychologists also recognize a verbal factor, though they have not split it into two, and a " space factor, believed to be much
the same as a "practical " factor found by
others.

T8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

A Possible Compensation ?
If it be true that there is going on a steady fall, generation by generation, in that intelligence which we measure or estimate by our present-day intelligence tests, may there not perhaps be compensation, it may be asked, in an increase in some other form of intelligence which may be more suited to the needs of the future. For example, is it possible that although verbal intelligence is decreasing, mechanical intelligence is in-
creasing ? There is against this hope the fact that nearly all if not all correlationg between mental tests are positive. This seems to make the hypothesis improbable, but it does not make it impossible, for it is conceivable that this fact too is changing, and that the selection which is going on generation by generation, owing to the differential birth rate, may land mankind in an epoch when what we now call intelligence is actually correlated negatively with what will then be called intelligence.
I do not myself share this view. I think that intelligence is much more one thing than such a view would suggest. It is true that in the adult it takes different forms, due mainly in my opinion to his education and the influence of the environment in
which he passed his formative years, though possibly also due to inherited powers which mature only in adult life. But although intelligence expresses itself in different forms,

in its highest aspects it is always concerned with abstractions and concepts and relationships. Practical intelligence,, as it is called, is of considerable importance in the world: but theoretical intelligence is of immeasurably greater importance. The clever garage me-
chanic may improve a motor-car engine. The student of thermodynamics or of atomic
physics is much more likely to make the motor-car engine obsolete and replace it by a more efficient engine. And such men* think in abstractions, often clothed no doubt in symbols of some sort or another, symbols which may be verbal, or mathematical, or, like Faraday's tubes of force, more mundane and materialistic, but symbols nevertheless, the real values with which these minds are operating being abstract relationships. I think there is a power of thinking abstractly which we can recognize in some of our fellow men whether they be chemists or classics, artists or mathematicians, craftsmen or administrators; and that though these men of high intelligence (as I shall call them) may, whether from education or heredity, possess different factors of the mind, they are alike in operating with them at a high level. This level is what I call intelligence, and it is, I fear, being steadily lost to Europeans by the selecting power of the differential birth rate, those who possess it tending to have fewer children than those who
don't.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXXVIm, No. 1

