RACE MIXTURE*

By K. B. AIKMAN, M.D. M.R.C.P.

T HE immense advances in the last So great are the differences between these

hundred years in the medical sciences three Primary Races that they are compar-

and their application have greatly able to the differences between the species of

reduced death-rates, not only in civilized the zoologist rather than to those between the

countries, but in savage countries as well. varieties. Therefore, the crosses between

As a result there has occurred a general Primary Races will be described as hybrids,

increase of population and thus of migration, and the offspring of the more closely related

which has had important effects-economic, varieties and of the half-breeds, as mongrels.

social, moral, religious and biological-both

on the peoples who have provided the EFFECTS OF HYBRIDIZATION

emigrants and on those who have received them.
We must accept it as a fact that large numbers of different races cannot live side by side and compete for their daily bread without the production of racial mixture. There is one exception to this generalization: in proportion as there is intense antagonism, usually religious, the mixing of the races will
be lessened. The practical drawbacks, however, to such a method of race-separation, are proved by the history of India. We need merely note that race-mixing will take place when opportunity occurs and ask ourselves how far is this process desirable. It is a
question that cannot be answered in a word,
because the nature of the races crossed is important.

It may be said that the bulk of medical
opinion is against hybridization between the
Primary Races and that the best eugenic
opinion is definitely against it. Thus, Major Leonard Darwin wrote: " Theoretical reasons can be adduced for believing that inter-breeding between widely divergent races may result in the production of types inferior to both parent stocks: and that this would be the result of miscegenation is at all events a common belief." Professor
Ruggles Gates also supports this view. The biological objection is based upon the fact that, in these crosses, groups of inherited characteristics remain associated or " segregate," with the result that the offspring has a " chaotic constitution." Each variety of man or of animal, in the course of time,

THE PRIMARY RACES
Mankind may be divided into three Primary Races: (i) The Negro, blackskinned, with short woolly hair and, typically, African; (2) The Mongolian, yellowskinned, with long straight hair and, typi-
cally, Asiatic; (3) The Caucasian, white-
skinned, with abundant wavy hair and, typically, European. These groups may be subdivided, but I propose to do so only in the last case, classifying the Caucasians as the Fair Caucasians of the north and west of Europe and the Dark Caucasians of the south and east.

acquires a. constitution adapted to its particular mode of life and to the diseases to which it is exposed. When such constitutions are mixed by inter-breeding, a new constitution is produced, which is not adapted to the mode of life of either parent and too
often is not fitted for any actual environment whatever.
As examples of simple skeletal maladaptations, we find hybrids with skulls too large to permit of their birth; others with teeth
too large for their jaws; and others with either the upper or the lower jaw a misfit with its neighbour. There are, however,
many more complicated disabilities, such as

* Abridged from a paper read before the Eugenics Society on June 20th, 1933.

altered resistance to disease and disharmonies of the internal secretions. It is found

i6i

i62 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that the greater the difference between the environment, such as family-life, language,

races crossed, the less likely is the result to be education, religion, and the whole standard

beneficial: that the Caucasian is nearer to of living and of civilization. We must, then,

the Mongolian than either is to the Negro, answer the question: Is the environment

and that the Dark Caucasian is nearer to the of the hybrid likely to be as good as that of

Mongolian than is the Fair Caucasian, and the child of pure race? The answer is, No!

so the Dark Caucasian cross is the less Often it will be worse even than that of the

harmful of the two.

race of the inferior parent. Too often the

These generalizations, to which there may hybrid is illegitimate, hating his white

be exceptions, are supported by the Ameri- father and despising his black mother. But

can, Professor N. S. Shaler:

even if his parents are married and there is

" It is not only a general belief that hybrids of blacks and whites are less prolific and more liable to diseases than
the pure bloods of either stock, but also that they seldom live so long. Statistics
lacking on this point, I have questioned a large number of physicians well placed for judgment in this matter. All of them agreed that the offspring of a union between pure black and white parents is, on the average, much shorter lived and
much less fertile than the race of either parent. My father, a physician of experi-
ence and a critical observer, who had spent more than half a century in Cuba and the slave-holding South, stated that, in his opinion, he had never seen mulattoes,
that is a cross between white and pure black, who had attained the age of sixty
years, and that they were often sterile. The judgment of medical men seems to be that when the blood of either race preponderates, and in proportion as it verges to one or the other, the longevity and
fertility increase or decrease."

no racial prejudice against mixed marriages where they live, it is exceedingly unlikely that the environment will be good, for at least one of the parents is almost certain to be reckless, improvident, disinclined to settle down, and with poor ideals of parent-
hood. In considering how these factors will
affect the offspring, it should be recalled that the character of a child is formed at a very early age, and that it is impossible to
over-estimate the importance of the parents as a factor in his environment. No one, certainly no one who has been married, could doubt that the married life of parents
of such widely different races as European
and Negro would be grossly inharmonious, with consequent disadvantages to the chil-
dren of the marriage.
The United States presents these problems on the largest scale and has devoted much research to them. Indeed, in many States the American view is crystallized into laws
absolutely forbidding marriage between white and coloured persons. Furthermore, as the statistics of divorce show, family life

THE FACTOR OF ENVIRONMENT

in the United States is less stable than it was. I attribute this instability, in very large

This opinion, then, supports the view that measure, to the mixed blood of the bulk of

hybrids are usually worse than mongrels. her citizens. It is said that people of

I would, however, remind you that there is foreign birth and their children make up

more in this matter of heredity. There is one-third of her population, while another

environment as well. While it is no doubt third has had one foreign parent. Under such

hereditary effects which interest us in the conditions, it must be increasingly difficult

first place, we must cultivate a broad outlook to find two partners for life with similar

and give full consideration to those other ideals, tastes and outlook, and there would

effects which are scarcely less important be a growing tendency for marriages to result

because they are environmental. That at purely from mutual sex-attraction. This is

any rate is the eugenic standpoint. Race- indeed a valuable ingredient in married life,

mixture may alter many factors in the but marriages of which it is the main

RACE MIXTURE

I63

foundation are not likely to be a permanent intermingling of different races. Booker T.

success.

Washington, himself a coloured man and the

It is noteworthy that many of the Ameri- founder of the Tuskegee Institute, Alabama,

can cases to which I refer are marriages the foremost Negro educational establish-

between Europeans of different races. If ment in the world, said that " the problem

instability is a characteristic of such mar- is not so much what the white man will do

riages, it must be commoner still in the with the Negro, as what the Negro will do

hybrid marriages between the Primary with the white man and his civilization."

Races, and commoner still when these unions Other serious writers hold that the ultimate

occur without a marriage ceremony.

future of the United States of America will

be to be inhabited by a mixed race of Cau-

CROSSES BETWEEN ALLIED RACES casian-Negro hybrids and mongrels with a

On the other hand, crosses between races that are closely akin, whether of men or of animals, may result in superior and vigorous
offspring, at least in some cases. This is of especial interest to ourselves, because it
supports the view of such authorities as T. H. Huxley that the races which intermingled in these islands must have been closely allied by blood; for it cannot be denied that the intermarriages of all the peoples who crossed the North Sea, both
with each other and with the earlier inhabi-
tants of Britain, produced a vigorous and efficient people.
That this kinship may have been closer than is popularly supposed is also suggested
by the fact that, among the more distinct nationalities of Europe, it is very difficult to
decide where to place the line dividing those who are good or bad for crossing with each other. So much is this the case that one
authority, Professor Eliot of Harvard, considers that the marriage of people of different
European races produces children weaker
and less able than those whose parents belong to the same nation.

dash of Mongolian from the Red Indian stock. It happens that South America is already peopled mainly by such a mixed race,
although the proportion of American Indian, that is to say of Mongolian, is higher in most
parts; and, with the South American
example of instability, backwardness, political and other weaknesses at their door, it is
small wonder that the white Americans are alarmed for the future of their country, quite apart from any emotions which might be attributed to race-prejudice.
Nor is political instability the only issue, for the biological weakness of the hybrid
stock is attested by such an authority as F. L. Hoffman, of the Prudential Insurance Company of America, who asserts that the people of mixed race in the United States are physically inferior to either the pure white or black. This inferiority, he says, is shown in their weaker vitality and less resistance to disease. This view is reinforced by the interesting observation in the Philippines, that, among the men of the United States' Forces invalided home, the ratio of blondes to brunettes was as IOO to I26.
Moreover, it was the brunettes among whom

AMERICAN VIEWS AND EXPERIENCE

the proportion of mixed bloods and especially of Negro-white mixtures would be

The prejudice and emotion that may be highest, who suffered especially from neuras-

aroused by this question of race mixture are thenia and tuberculosis.

abundantly shown in the diametrically opposed opinions, expressed with the great- MONGOLIAN HYBRIDS

est vehemence, which may be found in the When from the Caucasian-Negro hybrid

copious (mainly American) literature on the we tum to the Caucasian-Mongolian, we find

subject. This vast literature, these prejudices (according to Dr. J. A. Mj0en, of Norway,

and emotions, not only give a measure of the who has made a special study of the hybrids

importance of the problems concerned, but between the Lapps, who are Mongolians, and

illustrate one of the drawbacks to the close the Scandinavians, who are exceptionally

164 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

pure Fair-Caucasians) that the offspring are of the nation produced by the Negroes and

inferior to either of their parents. " They hybrids.

are often mentally and physically unsound; It is not generally realized how great is

they are more likely to be a burden on the this effect already. It is likely to become

State, both from moral and physical in- even greater. Not only because the number

firmity; they are far more subject to tuber- of people with some negro blood in their veins

culosis." He urges that " until we have is increasing (and I would remind you that

more definite knowledge of the effect of there are some twelve million Negroes and

race-crossings, we shall certainly do our coloured persons in the States), but also

best to avoid crossings between widely because the Negro is increasing in material

different races." " Crossings," he repeats, prosperity and in education. It will become

" between widely different races can lower progressively more difficult to limit his

the physiological and mental level."

political power in the Southern States and

Professor H. Lundborg, of Sweden, sup- his political power in the North is much

ports this view and urges that " we must also greater than it was before the war. Little

pay great attention to immigration so that wonder, then, that there are many Americans

inferior individuals belonging to foreign who feel that all is not well with their

races cannot enter the country and settle culture, art, music, sexual-morality, family-

without any hindrance. A mixture between life and religion, and who attribute much of

nations who, from a race-biological point of the alleged deterioration to the effect of the

view, stand high and others containing lower extraordinary mixture of races and colours

race-elements is certainly to be condemned." and unassimilated aliens present in the

In connection with the Mongolian-Negro " Melting Pot," as Israel Zangwill termed

hybrid, there is little recent scientific the United States.

observation. As the Mongolian is closer, biologically, to the Negro than is the A CONTROLLED EXPERIMENT

Caucasian, my impression is that the Mon- But for those who feel that we cannot yet

golian-Negro cross is less detrimental. Cases see the end of the greatest experiment on

occur, for example in Jamaica, but they are earth in race-mixing, a striking historical

not regarded with enthusiasm, either socially case exists in the fate of the people of

or biologically.

the Northern Kingdom of Israel, after they

began freely to intermarry with foreigners.

SOCIOLOGICAL PROBLEM OF RACE MIXTURE

It may be recalled how they rapidly forsook their religion and became idolaters, soon acquiring all the vices of the surrounding

That is the biological side, but we must nations and losing their own virtues. They

remember that immigration of different deteriorated until they became so weak that

races leads to the complication of a whole they fell a prey to their neighbours, the

host of administrative problems which are Assyrians. Later, the same thing happened

all too difficult already in modem civiliza- to the Southern Kingdom of Judah. The

tion. One need only instance the segregation prophet Nehemiah well knew both the direct

of races, as in the " Jim Crow " cars on and the indirect effects of race-mixture, and

railways in the Southern States; the racial it was not without good reason that he cried

friction which often expresses itself in lynch- to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, after their

ings; the economic problems and trade return from Babylon: " Shall we then

disputes due to wage-cutting and to different hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to

standards of living; the legal problems, trespass against our God in marrying strange

often of the most distressing kind, due to women" (xiii, 27). The parallelism is strik-

laws in the United States rendering illegal ing. The same sequence of events occurred

marriages between white and coloured per- both in the Northern Kingdom of Israel, and

sons, and the profound effect upon the life then, more than a century later, in the

RACE MIXTURE

I65

Southern Kingdom of Judahl: race-mixture, exclude the Mongolian and the Negro races

deterioration; defeat and captivity.

from their countries. I need only refer to

Here we have two clean scientific experi- recent legislation in Canada, Australia and

ments, both on a nation-wide scale. The the United States to show this. But this is

second may be regarded as a control. Both much more than an Imperial problem, it

produced the same result and clearly demon- affects the future of the white race itself and

strated cause and effect. If, in Palestine, the through it the future of civilization.

result of this mixing of rather similar races The Report of the Census Director of

was unfavourable, which cannot be denied, South Africa stated that, unless increased by

we should expect an even less favourable accessions from abroad, the European race

result when the primary races are crossed. in South Africa " must for ever abandon the

And, indeed, we find that our deductions are prospect of maintaining a white civilization,

justified, and that when a similar experi- except as a proportionately diminishing

ment is made in modern times history repeats minority in face of an increasing and

itself. In the United States there was a ultimately overwhelming majority. It may

people, mainly of Caucasian stock like the then be forced to abandon its domination or

Israelites, and like them believing in a even abandon the country." These are the

monotheistic religion and enjoying a rela- words of a serious official report and they

tively superior civilization. The introduction should make us think. The Negro in the

of people of a different race, idolaters and of past has not shown any great genius for

a relatively inferior civilization, has led to stable political institutions. The native

racial mixture. The result, in the words of states established a century ago in South

Professor Van Dyke of Princeton University, Africa ended in collapse. The Black Repub-

is " perhaps the greatest and most perplexing lics of Hayti and Santo Domingo in the

problem that any nation has ever had to West Indies are examples of Negro rule after

face." While W. P. Livingstone declared, a considerable degree of white influence and

" so gigantic does the problem appear, so their record is one of wholesale massacre.

difficult of peaceful solution, that the nation Even in Liberia, at the present day, slavery

is helpless in face of it. . . . It remains, and torture are common. Thus, there is

what it has been for a century, the darkest good reason to fear that if Africa is to fall

and most menacing cloud on the horizon of back under Negro rule, it will deserve its

national life." Can it be doubted that the name-the Dark Continent.

many Americans who agree with these When we turn to the Mongolian races of

writers wish that their nation had devoted Asia, we must recognize that, speaking

more time in the past to the study of practically, they are the most serious

eugenics and ethnology and had acted on its menace to the Caucasian race. Even now

results ?

we are feeling severely the commercial

POSSIBILITIES OF THE FUTURE

competition of one of them and there is nothing incredible in the idea of another

Any race which is in possession of a land invasion of Europe from the East. It has

should take all these facts into consideration. happened several times before, and evidences

Such a race is morally bound to give the of these invasions remain, not only in

closest attention to the effects of race- written history, but in the Hungarians and

migration, not only as it affects the present the Lapps, who are Mongolians, and in the

generation of its citizens, but as it affects the Alpine Sub-race which is Asiatic in origin.

future generations, both as regards their We have all heard of the Yellow Peril, and

heredity and their environment.

a recent writer expresses his opinion of its

It is surely of great significance that all the reality in three words-" Ex oriente-Nox ! "

peoples of our own Celtic-Anglo-Saxon stock That is one view of the ethnological future.

who have had the most practical experience For us it is a gloomy one, but there is

of these problems are doing their utmost to another-and you may take your choice-

i66 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which is that the world will ultimately be We have seen that the effects of hybridiza-

peopled by an intimate compound of white tion between the Primary Races are bad, both

and yellow and black. It may be! Some biologically and socially, and that they are

people profess to look forward gladly to that likely to be especially bad if one race is

time when national rivalries shall be no more, primitive, while the other is in an advanced

because nations will have ceased to provide state of civilization.

that variety which is the spice of life, all Among primitive peoples of the same

sunk into a monotonous morass having the Primary Race, there appears to be less

colour of coffee and milk. But if these objection to intermarriage. Biologically,

alternatives are to be avoided-and I hope there may be an accession of hybrid vigour

that this is still possible-it can only be and the production of more efficient types:

through our studying the problems of race- on the other hand, there may be degenera-

mixture and by acting before it is too late. tion. In the present state of our knowledge

The impression I have formed is that, until we cannot predict the result and so are not

our real knowledge of heredity has made justified in encouraging such unions. We

very great advances, any policy of encourag- must bear in mind that these Primary Races

ing racial mixtures is a gamble which is are capable of much subdivision and we

unjustified. Our progress will be more must carefully study the mass of material

certain and more rapid if we apply the which is available; if only because this is

principles of positive and of negative eugenics essential to any intelligently planmed scheme

to the races which already exist. Eugenists of Empire migration.

are absolutely confident that all these races Socially, intermarriages between some of

can be improved biologically and no one these primitive peoples may be unobjection-

denies that they are also capable of improve- able, because they are sufficiently primitive

ment socially and environmentally.

to have escaped the devastating complexities

of civilization, but each case must be

THE NEED FOR " SEGREGATION "

considered on its merits.

Difficult as it undoubtedly is, some form
of mass-segregation of races seems to be desirable but, by this term, I do not mean complete segregation. The ideal would seem to be that teachers, administrators, judges and doctors should have access to the more backward races and that interchange of ideas should be allowed full play. In this
way, each people would make its contribu-
tion to the culture of the world and would have the opportunity of fuller development. If some of these races showed themselves
more fitted than others to certain districts
of the world and proved their survival value,

Among civilized peoples of the same Primary Race, intermarriage is less desirable than is commonly thought. Biologically, there are the same possibilities of hybrid vigour and of degeneration and the distinction between Fair Caucasians and Dark Caucasians is probably important. Socially, however, the complexities of the civilized mind militate against the harmony of such married lives and this must have great weight with the eugenist.
Much of what I have said may be summarized in one verse of Kipling's poem,
The Stranger."

they would tend to spread and the present "This was my father's belief

inhabitants of these districts would in time

And this is also mine:

be reduced to vanishing point. This has

Let the corn be all one sheaf

been the course of biological progress in the

And the grapes be all one vine,

past and it is still its truest course in the

Ere our children's teeth are set on edge

present state of our knowledge.

By bitter bread and wine."

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXV, No. 8.

