THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Galton Centenary Addresses.
SIR FRANCIS YOUNGIITTSBAND, K.C.I.E., K.C.S.I., President of the Roval Geographical Society, gave the first of the three addresses, at the Francis Galton Centenary Celebration held by the Society on Thursday, Februarv, 16th, 1922. He was followed bv Sir Henry Rew, K.C.B., President of the Royal Statistical Society.. Major Leonard Darwin, D.Sc., President of the Society and President of the International Eugenics Commission, gave the third address. I feel it peculiarly fitting to be the first to introduce in retrospect
the re.miniscences of Sir Francis Galton's life, as it naturally falls to me to speak of him as a traveller, and his explorations will be seen in his case to have made the beginning of his scientific work in other directions; and inideed the stimulus which first prompted those studies which later led him far into other fields: so that, beginning as a geographical explorer, he became an explorer in the matheenatical method of statistics and in the virgin soil of what is becoming a 'Science'Eugenics.
To the Royal Geographical Society falls the honour of setting him in the way of his first enterprise, for when as a young man, Francis Galton desired to travel, it was to the Royal Geographical Society that he came for advice, and it was under its auspices that he made that -first journev for which he was awarded the Gold Medal of the Societv.
His geographical activities were not confined to exploration. He -gave much thought to the theory of travel, and he is probably best known to geographers for his little book, "The Art of Travel," which went through several editions, and which has helped and influenced many hundreds of travellers.
This book gives so miany details of what a traveller ought to know, that many have been frightened at the bare thought of undertaking a journey, if so much knowledge was required beforehand. I felt truly alarmed at the many regions of which he demanded some knowledge-information enough indeed to secure the collection of accurate data and to insure sound and exact observation-points on which he perseveringly insisted.
And yet in this book the true secret of travel is never mentioned, and in my own case, I had to discover it for myself. When going
across the great desert of Gobi I began to find an almost intole.rable

2 ICUGICN'ICS RIEVII.W
strain in the dailv supervision and urging forward of my carriers: I lit on the plan of putting myself in their hands and making them take me. Instead of daily rising at dawn. and going the camp round to set all in motion for the day's march, I called up my interpreters and leading men, and agreed with them for a definiite reward if we got to my goal at a certain date, with an agreed increase of amount for every day in advance of said date should we arrive earlier, and a similar fine for every day 's delav. From that moment I had done with all trouble. The camp was astir long before me, and I was aroused by my men and urged forward, while the nightly halt was cheerfully pushed to the farthest practicable point.
Most people will understand that a traveller must carrv the people of the country along with him. But the true secret of travel is to make the people of the country carrv him-to make them feel responsible for him--to make the success of the expedition their business. This knack Galton had. No mention is made of it in the book above referred to, and it was only in reading his other book describing his own journey, and there only in reading that unwritten part that runs between the lines, that I saw he knew the secret.
He started on his journey in Damaraland in South Africa when he was only twenty-eight. But he managed to attach good men to him. He got them to work whole-heartedly with him for the success of the expedition, with the result that he was able to carry out a piece of original exploration of great value, in spite of having to travel through very difficult country and in a territory inhabited by natives who were decidedly unfriendly.
He never made any other exploration. BuLt this was onlv the beginning of his long association with the Royal Geographical Society,
and his influepce in the discoveries of this century was far-reaching!.
He served for manv years on the Council of the Society. And it was this period which was the greatest period of African travel-the time of the great journeys of Livingstone, Stanlev, Burton, Speke and Grant: and here he interested himself wholeheartedly in promotingthese adventures. The weight of his influence was felt not only in the encouragement of great undertakings and in wise counsel as to their direction, but in his unfailing insistence on exact study. He constantly laid stress on the necessitv for exactness of measurement in collection of data and the value of observation with precision. His own inveterate habit of statistical activity is happily coupled with reriiniscences of the Society's Council Chamber in the following passage of his autobiography:
"Manv mental processes admit of being roughly measured. For instance, the degree to which people are bored, by counting the number of their Fidgets. I not infrequently tried this method at the meetings of the Royal Geographicai Society, for even there dull memoirs are occasionally read. A gallery in the meeting is supported by iron columns. The portion of the audience as seen fronm the platform who are bounded by two of these columyins, and who sit on two or three of the benches, are a convenient sample to deal with. They can be watched simultaneously. The number of movements in the group per miinute can be easily counted, and the average number per man calculated. I

GALTON CENTENARY ADDRESS.

8

have often amused myself with noticing the increase in the number as the audience becomes tired. The use of a watch attracts attention, so I reckon time by the number of my breathings, of which there are fifteen in a minute: they are not counted mentally, but are punctuated by, pressing with fifteen fingers successively. The counting is reserved for the fidgets. These observations should be confined to persons of
middle age. Children are rarely still while elderly philosophers will sometimes remain rigid for minutes together. " (Page 278.)
The width and depth of his interests show him to have been a man
*cast in a big mould. He is one of those who did most for Geography
in this country.

BY STR HENRY REw, K.C.B.
We meet to honour the memory of an eminent Victorian. It is true that Francis Galton outlived the Victorian era; it is true also that his alert minid was unfettered by environment and reached ever forward to new activities. But he possessed in a high degree one of the qualities which we associate witlh the menmory of great Victorians, that of many-
sidedness. II these specialist days versatility, especially in the pursulit
of science, is rare, and with that characteristic Francis Galton was extraor(dinarily endowed. Explorer, Geographer, Meteorologist,
Anthropologist, Biologist, Psychologist, Statistician, Eugenist--to all these titles he established an unquestionable right. He touched no
subject which he did not illumine, and those who are concerned in any one of the branches of humani activity denoted by these titles may regard him as their colleague.
To mei it falls to claim himi as a Statistician. Francis Galton's genius for statistics was a natural inheritance. His arandfather, Samuel John Galton, was "a scientific and statistical man of buisiness" who had a decidedly statistical bent and loved to arrange all kinds of data in parallel linies of corresponding lengths, frequently using colour for distinction. His father, Samuel Tertius Galton, was "eminently statistical by disposition" and made a sliding rule his constant companion. He published a chart, with explanatorv observations, showing the relation between the Bank of England notes in circulation, the rate of foreign exchanges and the price of gold and silver and of wheat. If confirmation were needed of his statistical aptitude I might find it in his sense of humour, a
quality which, contrary to popular belief, is freqluently associated with
a bent for statistics. When his ancestral home lost its charm of isolation and became unattractive as a residence he leased it to the proprietor-of a lunatic asvlum, explaining that no onc in his senses would live in it.
Francis Galton was elected a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society in 1860 on the proposal of Colonel E. H. Sykes, seconded by Mr. Janes Heywood. He served on the Council from 1869 to 1879, and as a Vice-President in 1875. In 188X3 he was elected an honorary member of the Interniational Statistical Institute, which had been formed in London in the previotus year. Those on whom this dis-
tinction was conferred,,were-to quote the rules- "persons who have

4, 9U'GF*ICS RIEVIEW.
distinguished thenmselves in the domain of statistics," and the nmmber' was strictly limited. The fact that Galton was one of the first to receive
it is evidence of the reputation as a Statistician he had established,. not only at home, but also abraod. His first contribution to the.pro-ceedings of the Statistical Society was in 187.8 (Vol. XXXVI). Itstitle was "The relative supplies from town and countrv families to the
population of fututre generations." He described it as an enquiry
in1 the relative fertility of the labouring classes of urban and rural populations, not as regards the number of children brought into the world, but as re.gards that portion of them who are destined to become the parents of the next generation. By the help of Dr. Farr, then President of the Society, he obtained extracts from the census returns relating to 1000 families of factory hands in Coventry and 100() families of agricultural labourers in rural parishes of Warwickshire. The results of his examination and analysis, set forth with great lucidity and terseness, led to the conclusion that " the rate of supply in towns to the next adult generation is only 77 per cent. of that in the country. In two generations the proportion falls to 59 per cent., that is the adult grand-children of artizan townsfolk are little more than half as numerous as those of the labouring people who live in healthy country distriets. "
In 188.5 the Statistical Society celebrated the completion of fifty years' work, and marked the occasion by the preparation of a special Jubilee volume of its Journal. Among the contributions to this volume were two short papers by Francis Galton. One called attention to a common method of calculating mean values in certain classes of observation-those referring to the stature of a population being cited as an illustration--in which a difference in the degrees of minuteness to which measurements are recorded led to error, and the other described a graphic method of dealing statistically with values which vary in one dimension.
In April, 1896, a paper was read before the Statistical Society by Mr. Udny Yule on the "History of Pauperism in England and Wales from 1850, treated by the method of frequenev curvres." The paper included a detailed explanation of the methods used. Galton took part in the discussion, and in response to a request made to him during the meeting, amplified his views in a written memorandum, which was published in the Journal. It dealt with the application of the method of percentiles, the principles of which he had explained in his work on "Natural Inheritance" (1889).
In the coining of words Galton has acquiired fame by his invention of the terms "antievelone" and "eugenics," but he exercised his verbal ingenuity in manv other cases. In statistics he introduced the terms "percentiles," "quartile," "decile," and some others. But he did much more than this, for he may be truly described as the parent of modern statistical nmethods.
In his statistical work Galton may be said to have inherited the
mantle of Quetelet, thouigh his attention was first drawn to the normal law of error by its use by William Spottiswoode in a geographical memoir. From references in "Hereditary Genius" (1869) it appears that he derived his knowledge of the properties of the curve from

GALTON CENTENARY ADDRESS.
Quetelet's "Letters." His first contribtution to the methods of statisties, foreshadowed in "Hereditary Genius, " was the method of grades, or percentiles. in a memoir published in 1875 entitle.l "Statistics by inter-comparison with remarks 'on the law of freq!ency of error."
In this he emphasised l)rincipally, indeed almost wholly, the applica-
tion of the method to unmeasured characters. His object was to describe a method which was "applicable to a multitude of objects
lying outside the present liniits of statistical enquiry"; the objects need
only be ranked in order as reaards the character considered; the middlemost (median) then indicates the average. those one-quarter distant from either end (quartiles) the divergency of the series. These particular objects need not. perhaps cannot, be measured as regards the character concerned, but if they can be pictured or described we obtain a summary picture or description of the series. The method was freely used in "Natural Inheritance" and the memoirs that preceded that work, and Galton's continued interest in it is shown in many papers subsequently published by him. Among these, in addition to the contribution to the Statistical Society's proceedings already attended to, mention mav be made of notes on "the median estimate" in the British Association Report for 1899, on a geometrical method of determining the median of a normal distribution from two centiles in "Nature," 1900, on the application of the median in voting, e.g. for damages to be awarded by a jurv or in guessing, in "Nature," 1907, and of the explanatory introduction to a table of Grades and Deviates of the Normal Curve calcuilated by Mr. Sheppard in Biometrika 1907. A memoir 'on the most suitable proportion between the values of first and second prizes" published by Biometrika 1909 is related to the same train of ideas. It may be noted that the conclusion arrived at was that if in a competition only two prizes are given, the first prize, in round numbers, should be three times the value of the second, whatever be the character of the competition and whatever the number of competitors.
In the Dictionary of National Biography I venture to think that something less than justice is done to Galton as a statistician. After reference to his statistical investigations, extending over 40 years,
to prove the hereditabilitv of gernius it is remarked:
"Such investigations necessarily brought him to face the fundamental principles of statistics and although his mathenmatical equipment was inadequate he obtained a remarkably clear insight
into the subject."
I submit that his position in regard to statistics is more adequately stated by Mr. Udny Yule, a Vice-Presidernt of the Royal Statistical Society, in the following passage from the obituary notice of Francis Galton which appeared in the Society's Jouiriial:
"The method of percentiles, while in many respects novel,
mav be regarded as a new application of a much older idea--the
idea at the root of the determination of the median and of the
"lprobable error." By his invention of the method of correla-
tion Galton opened an entirelv fresh field of work.- Certain -memoirs by earlier writers deal with problems which present some

6 0EUGIJCS REVIEW.
mathematical similarity to those with which he was concernedthe distribution of shots on a target or of stars in space-but to no one had it occurred to apply such methods to the serious study of statistical relations, nor to employ a single co-efficientt as a measure of the closeness of the relation between two varying
(luantities. Just as the method of percentiles arose from Galton's
work on the inheritance of genius, the method of correlation arose from his studies on the inheritance of stature and in anthropometry.''
It mav be truie that among the many objects of Galton's attention and regard the coy maiden Statistics was not his first love, and still less his only joy, but at least it may be said that she was his valued companion and oftentimes his guide in his many enterprises.
He was an indefatigable collector of statistical data. It has sometimes been suggested that a truie statistician is one who collects statistics without any object, or at any rate without regard for any result which may be obtained from them. Indeed, in the early days of the Statistical Society this was the orthodox faith, and the wheatsheaf, which is the Societv's badge,;was encircled by a band on which was
inscribed the proutd mo-tto aliiq erterondum. The Society has long
ago yielded to the modernists, and for nmanv years has done its own threshing. Galton certainlv was never onc of those who leave the threshing to others. He set. out upon his investigations with definite objects in view. He describes in his "Memories" one of his metho(ds of investigation. "Whenever," he writes, "I have occasion to classify the persons I meet into three classes, "good, meditum, bad," I use a needle mounted as a pricker wherewith to prick holes, unseen, in a piece of paper torn rudelv into a cross with a long leg. I use its upper end for 'good,' the cross-arm for 'medium,' the lower end for 'bad.' The prick holes keep distinct and are easily read off at leisure. The
object, place and date are written on the paper. I used this plan for
my beauty data, classifying the girls I passed in the streets or elsewhere as attractive, indifferent, repel lant."
The object in this case was to obtain materials for a "Beauty map" of the British Isles. but the operation might properly be termed the collection of statistical data.
But indeed, aptitude and affection for statistics were ingrained in him and formed a large, if not a )redominant, factor in his mental equipment. He acknowledges his debt to his progentiors for a considerable taste for science, statistics and poetry. The medical studies which occu)ied his earlier vouth led him to reflect on the deficiencies of medical statistics at that time. "Medical statistics" he observed, "Care the least suitable I know for refined comparisons, because the conditions that cannot be, or at all events are not, taken into account, are local, very influential and apt to differ greatly. It is, however, humiliating to find how much has failed to attract attention for want of even the ru(dest statistics."
I cannot refrain, in bringing to a close an allocution which is all too unworthy of its theme. from quoting from the "Memories" Galton's just explanation and vindication of the function of Statistics:-

GALTON CENTENARY ADDRESS.

'

"Confusion is often made between statistical and individual results. It sometimes seenis to be held seriously that if the
effect of a particular union cannot be accuratelv foretold, the
application of the rules of Eugenics is vain. This is not the case. -Statistics give us assurance concerning the fate of such or such a percentlaae of a large number of peo)le which, when translated into
other ternms is the probability of each of them being affected by it.
From the statesman's point of view, where lives are pawns in the game and personal favour is excluded, this information is suifficient. It tells how large a number of undesirables or desirables can be introduced or not into a population by such and such measures. Whether their names be A, B, or C, or else X, Y, or Z, is of no importance to the 'statistician'-a term that is more or less equivalent to that of 'Statesman'."
In remembering Francis Galton as a Statistician we render homage to his many-sidedness, and we glorify his name as a pioneer in the path of human progress. If the proper study of mankind is man his renown as the prince of students can never fade. In any ease, on behalf of the Royal Statistical Society and of all the human interests which it represents, I esteem it a high honour to be permitted to contribute a leaf of laurel to the crown of remembrance with which to-day we commemorate the work of Francis Galton.

By MA.TOR LEONARD DARWIN.
When walking in the streets of London we often see oval tablets over the porch or beside the doors of private houses. At the top of these tablets, and presumablv giving the most important item of information which they contain, the letters L.C.C. may frequently be noted. thus informing us that they were erected by the London County Council. Lower down on the tablet we are informed, if it is, for example, St. James's Square through which we happen to be walking, that the house we are passing was at one timie inhabited bv William Pitt or Mr. Gladstone. Now many others besides myself may in the past have wondered why no suich memorial had been placed on 42, Rutland Gate, the house so long inhabited bv Sir Francis Galfon. On malking enquiries from the London Countv Council. I was informed that that body make it a rule or practice not to erect a tablet on any house uintil twenty years after the death of the distinguished individual who had lived therein; this being to avoid hastv action difficult to prevent at a time when to hint that his merits had been grossly overestimated by the public would be an unpleasant duty. This seems to me to be an excellent self-denying ordinance; but it has, however, the unfortunate result that no such memorial can be erected at public expense at or before the date of the centenary of the birth of anyone who, like Sir Francis Galton, lived to be over 80 years of age. Buit as a -fact, suLch a memorial is now to be seen over the porch at '12, Rutland Gate, informing all passers-by that Sir Francis Galton, Explorer, Statistician. and the founder of Eugenics. lived there for fifty years. Although not erected by the municipality, I should like to say a word
or two as to how that tablet came to be p)laced where it is now to be

A .i:%GIMIS 1EVIMW.
se; not because, like the London County Council, I think that the matter is in itself of any importance whatever, but merely.because in this instance it does throw a side light on the character of the man to whose memory we are to-day doing honour.
Those here present who like myself were constant visitors at Rutland Gate-I see at least two-will all remember the little man, short in stature, with a strong foreign accent, who let one in at the door with a broad smile on his face. This was Giffi, Sir Francis's faithful Swiss Servant, who lived with him for 35 vears, and to whom he felt, I believe. more like a friend than a master. Last vear I received a letter from the late Mr. 0 Plant-Carcasson ,* telling me that he was the owner of 42, Rutland Gate, and that Giffi, who on the death of Sir Francis Galton had passed on into his Service, had died recently. He added that Giffi had on several occasions requested him to write to me about the erection of a tablet in Rutland Gate. and concluded bv stating that "I think I owe it to the dear old man "-that is, Giffi"to mention to you that I am quite agreeable to permit" its erection by the Eugenics Education Society. This letter set me in motion, and with the generouis aid of Mr. Plant-Carcasson, who had the inscription cut in marble in Italy, the tablet was erected by our Society last summer. You will notice when vou see it that it has not got the letters E.E.S. at the top to let the public know that it was erected by the Eugenics Education Scoiety; but if in any brief way it could have been indicated it would not now have been put up but for the wishes of Galton's faithful friend and servant Giffi, I for one should have been delighted to have seen that fact placed on record. Here we have a proof of the falsity of the old saving that no man is a hero to his own valet. It is far more true to say that the real worth of a good man is best known to those who serve him most constantly, and it is with this thought in my mind that I rejoice to be able to place on record this proof of the respect and affection which Sir Francis Galton inspired in his own househeld.
When looking at this tablet we are naturally led to speculate as to what will be the sentiments of the passers-by say two or three centuries hence when they read the name inscribed thereon. Those learned in the historv of either geographical exploration or statistical research will doubtless be reminded of somne of the facts which have been recalled to ouir minds to-night in such an interesting manner bv the
Presidents of the Royal Geographical an(d Statistical Societies. ISuch persons will, however, I fear, be comparatively few in number, unless
indeed the mental condition of the public will have by that time undergone a marvellous transformation! But what I should like now to know is whether the name of Galton will at that distant date arouse any thoughts whatever in the mind of the intelligent man in the street, that is of the educated public. This will depend on the way in which the history of the coming centuries unfolds itself in certain matters. The Eugenics Education Society is now striving to make the public pay serious attention to all problems connected with racial progress and racial decline; and if we, its members, hold erroneous views, it is to be hoped that our errors will soon be exposed, that our Societv will
Mr. Plant-Carcasson, I much regret to say, died this winter.

GALTONKCNTRNARY ADDRESS.

9.

quickly sink into a well merited oblivion, and that many others besides myself will be spared a great deal of tedious and thankless labourt But if we -are right, what then? If Galton's teachings remain unrefuted, and if his name will be unknown to the public centuries hence,
that will mean, so I feel sure, that no steps will have been taken to
prevent the racial deterioration which we now fear is in progress, and
that the degradation of our national characteristics will have become well marked. Europe will for a second time have entered the dark
ages, after a second decline and fall of a civilization in some ways comparable to that of ancient Rome. But if, on the centenary of Galton's birth we are in anv way to follow Galton's exarnple, we ought to-night at all events to take a determinatelv optimistic view of the future of eugenic reformn; and, taking that view, and assuming a steady progress in all measures tending to promote racial progress, then few passers-by at that distant date will not know that to Francis Galton ought to be attributed in no small measure the improvement in the morals, intellect and health of the nation which will then have become indisputable. His will have become one of the great names in history.
But how will this eugenic victory have been won? The most important step in advance will be taken when Eugernics becomes a factor in religion, as Galton clearly saw would have to be the case. Scientific truths are always very slowly but very surelv incorporated into all powerful religious systems, and this in spite of no small opposition. To maintain that the earth went round the sun was at one time held by devout Christians to be an offence worthy of death; whilst at present a belief in organic evolution is widely held in religious circles and from not a few pulpits the animal origin of man, is openly declared to be in no way antagonistic to religious thought. This indicates a great advance; but there is not the slightest chance of a halt being called at the point which we happen now to have reached. With an increased and more widespread knowledge of the laws of natural inheritance, further changes of opinion are inevitable. For examples the moral responsibility of parenits in regard to their children is recognized by all religious teachers; but this sense of responsibility will in future be so extended as to be held to cover, not only the care of all childrenl already born, but also the question whether in ea.h case it
was right that anyNr child at all should have been born. When this broader sense of parental responsibility is generally accepted and widely
inculcated as a religious duty, the eugenic victory will have been nearly won; for then it will become impossible to deny the moral necessity of utilizing and inducing others to utilize our knowledge of the lawvs of natural inheritance for the benefit of posterity. Changes in ouir ideas and social customs will come and uught to come; but our
desire for progress, especially in regard to al] sexual questions, ouaht
always To be tempered by a sane conservatism. It is in order to secure wise and steady progress in the future, and to prevent the Eugenic
movenment from ever being led into harmfil ways, that I am intensely anxious to seciire a widespread interest in these racial problems. To weigh well everv step before it is taken, whilst never standing quite still out of timidity, that is the policy I ami confident that Franicis Galton would have approved*

10 EIUGRNICS R.VECRW..
Moral ideals often need to be encouraged or enforced by law in order to bear their full fruiit; and here it is that the statesman has to play
his part. Now in my vision of the future I think I see thc popularly.
elected politician listening deferentially to the views confidently expressed bv the biological expert, and then, utterly regard less of the
votes of his constitutents, throwing all his energies into the promotion
of sane and slow working measuires designed to benefit his nation in the distant future. Perhaps I need not renmind VoIu that Iam speakling with premeditated optimism to-nightl When this happy state of things has arrived, manv politicians are likely to have the following quotatioin from Galton's writings inscribed in letters of gold where it will be constantly visible, and where it will by auto-suggestion so influence their sub-conscious selves they will be continually and unconsciously led to advocate a policy of Eugenic reforml "A democracy cannot endure unless it be conposed of able citizens; therefore it mulst
in self-defence withstand the free introduction of degenerate stock."*
No doubt the l)revention of the influx of inferior types by immigration from abroad will have been lessened or prevented loncg before my imaginary perfect politician makles his appearance on earth. And no doubt when he does appear he will recoanise that what Galton meant by the "introduction of degenerate stock" was rather the results which
must inevitably flow from "that liberty of propagating childreni which is now allowed to the undesirable classes. "t To prevent racial detereoratijn from this cause. and to give as much liberty as possible to the individual, will be the aims of our ideal statesman, aimns which will
not infreqtuently have to be adjusted to each other by a wise spirit of
compromi.se.
I have spoken of the necessity of taking an optinmistic view of the future of the eugenic movement well knowing that in this respect I have been a frequent sinrner. I am glad, therefore, of this opportunity of remind ing myself, and others at the same time, that in being hopeful we are certainly following the lead given to us by Galton; for without hope he could never have persevered for so many years in his advocac.y of Eugenic principles, seeing how little support he received. And amongst our hopes we must, therefore, include the hope that Galton was well endowed with the facuilty of rightly foretelling the fulture; a faculty which he would certainlv have held to be hereditarv, like all other mental qualities. As to that scientific benit of mind, possessed bv himseJf and by his cousin, Charles Darwin, he tracedi it back to their common grandfather, Erasmuts Darwin; and here we are tempted to enquire whether we can claim for Galton any natural prescience as springing from the same source. Erasmus Darwin was mainly kniown for Ills ''targid poetrv that had become a temporarv craze in'" his day,+~a craze which fills with astonishment all those who now attempt to read his poetry. Almost the only quotation from his works whic'h is ever inserted in modern anthologies seems to be included merely because of the remarkable prophecy which it contains. Before
*Merpoir8 of my Lfie. F. Galt3n, page 811.
tlbid, page 311. tIbid, page 85.

GALTON CENTENARY ADDRESS..

11

reading it, which I shall do without any family pride as to its poetic .stvle. may I remind you that it was written in the last decade of the Eighteenth Century, when Watt was making his first experiment with the object of obtaining rotarv motion from a steam engine, and when Stevenson, the pioneer of railway traffic, was yet a little boy. The lines run as follows:-
*Soon shall thy arm, unconquered steam! afar
Drag the slow barge, or drive the rapid car; Or on wide waving wings expanded hear The flying chariot through the field of air.
His forecast of the methods of propulsion now adopted by aeroplane designers was certainly incorrect; but all the same this quotation indicates a remarkable power of looking into the future, a power which we eugenists confidentlv maintain descended in full measure to the poet's grandsoil, Francis Galton.
In my UTtopia of two or three centuries hence, I have assumed the existence of a widespread and indisputable knowledge of the laws of natural inheritance. When these happy days arrive, the vear 1822
will ever after be regarded as one of the most memorable dates in the history of science; for in that year were born both Francis Galton and Gregor Mendel. Mendel's great work lies outside the scope of our considerations to-night; though I cannot help expressing in passing the keenest regret that my father never even heard his name, and that a knowledge of his discoveries came too late to Galton to enable hiim to utilize them with any great effect. The line of thought encouraged by Mendel's discoveries led to the formnation of many institutions at universities and elsewhere, where genetic research has been pursued mainly by means of direct experinmentation on animals and plants. And in this connection I may perhaps express the great satisfaction we eugenists feel at the hearty co-operation and support which the American geneticists attached to such institutions gave last year to the International Congress of Eugenics at New York; an encouraging sign which I hone will be noted by English geneticists. Galton's work has developed on somewhat different lines, in so far as the growths from the seed sown by these two great men can still be distinguished; for, as we have already heard, many of Galton's notable advances were connected with statistical enquiries. He founded the professorship of Eugenics at the University of London, thus enabling his friend Prof. Pearson with great ability to lay mathematical foundations on which much work is destined to be built in future. With the aid of all these institutions, our knowledge of the laws of natural inheritance had made enormous progress during this century.
There was, however, in my opinion, another marked characteristic of Galton's work to which I should especially like to call attention; namely that he always had before him some benefit to mankind as the
*See Botanic Garden, Vol. I. Canto 6. Mr. Wheler-Galton points out to me -tbat the next four lines are eqjually prophetic. They run as follow:
Fair crews triumphant leaning from above Shall wave their fluttering kerchiefs as they move, Or Warrior -bands alarm the gaping crowd And armies shrink beneath the shadowy cloud.

12 EIJUGENICS REIEWM.
.final goal of his endeavours. He.knew as well as anyone that jinwoxdr to build any scientific structure we should begin to work at the very foundations; but the human superstructure which these foundations miaht carry was never absent from his mind. He saw clearly that to win in the eugenic campaign,. a definite propaganda mu.st be started.and unremittinglv pursued; and it was doubtless with this thought in his mind that he became the Honorary President of our Society. In my Utopia well supported Eugenic Societies will have arisen in every populotus centre, where a wise and temperate eugenic policy will be steadily advocated; and it is probably only a President of an existing Eugenic Society who knows to the full how lamentablv we now fall short of that idea. Our Society struggled on somehow through the war and since the war; but it was often verv uphill work, and it is no use pretending that we should not greatly appreciate further encouragement and further support. We want more men and especially more scientific men to follow Galton's example and to "take Euigenics very seriously, feeling that its principles ought to become one of the dominant motives in a civilized nation, much as if it were one of its religious tenets." Then again we must have a perfectly clear idea of what we are striving for; and in this connection the words with which Galton's autobiography closes may well be quoted. "Natural selection rests upon excessive production and wholesale destruction; Eugenics on bringing no more individuals into the world than can be properly cared for,. and these only of the best stock." Here is the Eugenic programme in a nutshell; and to win in the long fight before us, we must press forward with the hope of benefiting posterity as our only reward, a posterity whose gratitude we may possibly win but whose voices we shall never hear. If that hope was reward enough for Galton, it should be reward enough for us also.

