THEE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE

By W. T. J. GUN, F.R.HIT.S., F.S.G.

HE expression " Caste " derived from the Indian word is particularly appro-
priate to the European Royal Families,
regard to their constant interes, which present the nearest Western
to the caste system in India. The
of such close alliances are obviously
y of study from the eugenic point of Wi oods in his Heredity in Royalty, sbed in I9IO, examined certain families great thoroughness, but others he
ely left out altogether, and he hardly ched the generations living at the -at which he wrote. e orgin of the Caste goes back far into
but for the present purpose it will
.ther possible nor desirable to begin than the eighteenth century, except ional reference. Taking the families
present European monarchs, and of representatives of those monarchies have lately comne to an end, we find an nearly every case the greater portion
eighteenth-century ancestors were ed in the old Germanic Empire and
to the numerous families which
allegiance to that Empire, termed the Roman Empire, up to i8o6. It would mistake however to regard them as
an the modern sense of the word.
was certainly their native language, hmany preferred to speak French, but nationality, as we now understand
i not then exist. Each potentate himself first and foremost as the
* of his own particular territory, and
y as a member of the Royal Caste.
yaty to the Empire was a very halfaffair. The Elector of Saxony, to
s~example, would find himself just as
or as little, at one with the King of
Britain or the King of France as with
sgof Prussia. He might well indeed
friendly to the King of France than
King of Prussia, being himself, like

the French ruler, a Catholic, while the
Prussian monarch was a Protestant. The main division indeed of those days, a
division which has persisted to a great extent to the present time, was that between
the Catholic and Protestant sections, as
these intermarried but seldom. Occasionally
a Protestant princess might marry a Catholic prince, but a Catholic princess was hardly
ever allowed by her Church to marry a Protestant prince. This policy of the Catholic Church has been of great advantage
to the Protestant section, the stocks in which have been markedly superior to those
in the Catholic. Later the families belonging to the Greek Church were similarly compelled to take brides from the Protestant section only, and for purposes of heredity
are practically at one with them. Actually
the descent of the Protestant section has been not so much German as Nordic; the members of that section present in the main
the physical characteristics classified as Nordic, and in their origin they may best be described as Central European Nordic. As such they have fitted remarkably well into such countries as Great Britain, Scandinavia and Holland. As far as this country is concerned the characteristics of the Protestant section correspond with remarkable closeness to those of the British aristocracy. On the other hand the members of this
section who found themselves in such coun-
tries as Russia, Roumania or Greece have been far less in tune with their surroundings -an important point, especially in connec-
tion with Russi-a. The Catholic section has much less Nordic
blood and necessarily inherits less of the
Nordic character. The Latin influence has
been very strong in this section, especially
among the Bourbons. Slav influences have
been very inconsiderable in the Caste, but
have come slightly more to the fore in recent times. In the Caste as a whole the

'9

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

proportion of Nordic to non-Nordic may be estimated as at least three to one.
FivE IMPORTANT CONNECTIONS
Among the ancestors of the present European Royal Families special attention should be paid to five connections grouped round a common ancestor in each case. These five connections may be termed the Bourbon-Hapsburg, Hesse-Darmstadt, Coburg, Danish and Beauharnais respectively.
Bourbon-Hapsburg
The most important common ancestors are Emperor Francis (I708-65) and his wife Empress Maria Theresa (I7I7-80). Among their descendants there have been an exceptional number of intermarriages, less numerous now however than formerly. The connection has always been most nrgidly Catholic and forms practically a caste within a caste; some of its members have a little Protestant descent, but none of the Protestant families have themselves any descent from this group, which as a whole has shown decidedly the least ability of any of these five connections. In the Spanish branch in particular, there was much licentiousness, but a certain obstinate stupidity was perhaps the prevailing characteristic, often coupled however with a kindly disposition. In one or two cases actual feeblemindedness appeared, but insanity was practically absent. There is much less Nordic blood in this group than in any of the others.
HIesse-Darmstadt
The common ancestors of this connection
are two little-known personages of the
Protestant section, Landgrave Louis VIII
of Hesse-Darmstadt (I691-1768) and his wife Charlotte of Hanau (1700-26). Among
their immediate descendants were several families of attractive sisters. These ladies married impartially into the Protestant and Catholic sections, and nearly the whole Royal Caste of the present time has some of
this Hesse-Dannstadt descent; our own

Royal Family however is a notable exce tion. There has been much ability in thi group, especially in the arts, and remarkabi good looks, but an erratic and neuroti strain has been much in evidence, with som insanity, though feeble-mindedness has bee quite absent. Women have been especiall prominent. The pedigrees (see Tables I t 5B) show the various lines of descent fro the common ancestors of individuals i whom a mixture of the above characteristi has been very apparent Emperor William of Germany; the Czar Alexander II an Alexander III of Russia ; the Czarina Alex andra, wife of Nicholas II; Crown Princ Rudolph of Austria; and Louis II of Bavari (that strange monarch of marked artisti tastes who was ultimately overtaken b insanity).
Coburg
The common ancestors were FranciDuke of Saxe-Coburg (I750-I806) and hi
wife Augusta of Reuss (1757-I831). This w
decidedly the ablest of the groups; it ha much intellectual power and artistic tastes frequently coupled however with great hardness of character. The descent was very Nordic and so were the characteristics. There was only one case of insanity, that o the Empress Charlotte of Mexico, du however to very special circumstances, an feeble-mindedness was conspicuously absent
Danish
This forms a less definite group than th others. It may be said to centre rounc Christian IX of Denmark (1818-1906) and
his wife Louise of Hesse-Cassel (18I17-98)
though the whole of the Danish connectior were descended inter alia from George II oi England (I683-I760) and his wife Caroline oi Anspach (I683-I737). In any case th general characteristics of the group were
shared to a great extent by such families a
the Wurtembergs and the Mecklenburgs.
and to a certain extent by the Guelphs. These characteristics were on the whole rather commonplace, and the group produce few men or women of any eminence. A goo deal of common sense was however evident

THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE
r.'-

23I

>:

~~~~~~SowH&mss3m-DAR STADT D3&sc]NTs

acestors: LusVILadgrave of Hesw-Dartmstadt x691-1768 and Charlofte of Hanu- I7 00-1726

4^--

.;~~~~~T~A~BLE I
~~~~~Three descents of WVilliam I, German Emperor, b. x859
Lan~~~~~dgrave Loui VIll

Tadgrave Louis IX

George V}lliam

Louise Grand Duchess of Saxe-Weimar

Wl1;RmIII of Prussi

Charles Frederick Grand IDuke of Saxe-Weiniar

M'im I German Emperor

- ~Augusta

Frederick I lOrman Emperor

'William II demnEmperor

Frederica Princess Charles of
Mecklenburg-Strelitz Louise Queen of Pru si 'William I Gen nam Emperor

w ~~~~~~~TABLE2
w nt o Crown PAnce Rudolph of Austria I857-Ic889. His mother, Eliabth, was most uinsa ble, but ally beautiful; he himself had much natural ability, but was very ill-balanced.
I.andgrave I1.o Villl.

TaiAr Loowis IX

Caroline Margravmie of Baden
.
elia-Prince Charles Loui of Baden
Caroline Queen of Bavan'a

-- Sphia, Archduchess Charles Louis

I,
Ludovicia, Duchess M

Francis Joseph Emperor of Austria=Elzbt

Rudolph, Crown Pneof AustriaL

in BavariLa

1

.

TABLE 3

I-c«r,ts of LouisllII 845-I886 and Otto, Kigs of Bavaria. Both ultmel became insane ; they were very

., III
d-~Land
Iii8 or I EQueen

Louis IX

dgrave ILouis VIII

George VIllia

Caroline ricess
of Hesse-Homburg

Augusta ilectress Frederica Princess Charles

of Bavari

of Mecklenburg-Strelitz

PricoW*llam of Prusi = Ana

Louis I King of Bavaia

harlotte luchess of
Saxe-Altenburg
aMheresa

m
Ai- II g9 of Bavai

Maria-M m0

King of Bavaria
-I&~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Otto Kin of Bavaria

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEWV
SOMs HzSsz-DARMSTADT Dxscz | TABLE ^
First three descents of Alexander III, Emperor of Rua. He and his brothers w all good looking, but instabili of character predomnated.
Landgrave Louis VIII
I
Landgrave L1ouis IX

Los I Gnd Duke of Hesse
Louis 1I Grand Duke of Hesse

Amelia, Princes Charles Lous of Baden = Wilhelmina
ll

Fred Queen of Prsia
Frederick WJilliam III King of PrusiaI I
~~~~~~Charlotte Empress of Russaa

Maria = Alexander II Emperor of Russia Alexander III Emperor of Russi

TABLE 4B
Three further descents of Aleder III Emperor of Russia, mkng six descents in all. Te(Landgrave Louis VIII

Prince Ge WeiViam

Caroline Marre of Baden

Frederica Pincess Charles of Mecklenburg-Strelitz
Louisa yueen of Prussia

1

Louia, Grand Duchess of Hesse
Louis1 II Grand
Duke of Hesse

= I

Prince Charles Louis of Baden
Wilhelm~i~n~a~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Charlotte kmperor of Russia

Louis III Grand Duke of Hesse I

Alexander II Emperor of Russia

Mara

Alexander III mperor of Russia

(in strking contrast to the Hesse-Darinstadt group) and many individuals were very popular. Insanity was not absent. This group was entirely Protestant and com-
pletely Nordic.
Beauharnais
The common ancestors were Claude de Beauharnais (I670-I749) and his wife Renee Hardineau. Owing entirely to the chance that Napoleon I married the widow of Alexandre de Beauharnais this French family of the lesser nobility is now extensively represented in the Royal Caste. The present rulers of Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Belgium and Roumana are among those who

have Beauharnais descent, the three former sharing it with the French bourgeois family of Bernadotte, the two latter with the similar French family of Murat. There was ability in all these families, and the fresh strains must have been of great eugenic worth.
Unoffcial" Descents
The Caste may have been, and probably has been, affected by certain purely unofficial descents, the consideration of which presents great difficulties but cannot be ignored. The following cases would affect a considerable number of descendants of note:

THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE

23

SOME HESSE-DARMSTADT DzSCENTS
TABLE 5A
r descents of andra Empress of Ru i1872-1918. Very hdsome, but highly neurotic.
k~~~~~~~~~adgrave Lonui VIII
Landgrave Loui IX

d-
ot Hess

Ameli Pricess Charles Louis of Baden

LD@uuksoIfI HGerasnd I Wilhelminna A Prince

Prince Charles William of Hesse-Darmstadt

Caroline cess of Hesse-Homburg

Frederica Queen
of Prussia m of Prussia

Elizabeth Louis {V Grand Duke of Hesse AAlexandra Empress of Ru

TABLE 5B r descents of Alexandra Empress of Russia, making six descents in all.
Landgrave Louis VIII

Ger WVilliam

Caroline Margravine of Baden

Grand Duchess of Hesse

Prince Charles Louis of Baden

Louis II Grand Duke of Hesse

T Wilhelmina

Prince Charles William of Hesse-Darmstadt

Louis IV Grand Duke of Hesse

Alexandra Empress of Russia

j The Emperor Paul of Russia was story otherwise is full of improbabilities,

certainly not the son of the Emperor especially with regard to dates, and cannot

but of some paramour of his mother, be accepted. There is probably more sub-

Amous; Empress Catherine. Having stance in the often repeated statement that

"-to Paul's most unpleasant character, Louis Philippe's father, Philippe Egalitd,

t eugenic advantages would seem to Duke of Orleans, was the son of a coachman ;

[been secured, though Peter had been his mother's conduct was notorious. This

beter than an imbecile. The actual might account for Louis Philippe's appear-

pwas no doubt a Russian, and the later ance and ways, and more especially for the

ifs had therefore rather more Slav fact that none of his children resembled him

than was officially apparent.

in these particulars. By their time the

t has been asserted that King Louis plebeian descent would have been getting

of France was a changeling. A rather remote, which would not have been

iplausible story was put forward by the case if Louis Philippe had himself been

Hewborough (an Italian married to an a complete changeling.

an, according to which it was she 3. The parentage of Albert, Prince Con-

really the Orleans baby. Colour was sort, the most interesting of these cases, will

pthleclaimby the fact of Louis Philippe's be considered later.

appearance, quite different to 4. There has never been any doubt that

of his brothers and sister. But the Francis, the husband and first cousin of

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Queen Isabella of Spain, was not the father of her children. Quite apart from the other circumstances, if the official descent were correct, the heredity of this family would have been so bad that scarcely one could well have escaped being feeble-minded. Not only were Francis and Isabella first cousins, but his parents were also first cousins, while hers were uncle and niece. From all but the finest stocks the result must have been disastrous, and the stocks in question were far from being among the best. Actually Queen Isabella's children were quite up to the average, the Infanta Eulalia rather above. It may be added that it is doubtful whether Isabella herself was the daughter of King Ferdinand VII. If not, only four of her children's sixteen quarterings would properly belong to the Royal Caste. This case is of course quite exceptional.
Intermarriages
I have taken particulars of the monarchs and heirs to monarchs, also the representatives of deposed monarchs, in respect of the relationship of their parents, covering the last I22 years-i.e. since the Napoleonic era. The total number examined is IO9, 56 in the Catholic and 53 in the Protestant section. Of the 56 in the Catholic, in I2 instances the parents were first cousins, in 23 they were second cousins or nearer (such as first once removed), and in the remaining 2I the parents were more distantly related. In the Protestant section, the parents were first cousins in 9 cases, second cousins or nearer in 14, and more distantly related in 30. Taken altogether, out of the 109, 53 had parents with at least a second cousin rela-
tionship, while the parents of 5I were more distantly related, occasionally not related at all. There is only one instance in the whole 109 of the offspring of double first cousinsnamely, the Emperor Ferdinand II of Austria and his brothers and sisters. This proved disastrous. Ferdinand and his next brother were feeble-minded and the others, of whom Marie Louise, second wife of Napoleon was one, were below the average. The joint stocks in this case were Hapsburg and Bourbon, neither brilliant and the latter

distinctly poor. The immediate ancestors of Ferdinand II of Naples, the infamous " Bomba," were also closely related; the parents were first cousins and one set of grandparents were also first cousins. Other cases of the offspring of first cousins, whom palpable defects occurred, were thos of the Crown Prince Rudolph of Austria, and the Archdukes Francis Ferdinand an
Otto of Austria. George V, King of Hanover,
also the child of first cousins, was blind, but otherwise of good capacity.
It will be observed that in the whole I19 cases mentioned there is only a slight preponderence of children of close relatives.
Consanguinity in Recent Years
In recent years there has been no such preponderance at all. The present monarchs and their heirs, and the representatives of the most important monarchs no longer in existence, France, Prussia, Austria, Russia and Spain, may be examined in greater' detail.
(a) Parents, first cousins: The King of Italy, Crown Prince of Norway, Grand Duke Vladimir of Russia, Duke of Guise (France), Count of Paris (France).
(b) Parents, second cousins: The King of Bulgaria, Crown Prince of Roumania, Grand Duke Cyril of Russia.
(c) Parents, second cousins once removed: King George VI.
(d) Parents, half second cousins: ExGerman Crown Prince.
(e) Parents, second cousins twice removed: Archduke Otto of Austria.
(f) Parents, double third cousins: The King of Roumania.
(g) Parents, not nearer than third cousins : Queen of the Netherlands, Princess Juliana, King of the Belgians,. Duke of Brabant,
King of Sweden, Crown Prince of Sweden,
Prince Gustavus of Sweden, King of Denmark, King of Norway, Crown Prince of Denmark, King of Greece, ex-German Emperor, Prince William of Prussia, exKing Alfonso, Prince of the Asturias, ex-King of Bulgaria.

THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE

25

(h) Parents not related: Princess Eliza- I8I7, which was quickly followed by the

leth, Prince of Piedmont, King of Jugo- births of two sons in i8i8 and I819 respec-

;lavia.

tively.

. It should be specially noted that in the The further legend of a Jewish paternity

enultimate group the parents were not for Prince Albert may have centred round

Pwpcssarily as near as third cousins.

Symborsky, but it is unlikely that a Jew

- In the cases of the King of Italy and the would at that period have been an A.D.C. or

qConnt of Paris, the paternal grandparents for the matter of that, a " von." In any

also first cousins, the paternal grand- case a Jewish appearance, at any rate as

ts of the King of Denmark and Norway evidenced by a prominent nose, occurred in

o were also maternal grandparents of the several members of the Coburg family. This

te King George V) were second cousins and might possibly have been due to an "un-

alf second cousins, and the Duke of official" Jewish descent in an earlier genera-

bant's maternal grandparents were first tion.

InS once removed.

From the point of view of heredity in

it will be seen that there is only a small per- general the official paternity is far from

te of very close relationships among the improbable. Prince Albert in many respects

iate ancestors of the present monarchs resembled his uncle Leopold I of Belgium.

the other persons forming the group Marked ability also appeared,among other

survey. The figures for parents are as descendants of his Coburg grandparents,

: first cousins 5, nearer than third which was probably mainly derived from

7, and not nearer than third cousins Francis Duke of Saxe-Coburg's mother,

Elizabeth of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel, a most

determined and energetic woman, whose

tage of the Prince Consort

family had shewn high intellectual qualities

ong the offspring of first cousins, the for several generations. This family, though

of Albert Prince Consort and Queen also belonging to the House of Guelph, was

a held an exceptionally high place in rather distantly related to the Brunswick-

of general capacity. It has been Luneberg family which came to England,

however whether this relationship and was altogether their superior in talents.

t cousins really existed, though such

have only comparatively recently Descent by Alternate Sexes

their way into print, notably in Mr. Although, as has been pointed out, the

ce Housman's play Victoria Regina. Prince Consort's descent on his father's side

doubts unquestionably arose mainly is quite in accordance with many of his

the fact that Prince Albert's mother, characteristics, there can be no doubt that

Duchess of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, he owed much to the maternal side, and in

|~ tl left her husband for a certain one particular respect his descent in that

m* t von Harstein, and was divorced. direction was specially notable.

ikwever was in 1826, seven years after It has often been remarked that charac-

| Abert's birth in 1819, at which date teristics are apt to descend from father to

stein, who was younger than the daughter and mother to son, constituting a

wold only have been fifteen years line of descent where the sex is changed in

KPreviously however she had unques- each generation. In most families it is

Sycarried on a liaison with one Max impossible to trace characteristics in this line

Syborsky, A.D.C. to the Duke, but for more than a very few generations. The

dily as early as I8I8 which would public position of the Royal Caste affords

yae been a year after her marriage in greater facilities for such study, and in the

case of the Prince Consort characteristics
Dth'nepaarreetnts" riseltahtaitonosfhitph"irtbeeenttwheecnousPirninocnecses can be traced in this line for many genera-
* th^rough a joint descent from Henry VII. tions. The annexed pedigree carries back

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The Ascent from Albert Prnce Consort by Alternate Sexes

Albert III the Wise, Duke of Bavaria 1447-1508 - -

Sabine 1492-1564=Ulric VI of Wurtemberg

Christopher Duke of Wurtemberg 1515-1568

- --

Eleanor 1552-3[6i8= Prince Joachim of Anhalt-Zerbst,

Prince Rudolph of Anhalt-Zerbst 1576-i621 - - -

-4 -

Dorothea x607-x634 = Prince Augustus of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel

Antony Ulric Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel 1633-1714 4- -

Elizabeth 1658-1729=Bernard Duke of Saxe-Meiningen

Antony Ulric Duke of Saxe-Meiningen x687-1763 -

-

Charlotte 175s-I827=Ernest Duke of Saxe-Gotha

Augustus Duke of Saxe-Gotha 1772-1822

--

Louisa I8oo- 831 = Ernest Duke of Saxe-Coburg

Albert Prince Consort of Great Britain 8iq-x86i

Memoir in A llgeme Dusch
Biographi
Nurnbp of pages allotted
--

-7

4

--

- -2

--

X

* Charlotte Duchess of Saxe-Gotha, a most accomplished woman, receives repeated mention in the biograph
of her husband.

this ascent to the fifteenth century, and it s Families of the present time in connectio

to be noted that the men in the alternate with their general lines of descent, but wi

generations receive in every case a memoir special reference to the groups already

in the AiUgmeine Deutsche Biographic, some indicated. It will be necessary to limit this

of considerable length. Now it might be survey to the families of monarchs and the

argued that a prince would always receive a representatives of monarchs.

memoir whatever his merits or demerits, but this is by no means the case; there were so British Line

many princes in the old Germanic Empire The general aspects of the heredity o

that of necessity only a small minonrty King Edward VII and his brothers an

receive a memoir. In Prince Albert's case sisters has been already noted. Assumiin

the men in the line in question were all the official parentage of the Prince Consort

above the average in general qualities and we find three strong lines, Coburg twice

frequently also in intellectual qualities, and Gotha, and one Guelph, rather weak.

markedly so in the cases of Antony Ulric of The marriage of King Edward to the daugh

Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel and Antony Ulric ter of King Christian IX of Denmar

of Saxe-Meminngen.

introduced the special characteristics of the

The Prince Consort was undoubtedly the Danish type, much less intellectual but

most intellectual member of the Royal much less hard than the Coburg. Kin

Caste of his time, and no similar descent of George V took far more after his mother

any of his royal contemporaries is equal to side than his father's, and his character was

his. That of Queen Victoria was very almost a replica of that of King Christian.

infenor indeed. Of her similar ancestors only The description of the grandfather in Th.

one of the men receives any mention in the Times obituary notice in 1906 might stan

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie, and then almost word for word for the grandson.

only to the extent of half a column.*

Princess Mary of Teck brought in freIh

factors. It is true that the Danish type again

DESCENT OF PRESENT RoYAL FAMILIES predominated on the side of her paternal a

It is now proposed to proceed to the Royal

grandfather, Wurtemberg, and on the side j of her mother, Guelph and Hesse-Cassel.,

* It is hoped on some future occasion to make a The mother herself, the popular Princess j

thorough investigation of the ascending lines by Mary of Cambridge, was decidedly of that

alternate sexes of other members of the Royal Caste, including all the more important representatives at the present time.

type; Queen Mary appears to have taken I more particularly after the maternal;

THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE

27

grandmother, Princess Augusta of Hesse- Victor Emmanuel's marriage with Princess

Cassel, a very stately and dignified lady. Helena of Montenegro has now however

In one direction however a totally different introduced a wholly different strain, for,

type of descent was introduced. The beauti- technically royal, she had actually no

ful Countess Claudine Rheday, who induced relationship to the Caste. This Slav descent

Prince Alexander of Wurtemberg to con- must necessarily bring in virility, but no

tract a morganatic marriage, sprang from the access of culture, and does not equal the new

Hungarian nobility of Transylvania. Her element now brought into our own Royal

sxteen quarterings have been worked out Family.

and belong without exception to this class,

with no previous connection with the Royal Belgian Line

Caste. The families in the quarterings were This has proved one of the strongest from

all Protestant, and occupied a position the eugenic point of view. The Coburg de-

ingularly analogous to that of the Anglo- scent of that very able man, King Leopold I,

Iish aristocracy. Their characteristics too has already been considered. On the side

were probably much the same, very tem- of his mother, Augusta of Reuss, remarkably

peramental, allied to a great deal of charm. little is known of characteristics; her

It is to be observed that though only one- ancestors, though belonging to families con-

eighth of the ancestry of Queen Mary's sons sidered Ebenbuirtig,* had little territorial

is thus Hungarian, the ascent by alternative power and remained obscure, possibly how-

sexes leads straight to those purely Magyar ever chiefly from want of opportunity.

nes. Their general descent is however Leopold's Orleans marriage introduced a

predominately of the Danish type, with this mixture of qualities. His son Leopold II

dash of Hungarian and a dash of Coburg. was perhaps the ablest monarch of the

With the marriage of King George VI we nineteenth century, at any rate among

come to a complete break with the Royal those born in the Caste, but he was utterly

Caste. Queen Elizabeth's descent is more- ruthless and altogether detestable. There

over by no means confined to landed were elements of harshness on both the

families; of her first eight quarterings, four Coburg and Orleans sides. More remarkable

belong to such families, while four do not. was Leopold's financial capacity, rare among

While the direct male line is Scottish the members of the Royal Caste. Some Jewish

remainder of the descent is mainly English, blood might well be responsible for part of

with the addition however of both Anglo- Leopold's character and may have been

Irish and French. The heredity of her derived, of course " unofficially," from the

aughters is most excellently varied.

side of his grandmother, Augusta of Reuss,

whose features were of a distinctly Jewish

Italian Line

type.

It has already been noted that inter-mar- With Leopold's nephew and successor,

ilaes have occurred too frequently among Albert, the worst sides of the descent

0the immediate ancestors of the present disappeared. From his mother King Albert

; Kling of Italy. Further back, the House inherited from both the Beauharnais and

*rC Savoy had married outside the Caste, Murat families and also from the Darm-

fbuit the later descent is mainly from the stadt. The latter group appears also in

--Bourbon - Hapsburg connection, on the the quarterings of the present King Leo-

tChole however on its best side. The Aosta pold III on the maternal side. He has

tb-nch, the best-known member of which descents from all the groups but the

~nIitywtas the Duke of the Abruzzi, the great
t,sporer and mountaineer, has shown greater

Of equal rank with the more importanlt royal
families for purposes of marriage alliances.

than the main line. The Duke's f An examination, however, of her immediate an-

>5other was a member of the Italian arms-
'~acyunconnected with the Caste. King

cestry affords no clue. In every direction they were among the elder members of large families whose births came closely together.

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Danish, and this last is inherited by his son, the Duke of Brabant, through his mother, the lamented Queen Astrid. The sixty-four quarterings of the Duke of Brabant are most varied, thirty-nine belong to the principal families of the Caste, ten to lesser, but Ebenbilrtig families, and thirteen to families quite outside the Caste. Thirtythree of the quarterings belong to the Catholic and thirty-one to the Protestant section.
The Dutch Line
Queen Wilhelmina comes almost entirely from families of the general Danish type, essentially Nordic and essentially Protestant. One descent from the Emperor Paul of Russia is the most striking divergence. Princess Juliana has a very similar type of descent on her father's side.
Swedish Line
The Swedes have had no reason to regret the call to their throne of Marshal Bernadotte, a man whose abilities were little inferior to those of Napoleon, and whose judgment was greatly supenor. His son, Oscar II, had no royal descent. He married a daughter of Eugene Beauharnais by a Bavarian princess, and the next generation had accordingly one quarter of such descent. Since then the main line has married continuously into the Caste, but the successive families, Nassau, Baden and Connaught (British) have all been above the average. The Baden family were specially accomplished, but they and others brought in much of the Darmstadt blood, which however has often proved by no means harmful
when miixed with strains essentially sound.
The present Crown Prince of Sweden is probably the most intellectual member of the Caste at the present time, and it is quite likely that much of his ability is due to the Darmstadt descent.
The Kings of Denmarkz and Norway
These monarchs, who are brothers, inherit the complete Danish type on their father's side, and include the Bernadotte-Beauharnais

descent on their mother's. The combination is thoroughly sound. The parents of th Crown Prince of Norway are first cousins but the joint stock, the Danish, is just th type in which a reduplication would be leas harmfal.
The Greek Line
King George of Greece is doubly relat to the present British Royal Family, sham with them the Coburg and Danish stocks Unlike them he has also, through Prussi and Russian lines, a great deal of Darmstadt descent. There has been distinct ability in this essentially Nordic family which settled in Greece, but which has been greatly handicapped by divergence of characteristics from those of their people.
Roumanian Line
King Carol I of Roumania, a man of first-. class ability, sprang from the Royal Caste. as to exactly one-hall of his descent, as to the other hal from the French non-royal families, Beauharnais and Murat. His much
weaker nephew and successor Ferdinand,
descended through his mother from the rather feeble Portuguese House of Braganza. Ferdinand's wife, Prncess Mare of Edinburgh, partly Coburg, but with sixlines of Darmstadt descent on the side of her mother, sister of Czar Alexander III, is a woman of great force of character and many. attractions, sharing however some of the defects of her first cousin the ex-Emperor William, whom in many respects she greatly resembles. Her family, the present King Carol of Roumania and his brothers and sisters, have a descent from all the groups but the Danish, a somewhat significant exception.
The King of Jugo-Slawia
His mother is a sister of King Carol II of Roumania, and on her side he inherits the
very varied descent just set out, while on that of his father his descent is purely Slav.
His position therefore resembles that of the Prince of Piedmont, with however distinctly greater ability on the non-Slav side.

THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE

29

Bulgarian Line

He married into a stock closely allied to

Ex-King Ferdinand of Bulgaria is one of the Danish, the characteristics of which

the strangest personalities of modern times. were conspicuous in the late Empress; and

Some of his characteristics can no doubt be the ex-Crown Prince's wife, Duchess Cecile

trced to the mixed Coburg and Orleans of Mecklenburg, a charming and popular

ancestry, almost precisely the same as that woman, has introduced into the Prussian

-of Leopold II of Belgium, but a pronounced line an heredity which should keep up its

arientalism in his character and still more in ability while lessening its eccentricities.

his appearance can hardly be so easily accounted for. His son Boris, the present

The Russian Line

xuler of Bulgaria, has undoubtedly taken The marriage of the half insane Emperor mre from the side of his mother, Louise of Paul into a much sounder Wurtemberg

Farna, of almost wholly Hapsburg-Bourbon stock partially saved the situation, but of

descent. From her he derives kindliness of his sons Alexander I was very unstable,

disposition, and seems to have been for- while Nicholas I was a brutal tyrant,

mtnate enough to escape the weaknesses of though by no means devoid of ability.

saat connection, inheriting in fact the best Instability was further increased by the

Xf both sides.

successive marriages of Nicholas and his son Alexander II into the Darmstadt connection.

.EPRESENTATIVES OF EXTINCT MONARCHIES Alexander III and his brothers and sisters

{ The five more important will be con- were typically Darmstadt, their good looks

ered, viz. the Prussian, Russian, Austrian, were proverbial, but their characters ranged

ish and French (Orleans) lines.

from the merely unstable to the completely

amoral. The mother of Nicholas II brought

sian Line

in the sensible Danish stock, and the last of

ex-Emperor William I was certainly the Czars might have developed differently

the greatest of recent European mon- had he not been so completely overshadowed

but was in many respects the most by his wife, with a Darmstadt descent in six

resting. The earlier type of ability of the different lines. Her unfortunate family had

Hohenzollern family did not survive this descent twelve times over.

generation of Frederick the Great. The present head of the Romanoffs,

es of Kings of Prussia into the Grand Duke Cyril, has the much sounder

stadt connection followed in three Mecklenburg descent on the side of his

ie generations, the third of which mother, the Grand Duchess Vladimir, a

-brought in a descent from the Emperor lady very prominent in the last Russian

of Russia. Finally the Emperor Court, alike for her determined character

s mother belonged to the Coburg and for her taste in dress. This taste was

xp. From such a descent versatility shared by her niece the Crown Princess

ht well appear and certainly did appear Cecile of Prussia, and inherited by her

tecase of the Emperor, who however granddaughter the Duchess of Kent.

bbtedly inherited more of the Darmlt and Russian capriciousness than of the The Austrian Line

sense; but his tactlessness quite The Empress Maria Theresa was herself

xly emanated from the side of his above the average, owing to the fact that

her, whose great abilities, like those of her mother belonged to the intellectual

father the Prince Consort, were much Brunswick-Wolfenbuttel family. Her own

Et by this unfortunate characteristic. It marriage into the House of Lorraine was not

be observed that the Emperor William disadvantageous, but unions with very poor

rswith his maternal grandfather the Bourbon stocks in the next two generations

Qble descent by alternate sexes which brought the main line to the verge of com-

¢ben set out.

plete degeneration. Princess Sophia of

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Bavaria, mother of the Emperor Francis Joseph, partially saved the situation, but the stock, with now a considerable admixture of Darmstadt blood, remained on the whole weak. Another Bourbon marage and one into the dull though worthy family of the Kings of Saxony, did little to retrieve the situation. The consort of the unfortunate Emperor Charles, the ex-Empress Zita, is by no means without ability, coupled however with many of the well-known failings of the Bourbons. Her son, Archduke Otto, claimant to the Austrian throne, has certainly the least satisfactory descent of any of the prominent members of the present Royal Caste. Of his sixty-four quarterings, thirtyfour, or just over one half, belong to either the Hapsburg or Bourbon families, and he is descended in no less than seven lines from the House of Hapsburg-Lorraine, founded by Emperor Francis and Empress Maria Theresa.
The Spanish Line
It has already been shown that King Alfonso XIII has in all probability much less Bourbon blood on his father's side than
appears officially. His mother belonged to the branch of the Hapsburgs which was founded by the famous general the Archduke Charles, and included nearly all the abler members of the Hapsburg family. From the wife of Archduke Charles, King Alfonso has
a descent from the House of Nassau of the Protestant section. There is a good deal of variety therefore in his ancestry and still more in that of his family, for Queen Ena, Coburg on her mother's side, derives on her father's partly from the main line of HesseDarmstadt and partly from the non-royal family of von Hauke, with mixed German and French descent and a connection with Poland. The curse of haemophilia has come upon some of Queen Enats children, who have otherwise a descent which should make for ability and which, like that of the Roumanian family, includes all the groups except the Danish.
French (Orleans) Line
The sons of King Louiis Phillipe were all

men of parts, rather remarkably so, con sidering that their mother belonged to th Neopolitan branch of the Bourbon, a decidedly poor stock. It was unfortuna for the family that its head, the Comte d Paris, was not the equal of any of his uncles thereby militating greatly against th chances of recovery of the French thron after the foundation of the Republic in I870. The present Comte de Paris, son of the Duke of Guise, the head of the house, spoken of as intelligent above the average, notwithstanding the close relationship of parents and paternal grandparents.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
The effect of intermarages on the Royal Caste of the present day has quite clearly
been less injurious than is often supposed,
except in a few extreme instanees. In any case such intermarriages are decreasing, and will in all probability further decrease in the future, till finally no Caste as such is left. At the moment, however, royalties, with few exceptions, are still mainly descended from royalties. In the Protestant section the stocks themselves have been sound enough to stand the intermarriages that have taken place; in the Catholic, once so injuriously affected, a certain improvement is now evident. There is no strain now as feeble s the Bourbon at its worst, but there is on the other hand none so able as the Coburg at its best. The Darmstadt influence is doubtless still strong in the Caste, but its worst features are certainly less in evidence.
On the whole the Danish type now predominates. As has been pointed out,
this type bears a marked resemblance to the English character, and a certain angliciza-
tion of the Caste has been much assisted by the now almost universal knowledge of the English language among its members. A
fitness for the part of constitutional monm
arch, as opposed to that of dictator, might well be a corollary to such anglicization.
Under such conditions a suitable candidate for any throne could certainly be found among the Caste, indeed some male line families could produce several, with a reservation however as to the difficulties

THE HEREDITY OF THE ROYAL CASTE

3I

gherent in the position of a Nordic monarch once adumbrated by Professor Schiller with

W ing over a non-Nordic nation.

regard to the peerage. Unfortunately it is

From the eugenic point of view the ideal only in very special circumstances that such

Alution would be selection on the system selection could be found possible.

1 SAFE

CHILDBIRTH

The Three Essentials

By KATHLEEN VAUGHAN, M.B.

"This work is the result of many years of painstaking observation and research.

The writer brings forward a number of facts of which no one can deny the

truth, of the very greatest importance in the study of the problem of maternal

mortality .. . We regard this volume as a most important contribution to the

study of this subject."

Medical World.

*z4 plates

Price 7s. 6d.

Postage 6d.

BAILLIERE, TINDALL & COX
7 and 8 Henrietta Street, London, W.C.2

1
1

Eugein Review, VoL n, o.1.

