D. V. GLASS
B.Sc.(Econ.), Ph.D., Professor of Sociology at the London School of Economics, University of London
C. D. DARLINGTON
M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc., F.R.S., Sherardian Professor of Botany in the University of Oxford
C. H. WADDINGTON
C.B.E., Sc.D., F.R.S., Buchanan Professor of Animal Genetics at the University of Edinburgh
The Control of Evolution in Man*

CHAIRMAN: Professor David Glass: You physical properties on the one hand, and on the

have no doubt already seen a good number of other hand all his mental characteristics, they

reports on the celebrations of the Darwin are all capable of being understood in the first

centenary. There has been at least one book instance by analogy with what we observe in

already and there will certainly be many more animals, and particularly by the study of human

books and articles on the subject.

heredity and human variation: natural selection,

Darwin himself surveyed the whole field of sexual selection, geographical isolation and all

evolution but since Darwin's day work has these ideas. And I think there are two very

proceeded in rather specific fields of evolution. important advances that genetics has made in

In particular, in the human field the whole study studying these ideas. They are the understanding

of human genetics is of relatively recent develop- of the importance for evolution of the systems of

ment and in the last twenty or thirty years great inbreeding and outbreeding that occur in plants

strides have been made in this study. I wonder and in animals and in man. In man they have

whether now we ought not to pay special been developed to an extraordinary extent, and

attention to the human aspect of evolution, in some respects a unique extent, by his own

whether we ought not to look at what have been intelligence. As he has grown more and more

the contributions in the last fifty years or so and intelligent he has become more and more

how far these would enable us to say something discriminating in his choice of his mate.

more about man and his evolution and his Glass: May I interrupt you here? How do you

prospects for the future than has been said- mean that he's become more discriminating-

in a general way, at least-by many people in the what kind of discrimination?

past. Darlington, I wonder whether you would Darlington: I mean that he has avoided breed-

mind beginning by saying something about man's ing with his relatively near neighbours by a

evolution-what is the history of man in genetic principle of what is called exogamy, outbreeding,

terms, and what are his prospects.

and at the same time, of course, he has developed

Professor C. D. Darlington: Well, I suppose a very fine discrimination in regard to the

the two important ideas that Darwin introduced avoidance of inbreeding: in nearly all civilized

to the world at large were the ideas that man and uncivilized societies he specifically avoids

can be considered as an animal and that his inbreeding with members of his own family.

peculiarly human characteristics have arisen And those two conditions are, on the grounds of

during his evolution from an animal. And that genetics, likely to be extraordinarily important

means, of course, that when we consider his in determining evolutionary processes.

Glass: Waddington, do you think these are

* The transcript of a discussion broadcast in the Third the two most important aspects?

Programme of the B.B.C. in January 1959. It is here reproduced by kind permission of the
Corporation and the three discussants.

Professor C. H. Waddington: I feel that in man we have to take into account the fact that

4-ER

25 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, April 1959, 51, 1.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

he has produced a second way of transmitting things from one generation to the next-he has
a second system, which is the system of social
teaching and learning-transmission through
books or writing or speaking. This is extremely
rapid compared to the biological system. And if one is thinking in terms of a few generations-
a century, or times of that order-my own feel-
ing is that this second human mechanism is the one which really decides things in the shortterm. It's based, I think, as Darlington has said, on a long-term biological animal background mechanism. But to a considerable extent the short-term overshadows the biological mechanism, in my view. So that in considering questions of breeding between different classes, between different races-if we're thinking in terms of only a hundred years-I believe the social factors are probably more important than the animal genetical ones.
Glass: I wonder-now, I'd like to take up this question with Darlington; it derives from what you said, Waddington-whether you don't
think that the social factors themselves have not in a sense revolutionized the biological factors in, say, the last hundred years. Haven't the social factors changed so much since, say, the middle of the nineteenth century that breeding habits are radically different now from what they were a hundred years ago.
Darlington: Oh, no, I absolutely disagree. I think the social discrimination in breeding is as strong now as it ever was; the genetic differentiation-the social classes in England-is probably increasing in intensity. It's increasing as a result of education, that is to say, ability is being drawn out of the working-class into the middle-classes, and out of the middle-classes into the governingclass, and those classes are becoming probably more differentiated than they ever have been before.
Glass: Do you agree with that, Waddington? Waddington: I should say it's questionable whether some classes or other are becoming more sharply distinguished. But if they are, they're not the same classes as were being distinguished a hundred years ago. Darlington: No. Evolution is taking place. Waddington: But evolution of the mechanism is also taking place. A hundred years ago, say, we

had classes defined in ways originally based on
the ownership of land or on the accumulation of capital. Now, from what you're saying yourself, if we have classes they are going to be much more determined by intellectual ability as
exhibited in school tests. Glass: More and more assortative mating-
for example, in terms of educational back-
ground
Waddington: Well it was assortative mating in the days when the landed gentry married the landed gentry. Now it may be assortative mating on the basis that people with a high I.Q. marry each other or the class structure will be based on the eleven-plus exam
Glass: The grammar-school boy marrying the
grammar-school girl.
Darlington: Oh, I'm glad you both agree there is assortative mating and that that is going to
have a very important effect because it means that society is in genetically differentiated groups -differentiated in their abilities so far as they can be tested by all the mechanisms of schools and universities
Waddington: May I burst in on ? Glass: Do. I can see that you don't really agree with this. Waddington: If it went on for tens of generations without any change it would have important effects on the biological level by selection of certain hereditary characters, and so on. It's very unlikely to go on-it's only gone on for two generations since we invented the I.Q. system or whatever it is, or not even that-one generation Glass: One half of one generation Waddington: It will have important effects, but not biological ones-it will have important effects through the sociological and not biological transmission of characters within families. Darlington: But do you think that the people who pass an examination and the people who don't pass it are genetically not to be distinguished? Glass: It would be a little difficult to be hard
and fast as to whether those who pass the eleven-plus exam or those who don't are biologically distinct. But quite apart from that, you seem to have forgotten, Professor Darlington, the whole question of the breaking up of terni-

26

THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

torial assortative mating, the fact that people Waddington: But the American system of class

in villages married each other a hundred years structure, which is as definite-[No]-or per-

ago and that now the area in which they choose haps not quite as definite as the British. They

a mate has been greatly increased. I've heard it pretend it isn't, but it's jolly nearly as definite

said, for example, by geneticists, that the as the British-has developed in two or three

motor-bicycle has been the greatest reshuffier generations in an immigrant population, pre-

of genes the world has ever known! This is not sumably of violently different heredity-but it's

the same assortative mating-this is a sort of been developed, not on a basis of hereditary

alternative to the earlier assortative mating. How differences, but of social differences.

does this fit in with your scheme?

Darlington: The American system of class

Darlington: Oh, I don't agree with you that differentiation has developed in precisely three

it's not assortative-I think it is still assortative: hundred and fifty years, as a result of genetic

I think that it's more assortative now than it differences amongst the people who arrived in

was unfortunately before because now we have America originally and have been arriving ever

less illegitimacy in this country than ever before, since.

and illegitimacy, of course, was the only means Glass: Well, I think there is a very wide margin

that existed for a real breakdown of assortative of disagreement-not only between you and me

mating in former days. It produced, of course, on this subject but between the three of us and

very important and valuable results. But all these many other people. I wonder whether, even so,

changes in the system of assortative mating are we could go on to another question, which is

themselves bound to give rise to genetic changes really very relevant to the discussion here-

-genetic changes in class structure, and evolu- namely: taking this general background of

tionary changes.

man's own evolution, how far in the past have

Waddington: Well, again you are thinking in there been deliberate efforts to control it? How

terms of tens of generations-they are bound, if far has man, with what intelligence he has, tried

they go on long enough, to give changes of a -either on the basis of actual knowledge or

biological nature, but if they go on quite a assumed knowledge-deliberately to alter breed-

short time-two or three generations-they may ing habits in order to create particular types of

give rise to changes, but they will be changes on human being or of human groups, Professor

the sociological level, due to the transmission of Darlington: what do you think?

family traditions in the family, and so on, rather Darlington: Well, I feel the most important

than of biological factors.

evidence we have is, first of all with regard to the

Glass: Yes, I should think that human breed- origin of caste in India, and secondly with regard

ing habits are habits which may change fairly to the origin of social structure in Greece and

radically over the short run-I mean, the fact, Rome in early historic times, and the evidence is,

for example, at the present time that the age of I believe, that in both these cases there has been

marriage is probably lower than it's been for the a strict rejection of breeding between what we

last three hundred years is an important should call social classes; this rejection of

sociological phenomenon, rather than a bio- breeding between social classes has of course,

logical

never been a hundred per cent effective, but as

Darlington: Not so important as the genetic far as it has been effective, it has kept those

one-it has no consequences, therefore, in classes in a character for-usually-three or

evolution. It's not a question, surely, of what four hundred years, sometimes, in the case of

will happen in two hundred years-we are dis- India, for much longer periods-kept them in a

cussing evolution. In a thousand years, the character which has given them a special social

British system of class structure of society has value. The distinction between the Brahmins,

developed-in thirty generations-and that is an for example, and other castes in India is very

evolutionary change which has happened in the obvious; the distinction between the patricians

past, and it is very likely, therefore, that similar and the plebs in Rome was very marked, and led

changes will happen in the future.

to the most bitter revolutions, and exactly the

27

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

same kind of distinctions have been described in more pnrmitive cultures. All those systems of
restrictions of mating have a profound evolutionary effect, because if we all mated at random it's perfectly certain, on our knowledge of animal genetics, that the results of breeding would be
quite different. Glass: Yes, but you yourself have said that
the system of breeding within the patrician
category in Rome gave rise to great unrest-it gave rise to revolutions; it gave rise to a re-
shuffling of the breeding systems. Aren't you
over-simplying the history of man in saying that these breeding systems have been so consistent
and so self-contained: Waddington, what do
you think about this claim? Waddington: In the majority of cases, I think
that these distinctions between classes that don't marry each other, or castes that don't marry each other, are probably primarily sociological and transmitted by sociology. If we all married
at random and if, in a caste system, everyone
married across the castes, of course the caste system would break down, because you would be bringing wives of one caste into a father's house of a different caste, and the family traditions would break down-and I think that that is much more generally important in the historical periods when we think in terms of one or two centuries. Again, I feel all the time we are talking about evolution in man and, for the biologist, evolution is something that takes place in fifty thousand years, or more.
Darlington: That's what I've been saying, you see-that you have no right to say that evolution proceeds slowly in man because it proceeds slowly in animals, and in my opinion it's quite the reverse-man's evolution is
proceeding rapidly Waddington: It's proceeding rapidly because
of the social mechanism, not because of the
biological mechanism. Glass: Yes, but if these breeding systems are
continuously interrupted-is there really any kind of class system which is completely endogamous or even so endogamous in the general sense as to be really an inbred system? Every class system, even an Estate system accepts people from below. It may take a
generation, but they do move up.

Darlington: It took far more than a generation
in Rome to introduce the Plebs.
Waddington: The old statement in Britain in the last century: it took three generations to make a gentleman, wasn't it? That was when we had a definite class system in which "gentleman"
was a definite position in the class structure. If
you could make a gentleman in three generations,
you could do very little genetically i4 three
generations. A cattle-breeder, with absolute
control over breeding, may be able to make some
difference in three generations, but in an ordinary society, where mating is by personal
choice, three generations is a negligible time genetically. If you've changed a lower-class into a gentleman in three generations-you've changed him socially, but not genetically.
Glass: Yes, and I think you exaggerate the
time-scale, for the great role of the public school in the nineteenth century was to make a
gentleman in one generation. Darlington: Yes, but a man couldn't get into
a public school-a working-man get into a public school-by saying "I wish to go into a public school"-he couldn't. His parents had to have money. His parents had therefore to have had a definite character distinct from the other people; other members of the class from which they arose. Now those classes, with those distinctions, I'm not saying that they were good or bad but they were different. They may have been
outstanding gangsters; undoubtedly some were, but they were different and-
Waddington: Different socially. Darlington: Genetically, certainly genetically. Glass: Well, that's exactly the problem-at this point we are unable to distinguish the relative weight of the genetic and the social components. Waddington: I think really I ought to say here that I have been acting a bit as the Devil's
Advocate on the social side and Darlington-I doubt whether he would admit to it-acting as the Devil's Advocate on the genetical side. My personal feeling is that really we don't know.
Darlington: You think you can make a silk purse out of a sow's ear then? With a little care?
Waddington: In man I think you can. Glass: I'm afraid we must leave that point here. We haven't really said a great deal about the deliberate control of man's evolution in the

28

THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

past. We haven't, for example, mentioned the have been talking about the unconsidered, the

kind of schemes of so-called race control which unanticipated consequences of various kinds

were put into force or which were attempted in of administrative action and of course this is

various regimes of the past, like those of the the kind of problem which occurs in every field.

Nazis, for example. But perhaps we'd better There are the unanticipated demographic con-

leave those topics now and reconsider our pre- sequences of social action and the unanticipated

sent situation. Here we are with all of this new social consequences of economic activity and so

work on human genetics. Knowing what we do on. But what about deliberate action? What do

know at the present time about human genetics, you think, Waddington, about our knowledge

what kind of basis do we have for making sug- of human genetics to-day? How far would it

gestions for measures of political policy-either enable us, for example, to make suggestions

positive measures, or negative measures, of about negative eugenics? How far should we

giving advice to people to discourage them or be justified scientifically in saying to given

introducing measures to encourage them to have prospective parents for example, that they should

children. Professor Darlington, what do you or they should not have families or they should

think?

not have large families? Are we in a position to

Darlington: Well, I don't think we know very give sound advice of that kind at the present

much more in human genetics than was known time?

by Galton seventy years ago when he first Waddington: I think in certain situations we

investigated these problems and I think what are. We know something about the heredity of

Galton would have said, and what I certainly am certain definite conditions, diabetes for instance.

prepared to say, is that every important adminis- We know something about the genetics of

trative act of governments affects the evolution- quite a number of human characters and I think

ary prospects of the people they govern; educa- we probably should provide a service by which

tion affects the migration of people from one parents could discover what the scientific

social class to another. It affects, in fact, the information is about any transmissible, biological

kind of social classes you have. The Welfare character they may have. My personal view is

State, by introducing medicine to the whole that it should then be entirely a matter for them

nation affects the survival of individuals who to decide what they do about the information,

would not otherwise survive and consequently whether this information is such that they

their propagation. Family allowances favour would prefer not to have children or whether in

one race against another and they also favour one spite of it they would rather go ahead and have

class against another and the way in which you them. But I really think this whole problem

administer them will therefore have evolution- ought to be considered, not in a parochial sense

ary effects. Imprisonment affects the reproductive of what we are doing to the population of Great

capacities of the people who are imprisoned, it Britain and its future. The major problems of the

effects the propagation of the criminal class for world to-day, it seems to me, are the problems

example, which is so noticeable at the present of the relations between races throughout the

day. The control of migration affects of course whole world. And the major genetical problem

the distribution of different kinds of people in facing mankind is the question of relations

different countries because migration is always between Africans, Indians, Chinese, Western

selective. That is to say the less intelligent people Europeans and so on. I feel that this problem

stay cultivating the worse land and the more should not be left out in any consideration of

intelligent people always move on to the better human evolution.

land. That kind of principle has been operating Glass: But if we do turn to that problem, if

in the past and it can be controlled and is con- we cease to be parochial, how much do we really

trolled now by different kinds of administrative know on that more general problem?

action. And finally of course you come to the Waddington: I'm afraid that's what I was

question of artificial insemination.

going to say, we know remarkably little.

Glass: May I just take up that point? You Darlington: I think we do know something

29

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

very important, we have every kind of evidence ences that you emphasized as existing in the past,

that all class structure in all civilized nations is do not play the same role as they did a hundred

the result of the mingling without inter-breeding years ago?

of genetically different groups, sometimes, of Darlington: Oh I think they do and I think

course, different races. And that it is by the they always have done. I would go much further

co-operation of different races which have now than I have done and say that the whole differ-

become different social classes that society has ence in temperamental character between the

in fact developed to its present level, so that I peoples, for example, of the New World, people

think there is in history, in the genetic history of of the United States in particular, and those of

mankind, the most powerful evidence in favour Europe is that you have the difference between

of the understanding of genetics and the genetic people who are genetically more restless, more

interpretation of our social history.

energetic, in some ways, than the people of

Waddington: There are many cases, certainly, Europe and it is to that they owe their peculiar

where one country, one nation, or one race, has character.

conquered another and set itself up as the Glass: I think that there will be a great deal of

aristocracy and the other nation has been a dispute on what you have said.

lower class and then when they started to co- Waddington: I should hesitate to accept it; I

operate the whole society has done very well. I feel that we probably don't know. There are so

don't think there is any evidence that the class many other factors that could account for this

that happens in one case to have been con- restlessness. For example when they got to

quered by the other is in any sense inferior. America it was an empty continent to all intents

Darlington: Why say inferior? The whole idea and purposes.

of inferiority it seems to me is a wrong notion to Glass: I'd go further than that. I'd say one of

bring into this discussion. We are not concerned the great unifying and distinguishing character-

with inferiority when we talk about the co- istics of the American population, whatever

operation in one society of different groups, each their origin, is their attitude to political

being necessary to the other.

philosophy-that in this attitude they forget their

Waddington: My saying that doesn't necess- origins and their historical experience and tend

arily mean that they are inherently inferior at all. to adopt a single-minded approach to the nature

Glass: I'd like to come back to one other point of society. This is one aspect-and not a

about which Darlington has talked. He was biological one-of creating a new society.

talking about the unanticipated consequences of However, apart from these historical develop-

administrative action-not only of explicitly ments and the unanticipated consequences of

administrative but also of general historical administrative action, what about direct action?

action-of uncontrolled historical action. I For example there's a great deal of discussion

wonder whether some of this action has quite the and a certain amount of recourse to artificial

same genetic consequences as it had say fifty insemination at the present time. How far is this

or a hundred or two hundred years ago. For likely to affect human evolution in the societies

example, you mentioned the selective aspects of which are practising it?

migration. Well, if you remember the inquiry Waddington: In my view it's not likely to

conducted by the Scottish Council for Research affect it very much. Artificial insemination can be

in Education, they found that although there very effective in changing the genetical situation

was evidence of selection in internal migration in a population if you use it in the sense of using

in Scotland, the I.Q. differences between people one sire for a large number of cows as in artificial

who moved and those who did not move were insemination of cattle. There you spread the

statistically very small. May it not be the case heredity of one selected male over a large

that when you build up to something more than number of females and you can make consider-

a rather parochial system, you are in fact able change in four, five or six generations. In

absorbing people so much in a wider society human situations, there is no particular reason

that some of the differences, the genetic differ- or even likelihood that a father in artificial

30

THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

insemination by donor will be genetically very the population seems to be growing much too

unlike the person the woman might have married fast in almost all countries. It's possible that we

in any case.

can keep pace with it, with our reproduction rate,

Glass: And it is most unlikely that there would by the full application of science to agriculture,

be one sire for many wives. This would in fact producing foodstuffs and so on. I think it's

be the great argument against using artificial unlikely we shall, in point of fact-I think we

insemination at all. I mean, on moral grounds shall have enormous population pressures-

wouldn't it?

famines, or half-famines, and so on. But I think

Darlington: Well, if you're assuming that one of the problems the world has certainly got

artificial insemination is going to be used on a to face is that, having got a respectable medical

very small scale, obviously, of course, artificial science and thus reduced the enormous wastage

insemination doesn't matter very much. But it of young children which has been characteristic

could be used on a large scale. It might be used of the whole of human history up to the present,

on a large scale and the important thing is to we have got to take some compensating steps to

discover from artificial insemination what its keep human reproduction in balance with the

own results are likely to be. It so happens that much reduced infantile mortality. That's where,

artificial insemination is the only method of I think, measures controlling human repro-

breeding in man which corresponds with the duction are going to be urgently called for, and

method of experimental breeding in animals. they will have evolutionary consequences.

That is to say that you can know the results- Glass: But these might well be general

in the terms of large families-of the breeding of measures-one might well argue that, in general,

a particular individual and it's going to be a very it's undesirable for anybody to have, say, more

unfortunate thing if artificial insemination is than three children, because on the average this

carried out by people who don't understand is all that the world can take in future.

human genetics, and don't record, and don't Darlington: I should say it's very undesirable

make available for anyone who does understand that some people should have three children!

human genetics, the results of their operations: Glass: Well that is the basic question, you see.

artificial insemination, if it is secret, could be most There have been societies-like Nazi Germany,

deleterious.

for example-which have said that there are

Glass: What you're arguing is that, whatever certain categories of people whose further

else is done, there should be statistical records. breeding should be discouraged-not only dis-

These records would not identify an individual couraged in a mild sense, but discouraged in a

or the progeny of a particular father, but they very positive sense, by sterilization, for example.

would be statistical and genetic records which Darlington: Well, sterilization is practised

would enable us to see what happens as a result now on a large scale in the United States and

of particular types of breeding.

Denmark and other countries, sterilization of the

Darlington: Yes, certainly.

mentally deficient, and I think that one cannot

Waddington: Yes, I think that it is certainly a doubt that the population of the lunatic asylums

potential source of a great deal of information is greatly reduced by that restriction on

about the human biological make-up, which it multiplication.

would be a great pity to lose.

Waddington: A higher proportion of the

Glass: Are there any other forms of deliberate American population is in lunatic asylums than

control of evolution which you think are any other population we know of.

relevant, but which, for example, might not be Glass: Yes. I'm just wondering, d'you see-

accepted by the kind of society in which we live, the mental defectives sterilized may, in many

or to which we aspire?

cases, in other societies be those whom you would

Waddington: I think the great problem in this keep in institutions, who therefore couldn't breed

connection is the problem of the numbers of to any significant extent. I'm not sure whether

human beings in the world. I think there are too that type of sterilization is really effective.

many people in this country, and I think that Darlington: I should not have thought that

3'

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

was true in Denmark. I don't think their system
is very different from ours.
Waddington: No, the point I was trying to make was that, if you are talking about legis-
lative measures concerned with human reproduction, which measures are going to be difficult for a democratic society to understand and accept, I think they are going to be called for in relation to the pressure of population much
more than by any attempt to direct reproduction into one channel or another. I think that there is
going to be a pressure for the overall quantity of reproduction, which is going to call for steps which will be very difficult for people to-swallow.
Glass: But this is non-selective? Waddington: I feel, as Darlington pointed out, that anything that is done will be done by some general administrative mechanism. This will, in fact, be selective, but it may be done not for selective purposes-for example, say you changed the system of family allowances and cut them off
after two children or did something else to try to reduce the total number of children, this would have selective consequences though it was done
with an unselective aim in view. Darlington: I suggest that the important thing
is that the Government should understand the selective effects that their administrative acts
are likely to have, of which they are at present entirely unaware. Whether they have any intentions in that direction it's impossible to dis-
cover. Glass: I'm sure that they could be made more
aware, or they could become more aware than
they are at present. But are the experts so much more aware of the unanticipated consequences of administrative action that they could give firm guiding lines to Governments?
Waddington: You're looking.at me, and I should say that the experts are not at all confident as to what the unanticipated consequences would be. I think we are confident that there will be some but we can only give guesses
of what they will be. You spoke of the great
advances of human genetics in Darwin's day, but you were really being rather optimistic: it's a branch of science which is remarkably little supported-there's very little work in it actually, compared to its potential importance, and I think that until we have very much further knowledge

about it, we are really hardly at all in a position to give anything firm in the way of estimates of what consequences are likely to happen. But I
should like to make one further, I think rather optimistic, point. In the study of animal evolution, where we are definitely dealing with genetic transmission and not social transmission, a lot of work recently has emphasized the extreme resistance of animal populations to
evolutionary change. Admittedly they do evolve,
but they do it jolly slowly, and anything you do to an animal population to change its hereditary make-up-you're likely to find it does something on its own to annul what you've tried to do.
They have a great self-balancing property: you select all the parents which have got such and such a character-you find only about a quarter of their children will have the character, and the
thing goes back to the norm.
Darlington: And the reason why human evolution is so much more rapid and so much
more dangerous, and also so much more hopeful than animal evolution is, of course, that man is infinitely more diverse. Even within this one country of England, you have more human varia-
tion than you have in any species that you would call a species of any animal. And so the possibilities of selection and selective propagation within men are vastly greater, and they are going to be vastly more rapid than they can be in any animal species.
Glass: But, at the same time-aren't you
anxious to encourage the persistence of variation and adaptability in man?
Waddington: Oh yes-very much so. But this
point of Darlington's-it may have something in it-I think it has, but it has also a caveatI mean, to you and me all sheep look alike, but I know a chap who is a sheep breeder, and he could look at a flock of a couple of hundred and recognize them all by their faces-by their first names. To some extent, the reason we think the
human population so diverse, is that we're adjusted to spotting the differences. If you look at a whole population, say, offruit fiies, you can't tell Tom, Dick or Harry apart.
Glass: Would it be fair to say, in summing up the position, that although there have been advances since the days of Darwin, the advances have been of a kind which perhaps make some of

32

THE CONTROL OF EVOLUTION IN MAN

us rather more cautious than the people of ence this hundred years has made is this. When

Darwin's period would be, in that we're rather Darwin first wrote about it he was propounding

more aware of the problems which haven't the revolutionary idea that you could consider

been solved and the questions which need to be the future of man in terms of his genetic evolu-

answered than would have been the case a tion, his evolution as an animal of a very

hundred years ago. There are many relevant lines peculiar kind. I should say, within this hundred

of work which have opened up-work which years we have realized that was absolutely right

may have quite significant general social implica- -this is a way in which the future of man has

tions in the future, but we just haven't got far got to be considered. We have entirely accepted

enough at the moment to give really firm answers Darwin's opening the door, and though we

to some of the questions which we believe are haven't got very far through the door yet,

likely to be very important in the future.

we do realize that it does open on to an enormous

Darlington: I think one could say a great deal field of the most fundamental scientific know-

more. Darwin, of course, said very little about ledge that man can have, because it is the scientific

these things. He restricted his remarks on the knowledge about his own future.

future of the human race to two pages, I think, Glass: Yes, I agree with that, but I should like

at the end of the Descent of Man. It was Galton to add a caveat from the sociological side. I

who talked so much about the future. But I believe think that we are only beginning to understand

we can go now a great deal further than Galton those aspects of the environment which are

did. Although we don't know much more that is relevant to the study of heredity, and I'm think-

helpful in human heredity, we do know more, for ing of this particularly in relation to what

example, about identical twins than Galton did. Darlington said about identical twins. We're

He invented the study of identical twins, and only just beginning to understand the complexity

we can say with much greater confidence than he of environmental differences between individuals

could that the conclusions he reached were right and groups. There is along way for social research

-that heredity was over-poweringly important. togobeforeitcanmakearealcontributiontowards

Glass: Would you agree about that, Wad- genetic research, and I don't think that without

dington?

the double combination of genetics and social

Waddington: Well I should say the real differ- research we can give firm answers in either field.

33

