EUGENICS AND THE DOCTRINE OF THE SUPER-MAN.'
By PROFESSOR J. A. LINDSAY, M.D., F.R.C.P.
WAR is a great educator. It brings us into close relations of friendship or hostility with other nations. It places the leading personalities-military, political, literary, scientific, artisticof friends or foes in a fierce light of publicity. It compels us to take account of alien modes of thought, of convictions, beliefs, prejudices, of which we were formerly in larger or smaller part ignorant. It compels us to re-think many of our cherished opinions which we were prone to regard as first principles, incapable of challenge and calling for no defence. And, upon the whole, this is a gain. It tends to enlarge our vision, to soften our prejudices, to mitigate our self-sufficiency, to moderate that insularity of mind which has so often, and not quite causelessly, been charged against us as one of the foremost of our national failings. Greater mutual knowledge amongst the nations is on every ground to be desired, not only for present advantage but as tending to bring nearer that broad humanitarianism of which some of us even in this dark hour have not entirely lost hope.
Of the men whom the war has thrust upon the public eye of Europe an important place belongs to Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche, though it is fifteen years since the grave closed upon his troubled career. He has been supposed to be in large part responsible for the present temper of the German people, for their megalomania, their exaltation of force, their idealisation of war, their ruthlessness, cruelty and contempt for the softer and more sympathetic virtues. This view is a mixture of true and false. Nietzsche was no lover of Germany or of Germans. He prided himself upon his Polish ancestry and was a Slav in temperament as well as in race. He despised the German culture of his day. He abhorred Prussian militarism. He
'A lecture delivered before the Eugenics Education Society, on October 7th, 1915, at the Grafton Galleries, London.

248 EUGENICS REVIEW.
aspired to be reckoned a good European, and in sympathy and modes of thought was thoroughly cosmopolitan and as little as possible national. He regarded patriotism as a disease. Napoleon, as the supreme Super-Man of the modern world, was one of his chief heroes. Nietzsche as the fugleman of modern Prussianism is, in fact, ridiculously out of place. Yet it is impossible to deny that his philosophy has influenced the modern German mentality, or that his ethical ideas have supplied some of the fuel for Treitschke and Bernhardi. His insistance upon the robust and martial virtues; his contempt for sympathy and self-sacrifice; his worship of strength, power, efficiency; his exaltation of war as a thing good in itself, apart from causes or results; his condonation of cruelty, his contention that suffering must be inflicted as tending to the highest endsthese are ideas which have found a congenial soil in the country of the Great Elector and Frederick the Great, of Bismarck and Moltke, of Treitschke and Bernhardi. A great genius scatters his ideas lavishly and does not always foresee where they will find root. When Nietzsche says-Werdet hart; every great act is a crime; the greatness of a man is to be measured by his capacity to inflict suffering; all creators are hard; a good war sanctifies every cause; no force superior to force; we seem to hear the first rumblings of that moral cataclysm which has desolated Europe and horrified the world.
Before we can understand and adequately appraise Nietzsche's famous Doctrine of the Super-Man it will be necessary to take account of his general philosophical position. Perhaps the feature of his teaching which has most impressed the modern world is his doctrine of the " transvaluation of all values "-metaphysical, moral, scientific, artistic. He held that the ideas of time, space, and causality have no reality in themselves, that they represent only the truth for humanity under certain conditions, that they are simply beneficial to humanity in the struggle for existence. In morals he held that the ideal should be one of strength, mastery, command, efficiency, while he regarded the ideals of meekness, patience, forgiveness, non-resistance to aggression as marked by "a profound psychological corruption," as a counsel of cowardice,

EUGENICS AND THE DOCTRINE OF THE SUPER-MAN.

249

and essentially a " slave morality." Not happiness but power, not justice but efficiency, not sympathy but self-realisationsuch in the Nietzschean scheme would be the principles of conduct. Science he condemns as holding up an ideal of wealth, material comfort, and intellectual mediocrity. Art, according to Nietzsche, is the great stimulant of life. It rests essentially upon suffering, which is the real spring of artistic creation. Art teaches us to stand without fear before the terrible and the mysterious. Suffering, cruelty, pain, tears, are necessary to art, are elements in the great edifice of beauty, to create which is the chief end of existence. Our aim should be to heighten vitality, to enjoy life in all its fulness, to develop the robust virtues, and to wage relentless war against spiritual anaemia, against neurasthenia, against pessimism. " What is good ? " he asks, " not contentment but more power; not peace at any price but war; not virtue but efficiency." Whatever enhances the feeling of power is to be approved. "The weak and the ill-constituted shall perish: first principle of our charity. And people will help them to do so. Sympathy thwarts on the whole the law of development, which is the law of selection." The true morality is the morality of an aristocracy of health and power. Man is to be regenerated by the production of the Uber-Mensch, the Super-Man, the genius-leader, ruler, thinker, philosopher-who will command and govern. He will point the way to an ever-expanding vision of life in its fulness and beauty. He will be ruthless and unpitying because hardness is necessary to him who would lead. He will inflict suffering because suffering is the root of much that is precious, of strength of character, of artistic creation. He will be a member of an aristocracy of health, energy and talent, an aristocracy to which only those will be admitted who are the creators of values which humanity worships, and each member shall gain admittance to this charmed circle only by deeds of daring and prowess, physical or intellectual. Nietzsche's ideal of life is the integral life, the life which manifests itself freely and without hindrance, the life which realises all the possibilities contained in it, the life which gives itself freely, which creates and beautifies the world by its power of artistic creation. His

250 EUGENICS REVIEW.
" immoralism " consists in the audacious contention that morality is to be approved only if it can be shown to be more useful to life than inmmorality. He wages war upon the Categorical Imperative, the Sermon on the Mount, democracy, socialism, pessimism, and in general upon all the ideals of modern civilisation. He regards those ideals as anamic and decadent, the sapless fruit of democracy, nihilism, weariness, neuropathy. He would have re-echoed the words-
"'Tis life of which our nerves are scant 'Tis life and fuller life we want."
Asceticism, repression of natural instincts, self-sacrifice, pity for the weak and the unfortunate, he regarded as disease, as notes of the religion of slaves, not of the religion of masters and rulers. He held that we must raise ourselves above both optimism and pessimism to a higher state in which the antinomy between the two is resolved. He maintained that we must learn to contemplate suffering with serenity because suffering and pain are indispensable to the creation of beauty. He maintained that the pain and suffering which are the accompaniment of the world-process are the material out of which beauty and art are created. Nietzsche is an artist, and he is an artist who sees life as a manifestation of beauty, as synonymous with the Will to Power. These conceptions presuppose the existence of an elite who alone can create those conditions which render life beautiful, fruitful and strong. The vitality of this elite can
be maintained only on condition that it is rendered hard, and it is to be rendered hard by the sight of suffering. Suffering, pain, cruelty, tears, are to be regarded not as evils in themselves but as essential elements in the edifice of beauty and truth which is the mission of man, and especially of the Over-Man, to erect. The modern democratic State, according to Nietzsche, has for its ideal a dull, characterless, ineffective mediocrity. It aims at the suppression of the exceptionally strong, and of the exceptionally gifted. It is the enemy of everything that is exceptional, powerful, extraordinary, independent. The greatest happiness of the greatest number-its favourite maxim-is a profound fallacv. Not the greatest happiness of the greatest number; not regard for the masses of common people who can

EUGENICS AND THE DOCTRINE OF THE SUPER-MAN.

251

contribute nothing to the well-being and progress of the race; but the development of an intellectual and moral elite is the proper social ideal. The anarchist is equally at fault. He would reduce all ranks to the same common level, he would abolish distinctions of merit and efficiency, he would reduce leadership and command to a minimum. His objects, if accomplished, would sterilise humanity.
The keynote to most of Nietzsche's thought is to be found in the affirmation that that which tends to increase vitality and to strengthen and beautify life is alone good. There is no such thing as " good in itself." The standard by which all things must be judged is their utility to life at a given moment and in given conditions. The ideal of science is " well-being," " happiness," "charity," "pacificism." It glorifies the material, offers a mediocre culture, and exercises a levelling and democratising influence. Life is not for the pursuit of comfort, ease, happiness, nor even for the advancement of knowledge. It is for struggle, for combat, for self-realisation. Too much solicitude about morals is condemned as likely to hinder rather than to promote real vitality. We are to " live dangerously," to ignore mere personal aims and feelings, to remember how little the individual weighs in comparison with the ceaseless and relentless Cosmic Process. " What is necessary," says Nietzsche, " is to know how to command and how to obey without cringing; to be able to stand in the ranks and yet to be ready at any moment to assume command; to prefer danger to safety; to be able not to weigh in the balance that which is permitted and that which is forbidden; to be a greater foe of skilfulness, of meanness, and of parasitism than of evil. What is the lesson which one learns in such a school of discipline? To obey and to command."
Nietzsche contemplates a new religion, a religion of beauty and of the enthusiastic affirmation of life. He regards Christianity, the democratic movement, Schopenhauerian pessimism and Wagnerian romanticism, as so many manifestations of decadence and a weakening of vitality.
It is not within the compass of this address to attempt any systematic evaluation of the Nietzschean philosophy. I shall

252 EUGENICS REVIEW.
content myself with a few general observations and then pass on to deal in more detail with his Doctrine of the Super-Manhis essentially aristocratic ideal of life.
It is often affirmed that Nietzsche's philosoplhy is the fine flower and fruitage, the necessary and legitimate corollary of the doctrine of Evolution, of the principle of Natural Selection. His doctrine of the rule of the strong and the efficient, his emphasis on force, his contempt for the weak and for the humbler spiritual virtues may be represented as simply involved in the law of the Survival of the Fittest. But this is a profound mistake. The " fittest " must not be confounded with the strongest. Evolution must take account not only of physical, but also of spiritual development. The sympathetic virtuespity, mercy, altruism-have survival value. Pure egoism, either in the nation, the tribe or the individual, is ultimately a source of weakness. Mutual help is found in the animal kingdom, and is the special hall-mark of man. The puny and sickly child, which a ruthless philosophy, arguing on purely biological lines, would cast to the dogs and to the kites, may become a great poet, a great discoverer or a great philosopher-witness Pope, Newton, Pascal. Physical fitness is often dissociated from intellectual, spiritual or moral eminence. Julius Caesar and Mahomet were epileptics. Rousseau was a nervous degenerate. Comte was insane. Schumann, Nietzsche and Guy de Maupassant were general paralytics. Chopin, Rachel, Heine, Keats, Shelley, Schiller, Spinoza, Descartes, Mozart, E. B. Browning, J. S. Mill and R. L. Stevenson were phthisical. Pascal was a neurasthenic. This list might be expanded indefinitely. A large proportion of the most gifted men and women-the intellectual and moral flower of the racehave had a fragile physique. Natural selection must take account of these facts. The apotheosis of force, the exaltation of strength requires important limitations. It is at best only a half-truth.
Nietzsche's " immoralism," his " transvaluation " of moral values seems open to a similar criticism. It may be that undue emphasis has been placed upon the softer virtues: sympathy, pity, charity, self-sacrifice, and that the virtues of courage,

EUGENICS AND THE DOCTRINE OF THE SUPER-MAN.

253

energy, self-reliance, self-realisation have been too lightly esteemed. If this be so, the Nietzschean ethic may be of value as a reminder that what may be called the heathen virtues must not be lost sight of in a civilisation more or less permeated by Christianity. But Nietzsche does not seem to have appreciated the fact that this moral code is the fruit of a vast human experience. It is a code which allows a large place to those virtues which Nietzsche contemptuously casts aside as a "slave morality."
Another obvious criticism of the Nietzschean ethic is that it is essentially a gospel for the strong. It offers little hope and little consolation to the weak, the ailing, the unfortunate. It forgets that even a Super-Man will be " sometimes sick and sorry." The great religions of the world have with considerable unanimity recognised that man is a sufferer, that sorrow is closely intertwined with the web and the woof of human life, that mankind, dimly groping its way in a difficult world, looks for guidance, help and consolation.
In appraising the Nietzschean philsophy with its insistence upon strength, vitality, self-realisation, we must take account of the personal equation. During a large part of his active life Nietzsche was a semi-invalid, a prey to neuralgia and insomnia, threatened with blindness, dependent upon drugs, wandering from place to place in the vain pursuit of health, constantly confronted by the menacing spectre of insanity. His insistence upon the " affirmation of life," upon the need to make life strong, full and beautiful may have been, at least in part, the secret, subconscious reaction of one to whom life had yielded little. His emphasis upon the part played by suffering in the development of character and in the stimulation of creative effort may have been a secret striving for self-consolation, the back-wash of self-pity. " It is the school of suffering, of intense suffering," he insists, " that has created every great thing which humanity has produced "-surely a very questionable proposition. We are far here from the serenity and repose of the best Greek or mediaeval art, from the friezes of the Parthenon or the stanze of the Vatican. Suffering does not necessarily strengthen, stimulate, develop or create. It may have precisely

254 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the opposite effect. It may enfeeble and sterilise. All depends upon the sufferer. When Herbert Spencer says that " Happiness is the best of tonics," he puts truthfully the alternative point of view. Nietzsche's thought is coloured by his tortured body, and while often brilliant and profound, it is too seldom temperate and sane. His bow never unbends, his voice too often rises to a scream, his furnace is always at white heat. He has nothing of Goethe's toleration, large humanity, and Olympian calm. He is a " young man in a hurry "-in a hurry to make himself heard before he is engulfed in the night of insanity. This gives a pathos to his writings which the sternest critic can scarcely ignore. The central doctrine of Nietzschethe necessity for strength, energy, leadership, self-assertion, efficiency-is not a heresy but a half-truth. When he asks"How much of the evil of the world is due to weakness rather than to sinfulness? " he puts a searching question which demands a serious answer. " Be strong " is the chief message of this powerful thinker, prematurely lamed by physical disease. We agree, but we are offended to find linked to this irreproachable injunction an apparent indifference to the rights of the weak. Yet Nietzsche, who was far from being a consistent thinker, could say in one place-" The great aim of our endeavour should be to spread justice and love in the world."
There seems to be an essential antinomy in his thought, an irreconcilable antithesis between his dreams of the ennoblement of man by strength, energy and self-realisation, and his scorn of some of the most indispensable of virtues. He does not seem to have reflected sufficiently on what is to us a self-evident truth, viz., that civilisation rests ultimately upon justice, and that justice involves the recognition of the rights of minorities, liberty of conscience, freedom of speech, and protection for the weak. The rule of the strong may seem an attractive prospect, but we have no guarantee that the strong shall also be the wise and the good.
Nietzsche's views on sympathy seemn a good example of thoroughly false psychology. Sympathv, he insists, does not help him to whom it is proffered, but drags him who proffers it to the level of the sufferer, thus adding to the number of those

EUGENICS AND THE DOCTRINE OF THE SUPER-MAN.

255

who are miserable. Surely, this is an almost exact reversal of the truth. Sympathy soothes, consoles and strengthens the receiver, while it quickens the sensibilities and the social sympathies of the giver.
Let us now turn to deal in greater detail with the Doctrine of the Super-Man, to which allusion has already been made. It is one of Nietzsche's most fundamental thoughts and its eugenic affinities and implications are obvious. According to this doctrine, the aim of our endeavours, the ultimate justifications of humanity, the new "wherefore? " is to be found in the development of a superior race, a new and higher type of
humanity, physically, intellectually and morally-a type as far
above the man of to-day as he is above the ape. This is the Uber-Mensch, the Super-Man. The Super-Man is to exhibit the qualities of bodily strength and beauty, courage, skill, daring, prowess alike in the field of action and in that of thought. He will be ruthless and cruel, if necessary, and will not shrink either from inflicting or enduring suffering. He will be the foe of asceticism, democracy, mediocrity and degeneracy. He will command and lead. He will regard war as a good in itself, as a necessary tonic for humanity. He will prize willpower, self-assertion, independence, self-confidence. He will judge moral questions not from any theoretical standpoint, but simply in so far as they tend to promote or retard a full vitality, a complete realisation of life. He will enforce and submit to a stern discipline. He will have the capacity of sticking to his guns. He will despise the life of repose, contemplation and mere speculation. He will be essentially an actor, a creator-a creator of values by which humanity will profit-but an actor, and a creator either in the field of physical or intellectual energy. As types of the over-Man, we are invited to regard Prometheus, Pericles, Alexander, Caesar, Macchiavelli, Cesare Borgia, Shakespeare, Goethe, Napoleon, Cecil Rhodes-a sufficiently motley group.
This Doctrine of the Over-Man pervades Nietzsche's works, but in no place does he subject it to scientific analysis or justify it by scientific proof. He writes like a prophet and not like a man of science. He sees visions; he hears voices. He is

256 EUGENICS REVIEW.
oracular, rhetorical, dithyrambic-anything but scientific. It hardly seems to occur to him that the development of the OverMan-assuming that such development is possible-must be at bottom a biological question. Here we touch the most fundamental defect in Nietzsche's philosophy-his ignorance of biology-a defect which becomes glaring when he deals with racial, eugenic or genetic questions. His training was literary and philosophical. He held for some years the professorship of classical philology at Basel. There is no evidence that he ever gave serious attention to biology, or that in any department of science he was more than an amateur. He never seriously propounds the question-how is the Uber-Mensch, the Super-Man, to be evolved ? We are told that he is to be strong, hard, efficient, cruel if necessary; that he is to be moulded in the school of suffering and discipline; that he is to lead, command and seek full self-realisation, and so on. These matters are all purely psychological. We get no glimpse of the biological basis upon which all genetic problems must ultimately rest. Yet Nietzsche did recognise the importance of breeding. In one place he says: " The only nobility is that of birth and blood . . . wherever people speak of the 'aristocracy of intellect' reasons are generally not lacking for concealing something. . . Intellect alone does not ennoble; on the contrary, something is always needed to ennoble intellect. What, then, is needed ?Blood." Yet, I think, the student of Nietzsche will search his works in vain for any systematic discussion of the UberMensch from the point of view of biology.
The Doctrine of the Super-Man raises one of the most important, also one of the most difficult and obscure of all problems. What is the probable future of mankind from the biological point of view? Has the human race reached a stage of arrest as regards the physical organism, or are changes still in operation, and can we find any landmarks to suggest to us the further line of development? It has been affirmed on high authority that since the Neolithic Age man has been a fixed type. Certain important changes have undoubtedly taken place since man was differentiated from his simian ancestors, though we may not be able to date them even approximately. Our

EUGENICS AND THE DOCTRINE OF THE SUPER-MAN.

257

ancestors were at one time better protected than we are against the inclemencies of the weather by a natural covering of hair. Their hearing was much more acute than ours, and they retained the power of moving the pinna of the ear so as to collect sounds by the operation of muscles which are rudimentary and practically useless in modern man. Their sense
of smell, probably intensified by Jacobson's organ, was more highly developed than now. Their visual organs, provided with a third eyelid and various muscles, now obsolete, were much more efficient than ours. The structure of their larynx was such as to give the voice greater strength than we possess. Their canine and molar teeth were more powerful than ours and less subject to decay. Their appendix vermiformis, whose aberrations give so much employment to modern surgery, was functionally more efficient than ours. Wiedersheim, in his work Der Bau des Menschen, reckons more than a hundred organs or parts of organs in the human body which are undergoing retrogressive changes. These changes take place in obedience to the general law of Adaptation to Environment. The modern man, thanks to an environment of civilisation, is not dependent upon acuteness of hearing, strength of vision, or delicacy of scent for obtaining a livelihood or securing survival and posterity. These qualities, indispensable to the lower animals and important to savage man, have almost wholly lost their survival value. On the other hand, man has gained in size and complexity of brain. Less robust physically than his ancestors, modern man far surpasses them in his ability to bend the forces of Nature to his will. He not only holds the lower animal creation in subjection, but he takes the winds into his service, harnesses the rivers, and makes the lightning do his bidding. Physical strength has become less important than mental efficiency.
The history of the cerebral and mental development of man is too large a subject to be adequately considered in the present address. We can hardly doubt that man's headship of the animal world has been the result of superior development of brain. The gap between the highest ape and the lowest man in point of size and complexity of brain is a wide one, and we should naturally look to geology to afford evidence of progres-

258 EUGENICS REVIEW.
sive development. That evidence is forthcoming, but some of the facts are at first hand somewhat startling. The brain of Cr6 Magnon man, who existed many thousands of years before the historic period, had a capacity of from 1,590 to I,7I5 C.C., considerably greater than the average of the modern European, but this race seems to occupy an exceptional position amongst palkeolithic peoples. Galton held, probably truly, that the average intellect of the Athenian of the Periclean age was considerably in excess of our own. To this contention we may reply that the freeman of Athens at the period in question was a member of a select and limited class, numbering not more than 20,000, and resting upon a basis of slavery. That the general intellectual level of the Greek race as a whole was higher than that of modern Europe is improbable.
The general drift of these reflections does not lend much weight to the contention that the man of the future will be a Super-Man, excelling our contemporaries in beauty and strength. Probability seems rather to point in the opposite direction. Our modern warriors, who are now engaged in the greatest of wars, probably are not superior in quickness of eye or strength of thews to Achilles and Hector. Their superiority is a question of weapons not of muscle. Man has developed, and is likely to continue to develop, not in strength and beauty, not in stature and physique, not in bone and muscle, but rather in mental capacity, in dexterity of hand, and in articulate
speech. Nietzsche's vision of the Over-Man, splendid in body and in mind, becomes in the light of the teaching of biology a somewhat unreal phantom, an aspiration likely to fail of fulfilment.
The Doctrine of the Super-Man raises another question of great interest, the perennial controversy between the aristocratic and the democratic ideal. In the great affairs of life, are we to look for light and guidance to a few leading minds or to the general concensus of opinion of average men and average women? Shall we give our allegiance to the Super-Man of Nietzsche, the Heaven-sent Hero of Fichte, the Hero of Carlyle, or to the ballot-box? Is public opinion really the opinion of the public, or at bottom only the reflection of the convictions

EUGENICS AND THE DOCTRINE OF THE SUPER-MAN.

259

of a few superior minds? Does the statesman lead or only reflect the mind of the nation ? Does he steer the State-coach,
or only, like the carriage-dog, run in front and bark while another really guides? This is one of the oldest of controversies; and while the democratic ideal has made great progress in the modern world, the issue still remains open. Nietzsche's Doctrine of the Super-Man is, of course, a statement of the aristocratic position in its most extreme form. His contempt for the average man, and, painful to add, for the average woman, was profound. He kept his admiration for the aristocratic virtues-self-mastery, capacity for command, love of danger and of responsibility, personal dignity, endurance, fortitude, courage. These are good things, indispensable elements of character, which even in a democratic age we should do well to cherish. The democratic ideal implies three things-viz., First, that the impulses of men are, upon the whole, good. Secondly, that the masses of men can be trusted to know their own true interests. Thirdly, that the masses may be trusted to select the proper means to secure those interests. It is obvious that all these postulates may be, and as a matter of fact, have been questioned. Perhaps the strongest argument in favour of democracy is the contention that no class can be trusted to legislate for other classes. Lord Acton says: " The danger is not that a particular class is unfit to govern. Every class is unfit to govern. The law of liberty tends to abolish the reign of race over race, of faith over faith, of class over class." And in another place he says: " Almost all that has been done for the good of the people has been done since the rich lost the monopoly of power." The democratic ideal affirms that liberty is more important than authority; that the capacity for self-
government in the State, just as self-control in the individual, must be acquired and can be acquired only by practice. A wise education recognises the autonomy of the individual, and it is contended that a wise constitution will recognise the autonomy of the people. It is pointed out that there have been occasions when the general sense of the people proved a true guide in a great national emergency. Thus, during the great American civil war the masses in this country were for the North, while

260 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the classes, influenced by considerations which were quite intelligible, but which history is unable to justify, were for the South.
The counter argument may be thus stated: In many important fields of activity we should never think of merely counting heads. If it were a question of the merits of a great picture, a great sculpture, or a great poem, no one would propose to put the issue to a mass vote. The expert decides and the mass of men follow his lead. Many of the greatest thinkers and philosophers have distrusted and repudiated democracy. Socrates, living during one of the most brilliant periods of Athenian democracy, condemned the constitution of Athens on the ground that, while in all other fields the weight of authority rested with specialised knowledge and mature experience, in politics decisions of the most vital importance were at the mercy of the uninstructed multitude. Plato and Aristotle were probably of the same opinion. The long hereditary habit of command which is inherent in aristocracy is a factor which a wise philosophy will not be disposed to ignore. Art, education, and culture in general have owed much in the past to princes and prelates, and it is not yet certain that they will tend to flourish in the atmosphere of modern democracy. There is a passage in a letter of Charles Eliot Norton to a friend which is interesting in this connection. " No present age," he writes, " no actual age, was ever good, I fancy, for idealists like you and me. In Europe I could not but feel with pain the ill wrought by the progress of democracy-the destruction of old shrines, the disregard of beauty, the decline of personal distinction, the falling off in manners. Here (America) as we have less to lose, we have less to regret, and the spread of comfort, the superb and unexampled spectacle of fifty millions of human beings living at peace and in plenty, compensates in a certain measure for the absence of high culture, of generous ideals and of imaginative life."
It is not my object to suggest any verdict amongst these conflicting contentions. The question is very complex, and much depends upon time, place and circumstance. Democracy has been, upon the whole, a failure in South America, and,

EUGENICS AND THE DOCTRINE OF THE SUPER-MAN.

26I

again upon the whole, a success in North America. The capacity of the people to think for themselves and to govern themselves is a variable quantity. The success of democracy is largely dependent upon the degree of insight which the people show in the choice of the leaders and governors to whom they give their confidence. Anatole France says truly-" If aristocracies can live for a long time upon precepts, maxims and usages, democracies exist only by useful knowledge, the practice of the arts, and the application of the sciences." Modern democracy is upon its trial. Much depends upon how it will emerge from the fiery ordeal of the present war. Whether it will prove to promote or impair national solidarity and national efficiency will be the final test. The Nietzschean philosophy is bound up with the success of aristocracy.
I take it, then, that the Doctrine of the Super-Man is not likely to promote the cause of Eugenics. The production of genius, if we limit that term to supreme achievement, is never likely to come within the range of biology. The genius is a rare variation, a mutation, arising we know not how, we know not where. That the greatest dramatic genius of humanity should have arisen in an obscure Warwickshire village of quite undistinguished parents; that America's greatest statesman should have been the son of a ne'er-do-well backwoodsman; are facts upon which biology and genetics can throw no light. We welcome genius as a rare flower, but we know little of the seed or of the soil. It is quite otherwise, however, with talent and general mental efficiency. These run conspicuously in families, and may, we can hope, be cultivated by judicious mating.
The work of Eugenics, in the present immature condition of the science, will probably for some time be exercised mainly negatively, i.e., in the endeavour to remove or mitigate certain elements which tend to corrupt the human stock. It will show the way whereby the incidence of insanity, epilepsy, feeblemindedness, hysteria, and neurasthenia may be lessened. It will lend its aid in the fight which is now being successfully waged against tuberculosis. It will help to stem the terrible evils of venereal disease. These are aims which are both of vast importance and quite within our competence. Those who

262 EUGENICS REVIEW.
affirm that our ignorance of heredity is so profound that our present duty is research and not action overstate their case. We know enough to make a beginning in a department of philanthropic activity which has been too long neglected, and which, as Bateson says, is " destined to become one of the chief pre-occupations of thinking men."

