REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS

409

Leaeh, R. A., Barrister-at-Law (with an introduction and annotations by).

The Mental Deficiency Bill. London. The Local Government

Press, 1912; price 6d. net.

THIS little pamphlet is a reprint of the Mental Deficiency Bill, as intro.

duced by the Government, in a convenient form, and the copious annota-

tions and references to such reports and existing statutes as bear upon

the different clauses will probably be found of use by official and other.

persons concerned with the mentally defective. In our opinion it is

marred by the introduction, which not only reveals a curiously medieval

state of mind in regard to scientific and social progress, decidedly out

of place in a lawyer, but which also suggests that Mr. Leach's practical

experiences of aments is somewhat limited. As an example we may

quote his statement that " the greater misery to mental defectives is to be

under detention in an institution away from their homes." We wonder

how many superintendents of institutions would endorse this view. Again

he says, " if there be any hurt in the Bill, the labouring classes are the

classes that would be hurt most." He is evidently unaware of the almost

daily requests made by members of the labouring class to have their

unfortunate children admitted into homes which do not now exist, and

most people who know will consider that the labouring class is not going

to be hurt, but to be helped most.

A. F. TREDGOLD.

Pearson, KARL, F.R.S. Eugenics and Public Health. (Questions of the Day and of the Fray, No. 6.) London, 1912. Dulau and Co.; pp. 34; price is.

Pearson, KARL, F.R.S. Social Problems: Their Treatment, Past

Present, and Future. (Date of publication and price as above.5

(I.) Is a reprint of Professor Pearson's address delivered at the York

Congress of the Royal Sanitary Institute this summer. Attention is

directed to the necessity of caution in interpreting the evidence relied

upon by medical officers of health; some instances of defective reasoning

are examined, and one or two aspects of infant mortality are discusse.

Professor Pearson, in the course of a criticism of the paper by Dr. R.

J. Ewart, recently published in this review, uses the phrase, " I cite from

the statement of a medical officer of health published by the London

Eugenics Education Society, a society which professes to help forward

the cause of Eugenics " (p. 13). It is perhaps desirable to remark that,

although the publication of a paper in this review indicates that the

editorial committee believe the paper to contain matter of interest to

students of eugenics, no responsibility is or can be assumed by the council

of the society for the correctness of the conclusions expressed or the

validity of the data used.

(2.) Contains the substance of a lecture delivered at the Galton Labora-

tory in M\Iarch, and once more emphasises the difficulty of interpreting

the semi-official statistics which are now accumulating at a rapid rate

and are generally thought to prove the all-sufficiency of environmental

reforms in ameliorating racial and social defects.

M. G.

Pearson, KARL, F. R. S. Tuberculosis, Heredity and Environment.
(Eugenics Laboratory Lecture Series, VIII.) Dulau and Co.; pp. 46; price is.
Pearson, KARL, F.R.S. Darwinism, Medical Progress and Eugenics. (Eugenics Laboratory Lecture Series, IX.) Dulau and Co.; pp. 29, with seven plates; price is.
(i.) The first of these lectures is a trenchant criticism of the evidence upon which popular medical authorities found statements which lead the general public to suppose that the " conquest " of consumption is to

4IO EUGENICS REVIEW

be achieved by measures directed to the environment. We could wish

that the contents of this booklet might be carefully studied by all medical

officers of health and the army of officials called into being by the

Insurance Act.

(2.) The second lecture was originally delivered to the West London

Medico-Chirurgical Society. It is an eloquent plea for the creation of

medical mathematicians and, pending the realisation of that ideal, for an

entente cordiale between the statistician and the public health officer.

Among the topics dwelt on are the influence of natural selection on

man and the inheritance of certain special defects, such as achondroplasia.

Some beautiful plates are reproduced from the " Treasury of Human

Inheritance.'

M. G.

Zizek, Privatdozent. DR. FRANZ, von Statistik und Rassenbiologie

einschliesslich Rassenhygiene. (Sonderabdruck.) Statistische

Monatscrift, 1912; pp. 43 I-460.

THIS is a summary of the results reached by various workers in the de-

partments of racial biology and hygiene with the aid of statistical

methods. The article will be of use to many who desire an introduction

to the literature, but the author's knowledge of statistical processes, if

we may judge by his remarks on page 44I with respect to the meaning

of a coefficient of correlation, is somewhat superficial, and safer guides

may be found in this country.

M. G.

Davenport, CHARLES B., M. D. Eugenics and the Physician. (Reprinted from the " New York Medical Journal," June 8th, I912.)
IN this address, delivered to a medical audience, Dr. Davenport points out the valuable help which physicians might derive from the
systematic study of family traits in their patients, as bearing, for instance,
on individual differences in susceptibility and mode of reaction to infective agents; and he further appeals to medical men to co-operate with students of heredity in accumulating data concerning the inheritance of normal and morbid characters in man. The natural affinity of Mendelian methods to the individualist attitude of medical practice
should secure a sympathetic response to Dr. Davenport's invitation. Though it ought to be well known by this time, it may be worth while to repeat that the Eugenics Record Office at Cold Spring Harbour, New York, will furnish printed schedules for recording such data, and will welcome information with regard to familv histories. Dr. Davenport mentions that he is at present studying the heredity of cleft palate and harelip, and would be glad to receive data hearing thereon.
W. C. SULLIVAN.

MtpttpaTngdmpapseionrhsaaoeuioHuoCsteersmnvIncsioatteieh,osSiqthnarsnuanbumbnuithfdcelieehttewffmeekttnahsoelceotyotnotrrsolenort.fetiorrt,omkwirnyfDro.taehgtreefriihi.tndnneiiehRcctOifnsdnse.,e.ntahMeunae,thmccctIefeieCiethhtiMtnolasLnioadhht.iussnofntseei,eartiindnhaotrrrtmdseenseehoybfetaoamerPtleautlcetnhihleslntplhfeain..',hmnadmyeonrnesDerooaarn.tsrimmshbtittdJitaoanenhaehlieotofre,nneayslfirhgtoltdaioeofenua,ccCfofncarttmtclrrfo.ttheenMeeeerieihneadupesncmpaced,htrtiuocewabaesrsnnnhxbpoyFkndacaaioaolirdrefnlylsimeobklpasondhf;ieosttsmnmRavtacitodeaerhoii1othionstaienl9tnhsfeepttisttnIhusecxmoyue,2oigmuhbh,nbsr;nesteaeesjeons.oxuoie3isieneacscbt3onnnhxswmlttiif9qgachuneilausetiisgpivlintpwhDtcoipterybteehefhvy.lyfeheafo,e;yotearefisqhahrnxfiovnbipueedenpmceasnieritiiidsnaonithsacaiihdbciemgwcltodsifieclehuSiosneane.sipooraclmrg7osnccusveltefe,.ihnosiruotdmbapepiifdh6arlepewuteseIhdseirmct,nsesh.eitnetibxmCmrsasstipteniaooehtbetaiihebrnsnnalhnytvoaaui,td-ts.eestfe-t-s

