THE EUGENICS REVIEW
The theoretical basis of the techniques used to determine the role of heredity in the control of growth and other quantifiable phenomena in mice and men is discussed in the third part of the symposium. The author of the paper on mice makes the common mistake of regarding body weight as a measure of growth when it may, in fact, indicate change in body composition either with or without true growth. This however does not detract from the value of his paper as a study in genetics. The genetic basis of variations in the neuroendocrine response to stress, in humans, is discussed in relation to the information which can be obtained from the study of "inborn errors" of metabolism. The value of studying inbred strains and poly-genetically determined characters in animals in relation to the inheritance of stress responses and behavioural characteristics is also considered. Interesting questions are raised in relation to gene-hormone interaction in the development of the neuro-endocrine system.
The book's main value does not lie in the factual information it provides about either the genetic basis of endocrine phenomena or the endocrine basis of heredity because, as is usual with symposia of this kind, no final answer is obtained to the basic questions which are asked. The reader is however stimulated to ask new questions and he gains information which will help him to frame them in a useful way. The non-geneticist will learn about genetic techniques which can be applied to the study of endocrine physiology and growth while the geneticist may be encouraged to use his techniques in this way. Certainly they will both find parts of the book well worth reading.
W. A. MARSHALL
Green. E. L. (Editor). Biology of the Laboratory Mouse. Second Edition. New York and London, 1966. McGraw-Hill. Pp. xii+706. Price 132s.
THIS IS THE second edition of a book first published in 1941 which has been widely read especially by anybody interested in the house mouse as a laboratory animal. After being reprinted in 1956 it has now been extensively revised and rewritten and twenty new chapters added to the original thirteen. It follows the same general arrangement as the first edition with a comprehensive bibliography at the end of each chapter. This leads inevitably to some repetition, but it probably does not add appreciably to the overall bulk of the book. An author index separate from the subject index would have been an advantage and also some means of identifying those items which refer solely to topics mentioned in papers, but not dealt with in the general text. Techniques connected with mouse husbandry and genetics, including a catalogue of mutants with a brief description of each; anatomy, development, physiology and biochemistry; responses to radiation, drugs and foreign tissues; pathological conditions and immune reactions as well as behavioural traits are all dealt with in detail. The editor states clearly in his introduction that there are still certain aspects of the mouse which have been omitted (e.g. experimental embryology, organogenesis, late responses to radiation, responses to stresses other than radiation and drugs, and induced tumours). The printing and layout of the book are of a high standard and it will undoubtedly have a long and valued existence wherever there is somebody interested in the mouse both in sickness and in health. GILLIAN M. TRUSLOVE
SOCIOLOGY
Maccoby. Eleanor E. (Editor). The Development of Sex Differences. Stanford Studies in
Psychology. London, 1967. Tavistock. Pp. 351. Price 60s.
THIS BOOK CONSISTS of six contributions to a series of discussions held at Stanford
University, USA. The contributions are, broadly, from the point of view of pediatrics,
198

REVIEWS OF BOOKS
anthropology, sociology and psychology, the last being divided into the areas of intellectual differences, social learning and cognitive development. Each of the papers is in itself a balanced and well documented survey of the particular sector of the topic dealt with; they range from a discussion of the effect of sex hormones on the development of sex characteristics and behaviour to an anthropological survey of sex roles in terms of occupation in a large number of societies.
The general trend of these independent treatments is towards stressing the importance of social as distinct from biological determinants of differences in sex behaviour. All are agreed that the evidence available is incomplete and sometimes contradictory; all are also agreed on the importance of early sex identification, either by wrapping girl babies in pink blankets and boys in blue, or by the child itself learning to play the expected sex role. It is generally agreed that by the age of three to four years, children are not only aware of their sex roles, but are actively identifying themselves with these roles. The predominant factor is that with young children, the age role is common to both sexes, and the only role which can be ascribed is the sex role. There is in each society a structure of sex differentiated role and status for which children are groomed, either consciously or not, from an early age. This structure obscures other than the most obvious biological differences. The girl tomboy, for example, is tolerated more readily than the "sissy" boy, but in assessment of intellectual differences tests are constructed to eliminate a bias towards either sex. This is one of the difficulties about the book, the very diverse nature of the excellent individual contributions. The reader is left without a coherent picture of the process of sex differentiation.
One feature of the book must receive special commendation. The bibliographical apparatus is the most complete the reviewer has encountered. Each of the six contributions has its own list of references; an Annotated Bibliography by Roberta Oetzel, covering nearly 100 pages, gives a summary (about a paragraph in length) of all the main sources used by the contributors; this is followed by a classified summary of research, listed under the main behaviour areas, such as Aggression, Moral Development, Methodology and the like, covering some twenty-five pages, giving the essential findings of each piece of research in one or two lines of print. As some of the original sources, such as the Transactions of the New York Academy of Science, are not readily available, the bibliography is a real aid to the serious student of the topic. It may seem odd to select the bibliography as the most outstanding feature of a quite thorough and competent series of studies, but it is there, and justifies its occupying about three sevenths of the whole volume.
JAMES MAXWELL
ADOPTION
McWhinnie. Alexina Mary. Adopted Children. How They Grow Up. London, 1967. Routledge & Kegan Paul. Pp. xvi + 302. Price 42s.
THIS BOOK IS concerned with the attitudes and feelings of a group of fifty-eight people, eighteen years and over, of whom fifty-two had been adopted and six fostered when they were children. The knowledge so obtained is used to assess their adjustments to adoption.
Any study of this kind poses problems of selection and interviewing. Dr. McWhinnie
is an experienced case worker. She was anxious for the group to be representative and hit upon the ingenious plan of interesting the surrounding General Practitioners in her project and asking them to refer any patient aged eighteen or over whom they knew to have been adopted and who was willing to co-operate. She brought her special skills to the interviews, which, though they had direction, were conducted in the atmsophere of
199

