THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
LEAD POISONING AND THE RACE
By SIR THOMAS OLIVER, M.D., Professor in the Univrsity of Durham College of Medicine and Physician to the Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle-upon-Tyne
FROM the purely physical point of view a nation's strength is measured by its reproductive power and the high percentage of the fitness of its children. In future wars, numbers will still count for much, especially if accompanied by good physique, and far more, if accompanied by brain power as well. While civilisation in one sense multiplies the opportunities of reproduction, human checks are interposed, or there are interposed conditions which interrupt the normal course of events and prevent pregnancy reaching term. It is therefore not before time that the nation has been asking for some explanation of its declining birth-rate. The employment in factories of women when enceinte and at a time when they ought to be sparing themselves, is one explanation of a large number of immature births, just as the return of mothers to the factory at too early a date after their confinement is one of the causes of the high death rate of infants. It is estimated that on an average among the general population one of every six pregnancies ends in abortion. Where the condi-

84 T. Oliver:
tions of labour make heavy demands upon female workers and tend to exhaustion, the number of immature births in a community rises, for by this means is partly explained the fact of 87 per cent. of such births in one Lancashire town among the female cotton operatives, compared with 44 per cent. of immature births among the general population of the same town but not employed in factories, and in another Lancashire town 63 per cent. of still births in textile workers compared with 40 per cent. in women of other towns, but not engaged in the cotton industry. Hard and exhausting work followed till towards the end of pregnancy is not only a cause of infantile immaturity, but of a reduction of the resistance of the expectant mother to the fatigues incidental to the stages of childbearing, as well as of an ill-nourished condition of the infant when born. Beyond mentioning the fact, I shall do no more than allude to the havoc which is being wrought by the modern craze for pleasure, and which among all classes of society is undermining the best instincts of womanhood. But it is less with these social weaknesses of our times and with the physical conditions of industrial labour in general that I intend to deal, as with the influence on offspring of a particular kind of poison inhaled or swallowed by men and women when at work. To the injurious effects of alcohol upon progeny other lecturers have drawn the attention of this Society, as also to the far-reaching consequences of the effects of syphilis. My task to-day, if of a humbler character, since the subject concerns a more restricted number of people, is yet none the less important, for with lead and its compounds we are dealing with poisons whose action although subtle, is yet unerring, the sadness of it all being that in the largest number of instances the sufferers have done nothing to bring the trouble upon themselves. Their daily occupation, the means by which men and women have sought to earn their living, becomes the cause of their illness and possibly death, of individual physical degeneracy and of inability on the part of women, to rise to the dignity of the completed act of motherhood. Nearly two decades have passed since I strove for and succeeded in securing the emancipation of female labour from the dangerous processes of lead-making, and although for years I was the

LEAD POISONING AND THE RACE

85

target of abuse of manufacturers and of some of the Labour Societies, events have more than justified the recommendations I made, since the manufacture of white lead has become less the subject of public reproach, the financial claims upon the industry have been lightened, and the health of the workers has generally improved. It is difficult to estimate directly and indirectly the gain to mankind by the abolition of female labour in white lead factories, and in all processes wherein lead is used.
A few years ago, in one of the Yorkshire towns, there
was an endemic of still births which called for an unofficial enquiry. The cause was found to be contamination by lead of the drinking water supplied to the town. With the removal of the cause, the effect ceased. In this endemic it was the women and children who suffered most. There is a sexual idiosyncrasy in lead poisoning which cannot be ignored. Quite apart from its effects upon emunctories, such as the kidneys, also upon the blood-making organs and the nervous system, lead hits hard the reproductive powers of man and woman, but especially of woman. Lead destroys developing life by directly poisoning it, or it checks the growth of the feetus in the womb by cutting off its channel of nutrition. Taking fowls' eggs and incubating them, after having painted the shell of some of them with a strong solution of lime and the shell of others with a solution of nitrate of lead, I found that, while all of those which had been painted with lime came to maturity, from not one of those painted with lead nitrate solution came there forth a live chick.
On opening the 'egg, the embryo was always found to have reached a fair stage of development and had died in all probability as the result of poisoning. Similarly in the case of pregnant rabbits, to whom lead was administered in food, miscarriage took place, and in the internal organs of the foetuses lead was found on chemical examination. By these experiments is not only confirmed the statement regarding the frequency of still births among female lead workers, but of the direct transmission of lead as a poison by affected mothers to their offspring.
Whether we deal with life as seen in the lower animals, or with woman, this influence of lead in bringing pregnancy to a premature close is generally admitted, a circumstance which of

86 T. Oliver :
itself is one of the strongest reasons for the exclusion of females from the dangerous processes of the manufacture and the manipulation of lead and its products.
Dr. George Reid, in Vol. II. of the Report of the Departmental Committee on the Dangers attendant on the Use of Lead, etc., supplies the following figures which bear upon this point: Taking I00 mothers he found that in those engaged in house work, the number of miscarriages and of still births was 43.2; mill workers, but not engaged in lead 47.6; mothers who worked in lead previous to their marriage, 86; mothers who became lead workers after marriage, I33.5, and where the father was a lead worker, 48. In addition he found that, while the deaths under one year per i,ooo births were for mothers engaged in house work, 150; mill workers, 2I4; where the father alone worked in lead, I89; mothers working in lead before marriage, I57, and when mothers worked in lead after marriage the numbers rose to 27I. That is to say, females who worked in lead before marriage miscarried twice more frequently, and females working in lead after their marriage miscarried three times more frequently than those engaged in ordinary house work. Taking the manufacture of pottery as an industry in which lead compounds are used, Reid found that the incidence of poisoning is most marked in females engaged in the dipping department, and next to these that plumbism prevails most among the majolica paintresses. It is difficult to obtain accurate figures in an Enquiry like that which Dr. Reid carried out, for many women are unwilling to divulge such personal matters as concern their possible motherhood, especially when the influence of their occupation is being called in question.
The facts which I have just related are of interest from a national point of view, since they deal with an enormous loss of infantile life from immaturity and still-births. A high percentage of the children born to lead workers die shortly after birth and during the first few months of life. One question which the Eugenics Education Society cannot but feel interested in, as regards lead-poisoned parents, is, what are the possible effects of lead upon the children who survive ? In a footnote of the Departmental Report to which I have referred, it is stated: " It

LEAD POISONING AND THE RACE
does not appear from the Tables that working in lead has any injurious influence in lowering the birth-rate, nor is there any evidence to show that the children of lead workers are any less healthy than those born of non-lead workers." The fact that female lead workers miscarry more frequently than pregnant women following other occupations shows that the birth-rate is adversely affected. It is to the question as to whether the children of lead workers are less healthy than those born of nonlead workers that I am desirous of drawing your attention. In other addresses I have shown that, where a pregnant female lead worker who has miscarried time after time, frequently six times in succession, leaves the factory, succeeding pregnancies are brought to a successful close and the children born alive, live and grow up. What becomes of those children, and what too is the fate of those children born alive to lead workers who do not die within the first few months after birth? It is contrary to expectation, although not to our experience, that the children who survive should be quite healthy, for in the bodies of the still-born children of lead workers and in those of children dying shortly after birth lead has been found in the tissues, to the presence of which death must be attributed. In most instances, if not in all, it must be simply a question of dosage of the poison, so that where children born under these circumstances survive birth, the amount of lead in their system is too small to kill, or there has been no poison absorbed at all. Analogous cases are seen in syphilis, where a syphilitic mother has a succession of still-born children, and then one or two children are born who survive, or where a father who has been infected is yet the parent of apparently healthy children. Some of the children, although healthy-looking and well-nourished when born, develop symptoms of congenital syphilis a few weeks after birth, while others grow up and appear to be healthy children, but are they quite healthy? Does the something which has been inherited not influence them in the ordinary infantile illnesses they may perchance suffer from, or in later years show itself in some of those obscure forms of nervous disease which are often inexplicable? Many Asylum physicians to-day believe that such a malady, for example, as general paralysis in middle-aged men is

88 T. Oliver:
in many instances the result of congenital syphilis, even although the patients have never presented the ordinary physical signs met with in the inherited forms of that illness. Infants of an alcoholic mother frequently die of malnutrition weeks after birth, while others survive, only to exhibit in later years an instability of the nervous system and a liability to become not only more readily intoxicated by alcohol, but to be affected by it in a manner different to other people. It is with lead as with alcohol and syphilis, children may not only be born apparently healthy but really so, and remain as healthy and develop as well as the children of parents who have never been brought into contact with lead, but there are others who must retain some impress of the transmitted maternal toxaemia, although it is impossible to state the peculiar direction along which that impression will show itself. The subject of plumbism bristles with biological problems of extreme difficulty, as shown by the following circumstances. Female lead workers give a higher percentage of stillbirths (Dr. Prendergast of Hanley states that one potter's wife miscarried twelve times in succession) than women employed in other occupations, and in the body of the children lead is found, which probably caused their death, while the mothers have not and do not exhibit any signs of lead poisoning. It is interesting to remember that latent paternal and maternal plumbism is fatal to offspring, while the parents remain to all appearance in good health, and yet experience shows that Nemesis may still overtake these parents years after they have ceased working in lead. Acute poisoning from any cause is peculiar in this respect, that death can occur without any structural alteration of the tissues being observed, although on chemical examination the poison can be detected. Acute lead poisoning in the adult can be recovered from. A person may take a large dose of acetate of lead and suffer in consequence, but provided no more of the poison is taken, it will be eliminated from the body and the individual will recover. It is quite another thing when small quantities, each of them harmless in itself, are taken regularly into the system over an extended period as at work, or in drinking water. Lead poisoning develops insidiously, the metal acts upon the cells of particular organs of the body, derangingitheir function and structure,

LEAD POISONING AND THE RACE

89

so that life is gradually brought to a close by the intervention of disease of organs such as the'kidney or nervous system, years after it may be thelperson has been near lead. It is not to be expected that actual disease of organs is transmitted by leadpoisoned parents to their offspring, although, as we have seen, lead itself can pass from the maternal organism to the foetus, but from the poisoned blood of the mother there cannot be added to the stream which nourishes the child in her womb those healthy materials which make for normal development. Something is given or withheld which cannot but influence in later years the behaviour of the tissues to the ordinary demands which life imposes upon them. Dr. Prendergast of Hanley, Staffordshire, who has spent many,years of his professional career in the Potteries, tells me that, in his experience, the children of lead workers who survive the first year of life are of an inferior physique to other children. They suffer from wasting and have not the average vital stamina. He knows of nothing which tends to deteriorate the physical well-being of children so much as the fact of a father or mother having been brought into contact with lead, especially if the lead has been absorbed in fairly toxic quantities. Dr. Prendergast is of the opinion that the children of lead-poisoned potters do not grow up into capable men and women like other children, but that they are handicapped in their start in life, and that subsequently many of them exhibit signs of mental as well as of physical deterioration.
Twenty years ago an unmarried female lead worker was under my care in the Newcastle Royal Infirmary on account of convulsions and blindness caused by lead. Four months afterwards she had pretty well regained her sight, and the other symptoms of plumbism had disappeared. Acting on my advice, she did not return to the lead works. A few years afterwards she married; her husband was an outdoor labourer. In I905 this patient was readmitted into the Infirmary on account of paralysis of the eyeballs. She had had three miscarriages, and six living children, one of the children has since died. Although it was seventeen years since she had worked in the factory, Professor Bedson found lead in this patient's urine. Her children whom I have seen are healthy and compare favourably

,go T. Olivrer:
with the children of healthy parents, although patient herself has recently become almost blind. Mrs. M., aged 42, an old lead worker, has had twelve children, six of whom are alive. Two of the daughters, aged 22 and 23, although of slim build and short stature, seem quite healthy. Mrs. J., aged 46, formerly a white lead worker, has had foutrteen pregnancies. Of these seven ended in still-births; four of the children born alive died, one suddenly at the age of four months and another three days after its birth; there was one miscarriage; two sons have been spared to her and are grown up: one of the sons, aged 22, is in the asylum, the other is said to be quite well, and is following his occupation as a mechanic. Mrs. A., aged 36, whose husband is a labourer, was a white lead worker for six years before her marriage and for three years after it. She gave up the work fourteen years ago. She has had four children, three of them were still-born; her only child, a boy of ii years of age, is healthy. When I asked this woman to give me the names of some of the women who as girls used to work in the white lead factory with her, she at once exclaimed: "They are nearly all dead," and that her own mother, Mrs. N., who had also been a lead worker, had died at the age of 58 from the effects of lead.
To see the worst effects of lead upon a people who are following an occupation for a living, one must go to Hungary. Struck by the harrowing details of the suffering experienced by the small pottery manufacturers of Hungary and the unusually severe types of plumbism which prevailed among the women and children, I visited that country eighteen months ago, to study the problem on the spot. I have seen a considerable amount of lead poisoning both at home, in France and elsewhere, but I have seen nothing to equal the sad sights I witnessed in Hungary. Through the kindness of Mr. Csterenyi, then Home Secretary, who placed at my disposal one of the Royal Inspectors of Factories, I had the opportunity of visiting several of the out-of-theway villages, where the making of cheap pottery is a home industry. As the work is often carried on in the day and sleeping rooms the whole family is living constantly in a poisoned atmosphere, hence the readiness with which plumbism occurs in husband, wife and children. But setting aside these cases where

LEAD POISONING AND THE RACE

9I

the children suffer from plumbism, the result of inhaling lead dust in the atmosphere of the living room, there are scores of lead-impregnated potters and their wives, who are not necessarily ill or laid off work, and, as Dr. Adalbert Chyzer showed, the children of these persons are frequently the subjects of rickets, the outline of their skull is angular, the ends of their long bones are swollen and club-shaped, while owing to the rickety condition of their jaw, the teeth are irregular. Owing to their wives so frequently miscarrying, potters in Hungary have few children, seldom more than one or two, and the children who are spared to them grow slowly, are of short stature, and are frequently almost dwarfs. In some of the villages the majority of the potters have no children at all-not one of the infants born alive has survived. In these villages the children die from hydrocephalus, from acute meningitis or in convulsions. Dr. Chyzer -found " fits " to be much more frequent in the children of potters than in those of other people. At Temerin, in one potter's family seven children had died in convulsions, in another potter's family six children had thus died. Where death does not take place in early infancy from convulsions, epilepsy is found later on to be more frequent in the children of potters than in those of non-potters. In fact, apart from the transmission of the worst effects of such poisons as syphilis, plumbism is one of the most serious destroyers of infantile life.
The manufacture of pottery in Hungary as a home industry is, when the circumstances permit of it, frequently a hereditary occupation. In Varpaloto, Dr. Chyzer found a potter and his family whose respective heights were as follows:

Father - - -

Mother -

-

Elder daughter, 28 years of age

Son, 27 years of age -

-

Younger daughter, 9 years of age

5 feet 31 inches
4 ,, 9
3 ,, IO
4 ,, 9
2 ,, 5

In some of the villages I was struck by the short stature of
the potters as a class. Men of 2i and 22 years of age looked
like boys of 14. Infantilism is therefore one of the effects of
inherited plumbism. In families where the mother has mis-

92 T. Oliver :
carried on several occasions, the children who survive are frequently idiotic, or they are feeble mentally and physically,
and are always ailing. It is characteristic of most infectious diseases that one
attack renders a person immune to subsequent attacks. As a result of the action of toxins developed by micro-organisms, there occurs a reaction on the part of the white corpuscles of the blood and the cells of the tissues, whereby anti-toxins are formed. These by overwhelming the toxins not only bring about cure of the disease, but they leave behind a protective influence in the body which lasts for years. There is, however, not always this immunity conferred. One attack of pneumonia, for example, rather renders an individual liable to a second attack than protects him against it. This increased susceptibility to a return of the same disease is called anaphylaxia. It is characteristic of recovery from plumbism that fresh contact with lead is followed by a ready recurrence of the malady, hence the serious consequences to lead workers who trifle with the dangers to which they are exposed in their occupation. Familiarity with danger frequently causes workmen to become careless, but the risks remain none the less and too frequently the unwary are caught. Anaphylaxia or increased susceptibility is characteristic of many metallic poisons, but not all, as witness the arsenic-eating capabilities of the mountain peasantry of the Austrian Tyrol, who, commencing with small doses of arsenic to increase the staying power of the individual and improve his breathing capacity, finally end by taking larger and larger doses with immunity. Opium eating is an illustration of the same fact of an acquired immunity as against the anaphylaxia observed in lead poisoning, and yet occasionally a degree of immunity is sometimes met with also in plumbism. This, however, is so rare that it in no way diminishes the need for constant care on the part of lead workers in their occupation; for, as already stated, it is the repeated entrance of minute quantities of lead into the body, and not of one or two large doses, which gives rise to the worst types of plumbism.
Improvement of the industrial conditions of the potteries and abolition of female labour in white lead factories have

LEAD POISONING AND THE RACE

93

removed so many of the evils of plumbism as affecting potential
motherhood, that in Great Britain it is difficult to say to what extent plumbism is affecting the future of the race. It is probably necessary that unhealthy conditions should operate through three or four generations before any permanent effect can be seen in a people, but already in Hungary, and less in Staffordshire, there are signs that the development of child-life is to some extent being interfered with. The influence upon offspring of paternal and maternal lead intoxication is still a subject for careful enquiry. The fact that the wives of men working in lead miscarry more frequently than the wives of men following other occupations, and that the tendency is greater when the women themselves work in lead, shows that the embryo is unhealthy. Where life is brought into existence under these circumstances and the infant survives its birth, well might we ask whether it can ever throw off the influence of lead which has become so stereotyped into its tissues.
Industrial legislation has accomplished much. Although it is known to have benefited both the workers and the trade generally, there are yet many of the workers who raise objections to it. They claim the right to work even in unhealthy occupations without State restrictions. There are others, too, who do all they possibly can to shirk the medical examinations and who are indifferent to the Regulations for the prevention of plumbism. Fortunately these persons are few. Rules may be irksome and compliance with them may entail considerable personal inconvenience, but if employers will do all they can to make them as little irksome as possible, then, since the objects which it is wishful to be secured are health, fitness for work and longevity, the workers in the long run are sure to realise that the end justifies the means that have been recommended.

