TWIN RESEARCH IN TUBERCULOSIS*
By BARBARA SIMONDS, M.A., M.B.

T UBERCULOSIS has been recognized role that individual inherited resistance or

as a clinical entity since the time of susceptibility plays in the development of

the Greeks. Before Koch's discovery tuberculosis is still in doubt. It is possible

of the tubercle bacillus, however, various that heredity plays little or no part in the

theories were put forward to explain its development of tuberculosis and if this is

aetiology, but the most widely held view the case it is important that the measures

was that tuberculosis was caused by an in- to prevent tuberculosis are directed in the

herited constitutional predisposition. Thus right direction. On the other hand, tuber-

Hippocrates in the 4th century B.C. con- culosis may be an example of a disease in

sidered that tuberculosis affects people with which it is impossible to distinguish the

a "smooth skin, blue eyes and of leuco- separate parts played by heredity and

phlegmatic habit, with shoulders projecting environment. Whatever the role of heredity

like wings." The English physician Richard in tuberculosis the part played by environ-

Morton, while recognizing the infectious ment in the development of the disease is

nature of tuberculosis, also wrote in I689 of considerable, if not paramount, import-

"An Hereditary Disposition from the Parents ance.

does very often bring on Consumption of the The role of heredity in tuberculosis has

Lungs

been investigated mainly by the study of

With the discovery of the tubercle bacillus families and more recently by twin studies.

by Koch the problem of the actiology of Indirect evidence of heredity factors has

tuberculosis appeared to have been solved been obtained from the apparently different

and efforts were directed to eliminating the racial reactions to tuberculosis and by the

disease by an attack on the bacillus. It soon study of animal populations artificially in-

became clear, however, that in natural fected with the tubercle bacillus. It is

infection the mere presence of the bacillus is impossible to discuss here the findings of

not always sufficient to produce disease; these many investigations. I would just

virtually ioo per cent of an industrial like to mention some of the advantages of

community are infected with the tubercle twin studies over family studies. Family

bacillus by the age of twenty, but few of studies usually rely on the patients having

them develop manifest clinical disease.

a detailed knowledge of their immediate

ancestors and relatives, a knowledge that

Factors affecting the development of may be absent or inaccurate. Even if

Tuberculosis

accurate information is obtained in family

Many factors have since been shown to affect the development of tuberculosis; factors such as the dose of bacillus and particularly the capacity of the individual to resist infection. This resistance to infection may be an acquired capacity, for example, acquired as a result of previous infection with the bacillus, or resistance to infection may be an inherited capacity. The

studies, it is difficult to separate the role of infection and heredity. For example, a child
may develop tuberculosis many years after
one of his parents has died from the disease. This could be explained either by heredity or by infection in early life which has lain dormant for some time because of the chronicity of tuberculous disease.
It is also invalid to compare some relationship groups, e.g. children and consorts

* Paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on January s6th, I957.

of tuberculous patients. The children are usually exposed to tuberculosis prior to the

25
TE EUGENICS REVIEW, April, I957. 49, i.

26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

development of an acquired immunity, assumed to be some hereditary influence on

whereas consorts are exposed in adult life. the disease.

This assumption is, however, unjustified

Twin Studies

if certain hazards are not avoided. The

The study of tuberculosis in twins removes following are, I consider, the main ways in many of these difficulties. Both partners of which errors may be introduced into this a twin pair can be examined and the presence type of investigation.

or absence of tuberculosis can be established. I. By a failure to discover every patient

The morbidity rate of tuberculosis in the who is a twin, and suffering from tubercu-

co-twins of monozygotic and dizygotic twins losis, in the hospitals and clinics from which

with tuberculosis can then be compared. A the twin sample is obtained.

large study of this nature was first undertaken by Diehl and von Verschuer1, 2 in Germany. In I936 they published the case

2. By incorrectly diagnosing the zygocity of the twins.

histories of eighty monozygotic and I25 3. By ignoring other factors which may

dizygotic twin pairs. In each twin pair one account for the difference in the morbidity

twin had been repQrted to them as a case of rate in the monozygotic co-twins from the

tuberculosis diagnosed at a chest clinic or dizygotic co-twins. For example, in tuber-

sanatorium. They found that 65 per cent culosis it is known that contact with

of the monozygotic co-twins and approxi- tuberculosis considerably increases the

mately 25 per cent of the dizygotic co-twins possibility of contracting the disease. A

had a similar tuberculous history to that of pair of dizygotic twins living fifty miles

their twin.

apart may rarely see each other, a pair of

Kallman and Reisner3 carried out an in- monozygotic twins living I50 miles apart

vestigation in New York and New York State may visit each other more frequently and

and -published their results in I943. They be more affectionate when they meet. Such

enlarged the study to include the siblings, factors are difficult to measure quantita-

parents and consorts of the twin index cases. tively, but they must be remembered when

They reported on seventy-eight monozygotic assessing the results.

and 230 dizygotic twin pairs and their Mistakes in the diagnosis of zygocity are

families, in which the index case had re- probably not frequent. It is preferable to

infection tuberculosis. They found that the have a category of twins of doubtful zygo-

tuberculous morbidity in the co-twins of city, but by examining the blood groups

monozygotic index cases was 6i'5 per cent these twins of doubtful zygocity will be a

and in the co-twins of dizygotic index cases very small percentage of the total twins.

was I8-3 per cent. The rate for full siblings Using similarity methods it is possible to

was I8-9 per cent, i.e. the rate for dizygotic classify many twin pairs as dizygotic. Other

co-twins and siblings was very similar while pairs will be thought to be monozygotic on

that for monozygotic co-twins was higher. similarity methods and this will be confirmed

From their work, Kallman and Reisner by doing full blood grouping and finding

concluded: " The analysis of the morbidity that all their blood groups are the same. It

distribution in the sibship groups indicates is now possible, using calculations published

that resistance to tuberculosis is modified by Smith and Penrose4, to find the

by a heredo-constitutional mechanism which probability of these pairs being monozygotic

seems to be multi-factorial in its genetic using their blood groups alone. Some twin

nature."

pairs on examination will be thought to be

The use of twins in a study of heredity probably dizygotic but possibly monozy-

-mainly relies on the assumption that if both gotic. If these are then found to have some

partners of monozygotic 'twin pairs are different blood group they must be dizygotic.

affected more frequently than Joth partners If they have the same blood groups through-

of dizygotic twin pairs, then there may be out, further studies, such as finger printing,

TWIN RESEARCH IN TUBERCULOSIS

27

can be done further to ascertain their zyg.ocity.
To return to the first hazard I mentioned, that is, the failure to collect all the twins. This has, I think, probably produced more errors in twin research in tuberculosis than any other. There is no doubt that all twin studies endeavour to obtain an unselected sample of twins, but the criteria by which the nature of these twin samples are judged are not always sufficiently stringent.
In examining twin samples two methods may be used to decide whether they are an
unselected group. i. The twin sample can be analysed to
see if the number of monozygotic twins in it, is similar to the expected number of monozygotic twins in any population of twins.
2. The twin sample can be compared with the population from which it is drawn to see if the total number of twins in it is similar to the expected number of twins in a general population. The expected number of lving twins in the population is estimated by taking the number of twin births and correcting for their increased stillbirth rate and neo-natal death rate. There should be approximately 2 per cent of twins in the population.
Though the first of these two methods is useful I do not think that on its own it is an adequate method of judging the representative nature of the twin sample.
The Prophit Survey
I would like to illustrate this point from the work done under the auspices of the Prophit Committee. At first the twins were collected by relying on chest physicians reporting all newly diagnosed patients who were twins. By checking the number of twins reported with the notification rates for tuberculosis it soon became apparent that many twins were not being reported. The method of collection was then improved by arranging a more direct contact with fewer clinics and by finding out the number of new patients in each clinic who were diagnosed as suffering from tuberculosis during the time that twins were being collected. In this way ii6 twin index cases were found

from a total of 7,633 patients. This is I5 per cent and is still less than the expected number.
It was decided that the only way of obtaining all the twins in a given population was to make certain that every patient in the population was asked if they were a twin. Chest physicians in various parts of England co.-operated; the full register of tuberculous patients was obtained and each patient was written to directly asking them if they were a twin. Replies were received from
2I,25I patients, i.e. 97 3 per cent of those asked. Of these 405 are twins (i19i per
cent). This is very close to the expected 2
per cent. Thus, in the Prophit Survey three distinct
groups of twins have been collected. A. Twins collected from an unknown
population. B. Twins collected from a population
in which the number of twins found is I-5
per cent. C. Twins collected from a population
in which the number of twins found is ip9 per cent.
Quite different results are found in these various groups.

Twins

TABLE I
Total No. of Twin Pairs Investigated

Both with
Tuberculosis % Mono- % Dizyzygotic gotic

From an unknown population A.

43

50 I7-2

From population
giving I5 per cent of twins B.

73

20 29X2

From population
giving i.9 per
cent of twins C. 202

29-6 12-8

From Table i it is seen that those
twins known to be from an inadequate sample (Group A) show a considerably higher incidence of tuberculosis in the cotwins of the monozygotic index cases than in the co-twins of the dizygotic index cases. In the intermediate group (Group B) the morbidity is higher in the dizygotic co-twins. In the last group (Group C) there is a higher morbidity rate in the monozygotic co-twins.

28 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

These findings can be explained by assuming that in Group A the figures are incorrect because nearly all the monozygotic twin
pairs who both have tuberculosis are found and some of the twins in the other three categories are not found,! i.e. monozygotic twins where only one has tuberculosis, and dizygotic twins where both or only one have tuberculosis. In Group B it is possible that the missing 0o5 per cent of twins are mainly dizygotic twins, only one of whom has tuberculosis and thus the percentage of dizygotic twins both of whom have tuberculosis will be apparently increased. The only group which I consider gives correct results is Group C and therefore I will confine my further discussion to this group.
When questioned, 405 patients with
tuberculosis said that they were twins. These twin index cases were collected from various boroughs in London, and from Luton, Suffolk, Birmingham, Warwickshire,
Gloucestershire and Oxfordshire.
Further inquiries were made. concerning
the fate of the co-twins with the results shown in Table 2.

TABLE 2 Fate of Co-twin

Died before I2 months old .. .. Died exact age unknown .. ..

Died from tuberculosis

.. ..

Died after i year from non-tuberculous

causes .. .. .. .. ..

Alive .. .. .. .. ..

10
25 12
31 227

TOTAL ..

405

Of the co-twins who died from a nontuberculous cause after the age of one year, four died after the index case had contracted tuberculosis. These, together with the twelve co-twins who died from tuberculosis and the co-twins who are alive, are the useful twins to analyse. These 243 index cases are divided as shown in Table 3.

TABLE 3

Untraceable .. .. ..

Died before information

collected 3.. .. ..

Non-tuberculous

..

Followed up .. .. ..

16
3 3 221

TOTAL .. *- 243

The 22I index cases about whom information has been gathered come from 208 twin pairs as in thirteen pairs both twin partners are index cases. Table 4 shows the sex and. zygocity of these 208 twin pairs.

Index Cases
Female Male TOTAL

TABLE 4

Oppo- Same Sexed site Binovular Sexed 52 43
27 26
79 69

Uniovular
33
2I 54

Doubt- Total ful
4 132 2 76 6 208

There are six pairs of doubtful zygocity,
either because it proved impossible to complete the investigations or because the co-twin died before the index case was interviewed and it was not possible to come to a definite
conclusion with the information available. These have been omitted from the tables
which follow. If the number of opposite sexed twins is taken from the number of same sexed twins, this leaves the number of twins one would expect to be monozygotic. From the above figures one would expect fifty monozygotic twins whereas fifty-four were found. The fifty-four monozygotic twin index cases in this sample are 26 per cent of the total which is about the expected figure in a random sample of twins.
If these twin pairs are classifie1 according to whether both twin partners have tuberculosis or not the results shown in Table 5 are obtained.

TABLE 5

Monozygotic Dizygotic

Both with tuber-

culosis

..

One with tuberculosis.. ..

i6 29.6%
38
70°4%

I9
I2.8%
I29
87.2%

These results show that more than twice the percentage of monozygotic co-twins compared with dizygotic co-twins have some form of tuberculosis.

Further Analysis
Before any conclusions can be drawn from this result the twin sample must be analysed further.

TWIN RESEARCH IN TUBERCULOSIS

29

The monozygotic twin index cases and the In the monozygotic group forty-one of the

dizygotic twin index cases must be examined fifty-four twin index cases have phthisis

to see if they are comparable for age, sex, (75.9 per cent) and in the dizygotic group

type of tuberculosis and contact with tuber- iii of the I48 twin index cases have phthisis

culosis. Perhaps the most important single (75.0 per cent), i.e. the two groups are

factor is the type of tuberculosis which the similar.

index case contracts. If tuberculosis is con-

tracted in childhood, a primary infection Exposure to Tuberculosis

results which is usually localised and clears up completely; it may be a glandular infection alone or it may be associated with a pulmonary infection. Later in life the commonest form of tuberculosis is pulmonary, and solely in order to distinguish it from primary tuberculosis, I shall refer to it as phthisis. However, tuberculosis affects many parts of the body apart from the lungs
and these can be classified together as non-
pulmonary tuberculosis. Of the 202 twin pairs the index case has phthisis in I52 cases. These I52 twin pairs have been analysed separately and classified into those pairs where only one has phthisis and those where both partners have phthisis. These results
are given in Table 6.

Thus, so far it has been shown that in this group of 202 twin pairs the rate of tuber-
culosis in the monozygotic co-twins is over twice that in the dizygotic co-twins. Before this finding can be ascribed to an hereditary factor it is important to see if other factors can explain this difference. The only one which will be dealt with here is exposure to a known source of tuberculous infection.
Of the I48 binovular co-twins fifty-six, or 37-8 per cent give a history of exposure to tuberculosis. Of the fifty-four uniovular co-twins twenty-one, or 38-9 per cent give a history of exposure. Thus the co-twins have almost the same history of exposure and the different rates of tuberculosis in the co-twins cannot be explained by an increased ex-

Both with phthisis

TABLE 6
Monozygotic II 26-8%

Dizygotic 13
II-5%

posure rate in the monozygotic co-twins.
It has been suggested, by Kailman and
Reisner that a history of exposure in the
monozygotic co-twins makes little difference

One with phthisis .. 30

98

73.2%

88.5%

to the rate of tuberculosis in the co-twin; i.e. that monozygotic co-twins are likely to

The percentage of monozygotic co-twins develop tuberculosis whether or not they

with phthisis (26-8 per cent) is a little have a history of exposure.

lower than the percentage of monozygotic The results from the Prophit series are

co-twins with all forms of tuberculosis (29-6 illustrated in Figure i.

per cent) and the same applies to the dizy- This shows that there is a considerable

gotic co-twins (II5 per cent and I2-8 difference in the tuberculosis rate in both

per cent). This might be expected as for the monozygotic and dizygotic co-twins

various reasons it is commoner for both depending on their exposure to tuberculosis.

partners of a twin pair to have primary This difference is particularly marked in

tuberculosis than it is for both of them to the monozygotic co-twins. In other words, a

have phthisis.

monozygotic co-twin exposed to tubercu-

In the monozygotic twin pairs the co-twins losis is considerably more likely to develop

have all forms of tuberculosis 2-3I times tuberculosis than either an unexposed mono-

more frequently than the dizygotic co-twins; zygotic co-twin or an exposed dizygotic

and the monozygotic co-twins have phthisis co-twin. If a monozygotic twin develops

2-33 times more frequently than the dizy- tuberculosis his twin has a 48 per cent

gotic co-twins. That is, both types of twins chance of developing tuberculosis if exposed

maintain their pattern of behaviour what- but only a I9 per cent chance if unexposed.

ever type of tuberculosis they are suffering As has been mentioned earlier, the amount

from. of exposure to tuberculosis is difficult to

30
0/10 MONOZYGOTIC
60 CO-TWINS

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

DIZYGOTIC CO-TWINS

0/0
60

MONOZYGOTIC CO-TWINS

40n

40

DIZYGOTIC CO-TWINS

20 20

J EXPOSED TO TUBERCULOSIS
NOT EXPOSED TO TUBERCULOSIS
FIGURE I The rate of tuberculosis in the co-twins with and without exposure to tuberculosis.

0- L A
2 LIVING TOGETHER
*LIVI NG APART
FIGURE 2
The rate of tuberculosis in the co-twins living with and apart from their twins.

measure quantitatively. Twins have been It is interesting to note that it is possible

classified as being in contact with tubercu- for a monozygotic co-twin to live with his

losis only when they have been living in the twin and to be exposed to tuberculosis either

same house as a patient known to have from his twin, or from an outside source, or

phthisis. Many people may come into close from both, and still remain healthy. Nine

contact with the disease without being aware monozygotic co-twins who have lived in

of the fact. Whether or not the twins were these circumstances have remained healthy

living together at the time of diagnosis is and nine have developed tuberculosis.

therefore a check on the history of exposure. It is, of course, possible that some of the

Figure 2 illustrates the number of co-twins co-twins who are at present healthy will

who developed tuberculosis while living develop tuberculosis in the future. However,

with or living apart from their twin.

for the monozygotic pairs the average time

Thus fourteen out of thirty-four (4I per
cent) of the monozygotic co-twins living with the index case developed tuberculosis, whereas only twelve out of seventy-five (i6 per cent) of the dizygotic co-twins living with the index case developed the disease. The rates for the twins living apart is similar in the monozygotic and dizygotic (io per

between the diagnosis of the index case and the knowledge that the co-twin is healthy is 6o years. The average time between the diagnosis of tuberculosis in the twins when they both have tuberculosis is 4-4 years. It is therefore unlikely that any future cases
of tuberculosis will affect the figures to any
great extent.

cent and 9-6 per cent respectively) co-twins.

This series of twins therefore suggests that monozygotic co-twins are more likely

Twin Pairs in which Both Twins have Tuberculosis

to develop tuberculosis than dizygotic co- So far I have discussed the probability of

twins, but that contact with tuberculosis a co-twin developing, tuberculosis if their

and living with their twin gteatly increases twin has tuberculosis. A rather different

this risk.

aspect of the problem is the question: if

TWIN RESEARCH IN TUBERCULOSIS"

3I

both twins have tuberculosis, do they react in a similar way to the disease? If it is found that both partners of a monozygotic pair have the same type of tuberculosis more frequently than both partners of a dizygotic pair it would be evidence that the patient's reaction to a tuberculous infection has some hereditary element.
The body's reaction to a tuberculosis infection can conveniently be divided into two aspects.
i. The anatomical site or sites of the disease which results from infection.
2. The clinical development of the infection, i.e. whether the patient recovers, develops chronic disease, or dies. The clinical development of the disease is, of course, modified by treatment.
If the site of tuberculosis in the monozygotic twin pairs is examined: in fourteen out of sixteen pairs in which both twins had tuberculosis the disease was in the same site; in the nineteen dizygotic pairs in which both twins had tuberculosis eighteen had the disease in the same site. Pulmonary tuberculosis has been taken as one site and not divided into the two lungs or lobes of lungs. Thus both twins have tuberculosis in the same site in most of both the monozygotic and dizygotic pairs.
The ability of the patient to recover from tuberculosis is shown in Table 7.

TABLE 7

Monozygotic Similar outcome I2
75%
Dissimilar out- 4 come . .. 25%

Dizygotic
I2
63.I %
7 36.8%

In the monozygotic pairs 75 per cent behave similarly and in the dizygotic pairs 63 per cent behave similarly. Thus the monozygotic pairs do show a slightly higher percentage of twin pairs who behave in a similar manner.

These results, of course, need more detailed analysis because of the effects of treatment, particularly antibiotics.

It is realized that the number of twins who both have tuberculosis is small and few

conclusions can be drawn from these figures. They are presented as they do not show the striking difference between monozygotic and dizygotic co-twins which might have been expected from previous studies.
This paper is only meant to give some indication of the results expected from the Prophit Series of twins. Much vital information has been omitted. For example, the data on the families of the twins has not been given at all, and the twins themselves have only been analysed under broad headings.
The results so far, however, do show that the tuberculosis rates in all the co-twins is lower than in previous studies, and that the difference in the rate of monozygotic co-twins and dizygotic co-twins, though appreciable, is not as great as in previous studies.
These results may be interpreted in differ-
ent ways. The difference between the monozygotic and dizygotic twins suggests that there is some individual inherited resistance to tuberculosis. However, if this inherited resistance plays any great part in the development of tuberculosis it is remarkable that over 50 per cent of monozygotic co-twins exposed to tuberculosis failed to develop the disease. This can only be explained on differences in the exposure and in other features of the environment which it has not been possible to measure.
To me, the results indicate that the attack on the tubercle bacillus, i.e. early case finding in tuberculosis and the prevention of the spread of infection, remain the most important factors in the campaign against tuberculosis. This is, I think, encouraging because while recognizing individual variations in resistance to tuberculosis, it does not mean that some people are born who will almost certainly contract the disease. Given protection from the bacillus and good environmental conditions, anyone can remain free from tuberculosis, including the co-twins of monozygotic twins who already have tuberculosis.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the officers and members of the Prophit Committee, under

32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whose auspices this study is being carried out, for initiating the study and also for their helpful advice and criticism throughout. I would also like to thank Dr. Lawler of the Galton Laboratory who examined all the blood samples. Without the help of the chest physicians in many parts of the
country, too numerous to mention by name, it would have been impossible to even contemplate the work. They have suffered considerable disorganization of their clinics in order that this work might be carried out and I thank them most sincerely. Finally to

the twins who have most willingly cooperated in the survey, I extend my gratitude.
REFERENCES
i. Diehl, K. and von Verschuer, 0. (I933). Zwillingstuberkulose. Jena, Gustav Fischer.
2. Diehl, K. and von Verschuer, 0. (I936). Der Erbeinfluss bei der Tuberkulose. Jena, Gustav Fischer.
3. Kallman, F. J. and Reisner, D. (I943). Twin
Studies and Genetic Variations in Resistance to
Tuberculosis. J. Hered., 34, 293-30I.
4. Maynard Smith, S. and Penrose, L. S. (I955). Ann. human Genet., 19, 273-289.

