THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON
OFFSPRING
By ROBERT J. EWART, M.D., M.Sc., F.R.C.S., D.P.H.
THERE are two methods by which the ideals of the Eugenist may be attained, each of which has a sphere of usefulness in our efforts for the common weal. The first has for its object the improvement of the breed, and the second making the best use of what we possess under the present conditions of mating.
The first method selects the parents, whilst the second secures the most favourable conditions for the production of the young, and as these two ideals have different applications to the general
scheme, they require different handling. It is quite obvious that
interference with the free choice in selecting a mate is for many reasons undesirable, though there is good evidence to believe that some restriction of the choice might be followed with beneficial results. \Ve may take it, that the majority are in favour of some form of segregation of the unfit, though there may be considerable difference of opinion as to the meaning to be attached to that word.
In considering the question of breeding, in the collective sense, our object is to decide, not what we desire to produce, but what we wish to get rid of. When, however, we turn to the question from the point of view of the individual, we must approach the problem from the other end of the scale, and see how we can make the best of marriages under the system of " free and unrestricted selection."
Collectively, our desire is to obliterate the undesirable, genius being left to take care of itself. Individually, the positive knowledge of how to produce the best types is stronger than the negative ideal of how to avoid the production of idiots and the physically feeble.
I think it will be admitted that the possibility of good

A02 R. J. Ewart :
is more likely to decide a line of conduct than the chance of evil. Thus, when considering collective eugenics, we decide what types or kinds we wish to eliminate. We must put before the individual the ideal of the best, the fear of evil consequences being relegated to the background. It is easy to say what is undesirable with some chance of unanimous assent, but any endeavour to delineate the best would hardly meet with the same success.
With some the acquisition of the necessary knowledge will be sufficient to dictate a right course; whilst others, lower in the scale of humanity, ignoring acknowledged rules will act wantonly
and without purpose. The proper regulation of their own lives is impossible; they approach, if they do not actually enter, the sphere of collective eugenics, and should be dealt with under that head.
We see that the principles of our creed may demand something from us all, and I should say that he was a poor eugenist who could not produce as the result of his own actions and daily life a progeny that was the best attainable under the existing conditions.
The message that we wish to convey to our countrymen concerns not only the less fortunate sections of our community, but is of great importance to every individual member. I am sure that if the laws concerning reproduction without
reference to selective breeding, which I kropose to delineate,
were obeyed, much of the stigma attached to modern social life would disappear.
I do not wish in any way to detract from the importance of the segregation of physical and mental abnormalities, but simply to point out that this method can be only part of a comprehensive scheme, the object of which is to embrace all who disobey the eugenic law in such a way as to interfere with the production of the best. To define what is meant by the best, is a matter of considerable difficulty; for what is best in one circumstance is not so in another. Thus subtlety of mind may not be the quality most needed by a coal-heaver, though it may be of use to him; physical robustness may be desirable to an organiser, though perhaps intellect would be more serviceable. No doubt those

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 203
possessing the characters most suitable to the needs of their class, whatever they may be, would be the best in a certain sense. But in all circumstances there are certain conditions of physique, intelligence, and vitality, that we consider better than others. Our plan will therefore be to discuss under these headings certain happenings connected with birth, and I scarcely think there will be much disagreement as to the conditions under which the best types are born.
Criteria of superiority, when applied to individuals, as a means of classification, offer a very unreliable and insecure basis of judgment, but the same standards in respect to the mean of a large number, give very trustworthy data. Thus A may be taller than B, but that is no evidence that A is in any way more physically fit than B. On the other hand if the mean height of 1oo A's is found to be in excess of ioo B's, then there is strong presunhptive evidence that the A's have a superiority over the B's. And further, if the crucial test of competition could be applied, it would be found in all ordinary occupations that the A's were on the whole more successful than the B's. Hence, height may be taken as a good standard of physique, in any selected group of individuals of the same race.
Intellectual capability in its relationship to supremacy needs no comment, as its advantages are obvious. That the ordinary classification, as adopted in our schools, is a safe guide, is open to discussion. There is no doubt, that many individuals, who promise well in their earlier years, do not fulfil these expectations when they enter upon the race of life for which we all are trained. The causes of their failure are numerous and need not detain us. When, however, we deal with groups, and not with individuals, the correspondence between success in earlier and later life is unquestionable. Hence, we are justified in taking the standard of intellectual development as indicated by scholastic results, as a good and fair test of success in later life.
The causes of death are very various, and it would not be accurate to assert, that because X died at the tenth year, his inherent vitality was less than that of Y, who lived to the sixtieth. Such a deduction, however, approximates closely to the

204 R. J. Ewart:
truth in the case of groups of individuals if judged by average results. Thus, we may conclude that height, scholastic aptitude -as judged by the conventional standards and power of survival, may be taken as the criteria of physical fitness, mental development and vitality, and that that section of a community which ranks highest in all of these may be safely classed as " best," and further, that an individual who excels in any one, is better than he who excels in none. Biologically our criteria are synonymous with differentiation of function. The more specialised an organism the higher it stands on the phylogenetic tree.
We wish, then, to know under what conditions men, possessing these characteristics are most likely to be produced. The influences at work can be divided into three divisions, which tend to merge into each other: the hereditary, the natal and the developmental. Hereditary conditions I do not propose to deal with; developmental effects from birth onwards I have discussed in another place. My present purpose is with natal influences only.
These again can be divided under numerous headings, of which I have selected the following for discussion, viz.: the age of parents at birth; the interval after a previous birth and season of year in which birth occurred.
We have thus to consider, the influence of age, parental exhaustion, as judged by birth interval, and season, on physical fitness, mental development and vitality.
A search amongst the published summaries of knowledge furnishes us with practically no reliable information on these points.
This is surprising, for one would imagine that a matter which, after all, is so essential to our well-being, would have been the subject of much analytical thought. We practically know nothing of the conditions, favourable or otherwise, at birth to the production of the triumvirate of the soul, the mind and the body of man. Speculations there have been, and in the public mind there is a vague feeling arising, from primitive instinct, as to what should be avoided; but we possess no accurate knowledge.
Whilst I must regard myself, in a sense, as something of a

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 205
pioneer, I have no wish to take up the position of a prophet, or the attitude of a dogmatic teacher. Rather is it my object to stimulate the interest of those who are so placed, as to be able to verify or confute the conclusions I have formed from such matter
as has, through much patient search, come to my notice. My first enquiry concerns the influence of the age of the
parent at birth. We can investigate this point in two waysthat is either by what I may term the collective or statistical method or by the individual or experimental method. In the former we simply take things as we find them, measuring all and sundry, forming groups according to the age of parent at birth, and noting the mean of each rank.
In the second method we take a few individuals and note the relationship of each member of the family, the conditions being such as are relevant to the point under investigation. This laboratory method, we cannot, of course, use at will, but it is easy to find, in any community, examples which will answer to the restrictions of an organised experiment. Unfortunately, owing to what is known as individual variation, considerable numbers must be taken to obtain reliable averages of any group, and to be quite sure of our results, there should be from thirty to sixty examples studied.
The data on which I based my work, were collected at the town of Middlesbrough, with a population of I05,000 inhabitants of a very mixed kind. The town is prosperous and rapidly growing. The main industry (iron-working) is strenuous, and the conditions of life are severe, the death-rate and rate of infantile
mortality is high-higher usually thaIn any other community of a similar size in this country.
The types selected for my purpose were the children in their sixth and thirteenth years-that is, all those who were born in the years 1905 and I898 and who were still living in i9ii, a period in which there has been no trade disturbance or epidemic of sufficient severity to seriously affect these groups of individuals.
As far as possible, both the individual and collective methods were used, though the main deductions were based largely on the latter. It should be noted that the professional and monied class were not included. This does not in any way weaken

2o6 R. J. Ewart:
the general application of the conclusions, for I have shown elsewhere that in the town under consideration the children of the better working-class rather exceed than fall beneath the average standards of the professional classes and what is usually called the " Gentry." The reason for this is, I believe, the strong influence of selection and the more normal and less pampered life. In no class can we say with greater surety, that the race is to the swift or that it is more fairly run, than amongst the workers in such industries.
Tables I. and II., show in a concise way the effect of the age of both the parents at birth on the development the child will obtain at its sixth year in a normal population, figures being given in all cases where the numbers are sufficiently large to give reliable results. Table III. gives the best age combinations for father and mother. The sequences of means in the various groups is worthy of a little study. It will be seen, with respect to the mother only, that she produces her best girl before her twenty-fifth year, and her best boy in the 26-30 age period, the average being a little over *5 of an inch above the mean height for boys, and a little under that figure for girls.
It is further seen, that towards the end of the reproductive life of the parent, a second rise in the height occurs in both boys and girls. This rise, as will be shown later, is not due to a parental age influence but to another factor. Considering the father, practically the same results are noticeable with respect to boys, though the maximum is reached in the 30 to 35 age period, and not 25 to 30 as with the mother. In respect to girls, the results are not so uniform, though the same trend can be seen. In both cases there is a rise towards the latter end of life. It must be borne in mind that there is a strong correlation between the ages of mothers and of fathers, and hence, an effect that was correlated with the one would, of course, be correlated with the other. Referring to the body of the table, it will be seen that there are even greater differences than those mentioned above. Thus, with a father between 3I and 35, and a mother between 26 and 30, we get a boy of 41V87 inches in height, an excess of nearly two inches over the mean of those born before the twentieth year.

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING

207

TABLE I.-AGE OF PARENTS AT BIRTH AND HEIGHT IN INCHES oF BOYS AT

END OF SIXTH YEAR

Age of Father at birth

Mean

Age of Mother
iHeightat bs'rth

ro and under

2I

~tO

25

26

tO

30

3I

tO

35

36

tO

400 0Over

40

Totals

n inches

20 and under (8) (404'57)6 -(3) (-i)

(37) 40.52

2I tO 25

4 (69) (48) (Io)
- 40°94 40°79

(3)

(2) (I36) 40'99

26 tO 30

()-

(76)
V03

(6o) (II)
41-87 -

() (i6o) 4IV09
-

3I tO 35

-

(8) (43) (27) (8) (86) 40.93
- 40-96 40'43 -

363tOt640 O40-

-

(-I)

(4)
-

4(03-26)7 4(03-02)4

(67)

40-58

over 4 -

-() (-2) 4(V253)6 (29) 4V5

Totals (I'2) (103) (I36) (I20) (75) (69) (515)

in isches 39 69 40'93 4VOI 4V2O 40'70 40'99
Numbers in brackets give the number of instances recorded.

TABLE II.-AGE OF PARENTS AT BIRTH AND HEIGHT IN INCHES OF GIRLS AT END OF SIXTH YEAR

Age of Father at birth

Mean

.Ageo of Mother at birth

20 and under

2I

tO

25

26

tO

30

3I

tO

35

36

tO

40

over 40

Totals

Height in inches

2o and uinder (5) (I 5)
_ 39'58

(6)
-

(I)
-

2I tO 25

(3) (58) (39) (I2) 40°94 40-78 -

26 tO 30 (I)

(6)
-

(44046)4 4(04'47)5

(2)
(I-4)

(27) 4037
- (II4) 40-83
-
(-4) (I53) 40'63

3I tO 35 36 tO 40

--

OVer~-o4-0-

(-3) 4c(Y4~~7~)V69 40('330)7 (-xo) (90) 40°59

- (5) (24) ('4) (43) 40-76

- 40'79

-

- -(I) 4(02°I4)3 (22) 40.44

Totals

(9) (79) (I32) (IO9) (7I (49) (449)

in inchesi - 40'71 40 68 40'73 40 63 40 98
Numbers in brackets give the number of instances recorded.

208 R. J. Ewart:

TABLE III.-SHOWING BEST AGE COMBINATIONS FOR FATHER AND MOTHER

Ages of

Moan height in sixth Mean height in sixth

Father

Mother year of boys born year of girls born

20 tO 25 26 tO 30 3I tO 35
36 tO 40
4I and over

under2o 21 tO 25 26 to 30
3I tO 35 36 to 40

4076 40°79 4I.87
40'43 40'24

39'58 40-78 40°75
40'37

Best combination for a boy is five years later than that for a girl.

TABLE IIIA.-SHOWING INFLUENCE OF AGE OF MOTHER ON PHYSIQUE OF CHILD AT I3'5 YEARS OF AGE (SELECTED CHILDREN)

Boys Age of Mother Number Mean Height

Girls Mean Height

2o and under
2I to 25
26 to 30 30 to 35
36 to 40
4I and over Total

25
I27 I58
I05
75
ig
509

55.9 inches 56 o ,, 56 6 ,, 56.8 556 ,,
556

562 inches 57 3 ,. 570 , 56.6
564 s56o ,,

Note.-Best age combination for boys, is father 30 to 35 and mother 25 to 30. The mean height of such offspring at I3j years is 57-2 inches, for girls, father 25 to 30, mother 2I to 25, mean height is 57-5 inches.
The smallest children in this group were born when both parents were
over 40 years, mean heights being found to be 55-3 inches for boys and 56-o
inches for girls.

The same may be noted with reference to the girls. If we
take fathers of the same age-and mothers variable-that is reading the table from above downwards-or mothers of constant age and fathers variable, that is from side to side, the same differences become apparent, though of the two, it is more marked in taking, the mothers of a constant age. The same rise in both cases is again noted late in the lives of the parents, that is, after the thirty-fifth year.
The contention that the differences we observe are purely nutritional and are dependent on the incubation period of growth, cannot be sustained, for if such were the case the mother alone should be the determining factor.
That pre-natal influence plays a predominant part, however, is shewn by the fact that her influence is greater than that of the father, the causes of which have yet to be considered.
A few measurements made of infants within the first week
of life show practically the same correlation with the age of

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 209

parents, and negative the argument that the differences shown are due to the conditions of life subsequent to birth (Table IV.).

TABLE IV.-AGE OF MOTHER AND PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT OF CHILD AT BIRTH

Age of Mother
19 tO 24 25 tO 27 28 tO 30 31 tO 33 34 tO 36 37 to 39 40 and over

Number
8 32 50 25 22
II
9

Length of Child

Weight

i9*6 inches
I97 ,, 205 ,, 201I ig98 ,,
i9@6 ,9
201I ,,

721bs.
8 5 Pt 88,, ,, 8-6,, 78,, 8'4

TABLE V.-SHOWING INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL GRADE ON THE AGE CURVE OF PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT AT END OF SIXTH YEAR

Superior Artizan Class

Mixed Class

Inhabitants of Slum Property

Age of Mother Number Mean Height Number Mean Height Number Mean Height

Twenty years and under I5

2ISt to 2sth years

77

26th to 3oth years 105

3Ist to 35th years

45

36th to 4oth years

26

Over 40th year

13

4Ir6 inches 418 ,, 4I.6 ,
41'4 407 ,, 40°5 2,

2I 39-5 inches 103 40'9 ,,
139 40°6 ,, 79 40o6 ,,
49 403 ,, 5 4I5 ,

28 40°5 inches 70 3918 it 69 403 ,
52 405 to 35 403 *
13 41R7

Returning to the individual method of inquiry, and selecting only those individuals who fulfil certain conditions, and classifying them accordingly, we see a little further into our problem. When the data under consideration are divided into three classes according to the social grade of the parents-namely, (i), those who can procure everything that is now considered necessary; (2), an intermediate class in which the supply of necessaries
is not a certainty, and (3) our slum population. We see that in the
first case the age influence of the parents is well marked and there is no late rise, in the second the same correspondence is still
distinguishable, though the last decade shows an improved tendency, and in the third, the effects are almost the reverse of what is seen amongst those living under more favourable conditions (Table V.). (In this case the boys and girls are grouped together.) In Tables VIII. and IX. the foregoing results are shown in the form of curves for boys and girls respectively. The first of these Tables-shows in a marked manner the point
under discussion. For wealthier children the curve rises considerably in the

2IO R. J. Ewart :

TABLE VIII.-CURVE SHOWING INFLUENCE OF AGE OF MOTHEZR AT BIRTH ON PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT OF GIRLS AT END OF SIXTH YEAR AMONGST WELL-TO-DO AND POOR CLASS POPULATION

.....= Well-to-do class.

= Poor clas6.

TABLE IX.-CURVE SHOWING INFLUENCE OF AGE OF MOTHER AT BIRTH ON PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT OF Boys IN THEIR SIXTH YEAR AMONGST WELL-TO-DO AND POOR CLASS POPULATIONS -. . . = Well-to-do class. - = Poor class.
, .N
-- \
..z
/
0.e'f centre, with a marked fall at each end. Amongst the poor, though the curve shows the upward and downward tendency at the beginning and end of the reproductive period, in the middle there is a well-marked depression. The question naturally arises, " Why does this happen ? "
In the EUGENICS REVIEW, July, I9II, I showed, as had

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 2II

already been indicated by Dr. Duncan in i879, that fertility in women is greatest at the twenty-ninth year; falling off both before and after that age. Now it is a well-known fact that the average family is greatest amongst the very poor, and further that the birth interval is shortest at the time of greatest fertility, being, in the class under consideration, less than a year and a half. I think it may be stated as undeniable that no woman can suckle and nurture children at the same time without one or other of her offspring being damaged thereby; a contingency that is especially likely to happen amongst the slum households where the general conditions are unfavourable.

TABLE VI.-SHOWING RELATIONSHIP OF INTERVAL OF BIRTH ON PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT OF CHILD AT END OF SIXTH YEAR, BOYS AND GIRLS

Intterval

Number Mean Height Meat Weight

First births

204

3 years' interval and over I54

24; and under 3 years' interval 172

2 and under 21 ,, ,, i8o

Less than two years

I56

41-4 inches 4I17 ,, 40'26 ,
39'9 " 38.6

40'21bs.
394 391 388 S, 372 ,,

TABLE VII.-SHOWING RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INTERVAL OF BIRTH AND PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT OF THIRD AND FOURTH CHILD BORN BETWEEN TWENTIETH AND THIRTIETH YEAR OF THE MOTHER
AT END OF SIXTH YEAR, IN A POOR CLASS POPULATION

Interval

Number Mean Height Mean Weight

21 and under 3 years 2 and under 24 years Less thanl 2 years

63
72 58

41'2 inches
4V3 ,, 40'5 ,,

39 71bs. 39*S ,, 385 ,,

In Table VI. are given the average heights in their sixth

year, of children born at various intervals, the intervals being

the averages for each family, and not those from the preceding

births. It is at once seen that, should the average be

three years or over, the mean stature is greater than that of the

first birth, whilst if it is less than that, the stature is less;

in fact should the interval be under two years the deficit, com-

pared with first births is over two inches. This deficit, as will

be shown later on, is not confined to height only, but shows

itself in both the vitality and the intellect of the children. If

we confine ourselves (Table VII.) to the third and fourth child,

of a series born between the twentieth and thirtieth year, the

influence of adequiate spacing is still apparent, though not quite

so marked.

2I2 R. J. Ewart :
We can,now understand why amongst our poor class population the age curve becomes reversed. The female is used to the greatest extent that her fertility will allow; births at intervals of eleven months being quite common. The fertility before the twenty-third and after the thirty-eighth year, is of sluch a nature as to ensure a sufficient period of rest for some recuperation of her powers; but between these ages, the birth interval may be so short that the mother is unable to bring her whole vitality to bear. Thus one child, as it were, spoils the next, and the net result is the inversion of the age curve, as already shown. Many of the children born in this class do not long survive, and the high infantile rates in slums are notorious. The incidence of death, as I have already shown, follows closely the age and fertility curve. In this connection, a suggestion has been made which is worthy of some consideration, namely, that it is only the more physically robust women, and those who have used themselves well, who will reproduce after the fortieth year, and that this may also help to explain why a rise in the curve occurs at this period. The majority of births occur between the twenty-fifth and thirtieth years, and the differences in the age curves may be one of the causes of the variation in stature between the grades of society. We may put to ourselves the query, " which is the more desirable, three children of a mean height of 39-5 inches or two of 4IVO inches, with all the other attributes of manhood altered in the same proportion ?" As regards the individual, there is no hesitation as to the answer; but from the point of view of economic production it is quite possible that the three inefficients may be better and do more work than the two efficients. Racial supremacy, however, is not a question of numbers, and concerns individual fitness only.
It must not be imagined, moreover, that women escape without permanent inj ury from any excessive strain that they may undergo. To estimate the loss in collective health is almost impossible, and we must fall back upon a rather unreliable source of information, namely, the impression one obtains from working
among,st the poor, and attending to their ailments. These overstrained mothers may be roughly divided into
three classes. Firstly, those amongst whom the yearly reproduction

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 21,3
of a child seems to be the normal occurrence. In this class the mortality of the children is very high, though some do survive and attain a fair degree of development. Secondly, those cases in which both mother and children are hit, the latter dying and tie h2alth of the former being much undermined. Lastly, a few cases where the children are quite healthy, though their production seems to have completely sapped the strength of the mother, and her decease, from some debilitating ailment, occurs somewhere between the thirtieth and fortieth year.
This wastage of life, and production of immature progeny with its consequent misery and suffering to the mother, can to a much larger extent than is generally believed, be traced directly to the unfortunate fact that the fertility of women between their twenty-fifth and thirty-fifth years exceeds their power to reproduce healthy offspring. One cannot help wondering what was nature's object in substituting the polycestrous habit of man for the monoestrous condition of our ancestors. The yearly breeding season, so common in lower animals, would have suited our purposes very well.'
From the above facts, it might be argued that the sequence of birth is a more potent factor than the age of the parents. In a previous paper2 the relative effects of these two factors on infantile mortality were discussed, and it was shown that under proper conditions of rest, etc., the majority of women, barring accidents, are in every way improved by child-birth. It appears as though the exuberant vitality of the growing offspring pervades through the tissues of the mother herself and makes for her well-being.

TABLE X.-SEQUENCE OF BIRTH, INTELLECTUAL STANDARD AND PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT OF ALL CHILDREN AT END OF SIXTH YEAR

Number

First birth
Second birth Third birth Fourth birth Fifth birth
Sixth and over

225
I86 140
ioo
89
203

Mean Height
4V'4 inches 4 V3 ,, 407 ,, 402 ,, 39 9 397 ,,

Percenitage in Ratio between Class 1.

Class I.

and Class III.

33 1.3 33'5 ir8
34 i 6 28 1.0
25 o0g
24 og

1 See " Breeding Season in Man," Medical Officer, July I9I I.
2 Aristocracy of Infancy, EUGENICS REVIEW, July, igii.

2I4 R. J. Ewart:

TABLE XI.-GIVING IN AN HYPOTHETICAL FAMILY THE PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT, AND MENTAL STANDARDS OF AM AVERAGE CHILD AT END OF SIXTH YEAR SUPPOSING THE MATING OCCURRED AT 23RD YEAR FATHER AND 2IST YEAR MOTHER AND AN INTERVAL OF THREE
YEARS BETWEEN EACH CHILD

Sequence Age of Mother Mean Height of Child Percentage in Class I.

First
Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth Seventh

2I 24 27 30 33 36 39

414
4IV9
42V5
408
4O2
40o0 39 9

33%
35% 40% 38%
35% 30% 28%

TABLE XII.-INTERVAL AND SEQUENCE OF BIRTH AND PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT OF CHILD IN SIXTH YEAR

Ago of Mother at Age of Motklr at
birth 2o to 30 birth 30 tO 40

A verage

Meant Mean

Interval of Birth Number Height Numbsr Height

I8t, znd and 3rd child 2 years

I77 41I49 45 4I.I9

4th, 5th and 6th child ij years

78 39'94 49 4084

When we class the mean heights at the sixth year-see Table X.-in order of the sequence of birth, we obtain a series, which corresponds fairly closely to the power of surviving one year under the same conditions.1 If the correspondence werc complete, we should expect to find the second birth exceeding the first, in physical development, but actually it is a little less. From the second birth onwards, however, the resemblance is very close. Thus greater probability of death in the first year is associated with a lower degree of physique in the event of the child surviving.
We have here direct evidence of the selective character of our death-rate in these early years; for we see that infantile mortality falls, with a heavy hand, on those groups2 which attain a lower degree of physical fitness, and the presumption is, that had all the offspring, lived, the means already given would have been lower still.
In Table XI. is given the heights and intellectual development of a hypothetical family of seven, at their sixth year, the first birth occurring at the twenty-first year of the mother-and the rest at a three yearly interval.
In an actual family known to me, the accuracy of this table
1 Dr. Buchan, " Public Health " and ibid. 2 Aristocracy of Birth, ibid.

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 215
has been borne out as regards the sequence of height and development attained. The divergencies observed, from these ideal conditions, were a shortening of the birth interval to two years, from the second to the fifth, and a lengthening to over three, subsequently, between the third and fourth. Owing to the strain on the mother at that time, a mishap occurred and the fourth birth, though still living at the fourtieth year, has not enjoyed such robust health as the rest of the family. W'ith these alterations, this table may be taken as an example of an experimental finding.
Returning now to the age curve of attainable development in Table I. and II., we can understand why we get an apparent rise in the physique of children of a poor population born in the later years of life. It can be explained on two grounds, firstly, that the children born at these ages, and surviving at the sixth year, represent approximately a little over half of those brought into the world, and that this heavy selective rate has removed the weakly and those likely to reach a stature lower than the mean; and secondly, by the lowering of the physique of the children born in the 25 to 30 age period, due to maternal exhaustion consequent on the excessive breeding.
In a population consisting of all classes, as is given in Tables I. and II., the rise and fall in physique according.to age of parents, is still seen, though the curve is very much flattened and tends to be irregular. The inference to be drawn is that the majority of children born must receive at birth something approaching the maximum endowment that the
mother can give, though in a fairly large number, this is far
from being the case. An interesting sidelight might be mentioned at this point,
which has some bearing on the changes in racial characteristics. The question arises, " Are the children born in the most productive period of the parents life more likely to hand on their acquired characters, than those born before or after?" To answer it from direct observation is, of course, almost impossible in the present state of our knowledge. I suggest that the differences of physique noted in our various social grades may arise largely from the better born being economically

2I6 R. J. Ewart:
more productive, obtaining greater remuneration for their work, and thus rising in life. These selected workmen will mate with the better females, and will produce a generation which is some improvement on its ancestry, and thus distinct grades of mankind may be produced.
Selective and restricted breeding has, as we know, become a marked feature of the professional and leisured classes, and this may in some measure account for the increase in height and intelligence that has been one of the most marked features of the history of the upper middle class during the last IOO years. It further offers a very plausible explanation for the great differences observed in the heights of individuals even of the same race, and further-and this is a point of some fundamental importanceit throws great doubt on Weissmann's hypothesis, regarding the transference of acquired characteristics, for after all, age is essentially acquired. If we are to regard the influence of the age of the parent as being indelibly woven into the being of the child, and the effect to be of such a nature as can be transmitted, then this theory is no longer valid. Lastly, we see how alterations may occur in a race without resource to the hypothesis of chance modification, which according to their suitability or unsuitability to the environment, become the characters of a new
kind or are totally exterminated. If this contention be true, then we can easily understand how other factors, besides our immediate surroundings are concerned in framing our future, and that our destiny is more within our grasp than we formerly believed. So much then for physique.
We must now return to the intellectual side of our life. It is unfortunate that we are unable to measure mind with a foot rule; and, an intimate acquaintance with the subjects of our inquiry would be necessary, even to form a rough idea of their intellectual classification. I have no doubt, however, that could one person know all the thousand or more children dealt with, a classification could be made, as accurate as that for height, but such is hardly possible. Further, to take the personal opinion of a number of different observers concerned with the various sections would also fail, owing to the want of uniformity in standard.

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 2I7
If, however, a simple test is decided on, and is applied by those who are naturally unbiassed, and who know the children well, some chance of uniformity is possible. In the present instance the standard taken was the power to read or recognise letters, and the head teachers of the departments concerned acted as examiners.
The mental equipment necessary for the recognition of a word, and the interpretation of its meaning, is a good intellectual test at the sixth year of life, and three fairly well-defined grades can be formed. (i), those who can read little simple stories, and understand their nature; (2), those who can read short sentences, or who know the meaning of a few separate words only, and (3), those who can recognise letters only and who are scholastically termed "babies." Some of the children, however, who have entered on their school life later than others, are found to be wanting in instruction, rather than in their power to acquire knowledge. Still even in their case it was thought advisable strictly to adhere to the test selected.
There is, moreover, no object at the age of 6 in differentiating between the intellectual attainments of boys and girls, the differences being small, and if anything, in favour of the former. Hence, for purposes of classification, I have grouped them together, and have expressed the grade of each group by the percentage that Class I. forms of the total number in that group. In Table XIII. are given the relative positions of each, and taking a general survey of the table, we observe, with slight exceptions, the same sequences as were observed with reference to height, with the difference that the 26-30 age period of both father and mother is the best of the series. There is also a similar improvement in association with the closing years of reproductive life-that is 40 years and over-though it is not so marked. The relative influences of the parent also seem to follow the same trend, and in the body of the Table, where the age of one parent is constant and the other variable, we see that both participate, with the exception of the periods 36 to 40 of both parents, and 4 r and over of the mother, where for some reason the standard reached seems to have been better than would have been expected.

H~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

in

~00

inC

o~~~~~~~~~~~~~c

¢~ lf

e- 00

CI

o ++N 0

N2

t-0C 6l
-
O~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~c .

o CYe') ~ ~~~~ ~~~ ~~~~~ ~~~~~~~ ~~ ~' ~~~e C)
in en~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~4
>eP | | ee) In N co t. o %O I-° 0 C4|t O e4 "oo
00 0

Q 0~~~~~~~iL~n uO~0~~iI n~oc0 ~Ien\~O e~InIb"°
%
H~~~~~~~~~~~
,o

O 1
o

ad mc 8 8~~M~o~~~~~~~~1-d
~Id-'N '0~- I I
o cY)

m en en

en

~e O *

Z 0NC
en C,W4.

ef0-4 y)C4 P114

¢
j<z e C5 4
w

?A a
m

'c P,

Il
1 ed
A
en0
4% 1C0)

II II 009I
U4
+ ,1
0I
C5 0~~)~5-u) S-' %0O z~~~~~~~~~~

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 219
It would be interesting to know at what age of the parents the most noted personalities of the past have been born. I think I might prophecy that the results of such an iniquiry would coincide fairly closely with these statistical findings.
The differences observed between the effects of the influence of age of parents, and of other conditions affecting the health and vitality of the mother can be explained by the fact that, in all nutritional disturbances, nerve tisEues, particularly the brain, are affected less than any other part of the organism; for it has been found by experiments on starvation that these parts of the systems lose least in weight. The experience is, that in disturbances of sufficient severity to seriously prejudice our cerebral organisation, life becomes impossible. Thus it happens that whilst both mother and father are concerned in the development of the physical and intellectual, the influence of the former, though more marked in both cases, is paramount on the physical side of life.' Again, considering the same point in the light of the sequence of the birth, Table X., we see that the first and second
do not differ very much in stature, and that the fall begins really
from the third onwards. In respect to intellect the third appears to be the best when judged by the standard we have adopted, 34 per cent reaching Class I. I think anyone will be able to verify the truth of this point should they happen to kniow a family sufficiently well to grade the intellectual qualitie-s, and provided that the marriage had occurred in early life. Under ordinary conditions it is usually assumed that the eldest is the best, and hence his legal status. Thus the accident of being first makes an enormous difference in the life of that individual. That the first born should be regarded by the parents as being in some way different from the rest of the family is perfectly understandable on grounds of sentiment, but his claim to be more physically fit, and the superior of his kinsmen, cannot be sustained. There is no doubt that he often appears to be so, because he has the advantage of being a few years older than his brothers. Could we in our minds remove this factor, and classify all the members of a normal family as they appeared at the same age,
1 The old aphorism of the father for brains and the mother for health, finds some support.

220 R. J. Ewart:
there would be no difficulty in verifying the truth of the foregoing conclusions from our own experience.
We thus see that the law of primogeniture is based really on sentiment and not on what is rational and I think most of the heads of our notable families would naturally choose, were they able to do so, the best of their progeny to bear the honour of the name.
In a normal population, the first and second children are physically very similar, but the third reaches the highest standard intellectually, if a suitable birth interval has been allowed. The want of exact correspondence between physical and mental development as judged from the point of view of sequence, probably finds its explanation in the relative influence of nutritional (and other) factors.

TABLE XIV.-INTERVAL OF BIRTH AND INTELLECTUAL STANDARD IN THE SIXTH YEAR OF CHILDREN BORN WHERE THhE AGES OF BOTII PARENTS WERE BETWEEN 25 AND 35 YEARS

All Births

Ifterval fromn previous birth

Standard

First Births Second Less thanl 3 years Mori than 3yeai s

Class I.

29 26

69

32

Class II.

22 i8

102

29

Class III.

4 13

46

24

Percentage in Class I. 52% 48%

31%

32%

TABLE XV.-INTERVAL OF BIRTH AND INTELLE!CTUAL DIEVELOPMENT AT END OF SIXTH YEAR. WELL-TO-DO CHILDREN

First births Over three years' interval Under 3 years' interval

Number -
85 I37

Class I. 36 5I

Per cent. 42% 42% 37%

The relatively smaller influence of nutritional disturbances on the development of mind as opposed to physique is further supported by the observation (Table XV.) that the percentages of children attaining the highest intellectual standard is very
much the same in those born over and under the three yearly interval, the percentages in Class I. being 3I and 32 per cent.
respectively in those born between the twenty-fifth and thirtyfifth years of the mother. On the other hand the change in attainable height is marked.
This table further shows atn apparently contradictory state.ment, namely, that at this age period the second births do not

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 22I
reach such a high intellectual development as the first. It is explained by the fact that the period includes three years of rise to maturity and seven years of fall, and naturally the majority of the first births occur in the earlier period and seconds in the later.
Table XVI. is of some interest and may be regarded as the reverse aspect of the previous line of argument. In this instance, instead of dealing with the best, the incidence of actual mental defect between the seventh and twelfth years is considered. According to the official standards of the epileptic and feebleminded, sixty children out of 9,980 were found suitable for special instruction. In all these cases the age of the mother at birth was obtained, and the 9,980 were divided in a similar manner as before
as regards the age of the mother, and the incidence of mental
defect calculated on a basis of I,OOO children in each group.

TABLE XVI.-AGE OF MOTHER AT BIRTH AND THE PRODUCTION OF FERF-BE-MINDED CHILDREN

Age oj Mother

2o and tnder XI to 25 z6 to 30 3I to 35 36 to 40 4i atd owtr Totals

Number of Feebule--

minded born and

5

7 I7 ID 10 5

63

still living

Number of children

born and still sur- 650 2,550 3,050 2,370 I,I40 220

9,980

viving

Feeble-minded per

8

3 5 8 9 X3

6

It is seen that the probability of a child being mentally weak is least at the age period of 25 to 30, only o03 per I,OOO being then found, whilst the chances increase towards both extremes, being eight times as great after the fortieth year. With regard to the father a similar correlation is observed, only the group of 25 to 30 appears to correspond to 20 to 25 of the mother.
Here again we possess corroborative evidence of an age infltience, corre-ponding to that on physique.
Borrowing one of Euclid's axioms, we may state it in a modified form-thiis: " Things that are correlated to the same thing are correlated to each other.
Now, as we have seen that physique and mind are associated

222 R. J. Ewart :
with age at birth, we should expect mind and physique to vary synchronously. This is seen to be the case though it only holds good in what I may term normal life, that is, where something approaching the conditions already enumerated have been obeyed.
TABLE XVII.-CURVE SHOWING RELATIONSHIP OF HEIGHT TO INTELLECTUAL
~ ~ IMDEVELOPMENT. WELL-TO-DOCLASS POPULATION
m ? Ir.s9q X0 V 4A 43 4 F 4 4 --
Table XVII. graphically illustrates this point. Where we see that as the mean height of any group increases so does the percentage of children attaining the higher standard.
It would be unjustifiable to assume from this that a small person is stupid and a big one intellectual. There are, no doubt, many examples of men below mean stature who have had great influence over their fellows; but it does appear that the factors of age of parent, and to a less extent, nutrition, or anything affecting development, do influence both stature and intellect in a similar way.
This conclusion does not agree with Mr. Heron's and others findings for the children attending the elementary schools of the London County Council; but his basis of intellectual development is open, as Mr. Heron admits, to serious criticism. We now come to the third part in the above-mentioned triumvirate, namely,-vitality. In a previous paper (Aristocracy of Birth)
this point was discussed in detail with reference to the power of

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 223
an infant to survive one year, in relationship to age at birth, and sequence. In both we found the same trend of events as have already been shown in connection with physique and mentality. We wish now to consider these different classes of individuals and see what is happening. The scope of this portion of the inquiry is of course limited, as the information procurable is very meagre, ending at the fourteenth year.
The interesting subject of the relationship of death and its immediate cause to the age of parents at birth is one which has received no attention, aind even my own investigations, such as they are, may be summed up in a sentence; though I have sufficient evidence to make me believe that where data are procurable it offers a very fertile field for research. Shortly, we may say that cancer seems to fall more heavily on the younger than the older members of a family, as if this disease is more prevalent at maturityand in old age, and if some of the influence of time is transmitted to the offspring, the real age of the younger children should be regarded as being greater than the number of years they have lived; and hence the reason of this greater incidence of cancer. Again, consumption seems to be least frequently found in the children born at the central periods, beyond these somewhat vague findings it would, however, be unsafe to go.
In constructing a life table, with particular reference to our specific object, the almost essential feature is the consideration of the way in which the deaths occur in relation to the age of parents at birth. Data bearing on this point, without the help of the Registrar General, cannot be obtained.
Individual doctors in practice can of course get some information, but the numbers thus obtainable are much too small to base any conclusion upon, as thousands, at least, would be necessary. We can, however, get some idea of what is occurring by considering the living. This method has been adopted as the only possible one in Table XVIII. In the first column is given the distribution of a number of births (as many as could be obtained) with regard to the age of the mother. The father in this case was not considered. In the second column the numbers are reduced to a basis of i,ooo. In the third column, the number of

224 R. J. Ewart:
children living at the end of the first year is given and distributed in the same way; and in the fourth and sixth columns we see how the constitution of these populations at the end of the sixth and fourteenth year of life is varying. As time progresses the proportion of those born at the extremes decreases, whilst that of those born at maturity increases. The reason of this is obvious; death falls with a heavy hand on the children born
before the twenty-fifth and after the thirty-fifth year.

TABLE XVIII.-SHOWING NUMBER SURVIVING PER I,OOO (EXPECTANCY 0F LIFE) AT TXE
END OF THE FIRST, SIXTH AND FOURTEENTH YE:ARS OF LIFE ACCoCRDING TO THE
AGE OF THE MOTHER AT BIRTH

Age of Mother

at which child

Births

was born Number Per i,ooo

Twenty years & under 57

77

2Ist to 25th years I85

249

26th to 3oth ,, 210 283

3Ist to 35th

I68 226

36th to 40th ,,

go I2I

41 years and over 33

44

Totals

743

End of ist Year End of 6th Year

Number Per i,ooo Nunmber Per i.ooo

45 75

43 71

I56 26o

15I 250

I78 296

i86 308

130 zi6

I35 224

68 II3

64 io6

24 40

25 4I

60I 604

End of s4th Year Num*.vr Per i,ooo
38 64
148 25I i8i 307 138 235 60 ioi 25 42 590

NOTE-The above are random selections from some 2,000 in each age period living in the town under consideration.

NUMBER SURVIVING PER 1,000 OF EACH PERIOD, IN RELATIONSHIP TO THE "REPRODUCTIVE PLATEAU

Born before or after, that is before 2oth year or after 36th year
Born during the " Reproductive Plateau," that is from the 2ast to the 35th years

Births 242
758

End of First Year
228
772

End of Sixth Ysaa
218

End of
Fourteenth Ye 207

782 793

This point is shown more clearly at the bottom of the Table where the two periods before and after the establishment, and during what I have termed the " reproductive plateau " are compared. It is interesting to note, that as time progresses, the number of children born between these years is relatively increasing. How things fare after the fourteenth year I have no
data to show, but I slhould think the results would be in corre-
spondence with the number of years lived. It would seem that the expectancy of life of those born at maturity of parents is about 50 years, and at the extremes is about half that figure. It is a

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 225
point of some interest that, after the forty-third year of the mother the expectancy is about 25 years, which is scarcely sufficient to bring the offspring into the reproductive period. Now as the object of reproduction is to reproduce, births in these late years are in a collective sense valueless, and did we depend on them the race would be rapidly exterminated. If these deductions are correct, then we have strong support to Professor Pearson's contention that 75 per cent. of the deaths are selective in nature; for we are able to see what kind of lives are removed from our midst, by a study of these tables. In fact, should all survive, the mean height and intellect of our race would be even lower than it is to-day. Sentiment, I think, is right in holding to the ideal that, once life is created everything should be done that is possible to preserve it. It becomes vapid, however, when it upholds the ideal of immense families, irrespective of type, as something laudable. Their production is just as much to be condemned as any other form of intemperance, and this form of indulgence is as great a cause of evil as any other that human flesh is heir to, actual immorality, of course, excepted. The Greek ideal of " Temperance in all things," seems to hold good in every sphere of life.
There can be no question that the most effective way to arouse the interest of man is to appeal to him through his cupidity. If we can show that any factor in life has an immediate relationship to finance, and may be used by any individual for his benefit in that respect, we can rest assured that the spread of such knowledge will be much facilitated.
Now from what has been said in respect to vitality, and supposing that the influences persist throughout the whole life, a supposition that is highly probable, we see that the expectancy at birth must vary on the lines already given. We can thus form a much more accurate estimate of the number of years an individual will live than was formerly the case, and gauge more accurately the value of a life for insurance purposes.
Taking Government annuities as an example, it is obvious that no person would invest his money in this way unless he was in good average health at the time. The payments necessary are based mainly on the actuarial tables deducted from the

226 R. J. Ewart:
Registrar General's returns, and partly on the experience of the office. Now we have information which the department does not possess, and which it will be slow to recognise.
We can decide whether such an investment is likely to bring us a larger or smaller return than the open market allows. Thus, supposing that no obvious disease is present and that the life would be placed in the highest class under ordinary conditions, that the birth occurred between the twenty-fifth and thirtieth years (a year or two over 30 for the father and under for the mother), that the interval was at least three years or over from the previous one, and that the birth occurred at the true breeding season in man (January, February and March), then we can be reasonably sure that the annuity age will not only be reached, but that the number of years of life subsequent will be considerably greater than the present calculations on which this form of business is based. In fact, if my data held good, and all who satisfied the conditions I have laid down obtained such investments, payment beginning at the sixtieth year, by the time the full number of lives matured, the government would lose about half a million per annum, supposing of course that the existing terms were not altered in the meantime.
At the present time it is impossible to tabulate more accurate data in absence of sufficiently detailed information, or to assign to each factor its relative influence on this aspect of our being. Sufficient be it to say, that even from their financial aspects, the influences of the conditions of the birth on the subsequent development of the man merit careful and detailed study. One point still remains which is of interest both scientifically and sociologically, namely, the influence of season.
That in human beings there is a season at which conception is more likely to occur than at other times is well known, this point having been investigated by Haycraft and myself.'
The season in primitive man, corresponding to the " rut" in the lower animals. occurred in the spring; and its occurrence is still syrnbolised by the May Day Festival, the births occurring the following January, February or March; and in most
1 Medical Officer, igii Loeb (Das Weib) and Fraser (Golden Bough).

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 227
communities it will be found that the greatest number of births still occur in these months.
There is some doubt as to whether the dicestrous animal, like the sheep, or the polycestrous animal like the human being, is to be regarded as the later phylogenetic development. In general the advantages lie with the sheep, and if the polycestrous habit is to be considered as a later development, it is hard to see what object has thus been achieved. The view, however, that finds most general acceptance is that the spring season of heat in man is comparable to certain anatomical structures formerly of use, but now vestigial, such as the appendix, and is to be regarded as a remnant of a former habit which in course of time is becoming obliterated. It would seem as if much benefit would accrue could the habit be re-established through the agencies of the will.
There are certain charges in our physiological organisation that have relation to season, and it would be quite natural to assume that the ordering of life in accordance with such variations wvould lead to a greater potentiality for development and greater expectancy of life. Further, if a child is born in the late winter, and is suckled, it avoids the dangers of the intestinal disturbances of the summer so fatal to young children, and it begins to assume an independent diet when over twelve months old, at a time of year, namely, the spring, when errors in feeding are not so likely to have serious results. It can be said to have enjoyed two summers to one winter.
Bearing these points in mind, we might naturally conclude that those born in conformity with these laws will achieve a greater development than those born at any other season. When this subject is actually investigated the deductions we have made appear to be borne out by facts.

TABLE XIX.-SHOWING INFLUENCE OF SEASON OF BIRTH ON PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT ATTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH YEAR

Seasont
Jan., Feb., Mar. April, MIay, June July, Aug., Sept. Oct., Nov., Dec.

Number
83 82 92 79

.M1eant Hei.-lit
5i6in. 5062in. 49-95itf. 50o33in.

MIeanz lVeight
6I-451bs. 6o0S4l1)s. 57 8911)s. 57 88lbs.

228 R. J. Ewart:

TABLE XX.-SHOWING INFLUENCj, OF SEASON OF BIRTII ON TI-lE NUMBER LIVING (EXPECTANCY OF LIFE) AT THE END OF THE SIXTII AND ELEVENTH YEARS

Borni is;
Jani. to Jullne JulY to Dec.

At Birth

Numzbser Per i,ooo

3,600 519

3,340

48I

At Sixth Year

Number Per I.ooo

2,320
i ,6o

559 441

At Elevenjth Ycar

Number Pir I, CC

3,040
2,060

597 403

Table XIX. gives the height of children in their eleventh year, according to the season in which they were born. It is at once seen that those born in conformity with the prehistoric habit, achieve the greatest development, the height of those born in the first quarter of the year being 5V6 inches as compared with the group of lowest stature born in the third quarter with an average height of 49 95 inches.
It is to be noted that the change of diet would, in the latter class normally occur at the worst period of the year. It is not surprising then, to see in Table XX. that the same correlation is to be observed with reference to vitality. The number per 1,ooo at one, six or fourteen years of age who were said to have been born in the first quarter apparently increases in direct relationship to time, and hence this group must be more vital than any other. In fact the correspondence between these two characteristics is very close. We are now in a position to discuss with some prospect of arriving at a definite conclusion the question whether our race is degenerate or not, though degeneration is not a good word to use. It is better to confine ourselves to the formation of an hypothesis concerning the alterations likely to occur in the nature of our race through the agency of time. If those changes that are now occurring are rendering us less suitable to our surroundings, then we are degenerating-and if not-our race is still following its triumphant march.
The main point turns on the contention that has already been stated-namely, that the children of those born of mature parents receive in some degree an enhanced physique, and that the gift may extend to the third generation, though of course the relationship to the age influence of their immediate parents is paramount; that is to say, if a thirtieth year birth mated with another thirtieth year birth, and if the births resulting

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 229
from such unions again mated in a similar way, an upward trend would be established in physique, mental power and vitality.
Assuming this to be true, the alterations of our race would depend on the grouping of the births round about the thirtieth year, and the way in which individuals combine for purposes of reproduction, supposing that each birth is not detrimentally influenced by the preceding one.
If there is any actual degeneration in our race, there is no doubt that it can be directly traced to the serious errors in the way in which the young are produced and not to environment. It does appear as if severe conditions in after life seem to have rather a refining influence than otherwise.
This line of argument is, unfortunately, contrary to the hypothesis formulated by Weissman, and which has become an axiom in works dealing with heredity, namely, that characteristics acquired during the life of the individual are not transmitted. Thus, a hard and fast line is drawn between hereditary transmission of character and nutritional influences, but in the light of my own work I strongly doubt that such a line exists, and I believe that nutrition and heredity slowly merge into each other through the medium of age; or, to put it another way through the influence of time on the individual. Thus, in its effects on the offspring, we can draw no line between the influence of nutrition and of variations in the interval of birth, between that of the interval of the birth and the age of the parent; and lastly, one cannot separate age from purely hereditary influences. Thus, we might say that heredity is the influence of time in the past, and nutrition the influence of time in the present; and as there is perfect continuity of time, so there is perfect continuity between the factors moulding our race. This theory rather negatives Weissman's axiom, and gives to chance selection as an agency of phylogenetic history a share only, in modifying our destinies. It is a point of some interest to note, that as the mean of one generation does not vary appreciably either from that preceding or following, the mean of the children of maturity must
eventually exceed the development that the parents may have reached. That is to say certain of the offsprings will be better

230 R. J. Ewart :
in physique, mentality and vitality than their progenitors. We are now in a position to briefly summarise the result of our inquiries.
Firstly, the reproductive life of both parents may be delineated by a curve rising fairly quickly at the beginning of the sexual life, up to the twenty-first or second year, and then more slowly until, in the mother, the twenty-eighth or twentyninth year is reached, and in the father the thirty-second or thirty-third, and then slowly declines (" reproductive plateau"). With the mother there is an abrupt fall to zero commencing about the thirty-eighth or ninth, but with the father it is more gradual. In accordance with this age-influence, the physical and mental development and the vitality of the progeny varies. The best girl seems to be produced shortly before the summit of the curve is reached, and the best boy a year or two later. Sex also is influenced; for we find more girls before and more boys after the apex of the curve is passed.
As would be expected, the fertility is greatest when the capability of producing the best has been reached. The two curves seem to coincide. This fact, in certain sections of our community, unfortunately renders the birth interval so short that the age influence is completely obliterated. The economic loss this entails through the impairment of natural physi,que is beyond measure, our late trade disturbances being quite insignificant compared with it. There is evidence, of a special breeding season in man, and children born in conformity with these ancient habits do appear to attain a greater development than their less fortunate brothers and sisters.
The influence of these findings, if true, is obvious. They show us, amongst other things, what improvement is possible in our race and enable us to calculate the loss to mankind through indulgence; also they show us how the spread of the ideal of temperance, together with the education and training of the will to master self, are really the most potent factors for good in our future. Scientifically, these influences form a connecting link between mere heredity, arising from chance selection and environment, in shaping our destiny. And further, they give us some idea as to the position of our race in the wheel of time.

THE INFLUENCE OF PARENTAL AGE ON OFFSPRING 23I
Races, like individuals, are subject to the same master, and from the position of the summit of the age curve, I should say our heyday is past, but that with sobriety and restraint, a glorious and vigorous old age is before us.

APPENDIX

IN Table XXI. is given the correlation co-efficient for the various combinations of conditions already considered. The special co-efficient obtained in each case being, the correlation ratio and the correlation itself, and it is assumed, if it is within the probable error, it is equal to it, and the correlation is linear and
a straight line can be used. Some of the data obey this law, others do not, suggesting a regression of the curve. From these mathematical findings we may say that in the better classes of the population, a relationship between age and physical develop-
ment may exist, the correlation co-efficient being equal to o0i5
and the probable error being + 05. With a poor class population it falls to o6, with a probable error of + *03. This would agree with the conclusions we have already formed, where we saw that
the high fertility at the time of the best period of a woman's li'fe,

TABLE XXI.-CORRELATION VALUE BETWEEN AGE OF PARENTS AND HEIGHT OF CHILD
IN SIXTH YEAR

Well-to-do Class Population

Number o-t

ar

T.

Boys Father 20th to 45th year 148 2'0202 1437 .2327 ,io8 +±057

Mother

,. ..

149 202 II I*448 *2508 .073 + *o62

Girls Father ,.9 Mother

,. .. ,. ..

I30 I*846
126 I-50I

I *306 1-32I

*I752
*3

'092
.342

+±055
+.052

Mixed Pupulation-Mostly Poor

Boys G7irls

Father Mother Father
Mother

20th to 4oth year
,,
""
,, ,,

429 4454 389 405

2o056
2 o5 2 O5I
2-029

2-486 i6o *o8i + 032
2v663 *I34 'o27 + o33 2-53I 'I12 'I23 +'029 2'59 *I225 '017 +'033

Both parents (good class population) for all children (Mean)
Both parents (poor class population) for all children (Mean)

0
304
871

*2421 '153 +'056
'1321 o6R +'031

232 R. J. Ewart :
if used to the maximum, destroys the age influence, and under certain conditions the children then produced may actually be the smallest and least physically fit.'
It is worthy of note that the mean for the mother in better class children is *2 + *o6 and for the father is 'I ± 05, which is just half. In poorer people even this suggestion of a relationship with the mother does not exist r being within the
probable error (o022 + o3). With the father the correlation is '1 ± 03, that is the same as found in the better class children.
This may indicate that the cause of the differences between these two groups is to be found in the mother, and in the way in which the child is nurtured before birth and not afterwards.
This application of Prof. Pearson's methods shows further that really to get surety, and not simply the suggestion of probable law, thousands of instances are necessary. As my data, though based in all on between 4,ooo and 6,ooo observations, contain groups where the number on which a mean is based does not exceed 20, I hesitate to take the stand of a dogmatic teacher, but rather throw out suggestions for other workers.
1 A second and totally independent series of data give practically identical results so that the " factor of error " becomes much reduced and the assumption ,of the accuracy of the values given is probable.

