PROBLEM FAMILIES

7. March I945. "'The Social Problem Group:
Poverty and sub-normality of Intelligence," by D. Caradog Jones, M.A. Reprinted from the Canadian Bar Review. Published by the Canadian Bar Association, Osgoode Law School, Toronto, Canada.
8. September i944. " Problem Families," by R. C. Wofinden, M.D., B.S., D.P.H., Acting
Deputy M.O.H. and V.D. Medical Officer, Rotherham C.B.-PubNic Health.
9. Summer 1944. "Child Neglect. A Problem
of Social Administration," by A. E. Martin, M.D., D.P.H., Assistant County M.O.H., Leicestershire County Council.-Public Administration Summer Number.

io. Undated 1944. " The Care of Neglected Children." Special Report by the Assistant School Medical Offwr. Lealet by A. E. Martin, MJr., D-P.H.
II. 1943. "'Our Towns: A Close-up." Women's Group on Public Welfare (in association with the
National Council for Social Service).-O2ford
University Press. Booklet.
12. The paper just published (Oct. 1946) of Mr.
Charles G. Tomlinson, B.A. (Admin.), Senior
Administrative Officer, Public Health Department, Luton, is entitled: " Families in Trouble: An Inquiry into Problem Famfies in Luton."

PROBLEM FAMILIES*

By R. C. WOFINDEN, M.DM, D.P.H.
Acting Deputy M.O.H., Rotherham.

TEHE tremendous upheaval in family
life during the recent war and the newly awakened interest in social medicine has served to focus- attention once again on a section of the population originally described by Charles Booth as the " submerged tenth." Within this section are the problem families. These families for one reason or another have not kept pace with social progress and are a brake on the wheels. They are the despair of health de-
partments, education authorities, N.S.P.C.C.
inspectors, and, until recently, of anyone who attempted to improve their lot in life. They masquerade under a variety of names -problem families, social problem families, derelict families, handicapped families and misatisfactory households.
Definition
In spite of the mnltiplicity of names no accepted definition of such families has yet
*An aIdress delivered at a conference on " Problem
Families," held at Manchester on June 22nd, I946.

been produced. In i944 I defined them as
" families with social defectiveness of such
a degree that they require care, supervision
and control for their own well-being and
for the well-being of others." Dr..Burn,
Medical Officer of HeaIth of Salford, has suggested as a working definition " families where the standards of home life are so gravely defective as to damage the normal development of children"'; and Dr. Stal:ybrass, Deputy Medical Officer of Health of Livexpool, has suggested " families presenting an abnormal amount of subnormal behaviour over prolonged periods with a marked tendency to backsliding."' All these definitions suffer from a certain vagueness which, from
the point of view of comparative study, is a
distinct handicap. The Pacifist Service Units have also pointed out the disadvantages arising from the lack of a suitable definition, and the familis of their stuldy
have been selected m-terely by the fact of
their being referred for assistance.
But. does it really matter tha.t a deition,

128 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

incapable of misinterpretation, has not so far been produced ? There are some problems which are extremely difficult or even

done by the mother is negligible, and that the general standard of hygiene is lower than that
of the animal world.

impossible to reduce to mathematical formulae or to submit to strict statistical

Extent of the Problem

analysis, and in the present state of our These are the chief characteristics of our

knowledge problem families would appear to "problem families." One of the aspects I

be among them. Their problems are essen- was asked to cover this morning was the

tially those of human conduct and therefore extent of problem families-how many of difficult of measurement. Nevertheless, I these. families are there in this country ?

have always found that there is little doubt There are no national statistics and, so far in the minds of health and social welfare as I know, there have been only two publi-

workers of their chief characteristics, and in cations in this country estimating the default of an accepted definition reliance localized incidence of problem families.

must be placed on description of these For many years it has been our practice in characteristics. I cannot improve on the Rotherham to keep careful records of these

description I gave originally in I944.
Often it is a large family, some of the children being dull or feeble-minded. From their appearance they are strangers to soap and water, toothbrush and comb; the clothing is dirty and

families. Rotherham is an industrial county borough with a population of approximately 76,ooo; we estimate that we have 243 problem families and that they contain about 900 children under the age of I4 years, i.e.

torn and the footgear absent or totally in- about 5 per cent of all the children under the

adequate. Often they are verminous and have
scabies and impetigo. Their nutrition is surprisingly average-doubtless due to extrafamilial feeding in schools. The *mother is

age of I4 years. Dr. Sidney Savage in his Herefordshire inquiry found that in an area with a population of 90,800 there were 89

frequently substandard mentally. The home, if problem families which incfuded 333 children

indeed it can be described as such, has usually under the age of I4 years, or 19 per cent of

the most striking characteristics. Nauseating odours assail one's nostrils on entry, and the source is usually located in some urine-sodden,

the children. I understand that inquiries into problem families are proceeding in

frecal-stained mattress in an upstairs room. several other tQwns throughout the country.

There are no floor coverings, no decorations on the walls except perhaps the scribblings of the
children and bizarre patterns formed by absent

Certainly this country has no monopoly so far as these families are concerned, but,

plaster. Furniture is of the most primitive, until recently, probably less has been done

cooking utensils absent, facilities for sleeping to tackle the problem family than in other

hopeless-iron bedsteads furnished with soiled mattresses and no coverings. Upstairs there is flock everywhere, which the mother assures us has come out of a mattress which she has un-

countries. Thus Holland, Italy, Austria and Nyasaland are all aware of the nature of the problem and have made varying attempts

packed for cleansing. But the flock seems to to, combat it. In Nyasaland chief reliance

stay there for weeks and the cleansed and re-
packed mattress never appears. The bathroom is obviously the least frequented room of the building. There are sometimes faecal accumulations on the floors upstairs, and tin baths

has been placed on training centres, in Holland on segregation of the families in special estates, in Italy on offering cheap accommnodation in municipally owned fur-

containing several days' accumulations of faeces nished apartments, and in Austria on the

and urine are not unknown. The children,
especially the older ones, often seem perfectly happy and contented, despite such a shocking environment. They will give a description of

use of reconditioned property and longterm educational policies. Suggestions on these lines have been made for tackling

how a full sized midday meal has been cooked problem families in this country,--particu-

and eaten in the house on the day of the visit larly by segregation, but such an idea has

when the absence of cooking utensils gives the lie to their assertions. . One can only con-
clude that such children have never knownf

received little support owing to the obvious stigma attaching to residence in such a

restful sleep, that the amount of housework colony.

PROBLEM FAMILIES

129

It is surely obvious that national statistics on this question are vitally necessary before it will be possible to carry out any long-term planning. The authority for the collection of local statistics should, in my opinion, be the local health department, for the medical and public health aspects of problem families are all-important. The local health authority should be made responsible for the registration of these families, and should work in close association with housing managers, school teachers, probation officers, public assistance officers, and the local inspector of the N.S.P.C.C. Another useful idea is one which originated in Norwich by Dr. Soothill, of an " Unsatisfactory Households Sub-Committee." While such a committee can have few powers and duties, it does provide an opportunity for bringing these cases to the notice of the members of a local authority and giving an opportunity for discussion and making suggestions for improvement.
Ascertainment for Prevention
As a public health doctor, naturally I am most interested in the preventive aspects of problem families. Before we can embark on a successful programme of prevention it is necessary to ascertain the causation of problem families; and before we can find out the root causes prolonged and widespread research will probably be necessary.
The authors of the Pacifist Service Units' Problem Families have said that " study of these cases does not show them to be readily classifiable in distinct social groups," and that " each problem family presents a unique complex of circumstances"; or as Stallybrass puts it " each problem family presents a unique family problem." The implication is that the appropriate cure or rehabilitation is, in turn, unique and individual for each family. The authors further point out that one family in ten has shown sustained improvement with assistance. I know that their experiments have not been carried out over a very prolonged period and that the amount of assistance they have been able to give has, of necessity, been limited. Nevertheless this result does raise the

question whether some more fundamental approach should be made. Observation of these cases does suggest some form of grouping, and while there may be several contributory factors in each case one factor usually serves to predominate. In our Rotherham inquiry we found that about 20 per cent of the mothers of problem families were either certified or suspected feeble-
minde,d cases. Dr. Savage in his Hereford-
shire inquiry estimated that 29-2 per cent of the mothers of those problem families were intellectually defective and therefore ineducable and that 25 per cent of the children of problem families were mentally retarded by 3-4 years. Surely, then, here is one large group already. We all know the extent to which family life revolves around the mother. That a mentally defective woman should be allowed to bear and attempt to rear children is a negation of social progress. The solution is self-evident; more efficient ascertainment of mental deficiency, the provision of more special schools for educationally subnormal children and of more institutions and training centres. Lewis estimated in I929 that there were I05,000 feeble-minded children between the ages of seven and sixteen in England and Wales, and there is no reason to suppose that the numbers are any less to-day. These children, with the present widespread scandalous shortage of accommodation, are the potential parents of our future problem families. In short, I suggest that if the mental deficiency problem was tackled with more resolution there would be a good chance of reducing the problem of problem families by 2o to 30 per cent.
Classification of Problem Families
I think there are three other groups into which problem families may be broadly classifiable. There is one group in which the chief defect appears to be one of character-either viciousness or weakness in one or both parents. In another group the chief defect appears to be one of training, more
particularly of the mother. It is this group which would probably be most benefitted by the training scheme suggested by the Penal

130 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Reform Committee. Lastly, there is the group where the chief difficulty would appear to be economic. I would place in this group those families in whose case the father is unemployed or dead, cases with low family income (either absolutely or relatively on account of an excessive number of children), and cases in which there is chronic ill health of the mother.
A recent editorial in the Medical Officer
pointed out that, in reality, the problem family is " the extreme end of a more general problem-that of poverty and the degradation that poverty so often brings." This may well be true and doubtless many of those problem families which fall into the economic group would fairly rapidly cease to be problem families if all the suggested social legislation became a reality. But no social legislation so far proposed can make
much impression on those families in which the root defect is one of intellect, training
or character. In these cases the faculty of self-help is conspicuously absent and in the words of Simon " help from outside can hardly be of permanent value, except in proportion as it tends to develop the selfhelping faculties."
It may be that I have over-simplified this question of causation, but instances of families in one or other group come fairly readily to mind. Further inquiry may bring to light groups other than those I have mentioned. I only lay stress on the necessity of looking for families with fundamental similarities because it should help to simplify the prevention of such cases. I know that there is no simple short cut to stamp out this evil in our midst. A start has been made by the Pacifist Service Units and one or two local authorities in the rehabilitation of problem families, but it is imperative that the preventive side should be pursued with equal vigour.
Sane Elements in a Policy
Nursery schools and nursery classes, the training of girls in housecraft and of boys and girls An parentcraft are long-term policies which in due course will show rich dividends. As Professor Crew has pointed out, " In a

modern industrialized society there is a great need for the education of potential parents
in their responsibilities and duties, for a knowledge of the technique of raising off-
spring is not instinctive in us, it is an acquisition to be obtained only through serious study." It is possible that in the distant future, by a more enlightened out-
look on marriage guidance, contraception and sterilization, there will be a more conscious
selection of marriage partners with a view
to the consequences on the next generation. It is significant that the Church should be posing questions along these lines: ". . . do the principles of freedom and the rights of man require that subnormal adults should
be allowed to contaminate a neighbourhood with their sordid, filfthy houses and to bring
into the world children for whom they have no care or affection ? "
There are two other points I would like
to raise before leaving the-preventive aspects of problem families. The building of new houses is at present very prominently before
the public. It has been said that many problem families are housed in slum property
and they have never had a chance to improve, but that when they are provided with a new house they will improve. Our experience in Rotherham does not bear this out. Nearly half of our problem families are in good houses (municipal or the equivalent) and many of these families had been moved from previous slum property. In the pre-
war years it had been the custom to house
bad tenants next door to the good in the hope that by precept and example the former would improve. Unfortunately such has not been the case.
The second point I should like to raise is one that has been mentioned by several who have written on this subject. Stress has been laid on the importance of noting the early symptoms of family disintegrationpoor school attendance, dirtiness or verrmn infestations in the children, arrears of rent and so on. Any such case should rapidly be ascertained and the appropriate supervision and assistance given in order to preserve the family unit. In my experience such cases have not been common, but

PROB3LEM FAMILIES

I31

perhaps this has been because we have not To what extent these households form the

been specifically on the look-out for thern. reservoirs for infectious disease or the breed-

But I find it difficult to believe that a family ing grounds for juvenile delinquency is not

that has. once lived in a decent, hygienic known.

manner with a satisfactory routine can ever

sink to the depths of these problem families. Fate of the Children

Surely it is more a question of what prevents One of the most serious and immediate the family from rising above this level than consequences of problem families is that of

what causes them to be pulled down to this child neglect. The two are very closely

level. In the majority of cases I suggest associated and it is this question which has

that theproblem family is handed down from brought the subject of problem families

generation to generation partly by inherited before the public. One could almost argue

characteristics and partly, in the words of on a priori grounds that if children are living Dr. Stallybrass, by " an atrocious upbring- in conditions such as I described earlier in

ing" of the children.

my paper they must inevitably be neglected.

Problems for Research

Yet such children are often well nourished and, in spite of their environment, appar-

We shall not be in a position to consider ently quite happy. They have the family

the full consequences of problem families instinct well developed and will lie freely in

until we lsnow how many there are through- an effort to protect their parents. One is

out the whole country. From the Rother- torn between two conflicting emotions-the

ham and the Herefordshire figures it appears desire to pre'serve the family as a unit and

that the average number of children in these the desire to protect the children and give

families is high, and the question arises, Is them a satisfactory environment. I say

this type of family propagating itself to a conflicting emotions because, in present

greater extent than other families ? Some circumstances, it is rarely possible to rehabili-

observations of Titmuss are very much to tate the family in situ without the children

the point on this question. He says,

undergoing further hardship. The employ-

It cannot be regarded as wise or healthy if a ment of " home advisers," as in Norwich, considerable section of the future population is and the work of the Pacifist Service Units is

being recruited from a number of very large and very poor families. Is this the position in England to-day ? Are we, or are we not, confronted with a situation in which the economically under-privileged are producing a disproportionately large number of babies while those

an endeavour to reconcile these conflicting
emotions. But the high percentage of ineducable problem family mothers inevitably
vitiates much of their work. In any event it is being increasingly

more favoured with a good environment are realized that it is folly to prosecute all unduly restricting the size of their families ? parents for child neglect when many of

Titmuss goes on to say, "The answer . . . them, owing to lack of ability, cannot be

is that we do not know." Once again the held responsible. When a mentally sub-

need for further research is amply demon- normal parent is sent to prison for child

strated. Nevertheless, if these families are neglect the State iS, ironically enough,

reproducing themselves at a high rate, punisling the parent for its own deficiency.

Savage has shown that in Herefordshire their Evidence of the efficacy of a prison sentence

infant mortality rate is almost twice as high for child neglect might be obtained by an

as the average annual infant mortality rate examination of the number of cases in which

for that area. In the older children Savage the parents are prosecuted a second time for

says " the most serious detectable change in the same offence. I have been unable to

.the children (even when the mothers were discover any figures for the whole country,

of average intelligence) was a very consider- but in the last ten years in Rotherham, out

able retardation in school, amounting to of 40 cases prosecuted by the N.S.P.C.C. for,

mental deficiency in some of the children." child neglect involving the removal of I50

132 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

children to the Children's Homes, only one powers with regard to the children. -On the

case has been prosecuted a second time. other hand it would seem to be wrong, after

This would appear to be evidence in favour removing all the children in such cases, to

of prosecution, the implication being that allow the parents to start having another

the prison sentence had produced the neces- batch of children. Yet in such cases there

sary improvement in the parents. But is nothing to prevent them from doing so

from personal observation this is not the and the local authority is to all intents-and

case, and I think the scarcity of second purposes subsiding the parents' short-

prosecutions is due to the wish to avoid comings.

victimization. If the parent is sent to gaol for child neglect there is, of course, whole- Conclusion

hearted agreement on seizing the oppor- I hope that in this somewhat fragmentary

tunity for training the mother providing she account I have shown some of the inherent

is trainable.

difficulties of problem falnilies and their re-

I am not quite sure how far the local lationship to the general structure of society.

authority is justified in utilizing Section 52 In conclusion r would suggest that the most

of the Poor Law Act, I930, in these cases. urgent necessities are for the further scientific

If the parents are obviously incapable of study of these famnilies, the better ascertain-

being trained to run a home and look after ment and disposal of mental deficiency

their children, then, in the interests of the cases, and the setting up of experirmental

children, it would seem to be the duty of the training centres where parents can be trained

local authority to make the necessary re- in the proper management of a home and

solution to take over the parents' rights and the upbringing of children.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY
Articles appearing inforthcoming issues: FISSION AND DISINTEGRATION IN STTLARIA FOSSULARIS AT DIFFERENT TEMPERATURE.
By T. F. TsuI, J. CHU and S. PM, National University of Chekiang Meitan, Kweichow, China. THE EFFECT OF PEANUT OIL ON THE DESICCATION OF DIAPAUSE AND POST-DIAPAUSE
PUPE OF THE MOTH, CALLOSAMIA PROMETHEA DRURY. By Daniel Ludwig, New York University. THE INTERRELATIONS OF THYROID AND GONAD IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF SECONDARY SEXUAL CHARACTERS IN BROWN LEGHORN ROOSTERS. By BEN B. BLIVAISS, University of Chicago. AN ANALYSIS OF THE FACTORS INFLUENCING THE GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE MAMMALIAN REPRODUCTIVE TRACT. By Dorothy Price, University of Chicago.
Edited by W. C. ALLEE, Professor of Zoology, The University of Chicago. Published
Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press. Subscription: 57s. 6d. per year.
EnglishAgents: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Euenics Review, Vol. llXVII, No. 8

