THE EUGENICS REVIEW

family allowances were extremely glad that the Society was prepared to face up to the problem and to make available its resources, first of all for an inquiry, and when the inquiry was finished, for whatever action
might be necessary. Lord Horder said that he was very grate-
ful to Mrs. Hubback for what he took to be
in essence a vote of thanks. He was not
unwilling to believe that whatever he might have done in respect of various activities which in his judgment contributed to human
health and happiness had been the result of courage rather than of intelligence! Of the
two qualities it was perhaps of courage that there was the greater lack. A friend of hishe called him a friend, but he rather thought
the intention of his speech was not too

friendly-once said of him that he seemed to
be interested in everything from birth control to cremation. He accepted that
compliment at its face value. He was a doctor and therefore his interest did begin with birth, and even before birth, and as to the disposal of the human body after death, that also was a matter of sanitation, if
nothing else. He hoped that those present generally
would agree with Mr. Binney that it had been worth holding this Luncheon. Although it might not have made any constructive addition to their policy as eugenists, it had
demonstrated that they were alive, and that they were bent upon extracting from this
evil thing, war, whatever good may accrue to their fellow human beings.

ABORTION- RIGHT OR WRONG? *

By DOROTHY THURTLE
Author of the Minority Statement in the Report of the Inter-Departmental Committee on Abortion

Origin of Inter-Departmental Committee
Tr' HE disappointing results of the Maternity and Child Welfare Act of I9I8 in
reducing maternal mortality and morbidity led to the appointment, in I928, of an Inter-Departmental Committee with the following terms of reference: " To advise upon the application to maternal mortality and morbidity of the medical and surgical knowledge at present available and to enquire into the needs and direction of further research work." This Committee finally reported in I932, and subsequently a further investigation was undertaken by medical officers of the Ministry of Health, who paid visits to various centres and made a detailed examination of actual conditions, and of the working of the I9I8 Act. The results of this investigation were published in I937, and although the I928 Committee made reference to abortion, the medical
* Substance of a paper read at a meeting of the Eugenics Society on March igth, 1940.

officers went further and recommended that
an examination should be made into the
influence which abortion may exert on
maternal mortality and morbidity and
future child-bearing. The Inter-Departmental Committee on
Abortion was accordingly set up in May, I937. It consisted of fifteen members, of which five were women. Of these five, four were titled women and the fifth was myself. Two were doctors. One of the women
doctors resigned at an early stage, for domestic reasons, her place being taken by a male barrister, so that four women only
served on the Committee for most of the time. The male members were two barristers, one being the Chairman, Mr. Norman Birkett, three gynaecologists, one medical officer of health, the chief London magistrate, one coroner, one prosecuting solicitor, and a representative each from the Ministry of Health and the Home Office.
Memoranda was submitted by individuals

ABORTION-RIGHT OR WRONG?

Il

and organizations, and great care was taken public health and contraceptive work, that

to ensure that every point of view should among women who have no access to contra-

be represented in the evidence before the ceptive knowledge, it is the rule rather than

Committee. Every memorandum submitted the exception for efforts to be made to

was circulated to each member of the Com- bring on a period which is overdue. Invari-

mittee, although every individual submitting ably this is regarded as a sign that pregnancy

a memorandum was not necessarily invited may be present, and recourse is had in the

to give evidence.

first place to drugs, and when these are

The Committee sat for two years, meeting unsuccessful, to other and more sinister

47 times, taking evidence from 55 witnesses. methods.

Its report was issued in June I939.

The majority of my colleagues were so

Work of the Committee

bold as to report that in their opinion spontaneous abortion still accounts for a

At this point I should explain that when majority of the total number of abortions

I accepted the invitation to serve on the which occur. I did not feel convinced of this,

Committee I had an open mind on the and find no evidence to confirm it. My

question of abortion, and in fact knew position is somewhat agnostic-I do not

very little about it. I have always been very know. Even my colleagues, however, had to

active in pressing for contraceptive facilities admit that the practice of criminal abortion

for all women, and my sense of justice and appears to be growing.

equality has revolted against the unfairness

of the existing lack of system which causes Criminal Abortion

the poorest and weakest women to bear On the question of criminal abortion, it

the burden of constant child-bearing.

is my view that few women, lacking contra-

The Committee analysed abortion into ceptive knowledge, can escape the charge of

three groups-spontaneous, criminal and being criminals, for the reason I have already

therapeutic. It is quite impossible to given. A graphic description of the methods

ascertain what proportion of the abortions adopted by women when they fear they are

classed as spontaneous are in fact not pregnant, is to be found in the Majority

criminal. The I928 Committee, as well as Report of the Inter-Departmental Com-

the medical officers who investigated the mittee. This description throws light on the

question subsequently, both laid stress misery and suffering borne by women in

on the complexity of arriving at the number their efforts to control their natural fertility.

of cases intentionally induced. The I928 When it is realised that a great proportion

Committee reported that " when to the of this unhappiness is avoidable and would

biological aspects are added the problems not occur if contraceptive facilities were

due to intentional concealment, it is clear generally available, one realizes the heavy

that the clinician may find it difficult or responsibility lying at the door of the obscur-

impossible in any given case to determine antists in this matter, chief among which are

whether an attempt has been made at to be found in the Churches and among timid

artificial induction or not. . . . Most of the politicians.

medical witnesses . . . had a distinct im- I found a tendency among my colleagues to

pression, gathered from their clinical restrict the consideration of criminal abor-

experience, that the practice of intentional tion to those practising in undesirable

induction of abortion is more frequent than conditions among the poor, and I therefore

formerly."

introduced the question of illegal abortions,

This opinion is supported by those who and abortions induced for inadequate reasons

have had considerable experience among of health, carried out by qualified men in

groups of working class and other women. high positions, in nursing homes and in the

I am of opinion, and I think I shall find private houses of the rich. The operation

support from other women interested in known as dilatation and curettage covers

12 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

a multitude of abortions, and the complaisant practitioner who wishes to oblige his patient has developed a technique which would give great difficulty to the police if they attempted to prosecute him. The woman who wants to go winter sporting or who finds that a pregnancy would interfere with her activities during the season has no difficulty in persuading certain medical men to perform a suitable operation, at a price. The working woman on the other hand, whose condition might call for such an operation, has the greatest difficulty in getting it.
Therapeutic Abortion
The law with respect to therapeutic abortion, as laid down by Mr. Justice Macnaghten in the case of R. v. Bourne has made it clear that reasons of health must be taken into consideration as well as the life of the woman. This interpretation gives wide scope to medical men. They have in many cases been in the habit in the past of operating, on grounds of health, on women who could afford to pay excessive fees, and many operations have been carried out on very slight medical grounds which would not have been considered in the case of poor women. While welcoming this interpretation of the law, it still does not help the vast majority of women-it merely makes less risky the practice of fashionable medical men. Whether their fees will drop accordingly is a matter on which I am not competent to speak. It is true to say that the difference between the fee charged for a dilatation and curettage in the case of a rich pregnant woman, and that charged for one performed for certain conditions on a woman or girl who is not pregnant, is usually not for the medical risk alone, but for the surgeon's risk in performing an illegal operation in the one case, as against his security in performing the other.
Mortality and Morbidity from Abortion
It would be idle to attempt to establish an opinion that criminal abortion is not responsible for the greater proportion of all deaths arising from abortion, but it would

be true to say that our investigation established the fact that the death-rate is less impressive than might have been expected.
The Registrar General's figures for I937
gave the average risk of death from abortion
as approximately the same as -that from
child-bearing. It is generally agreed and re-
cognized that spontaneous abortion accounts for very few deaths, and the rate in criminal abortion is therefore correspondingly high. Notwithstanding this, it came as a surprise to members of the Committee to learn that the mortality rate was comparatively low. The real problem is ill-health caused by the
practise of unhygienic manipulation or by
drugs.
As soon as this fact dawned upon me, I
made a practice of asking all witnesses one simple question which took this form. " This committee has been set up to consider ways and means of reducing maternal mortality and morbidity arising from abortion. If all abortion attempts now being carried out in secrecy and under bad conditions were to be carried out by skilled practitioners in aseptic conditions, do you think a reduction in maternal mortality and morbidity would result ? " In every case the answer was in
the affirmative. Even the Roman Catholic
witnesses concurred in this proposition. Having delivered themselves into my hands,
those witnesses who were passionately anxious that no relaxation of the law should
be made, then proceeded to argue that if abortion operations were made easy to come
by, many more women would avail themselves of them, and argued further that remote morbidity would result.
I confess that I still find the question of morbidity arising from abortion operations, even carried out in the best conditions, a difficult one. The only people who can speak
with authority on this subject are those
medical men who have performed such operations for slight reasons, or for no medical reason at all. In the nature of things they are unlikely to give themselves away. In addition, in many cases it is possible that after performing the operation they never see their patient again and are not in a position to observe the results. I

ABORTION-RIGHT OR WRONG?

was assured by my gynaecological colleagues can render to the police. Doctors desirous

that such operations often produce undesir- of retaining the confidence of their patients

able results later in life. I know women are extremely reluctant to take any action

who have had more than one operation which will imperil this.

who appear to be normally healthy, and must They also recommended the issue by a

admit therefore that I was not very impressed magistrate or police officer, on production

by the assurances of my colleagues on this of prima facie evidence, of a warrant to

point. Their attitude on two matters of search any house or other place suspected

which I had considerable knowledge did not to be used in connection with the Offences

give me confidence in their freedom from Against the Persons Act, i86i, that the

prejudice. The two matters in question were words " poison or other noxious thing "

contraception and the public health work should be replaced by the words " any

carried out by local authorities. I heard it substance whatever" and that coroners

suggested that the practice of modem should be circularized to stress the import-

methods of contraception led to serious ance of exercising the utmost vigilance in

conditions, and this I could not accept. investigating all deaths following abortion.

With regard to public health services I came They recommended that the sale of

Xto the conclusion that, with honourable alleged abortifacient drugs should be re-

exceptions, the medical profession still regard stricted, or abolished altogether, that

these services as encroaching on their vested advertisements of female pills should be

interests, which are of more importance to abolished, and that all workers and doctors

them than the health of the people the coming in contact with women Fhould im-

services have been set up to help. I should press upon them the ineffectiveness of taking

perhaps qualify this by saying that I believe drugs, and the danger to health entailed.

that the exceptions are increasing as time I was not impressed by any of these

goes on.

proposals, because I felt that something

Doubtful as I am in this matter of more fundamental was necessary. The law

sequelae to abortion, it seems to me that as it stands is in contempt with modem

almost any condition would be better than public opinion. Great sympathy is felt with

allowing existing practices to continue, and the victims of abortion, even among those

I reported accordingly.

who administer the law, and something less

Enforcement of the law

negative is required to deal with the problem. I regard the sale of abortifacient drugs as

My colleagues spent a great deal of an evil because in many cases women spend

time and thought on trying to devise money they can ill afford on drugs which

methods of enforcing the law as it stands, cannot do what is claimed for them. In so

and made proposals which did not strike far as these sales are taking money under

me as likely to be very effective. For false pretences, they are to be condemned,

example, they said " it is important that but I should strongly oppose attempts to

every citizen should co-operate with the restrict the sale of any drug that may even-

police in the enforcement of the law." tually be found to bring about abortion, until

What could be more priggish and pious such time as every woman in the country is

than that? A great majority of people in a position to protect herself against con-

have a sneaking sympathy with the abor- stant pregnancies by efficient contraceptive

tionist, and particularly with the woman methods.

who has had recourse to her or him. One of From this it follows that I dissent from

the greatest difficulties experienced by the the recommendation of my colleagues that

police is the secrecy with which such cases if the new oestrogenic preparations now

are surrounded. My colleagues also recom- in an experimental stage eventually become

mended that doctors should keep in mind effective as abortifacients, they should be

the importance of the assistance which they controlled and the sale restricted.

x4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

I was disappointed and astonished that my mental and physical characteristics are likely

colleagues would not even go so far as to to be inherited, the Eugenics Society would

propose that contraception should be made agree that abortion is desirable. Incest

available for all women. In the course of would also probably be accepted as a proper

this discussion, in order to bring home the indication.

point, I asked my colleagues to reveal the In my report I included rape both in

size of their own families. Four members older women as well as in young girls, and

out of the fifteen admitted to four children I made no distinction between what are

or over. If I had placed the number at sometimes described as wilful girls, who

five instead of four, only one member lead young men on, and innocent girls who

would have qualified. I could not accept are Victims. My colleagues, while express-

the argument that advice should be with- ing sympathy, found the difficulties in the

held from the majority of working women way of amending the law in this way

because middle-class and rich women are insuperable. I do not understand why. In

not prepared to bear their share of main- the first place, the number of cases is small

taining the population at a size considered and cannot affect society, while the effects on

necessary for the well-being of the country. the girls themselves might well be disastrous.

My impression was that the majority of my I do not know whether my colleagues were

colleagues were deeply concerned with the of opinion that the numbers of young

problem of maintaining the population, but girls becoming pregnant would increase if

I pointed out that other methods must be they realised it was possible to dispose of

found for dealing with that problem.

their pregnancies. This suggestion was

I do not apologize for raising the question certainly made. I was not convinced that the

of contraception for it is of vital importance difficulties were insuperable, particularly

in considering the question of abortion. An as many European countries have already

effort is made in some quarters to make a enacted legislation permitting abortion in

distinction between abortion, (sometimes such cases.

referred to as " murder ") and contraception. The indication for abortion in which I am

The assumption would appear to be that most interested however, and which may

the seed has no life until fertilization has give rise to controversy, is that women

taken place. This of course is nonsense. who have had four or more pregnancies

The law in the Infant Life (Preservation) should be recognized as fit subjects for

Act has recognized the existence of an abortion operations should they desire this.

individual life after 28 weeks of pregnancy. I recommend this for two reasons. In the

In the words of the Act, if a woman has been first place, such women have done their

pregnant 28 weeks or more, this is prima share in maintaining the population. An

facie proof that she was at that time pregnant even more important consideration is that

of a child capable of being born alive. experience shows that the maternal death

Abortion prior to that time would therefore rate increases after the third child and that

appear to be merely the removal of develop- the risk increases with each additional

ing cells, and to me, is only one step along the pregnancy. In addition families of more

line from methods to prevent conception. I than four are more frequently to be found

believe that this is the way many women among people of low income, and the ill-

feel about it. No responsible person would health rate among these mothers is exceed-

advocate an operation for abortion after ingly great, as medical officers of health

this period, and it is very doubtful if any in the distressed areas and working class

experienced criminal abortionist would take districts generally can testify. In fact, as

the risk of operating after the third month. I see it, the problem of maternal ill-health is,

Indications for Abortion

if anything, even greater than that of mortality.

I do not doubt that where undesirable I may be asked why I do not advocate

ABORTION-RIGHT OR WRONG?

facilities for abortion for all women in any when she finds herself again pregnant at a

circumstances. It is true that I am one of short interval, the woman in very many

the increasing number of people who believe cases takes steps to bring on her period.

that parenthood should be voluntary, but If she is unsuccessful she may at a late

to enable this to become effective I prefer stage attend the welfare centre, or decide

to continue to press for wide facilities for to let matters take their course until it is

the spread of contraceptive knowledge as time to book a midwife. If there is any

an alternative to abortion. The right to abnormality, she has probably left it too

abortion for its own sake is something in late for treatment, and she may eventually

which I have no particular interest. Neither be found swelling the statistics of maternal

have I any particular interest in the woman mortality.

who wishes to have no children at all. I With the growth of private birth-control

believe she is rare, and is usually able to clinics there has grown up a practice among

take care of herself. I fixed the number of women attending them, of regular visits at

pregnancies at four because I believed it to intervals of one or two years. These visits

be reasonable, and likely to appeal to normal are of inestimable value. The examinations

people as a moderate suggestion, particularly reveal any abnormal condition that may

taken in conjunction with the increased have arisen without the knowledge of the

risks which I have mentioned.

woman, and conditions which might have

Constructive proposals

become serious if neglected are able to be treated. There can be little doubt that the

The Maternity and Child Welfare Act of gynaecological health of the women regularly

I9I8 has done a great deal to improve the attending birth-control clinics is a great

health and welfare of infants, and the improvement on that of the average woman

reduction in the infantile death-rate has been who does not receive such regular examina-

progressive. The results among mothers have tions.

not been so marked, although it is true This experience is one that the Ministry of

that after remaining stationary for several Health should weigh very carefully in con-

years, an improvement in the maternal sidering a comprehensive scheme to reduce

mortality rate showed itself in I936, and in maternal mortality and ill-health. The Minis-

I938 it reached a low record. The morbidity try is alive to the fact that the centres are not

rate is not found in statistics, but is un- attended as well as they should be, and there

doubtedly high, and is due to a number of will not be much improvement so long as the

causes, among which poverty is one of the centres are only interested in mothers with

most important.

babies.

The Departmental Committee which re- The Ministry must first recognize the hard

ported in I932, after examining the records fact that women are reluctant to bear child-

of 6,ooo women who died in childbirth, ren at intervals of eighteen months or two

estimated that at least one-half of these years, however robust they may be, and

deaths might have been avoided. In many if proper contraceptive facilities are not

of the cases diagnosis in early pregnancy available they will do all in their power to

would have allowed the condition to be get rid of pregnancies after the first few.

treated, and the woman and child saved. The first step to be taken therefore is to

In other cases, early abortion would at permit contraceptive advice to be given

least have saved the life of the mother. to all women regardless of the state of their

One of the greatest difficulties experi- health. The women should be encouraged

enced by welfare authorities is to persuade to make return visits for routine examinations

pregnant women to attend the ante-natal and for refitting their appliances.

centres as soon as they become pregnant. At the ante-natal clinic pregnancy diagno-

There is a very good and practical reason for sis should be available. Many women

this. After the birth of two or three children, dose themselves with drugs unnecessarily

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

under the impression that they are pregnant Since the Inter-Departmental Committee

when in fact they are not. Much misery and made its report the war has come upon us,

nervous ill-health would be avoided if they and the future of all social services looks

could be properly advised. If a woman is very black. But if the country is to survive,

found to be pregnant after the diagnosis, the health of our mothers must be main-

unless she is really desperate, she can be tained, and we can only hope that our

persuaded to go on with the pregnancy statesmen, recognizing this, will eventually

providing she is assured that after it is take the necessary steps to secure healthy,

over she will be given reliable contraceptive happy motherhood.

advice. There will no doubt be exceptions, I could find no member of the Committee

but the average woman is sensible, and the to join me in signing a Minority Report,

desperate expedients now resorted to are and on the other hand I could not sign that

due to the hopelessness of the position. When of my colleagues, as I felt it necessary to

she is pregnant with an unwanted child she produce a report which might form a basis

feels like a trapped animal with no one to for constructive proposals to encourage those

help her. The hope of being in a position to who are working for a real improvement in

control her fertility after the child is born the lives of working women. I remembered

would give her courage to go through it that years ago a Royal Commission was set

once more, in the knowledge that in the up to consider the Poor Law, and that

future she will not be so helpless.

twenty years after it had reported, the

Pregnancy diagnosis is now being carried Minority Report was the basis of sub-

on in some public clinics, and this is good as sequent legislation. Who knows, some time

far as it goes, but it is not a sufficient the Report of the Inter-Departmental Com-

inducement to encourage women to attend mittee on Abortion may receive government

as freely as they should. Contraceptive consideration. If so, I hope that history may

advice is the necessary pre-requisite.

repeat itself and that the proposals of the

I hope I have made it clear that while Minority Report may again form the basis of

accepting abortion in certain circumstances government action.

as necessary at present, I do not regard it I am one of those who do not profess to

as an ideal solution of the problem of a understand the purpose or meaning of life.

high individual fertility rate. The ideal For me, the achievement of human happi-

contraceptive has not yet been found, but ness, and an understanding of human rela-

the great majority of those now practising tionships, are sufficient purposes-they are

the latest methods have cause to bless within my capacity to understand. I have

the scientists who have been working on put forward the Minority Report in the

improvements. When these methods are belief that it will help to increase happi-

available to all women, irrespective of class, ness, or at least reduce avoidable misery,

it will be time enough to discuss whether and it is in that spirit that I commend

abortion at the will of the individual is the proposals contained therein to you this

desirable.

afternoon.

Eugenics Review, Vol. X I, No. 1

