REVIEWS OF BOOKS

43

Study and Treatment of Sub-Fertility
THE Family Planning Association's subfertility committee, referred to above, has
already made considerable progress. The very large number of replies received in response to its advertisement for a pathologist are being examined with a view to selecting candidates for interview. Arrangements are also being made for a demonstration of
methods used in the diagnosis and treatment of sub-fertility, which will be held at the North Kensington Clinic on Saturday,

October 9th, from 2 to 5 p.m. Invitations
will be issued to clinic doctors and other interested members of the medical profession.

Elections to the Society
THE following have been elected Fellows (starred) and Members of the Society during the past quarter:

*Dr. J. Isaac

A. E. H. Laston, Esq.

Leslie Jones, Esq. *Sgt. L. J. Latham, R.A.S.C.

*F. Lafitte, Esq. Dr. J. Lorenc

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

BIRTH CONTROL

The absolute fertility is so great that if it

were not for emigration the population would

Beebe, Gilbert Wheeler. Contraception double itself in one generation. However, the

and Fertility in the Southern Appa- author is at pains to stress that he considers

lachians., Baltimore, I942. Williams & Wilkins. London: Bailliere,
Tindall & Cox. Pp. xii+274. Price

fertility reduction as only one factor in relieving the low standard of living. On the other hand, as a single measure, it is preferable to emigration to urban districts.

I4S. The members of the National Committee

THIs scholarly work, published under the on Maternal Health Inc. have for some time

auspices of the National Committee on had an interest in devising control methods

Maternal Health Inc., conveys more informa- of great simplicity, suitable for use among

tion than is implied in the title. Dr. Beebe people in poor circumstances, and so it was

intended primarily to investigate the possi- possible, in liaison with the American Birth

bility of encouraging rural women of high Control League, to formulate a scheme for

fertility to practise birth control. In the the prescription (in the absence of medical

event, it was found possible to explore some advice) of a contraceptive jelly without an

"determinants of fertility in the absence of occlusive pessary. A schedule was drawn up

contraceptive endeavour."

on which the nurse entered the reproductive

The district of the investigation comprises history, both before advice had been given

an area of I09,500 square miles and the and afterwards.

families concerned live under conditions The population eligible was composed of

slightly comparable with those obtaining in women of rural non-farm residence, fifteen

the Rhondda Valley in I930-33, depressed to forty-five years old. It was no surprise to

industry among people who have apparently find that interest in contraception was

become irrevocably separated from the greatest in those of high fertility. The find-

fertile countryside. The district was speci- ings deduced from the completed schedule

fically chosen as a region of low economic have been collated and expressed in graph

opportunity and high population pressure- and tabular form. In many cases, comparison

in other words, from a materialistic stand- and contrast have been made with other

point, limitation of family couldbe welcomed. similar investigations, one in Puerto Rico

THE EUGENICS. REVIEW

and the other in rural Kentucky. One very An analysis of conceptions reported in"those

significant result is that adolescent infertility relying on the prescribed method showed

is by no means the rule, and that chrono- 46.3 per cent alleged as due to one or more

logical age may be a much more exact index omissions to use it, and as much as 45 5 per

of physiological maturity than age t cent due to unknown causes with alleged

puberty. Another is that, in the sampIes regular use.

taken, uncontrolled fertility of the Negroes In a chapter on the organisation of a con-

was well below that of the Whites, probably traceptive service in a depressed rural area,

because of venereal infection and other the classification is suggested into therapeutic

pathological states.

service (in which the patients are referred

Contraceptive practice was, of course, by because of medical contra-indications to

no means unknown before the service was pregnancy) and a general service (such as the

started, two methods mainly in use being one under review). It is obvious that 'the

the douche in Negroes and condom and former must put highest efficiency before

douche in Whites, but the average efficiency anything else, while, in the latter, many

was not good, and conception occurred in 50 other aspects must be watched. It is ad-

per cent of cases; io per cent of the mitted, therefore, that a single prescription

conceptions were terminated by spontaneous was far from ideal, especially since most

abortion, still-birth and induced abortion. clinicians rate the efficiency of an uncom-

(The incidence of the last was lower than bined method as low, and, moreover, the

in selected urban samples.)

patient's confidence is increased if she-

It seemed tJiat the service was welcomed regards the physician as a sympathetic

by those who accepted it, more because it adviser with large resources, rather than a

made contraception available to those who mere purveyor of a block prescription.

desired it rather than because it introduced The yearly cost of the service averaged

or " converted" those previously ignorant $4.20 per patient, but it should be noted

or apathetic. The service was free and it was that it was carried on independently of other

made as easy as possible for supplies of jelly public health services. On the other hand,

to be continuously available. It is believed supplies were obtained at prices below actual

that regularity or otherwise of use is a major cost and no charge was made to patients. It

determinant of risk and highly irregular use is estimated that the cost could be reduced

can offset differences of method. No great in practice from $4.20 to $2-3.

progress can be made in research on physio- Among the appendices is included a most

logical effectiveness until reliable statistics useful discussion of methodology in work of

can be obtained on this point.

this nature in which the author explains his

In assessing the worth of a contraceptive statistical techniques. The bibliography is

service, there is no doubt that acceptability apparently confined to publications in the

of method or methods prescribed is of major U.S.A. and the index is reasonably full.

importance, and Dr. Beebe reasonably con- The format is excellent and there are a few

cludes that regularity of use gave a measure photographic illustrations whose direct

of acceptability. Irregularity of use can be relevance to the subject matter is not

accepted as the first step to discontinuation. stressed.

DOUGLAS ROBERTSON-RITCHIE.

