REVIEWS OF BOOKS
As with other forms of pollution, "fall-out" must be judged by comparing the possible gains with the hazards. In the long run, as Commoner points out, little is gained by lying about the hazards.
Professor Bentley Glass is more of an "establishment type" and consequently is more restrained. In essence however he agrees with Commoner in stressing the interrelatedness of organisms, and the need for circumspection in making large scale modifications to the environment. He is equally forthright in opposition to any actions that will produce "fallout" for he is confident that any increases in the mutation rate would be harmful. Glass does, however, put the matter into non-political perspective by pointing out that mutation rate depends on temperature and therefore that the wearing of trousers rather than kilts may produce as many harmful mutations as all the other agencies. Besides dealing with issues of universal interest, he discusses several that are parochial. There is a curious diatribe against editorial referees and scientific committee men who are accused of delaying publication, withholding grants, and pinching results or ideas. I am as prone to think ill of my fellow men as most, but I doubt if conditions are quite as bad as Glass makes out.
N. W. PIRIE
POPULATION
Sheps, Mindel C. and Ridley, Jeanne Clair (Editors). Public Health and Population Change.
Pittsburgh, 1966. The University Press. Pp. xvii+557. Price $10.
THE TWENTY-SEVEN PAPERS in this volume were read at a Symposium organized at the University of Pittsburgh in 1964. Like the corresponding events which have been arranged annually by the Eugenics Society, its purposes included the promotion of understanding and communication among workers in varied techniques, including biology and the social sciences. The inter-disciplinary emphasis was here, however, mainly on public health and demography; thus, Part VII of the book consists of an address by Dr. Crabtree on the public health aspects of the population problem. Another principal axis of discussion was the identification of issues upon which research is needed; this is reflected in a Report on the Symposium, written by the Editors, which appears in Part VI, and in the character of many of the contributions.
The aspect of population to which attention was principally directed was fertility, and three groups of papers dealt respectively with natality, the physiology of reproduction, and birth control. Other topics given special emphasis were population policy and methods of measurement and evaluation.
Part I of the volume commences strongly with a good account by Professor Glass of the questions that need investigation if we are to understand better the relationships between population policy and demographic events. Historical research, as well as the analysis of present-day statistics, is playing an important part in the development of this important subject. Professor Thomas McKeown stresses the uncertainty of the contribution of medicine in the past to the fall in mortality in Western countries, which he attributes more to increasing economic prosperity in the early phases, and to sanitation in the later ones. He feels that the most important aim for the future is not a pill but to convince ordinary people in the less developed countries of the need for smaller families. Dr. Judith Blake, following up on this theme, argues in favour of "policies expressly related to family roles, and opportunities for legitimate alternative satisfactions and activities" as the "crux of future reduction in family size". Such policies do not require economic advance as a pre-condition, and should replace present policies, which are proving ineffective. Professor Brewster Smith deals with the psychological elements associated with the problem of conveying, one way or another, to the general mass of the people the message that a new way
61

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
of life is needed if poverty is to be abolished. He believes that psychologists should devote more attention to the matter.
In Part II there are five papers, two of which discuss recent trends in fertility in the United States of America and in underdeveloped countries respectively. The first of these, by Professor Goldberg, mentions a number of conflicting results in the study of differential fertility and concludes that little is known about the real causes of it. In the second, Professor Ridley throws doubts on "some common assumptions and preconceptions". Other articles in this section deal with the present position in Taiwan, and with the application of modern techniques to fertility surveys and to the development of community programmes designed to modify family size.
Papers on measurement and evaluation are grouped together in Part III of the book. Professor Lamont Cole surveys some problems of animal population and argues that, just
as the complexity of the phenomena in this field are poorly understood by those responsible for formulating pest-control policy, so also a more subtle practical approach to human population problems must be required. Professor Ansley Coale gives illustrations of the current actual relationships between birth and death rates and age distribution. Dr. Ryder writes a miniature textbook on the methodology of fertility measurement, and his remarks are appropriately followed by a survey of a similar character, on the use of probability models in the study of statistical patterns of human reproduction, given by Professor Sheps. Further contributions in this Section deal with the evaluation of community family planning programmes and with French statistical research into natural fertility.
Papers by two British scientists appear in Part IV, which is concerned with biological aspects of natality and its control. Professor Parkes surveys the various agents now available and describes two methods by which suppression of fertility in males might be achieved. Sir Dugald Baird assembles many interesting data relating to the effect on fertility of such factors as age, parity, physique, diet and race. He concludes that the essentials for easy and efficient child-bearing are youth, and first class physical development and nutrition. Dr. Christopher Tietze submits two contributions-one on induced abortion and sterilization and the other on the history and evaluation of IUCDs, which although still experimental are clearly envisaged as highly promising. Also in this section are papers on (i) lactation and its effects on birth intervals and (ii) problems connected with the newer reproductive controls. In the latter, Professor Lasagna advocates a change of experimental approach in the evaluation of the various possible methods, in order to make the best use of the assessment techniques that have now been established.
Further reference to the control of reproduction is made in three short contributions in Part V, which reports on a panel discussion which was evidently useful in bringing together those who are currently engaged in research on this rapidly developing subject.
In surveying a book of this character, the reviewer naturally seeks to group, to classify and compare, in order both to bring out its essential qualities and to save himself the labour of describing the papers individually (with its attendant problems of saying the same thing several times over in different words). It will be seen from the foregoing remarks that such is the diversity of the contributions in this volume that the labour of individual mention was scarcely avoided. This is, however, attributable to the excellence of some of the papers as much as to lack of cohesion in the Symposium as a whole. It would appear, nevertheless, that medical and public health aspects were rather overshadowed by the population element. Some of the biologists and doctors present may have regarded the ready identification of "research topics" and demolition of existing accepted opinion as having a faintly academic flavour. Nevertheless, the contributions on population policy are excellent, and it is good to see that the demographers are so full of ideas for the future. May they never run out of problems for investigation!
P. R. C.
62

