WAR AND THE BIRTH RATE
By RICHARD M. TITMUSS

J T is to be hoped that one of the results During the last war our birth-rate inter-

of the terrible struggle in which we are
engaged will be to direct more serious

rupted its steady decline to fall suddenly and sharply from 24 * I to I7 *7 per I,ooo popula-

and widespread attention to the falling birth- tion. In Germany the fall was much steeper

rate and the risks involved." This hope, a from 28 3 to I4 3. After a temporary rise

limited and by no stretch of the imagination following the end of hostilities the rate in

a utopian one, was voiced twenty-six years this country then resumed its steady down-

ago by Professor J. A. Thomson within the ward trend. In I938 the rate was i5 I (a

framework of an admirable lecture on the figure well below the lowest point reached

eugenic and social influence of war.* To-day, during the I9I4 war), in I939 it stood at in the midst of a struggle more widespread, I4*9, in I940 at I4 * 6. It is well to remember

more terrible and more expressive of a that this crude birth rate is only a very poor

climax in the social development of man, we approximation to the truth but as we cannot

must repeat that hope. Unlike Professor compute a more accurate index without the

Thomson's day when the war might have necessary statistics we shall have to make do

been expected to lead to a permanent with it during the war. However, we may

change in the trend, there is now, I suggest, probe a little deeper into the material we no escape; we must understand what is have.

happening. Not only has the birth-rate been By the use of a base line to represent the

falling in this country for more than fifty years but one difference between the I9I4 war and the present conflict is the difference

quarterly birth-rates for the decennium I92I-30 and then expressing the io-year rates as IOO for each quarter we obtain the

between two nations at war, one more than following ratios:

replacing its numbers, and the other with a

ENGLAND AND WALES

reproduction rate 25 per cent below replace-

I935 1936 1937 I938 I939 I940

ment.

March 78 78 77 82 8o 8o

Since the last war we have given insuffici- June

8o 8i 83 83 83 84

ent attention to the population problem. Apart from the short-lived influence of a

September 83 December 8i

83 82

83 8i

83 8i

84 79

78 77

little sensationalism the general public The regular course of the quarterly ratios

remains ignorant of what is happening. Much should be noted. The first sign of a change

the same may be said of the Administration; is the September I940 ratio. The reduction

witness the intellectual level of the Commons is large and is significant. That the change

Debate when the Statistics Act was intro- should occur at this point is interesting

duced. It is curious that the Governments because the births taking place during June

we have had in the past twenty years have to September 1940 are those conceived from

shown so little interest in the future size and September to December 1939-the first

quality of the population. Yet when the three months of the war. A very rough

root causes determining a long and un- approximation shows that there were 9,ooo

interrupted fall in the birth-rate wherever fewer births in this quarter than in the

civilization has bestowed its mixed blessings average of the corresponding quarters of

have been unravelled and analysed, we have I935-9. The September-December I940 ratio

gone a long way to understanding the nature shows a smaller drop and a corresponding

of both individual and collective conflict. loss of roughly 5,000. These births were

* " Eugenics and War." The Second Galton Lecture. conceived during December-March I940 February i6th, I9I5. (EUGENICS REVIEW, 1915, 7, I.) when the rush of anxiety due to the war had

49

50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

somewhat diminished and a period of semi- We cannot yet estimate the weight of

normality obtained. The decline in the last these factors, for the Weekly Returns of

six months of I940 caused the drop in the Births only apply to towns and urban

annual rate from I4*9 in I939 to I4*6. If no change had taken place from July to December there would have occurred instead a slight rise. It is significant therefore that the decline did not arise as a result of a uniform decrease spread over the whole year. It should be remembered that these figures do not reflect the influence of the fall of France

populations. As a result of population movements and evacuation the published data for urban communities alone are clearly of little value. For Scotland the Returns to the end of I940 show exactly the same pattern little change during the first six
months but a decided fall from July to

and, what may prove to be more important, December, which had the effect of producing

the effects of heavy and sustained day and the lowest annual birth-rate ever recorded

night raiding.

for that country.

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

STATISTICS

The present work gives the derivations of

formule in great detail and thus makes a

Peters, Charles C., and van Voorhis, real understanding of the working tools of

Walter R. Statistical Procedures and statistics easy. A particularly useful idea

their Mathematical Bases. London, I94I. McGraw-Hill Publishing Co. Ltd. Pp. xiii+5i6. Price 3IS. 6d.
net. As the authors state in the foreword, this is not a comprehensive treatment of the mathematical bases of statistics. But to have given it the title Some Statistical Procedures and a Little Insight into the Mathematical Bases of a Few of Them would

was to open the book with a chapter on " A

Little Calculus," which is a model of sim-

plicity and clearness. The book deals with

statistics mainly on the classical large-

sample lines, an understandable procedure,

as it is mainly addressed to workers on

educational and sociological research, where

samples are rarely small; but some space also given to the more modem treatment

is,!
of

small samples so often encountered ini

experimental work. Thirty pages of statis-

perhaps have been a little too modest. Most books on statistics addressed to the research worker give the methods cut and dried, as in cookery books. At the same time,

tical tables conclude the work. If I were asked which of the two books to buy, R. A. Fisher's Statistical Methods for Research Workers or this book, I should answer: both.

most research workers without special mathematical training find the more comprehensive texts somewhat indigestible, largely because the derivations are usually given in too condensed a form, omitting intermediate steps in the development as " obvious," obvious, that is to say, for the mathemati-

They are in many ways complementary, and there can be little doubt that Peters and van Voorhis's clear exposition of the origin of statistical procedures will help the research worker to apply the formule more safely and intelligently than if he is taking them for granted.

cian, though not necessarily for a biologist.

P. F. MILLER.

