THE PHYSICAL CONSTITUTION AND MENTAL ILLNESS *

By LINFORD REES, M.D., B.Sc., M.R.C.P., D.P.M.

G ENETIC factors are important in the
determination of both physical con-
stitution and mental illness. The
study of their inter-relationship is therefore of intrinsic interest in the field of eugenics. In this paper the term constitution is used in its wider connotation and refers to the sum total of an individual's morphological, physiological, psychological and immunological attributes determined mainly by hereditary influences.
The morphological component of human constitution, which comprises the major part of its external manifestations, has the advantage of lending itself more readily fo measurement than any of the others, and in fact the study of body-build in relation to temperament and various diseases has the respectable virtue of antiquity. Thus, over two thousand years ago Hippocrates recognized two main types of body-build, a slender type, the habitus phthisicus, and a
broad type, the habitus apoplecticus, which
he associated with a tendency to tuberculosis and cardiovascular disease respectively.
The humoural theories of Galen which dominated medical thought for many centuries, included body-build as an integral part. Various types of body-build were described, supposedly due to various humoural admixtures associated with specific temperamental traits and disease susceptibility. In more recent times four main schools have contributed to our knowledge of physical typology and disease.
Modern Views on Physical Types and Disease
Rostan (I828) and the French School generally may be credited with the elaboration of a trichotomous division of bodily
* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on April I5th, 1947.

habitus (digestive, muscular and respiratorycerebral) recently brought back into favour by Kretschmer (I92I) and Sheldon (I940).
The Italian School founded by Di Giovanni (I919) introduced clinical anthropometry, and Viola with his elaborate index classified people into microsplanchnic, normosplanchnic and megalosplanchnic types. Subsequent workers in the Italian school, particularly Boldrini, have not received the credit they have deserved for their careful statistical work in this field. The German school founded mainly by Beneke (I879), who correlated bodily measurements with various organic diseases, was continued by the work of Kretschmer and others into the field of psychiatry. The Anglo-American School, following the lead of Galton and Pearson, used the statistical technique of correlation in order to determine mote precisely the relationship of isolated bodily measurements with mental traits.
Work of Kretschmer
Kretschmer in I92I published his theory of a biological affinity between the pyknic body-build and manic-depressive psychosis on the one hand, and between leptosomatic, athletic and certain dysplastic physiques with schizophrenia on the other. Kretschmer's work stimulated a vast amount of constitutional research in psychiatry, but it lacked anthrometric and statistical validation and his classification of body-build into three discrete types, the leptosomatic, athletic and pyknic, has now become obsolete.
The work that subsequently followed Kretschmer's publication was handicapped because.
i. The variations of body-build in the normal population had not been ascertained by satisfactory objective methods.

50

THE PHYSICAL CONSTITUTION AND MENTAL ILLNESS

51

2. Knowledge on the factors underlying measure of body-type would be given by a

such variations was lacking.

regression equation using body measure-

3. The indices devised of body-build were ments as terms and weighted according to

not based on an inductive approach their saturation with the type factor. Such

designed to determine which measure- an index would be complicated, cumber-

ments in fact were likely to differentiate some, difficult to calculate and therefore of

physical types.

limited practical usefulness. But it so hap-

pened that two measurements were out-

Factorial Analysis of Physique

standing In their high correlation with the

An inductive method suitable for dealing type factor, namely, stature and transverse

with these problems was available in the chest diameter. These measurements had

statistical technique of factor analyses which similar saturations with the size factor, and

had been useful in the study of intelligence. saturations of equal size but opposite sign

Factor analysis was first applied in the with the type factor. The combination of

field of physical measurements in this these measurements in a ratio such as

country by Sir Cyril Burt (I937) and his Stature/Transverse Chest Diameter would be

students (Cohen, i938, I940, I94I; Ham- free from the effect of the size factor and tell

mond, I942). Burt described two main us the individual's position on the body-type

factors governing variations in body-build, scale. In order to have a convenient figure

a general factor of size and a type factor without decimals and a mean near I00,

determining bodily proportions.

stature was multiplied by I00 and transverse

Rees and Eysenck (I945) carried out a chest diameter by 6. As these measurements

factorial analysis of the intercorrelations ot differ as to variability, statisticians would

I7 physical measurements in a group of suggest using standard instead of absolute

200 soldiers. Two main factors were isolated measurements in this index. In order to

similar to those of Burt. The first was a determine whether this was necessary in

general factor influencing all measurements practice, the ratio was calculated both in

to some degree and determining size of the standard and absolute measure in a group

body irrespective of physical type. Analysis of i,Ioo soldiers and the correlation was

of the residual correlations after removal of found to be +0.94. In view of this high

the general factor yielded a second factor correlation the convenient use of absolute

which was bipolar, having positive satura- measurement is justifiable. Thus in men,

tions with length measurements and negative the index of body build derived from the

saturations with breadth, depth and circum- factorial study is extremely simple. In

ferential measurements. This was clearly a females, however, it was not possible to

factor of physical type giving rise to two produce a simple index and- a regression

polar types: a linear type with the breadth, equation had to be calculated.

depth and circumferential measurements Factorial analysis carried out by the

small compared with the longitudinal ones, author on anthropometric measurements of

and a broad type of which the converse is 2oo service women revealed two main factors

true. This dichotomy in bodily architecture as in the male group. There were four

has a striking similarity to the Hippocratic measurements highly correlated with the

delineation of the habitus phthisicus and the type factor-namely, stature, symphysis

habitus apoplecticus.

height, chest circumference and hip circum-

The results of factorial analysis show also ference; and the regression equation calcu-

which measurements correlate most highly lated for measuring female body-build was

with the type factor and therefore are most 0.59 stature +o.47 symphysis height -0.3I

likely to be helpful in the discrimination of chest circumference -o.64 hip circum-

physical types. There are a number of ference.

possible ways of using anthropometric Frequency distribution curves of the index

measurements for this purpose. The best and regression equation were plotted for

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

groups of I,100 men and 400 women, and in both groups body-build was found to be distributed along a normal frequency curve. These curves therefore afford no evidence for the existence of discrete and independent types as envisaged by Kretschmer and
others. We find instead a continuous variation of body-build from a narror or
linear form (leptomorph) to its antithesis (eurymorph).
For convenience of description and investigation of results the continuously graded frequency distribution curve was divided into three types of body-build:
i. Those with index values one standard deviation above the mean (Leptomorphs).
2. Those with index values within one standard deviation of the mean (Mesomorphs).
3. Those with index values one standard deviation below the mean (Eurymorphs).
The Relationship of the Factors to Growth
There is evidence that the factors isolated by factorial analysis are not merely phenotypical but are of genotypical significance.
Hall (I896) in a study of 2,000 school children, found that growth in breadth alternated with growth in length. Similar findings were reported by Duckworth (I929) and Friend (I935). Disproportionate growth at any of these phases may contribute to the adult type of body-build. It is interesting to note that Carter and Krause (1936) found that a well-marked bipolar type factor was present in newly born infants, and it seems likely that this factor is manifested by characteristic differences in growth rates of various parts of the body giving rise to the adult body type. The factors of geheral size and body type elicited by factor analysis appear to correspond to the isometric and
allometric forms of growth described by Huxley (I932) in lower animals.
Further research is required to determine the part played by physiological, biochemical, endocrine and other factors in differential growth rates, all of which appear to be ultimately determined by genetic influences,

Sheldon's Classification of Physique
Of the other recent approaches to the study of variation in body-build the chief is that of Sheldon (I940) who, from an examination of a series of standardized photographs of 4,000 college students, concluded that there were three main divisions of body-build determined by three distinct
components. The components were termed
endomorphy, mesophorphy and ectomorphy,
as they seemed to consist of structures derived from the three primary germinal layers, endoderm, mesoderm and ectoderm. Each component was graded on a sevenpoint scale and the individual classified according to his rating on the three components. Thus 7- I-I would be an extreme endomorph with large abdominal and thoracic cavities and low development of mesodermal (muscle and bone) and ectodermal (skin, hair, etc.) structures. With this method 67 somatotypes emerged from his group of 4,000 students. The somatotypes are not really independent of each other but rather continuous variations of physique artificially demarcated. Sheldon's approach'has been criticized on the grounds of its subjectivity, and although objective methods are available for somatotyping'the 20-2I'age group the basis of the system remains subjective. The photographic method, however, has the advantage of being quicker and easier to carry out than direct anthropometry.
Body-Build and Temperament
There have always been popular notions. on the relationship of physique to personality. Cesar's dislike of Cassius's " lean and hungry look" and his preference for " men that are fat; sleek-headed men, and such as sleep o' nights " reflects this popular view, which also finds expression in the old English apothegm " Fat and Merry, Lean and Sad" and in Shakespeare's description of the good-humoured jollity of the rotund Falstaff.
Such notions have only been tested scientifically in comparatively recent times, partly owing to the difficulties of measuring temperamental qualities and partly because

THE PHYSICAL CONSTITUTION AND MENTAL ILLNESS

of the inadequate methods of classifying the possibility of " halo effec-t " contributing

physique. In recent years two main lines to the correlations will have to be excluded.

of approach have contributed to our know-

ledge of physique and temperament-- Physique and Neurosis

namely, factorial methods and Sheldon's The question of possible- correlations

approach. Using the factorial approach between physique and neurosis has received

Burt (I937) found slight but significant scant attention until recent years. Rees

correlations between stoutness and cheerful and Eysenck (I945) using the Stature

emotions on the one hand and between x too/Transverse Chest Diameter x 6 index

thinness and inhibitive and repressive ten- classified a group of 450 soldiers successively

dencies on the other. Also using the factorial admitted to Mill Hill Emergency Hospital

approach Rees and Eysenck (i945) found a into Leptomorphs, Mesomorphs and Ecto-

tendency for leptomorphs to be more morphs as described above. These divisions

schizoid than eurymorphs who were more of body-build were compared with each other

extraverted, thus supporting Kretschmer's in respect to some 200 items related to

extension of his theory from psychotic to psychiatric illness and the significance of

normal personality types. These findings, differences determined by the critical ratio.

though statistically significant, do not indi- It was found that leptomorphs showed a

cate a sufficiently high correlation for tendency to anxiety depression and obses-

diagnostic purposes. Sheldon (1942) deter- sional symptoms whereas eurymorphs showed

mined correlations between a large number a tendency to hysterical symptoms. The

of traits and found that they tended to form mesomorphs were intermediate to the

three clusters in which traits showed positive extreme types in the majority of traits.

intracorrelations but negative correlations The investigation was extended later to a

with the traits of other groups. He regarded total of i,ioo persons and these findings

these groupings as indicating the three main were confirmed.

components of personality, which he named A similar investigation was carried out by

viscerotonia, somatotonia and cerebrotonia. the author on a group of 450 women service

Viscerotonia is characterized by love of patients suffering from neurosis, using the

comfort, pleasure in eating, greed for regression equation described above to

affection and need of company when classify the group into eurymorph, meso-

troubled; Somatotonia by an asserive morph and leptomorph sub-groups, and it

posture, high energy output, need of exer- was found that eurymorphic womnen too

cise, directness of manner, unrestrained tended to have hysterical symptoms.

voice, over maturity of appearance and need Further interesting relationships between

of action when troubled; and Cerebrotonia physique and neurosis were found by the

by restraint in posture, quick reaction, author (I943b) in a study of physique and

sociophobia, vocal restraint, youthful in- effort syndrome in 2oo soldiers. First, it

tentness and the need of solitude when became evident that the effort-syndrome

troubled.

group as a whole was significantly mote

This threefold scheme of personality com- leptomorphic than comparable normal con-

ponents resembles Sheldon's tripartite trol groups. Second, euirymorphic and

scheme of physique. He found that there leptomorphic effort-syndrome patients

were correlations of approximately +o.8 showed significant differences in the devekqp-

between ectomorphy and cerebrotonia, meso- ment of their illness and its form.

morphy and somatotonia and between The leptomorphic effort-syndrome patients

endomorphy and viscerotonia.

tended to have life-long effort intolerance

These correlations of physique with per- with long-standing hypochondriasis and

sonality traits are much higher than any general neuroticism, whereas the eury-

hitherto found by other workers. The morphic patients tended to have effort

findings need independent verification and syndrome of short duration, precipitated by

54 THE EUGENICS -REVIEW

exogenous factors such as febrile illness and battle stress. Thus, in the leptomorphic patients constitutional (endogenous) factors are predominant, whereas in eurymorphic effort-syndrome patients these are relatively unimportant and exogenous aetiological factors predominate. These findings suggest complex relationships between physical constitution and neurotic disorder and provide further evidence of a constitutional basis for neurosis.
Physique and Psychosis
A vast amount of research was stimulated by Kretschmer's theory. Some investigators were unable to support it; others could support it only in part; but there were some who confirmed it completely. The author in an anthrometric study of 42 manic
depressives and 49 schizophrenics (I943a)
found that there was considerable overlapping in the distribution of body-build in the two groups, but that manic-depressives were significantly more pyknic than the schizophrenics. Depth of chest was the measurement that showed the greatest difference between the groups.
As both pyknic body-build and manicdepressive psychosis tend to be associated with the middle-age period, it has been suggested that their association is attributable to the age factor. When the manicdepressive group was subdivided into age groups and compared with the schizophrenic group, there were still significant differences. Furthermore, it was found that though there was a slight correlation of age -wvith the type factor it was too small to invalidate Kretschmer's hypothesis of a biological affinity between pyknic body-build and manic-depressive psychosis. Kretschmer's theory was therefore supported in the main by this investigation, the chief points of diverence being that the schizophrenic group showed a higher incidence of pyknic bodybuild than suggested by the theory and that the greatest difference in body measurements was in the sagittal plane (i.e. in chest depth).
Clinical observations suggest further interesting relations between physique and the various forms of schizophrenia, e.g. that

simple schizophrenia is associated with a high degree of leptomorphic physique whereas paranoid schizophrenics seem to be more eurymorphic. These are clinical impressions which require validation by anthropometric and statistical methods. Bodybuild also appears to play a part both in the form and the course of schizophrenia. Schizophrenics of pyknic body-build tend to show better rapport and less splitting of intellectual functions than leptosomatic schizophrenics who tend to show a greater degree of introversion and splitting of
intellectual functions (Betz, I942; Kisselew,
I93I). The course of the illness.tends to be shorter in pyknic schizophrenics, whereas very leptosomatic schizophrenics tend to show a chronic dementing course (Kisselew,
i93i; Langfeldt, I937; Mauz, I930;
Vanelli, I932). Similarly it has been found that the response to deep insulin treatment is more favourable in pyknic than in leptosomatic schizophrenics.
Thus we find not only that the physical constitution has significant relationships with temperament and with neurotic and psychotic illness, but also that it seems to influence the development, form and course
of the illness. These findings are of great genetic interest
and point to the effect of the genotypic milieu on the hereditary disposition to mental illness. Thus in schizophrenia, for example, it would appear that the various genes of small effect which determine body-build act as modifiers on the expression of the schizophrenic gene, determining the differences in age of onsef, type of development, mental status and course of the illness between the pyknic and leptosomatic schizophrenics. The study of physical constitution as an integral part of total personality should prove an interesting field for further research in human genetics and clinical psychiatry.
REFERENCES
Beneke, F. W. (I878), Die anatomischein Grundlagen der Kostitutions-anomalien des Menschen, Manburg.
Betz, B. (I942), " Somatology of the schizophrenic patient," Hum Biol, 14, I92.
Burt, C. (I937), " The analysis of temperament," Brit. J. med. Psychol., 17, I58.

THE PHYSICAL CONSTITUTION AND MENTAL ILLNESS

55

Carter, H. D., and Krauze, R. H. (1936),
"Physical proportions of the human infant," Child. Develpm., 7, 6o.
Cohen, J. I. (I938), " Determinants of Physique,"
J. ment. Sci., 84, 495.
(1940), " Physical types and their relation
to psychotic typ6s," J. ment. Sci., 86, 602. - (1941), " Physique, size and proportions,"
Brit. J. med. Psychol, 18, 323. Di Giovanni (I9I9), Clinical commentaries
deduced from the morphology of the human body, New York and London. Translated by J. J. Eyre.
Duckworth, W. L. H. (1929), " Anthropometry," Encylc. Britt., i4th Ed.
Friend, G. E. (I935), The schoolboy, a study of
his nutrition, physical development and health, Cambridge.
Hall, W. S. (I896), " The changes in the form of the body during the period of growth." J. Anthrop. Inst., 25, 2I.
Hammond, W. H. (1942), " An application of
Burt's General Factor Analysis to the delineation
of physical types." Man, 42, 4. Huxley, J. S. (I932), Problems of Relative
Growth, London.
Kisselew, M. W. (I931), Z. ges. neurol. Psychiat,
141, 277.

Kretschmer, E. (I92I), Korperbau und Charakter, Berlin.
Langfeldt, G. (I937), The prognosis in schizophrenia and the factors influencing the course of the
disease, Copenhagen.
Mauz, -F. (I930), Die Prognostik der endogenen. Psychosen, Leipzig.
Plattner-Heperlein, F. (1932), Z. ges. neurol Psychiat, 141, 277.
Rees, W. L. (I943), M.D. Thesis. Univ. Wales,
"Physical constitution in relation to effort, syndrome, neurotic and psychotic types.
- (I943), " Physique and Effort syndrome," J. ment. Sc., 91, 89.
and Eysenck, H.- J. (I945), " A factorial
study of some morphological and psychological aspects of human constitution," J. Ment. Sc., 91, 8.
Rostan, L. (I828), Cours ele'mentaire d'hygeine, Paris.
Sheldon, W. H. (1940), Varieties of Human Physique, New York.
(1942), Varieties of temperament, New York.
Venelli, A. (I932), " La constituzione somatica degli schizophrenici," Schizophrenie, 1, 3.

A QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF DEMOGRAPHY
* * * * -* * * * * * *
Editor: D. V. GLASS Advisory Board:
R. G. D. ALLEN M. GINSBERG R. R. KUCZYNSKI T. H. MARSHALL R. M. TITMUSS
Subscription: 30s. net per volume. Single Parts: ios. net Volume i, Number I, ready July 1947
** * * ** * * * **
Published for the POPULATION INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE by the CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

