EUGENICS AS A MORAL IDEAL

The BeBinnink of a Progressive Reform
By F. C. S. SCHILLER, M.A., D.Sc., F.B.A.

T HE subject of eugenics divides ideals, we must look to positive eugenics.

naturally into two great branches, which sets itself to inquire by what means

which may be called the negative the human race may be rendered intrinsic.

and the positive. Negative eugenics aims ally better, higher, stronger, healthier,

at checking the deterioration of the human more capable, so that human life may be-

stock owing to the rapid proliferation of come happier and more worth living.

what may be called human weeds under the Now this is a very much bigger and

conditions created by cultivation: it is im- harder job. The more one goes into the

perative to cope with this growing evil, and ways and means of it, the more difficult it

easy to see that, unless something is done looks. Still, it is not a task to despair of.

to stop them, the weeds will impose in- It is not impossible. Something very like

tolerable burdens upon the more valuable what is needed has been done once, and can

flowers of humanity, and will crowd them presumably be done again. For the present

out. The admonition to cultivate our gar- human race has evolved, from something

den includes, therefore, the duty of weeding we all think lower and inferior, by the

it. efforts of creatures much less potent, intelli-

It is also fairly easy to see what sort of gent, and well equipped than ourselves.

thing must be done. For the weeds of Under providence no doubt; but is it not

civilization are largely consequences of civi- very near blasphemy to assume that the

lization. Under other social conditions they creative nisus was exhausted in evolving us,

would not flourish and could not exist. and cannot be trusted to sustain further

Natural selection would speedily eliminate efforts if we will make them? Is it not un-

them. All that a society desirous of speakably base and craven for us to content

rational action has therefore to do is to re- ourselves with remaining the poor creatures

frain from cuddling and cultivating them, to we are, when we might become something

withdraw the protection extended to them greater and better? For us to despair of

by social institutions, or better still, so to carrying on the evolution of man would be

improve on nature's crude and cruel methods as to eliminate them painlessly, rapidly, and effectively. Of such improved methods many are knowin, and others can be devised. Negative eugenics therefore, though an urgent need, is practicable, and probably the most important social aim philanthropy can set itself.
But negative eugenics is not enough. It is powerless to improve the human race and

to confess ourselves traitors to the cause of progress and essentially inferior to our apelike ancestors who aspired to better things
and attained theml As, moreover, only the most besotted optimist would contend that at present man is perfect and needs no im-
provement, it is clear that he ought to be improved. He ought to be improved in a great variety of respects and in all possible

to lift human life to a higher level. It can wavs. And it is a great shame that we have

only arrest deterioration. If we want im- done so little to explore the possibilities.

provement, progress, the creation of super- Herein lies the essential and enduring justi-

ior types of humanity, the realization of fication for positive eugenics.

103

I04

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

THE DECAY OF OUR IDEALS

academic ethics has no positive moral value.

Now if the function of positive eugenics Indeed, on the whole its value is strongly

be such as I have indicated, it clearly consti- negative. It is often positively demoralis-

tutes a moral ideal at least as good and ing. The academic disputes as to how (if

legitimate as any other. For it is fit to at all) the Good is to be defined, and how it

stimulate our moral energies and to evoke is related to pleasure, may conceivably be a

moral enthusiasm. Moreover, it may very good mental gymnastic, though even this

well fill the gap in our social structure left may be doubted. But it is an old story,

by older ideals which have faded or become as old as Socrates and the beginnings of

defunct under the conditions of modern life. ethical reflection, that, as his critics com-

It is almosit a secret de polichinelle that plained, ethical reflection is very upsetting to

modern life stands in great need of new and moral beliefs. ' Know thyself ' does not

effective ideals, and that morals are in des- mean ' Respect thyself,' and does not tend

perate need of reinforcement, precisely and to translate itself into ' Improve thyself.'

particularly in the quarters with which posi- So the intellectual analysis of instinctive

tive eugenics would most directly be con- and ingrained emotions and convictions is

cerned. I mean, of course, the social rela- apt to be merely disintegrating.

tions of the sexes and the arrangements for The professors of morals usually try to

the propagation, preservation, and education counter this criticism by contending that

of the human kind. These have always moral theory cannot be expected to have any

constituted one of the major problems of beneficial effect upon moral practice.

human society, and to whatever ideals, Morals, they say, merely provide the mate-

motives, and sanctions any society has rial for ethical theories to contemplate and

appealed, no arrangement has ever been speculate about, and it is vulgar and Philis-

quite effective and satisfactory in practice. tine to look for any more intimate and vital

Now it is no exaggeration to say that over relation between theory and practice. Sub-

large areas of the civilized world sexual stantially the same answer is given to a

morality has broken down, not merely in second objection that ethics, as it is taught

practice-which would be nothing new-but in universities, diverts our natural moral

even more palpably in theory, and that the energy into unprofitable channels, and frit-

great institution which has hitherto assured ters it away in the futile discussion of arti-

the continuance of the race, the family, is ficial and antiquated subtleties which never

everywhere showing ominous symptoms of mattered much and have long ceased to

collapse. It is high time, therefore, that have any practical meaning, while it leaves

we discovered or devised some further aside, untouched and unmentioned, the real

moralizing influence.

pressing problems of moral life.

It is evident, moreover, that the moral This second charge leads on to a third,

agencies on which we have hitherto relied the most damaging of all. Moral philosophy

to curb individual licence and self-assertion is practically useless, not merely because it

are progressively losing their grip on the has adopted a, false theory of the relation of

moral situation. For a variety of reasons, theory to practice. Its professors have in-

including the unwisdom and unprogressive- tentionally, of malice prepense and in their

ness of their attitude towards the problems own selfish interests, made it useless and

of modern life, the religions all seem to be meaningless, in order to shirk a theoretic

waning, and though their moral value is not problem which they could not solve and

perhaps in all cases beyond cavil, there is dared not touch, lest it should get them

nothing to take their place.

personally into trouble. This problem

Certainly ethics cannot hope to do so. concerned the application of moral prin-

Theoretic ethics is a broken reed. No intel- ciples to concrete cases. After the Catholic

ligent man can live long in any academic moralists in the seventeenth century had

atmosphere without becoming aware that come to grief and fallen into ill repute by

EUGENICS AS A MORAL IDEAL

I05

evolving a very scientific but very de- inheritance, can, and should, affect our

moralizing system of Casuistry (upon mis- actions, and modify them for the better.

taken lines) in their vain endeavours to solve For example, the man who knows that there

this problem, the Protestant moralists, who is heritable weakness, defect, disease, or

were really involved in the same difficulty, insanity lurking in the stock from which he

thought it safest to steer clear of the subject springs should conscientiously consider the

of application, to cases, to fact, to life, al- probable effects of his defect, not only on

together. So, in order that the purity of himself, but also on his offspring. If he

moral principles might run no risks of con- finds himself compelled to regard himself as

tamination from contact with the sordid hopelessly tainted, he should abstain from

facts of life, they proceeded to make them parenthood. If he is not so bad as that,

inapplicable in principle.

he should at least make sure that he does

The culmination of this sort of trickery not marry into another tainted stock, and

-for it is nothing more-is to be found in should scrupulously avoid defects identical

the Categorical Imperative of Kant, which with those of which he knows himself to be

ostensibly proclaims the sacrosanctity of the hereditary victim. If he is drawn to-

Duty with tedious reiteration, while actually wards a woman afflicted with a similar taint

forbidding us to ask it what, in fact, our in her blood, say insanity, he should vividly

duties are. It is still esteemed in academic realize the likelihood that some or all of

circles as the supreme effort and example of his children will go mad, even if their

a pure morality, and largely accounts for parents themselves escape the doom they

their emptiness. Its academic admirers have transmit. Already eugenical moral judg-

overlooked the damning fact that it is only ments of this sort are far from rare, though

' safe ' because it is utterly meaningless. they will have to attain a much greater diffu-

For a principle that cannot be applied to con- sion and intensity before they can do much

crete cases at all, or (what comes to the same to rid human stocks of dangerous ' reces-

thing) can be made to answer them in any sives,' or even create a social sentiment

way any one pleases, is as meaningless and strong enough to support strong measures

worthless in theory as it is in practice.

against those who will not or cannot

see their duties in this eugenical light. For

EUGENICAL ETHICS IN PRACTICE

it is one of the most distressing features of the situation that such considerations will

Eugenical ethics clearly will not fall into not occur to those who need them most. The

this trap. It will not refuse to be ' practi- feeble-minded, for example, just because

cal.' It will not refuse to consider applica- they are such, are very unlikely to perceive

tion to cases. It will avoid the dilemma of their duty to posterity. Being incapable of

Casuistry by pointing out, with Aristotle, exercising self-control, they will have to be

that moral rules are never absolute, nor controlled by other means.

meant to be taken in abstraction from cases. But this social control of those who can-

Hence they are never in themselves decisive. not control themselves clearly belongs rather

They are meant for the guidance of moral to the problems of negative eugenics. There

agents with whom the decision must remain. is no doubt that heritable but preventable

But these must learn to apply them with defects contribute a large percentage to the

an intelligent appreciation of the circum- flood of human misery and that their in-

stances of each case. And the better they heritance can and should be stopped. But

understand the circumstances under which I have only alluded to the social failure in-

they are called upon to act, the better is volved in the existence of vast numbers of

their judgment likely to be.

blighted lives brought into the world to

Hence the enormous enlightenment, which suffer needlessly and uselessly, to illustrate

we owe to modern biology, as to the laws the hideous and repulsive immorality of our

which determine our physical and mental present social order and of the systems of

io6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ethics and moral philosophy that do not hesi- ducive to the preservation of a biological

tate to approve of its atrocities, or at best say stock, and so of any valuable qualities of

nothing about them.

which it may be the vehicle. The gens

is not, however, by itself or merely, a bio-

REVIVAL OF THE CLAN

logical stock; it is at most one half of such a stock, and as inbreeding is impossible or

But my aim now is to consider what sugges- dangerous, an association of gentes into a

tions positive eugenics can make to improve congenital aristocracy is requisite to con-

the social order and the human race. I serve the qualities of a superior stock. It

should advocate for this purpose, in the first follows that the conception of the gens must

place, a resuscitation of an ancient institu- be reformed in the light of modern science;

tion which has played an enormous and, on it must embrace the cognati as well as the

the whole, a beneficial part in history, but agnati, it must no longer be conceived as

has in recent times lost greatly in repute patrilinear or matrilinear, but as both. Our

and in many countries fallen into disuse. noble families should realize that they must

I mean the larger family, clan, or gens. It trace their descent through both their

is not too much to say that originally the parents, and that biologically the mother is

gens was the backbone of the early civiliza- just as important as the father, and that

tions. It was nearly everywhere the social the captivation of a callow boy by a flighty

unit interposed between the individual and ballet-girl may mean the ruin of a noble

the tribe, city, or state, and far more potent stock. This realization is likely to be

than the latter in controlling and training a powerful check on the misalliances which

the former. The most cursory reader of are a blot on so many pedigrees. In future

Roman history can hardly fail to apprehend King Cophetua will not marry his beggar

that it is very largely the history of the maid so lightheartedly at sight.

great Roman families, their ambitions, rival-

ries, and policies, and owes its distinctive DEMOCRATIZING AN ARISTOCRACY features to their continuity and tenacity of

purpose. Similarly, the Roman character, Another reform to introduce into the old

in virtue of which, more than of anything clan-system would be a more democratic

else, Rome conquered the world, was formed organization. There does not seem to be

by the stern discipline of the patria potestas. Our histories do not perhaps make it equally

any good biological or social reason why the position of head of the clan should des-

plain that the early history of the Greek cend by primogeniture or seniority without

cities was almost equally dominated by the regard to merit and ability. It should be

great families, and that so long as these made elective, after the fashion I have endured aristocracy was the natural form of sketched in the paper on Eugenical Reform

government in Greece as in Rome. Simi- of the House of Lords,* and it is conceivable

larly, it is obvious that the history of the that with a small number of electors with

mediaeval Italian city-states is essentially a strong esprit de corps and an intimate

family-history, and the superb palaces which knowledge of all the circumstances, all

adorn them are intelligible only as 'the keenly alive to the welfare and greatness

abodes of noble clans of whom a surprising of their family and anxious both on public

number have survived to our days. The and private grounds to pick the best man,

stable civilizations of the East, again, the better elections might as a rule be made

Chinese and Japanese, owe their survival primarily to the family-system which en-

than with the vast hordes of ignorant and careless voters to whom we now entrust our

dured through all the vicissitudes of wars political destinies.

and dynasties. It seems clear then that the gens as a

Of course, it would be necessary to endow the clan with a legal status and certain

form of social organization is highly con- * EUGENICS RevIEw, January, 1929, Vol. XX, No. 4.

EUGENICS AS A MORAL IDEAL

I07

sorts and degrees of authority over its mem- to be a lottery, but it need not be so appall-

bers. In particular there would devolve ingly risky a lottery as it is now rendered

upon it the duty of controlling the matri- by the prevailing ignorance of both parties

monial vagaries of its members. Rules, of as to their own and each other's defects.

a eugenical character and intent, would have And in course of time it ought to become a

to be laid down as to the conditions under lottery in which every one worth marrying

which the clan's assent to a matrimonial should have a good chance of drawing a

alliance would be granted or withheld. prize, in the shape of a eugenically sound

These rules would evidently be more effec- and commendable mate.

tive and easier to enforce than ordinary The institution of the improved clan-

legislation to prohibit socially undesirable system I have outlined would not detract

marriages, and would more narrowly restrict from the influence of the narrower family

the right of a member- of a noble class to upon the individual, but would reinforce and

follow his whims than that of ordinary citi- reinvigorate it. It might indeed be con-

zens. Rightly; for the principle of noblesse tended that it would suffice to rely on the

oblige would clearlv apply.

family spirit alone, without the clan, to con-

But in itself there would be nothing new trol the individual, simplv by cultivating

about the principle of family control of social approbation and recognition of

matrimonial affairs. It is already and every- eugenically superior families and thus fos-

where a very real influence, and in many tering family pride. Now history shows

societies, past and present, left the indivi- that family pride is a potent passion, and

dual, especially the woman, very little one to which men are capable of sacrificing

choice. Too often it took the form of forc- themselves and everything else. It would

ing women to make ' good matches,' i.e. to therefore be a master stroke to enlist it as

marry rich or powerful old men, whom they an ally of the eugenical conscience. But

detested. Perhaps under eugenical tuition there can be no harm in further reinforcing

they may detest them less in future, because and regulating it by setting it in the wider

they will have more admiration for the context of the clan. We can hardly err by

qualities of which wealth and power are imposing too many structural restraints on

commonly the consequences. It may be the licence of the amorphous hordes that

hoped, however, that in the eugenical throng our modern cities.

society of the future family pressure on the

individual will tend to be exercised in a more rational and salutary way, and will in-

SELECTION OF SUPERIORITY

terfere with the individual's liberty of choice Of course, I am aware that these pro-

only in cases where there is genuine ground posals mean a revival of aristocracy. But

for objection and he might well pray to be I would raise the question whether a true

saved from his own desires. Hitherto, the aristocracy is not worth achieving. If we

strongest argument for the love-match has emancipate ourselves from catchwords,

been, not the insight and wisdom of the par- democracy is a means not an end, defensible

ties to them, but the shallowness and unwis- only as conducive to a better life than was

dom of the principles on which the mariage possible under a reign of privileged classes

de convenance has usually been arranged. whose superiority was merely imaginary.

In future we may hope that eugenical The real argument for political equality is

qualities and records will enter more and not that men are born equal, but that they

more into the preparations for the great ad- are born so unequal in so many ways and

venture of mating, and will exercise such a that society requires such a variety of ser-

fascination over the young that they will vices that the only practicable form of poli-

find it easy to fall in love with their posses- tical organization is to ignore their inequali-

sors. It is not probable indeed, for several ties and to give votes to all, and then to

reasons, that marriage will speedily cease trust to the intelligent few to manipulate or

io8 TE EUGENICS REVIEW

cajole the many into abstaining from fatal ideals to sterility and futility. Plato postu-

follies. Now this is not a very strong argu- lated a philosopher-king with absolute power

ment, though it may have been stronger and perfect wisdom who was to institute the

than any that could be urged for any of the ideal state by an instantaneous coup d'&tat.

old alternatives to democracy. But a But his first measure was to be grotesquely

eugenical aristocracy would be a novelty in impossible. All above the age of ten were

the political world, and would really be to be driven out of the city, and the philoso-

superior. Moreover, if we aim at better pher-king was to rule and educate the re-

things, we must follow nature's method. mainder. Evidently Plato did not realize

Whatever else natural selection means, it that he could not have taken care even of

means that some are to be preferred to a single baby.

others, and we too must select if we aspire

to better types of man.

PRIZES FOR DESERVING BABIES

But what are the better types of man we Any practicable, and therefore serious,

should aspire to? The critics of eugenics proposal for eugenical reform must eschew

often assume that it must be possible to such follies. It must not presuppose a revo-

state them with their specifications all com- lution but must begin to be operative here

plete, before it is possible or worth while to and now, and operate more potently as more

make the least eugenical effort. But this is resources are placed at the service of the

a complete delusion. It is not the way we eugenical idea. I will conclude my remarks

ever learn. We learn by trial and error. by sketching one such institution which

We do not know what the good, or could be started by private enterprise with

rather the better, is, any more than quite a moderate outlay, and ask whether

we know what the true, or rather it would not have an effect of the sort de-

the truer, is, in advance of experience. sired. I would call it the Eugenical Baby

Until we have experimented and learnt wis- Show, and proceed as follows:

dom from the outcome of our experiments, First, let a representative committee be

we can only state in general terms that it found of doctors, educators, scientists,

would be good to achieve something better artists, practical philosophers, and other

than the existing average of man, a crea- persons in whom the public would have con-

ture stronger, healthier, wiser, more intelli- fidence. Next let them collect funds and

gent, trustworthy, and moral, and less ephe- organize their Baby Show (or perhaps

meral. Nor need we hesitate to add, 'more merely a Eugenical Section in a Vulgar

beautiful,' though from the strictly bio- Baby Show, which would serve as a control

logical point of view beauty is perhaps the experiment), offering as many and as sub-

hardest of all the coveted qualities to account stantial prizes as their funds permitted. The

for rationally.

parents of the babies entered for these prizes

There is, however, one piece of advice would, of course, have to state their pedi-

which may safely be given to any society gree and allow their statements about the

that attempts to remould itself nearer to the history of the family to be verified. Then

heart's desire Dy eugenical expedients. This the babies would be themselves examined

is that all attempts to reach an ideal must and the awards made after due consideration

start from the actual. It is no use to postu- both of themselves and of their ancestry.

late to begin with a human nature that does Finally, and as a matter of course, their

not exist. The mentality invoked and the pictures would be published, like those of

motives appealed to must be such as are our successful athletes and other notorieties.

familiar to human psychology; the institu- For evidently, to be the first eugenical

tions presupposed must be those operative prize-winner of the year would be a high

in our actual world. Neglect of this proviso social distinction, and a prelude and stimu-

was the fatal mistake which Plato made in lus to further honours. In subsequent

his Republic, and which condemned all his years there would be periodical revisions and

EUGENICS AS A MORAL IDEAL

IO9

renewals of the awards, and further publi- assured. They would be flooded with lucracity about the doings and development of tive and honourable offers of employment, the prize-winners, who would no doubt be and no right-minded girl would dream of aided by eugenical scholarships, with more refusing their offers. A eugenical first pictures. They would thus remain in the prize would soon be recognised as the greatpublic eye, and much would be expected of est prize to be won in the lottery of life.
them-more, and more important things And what about the lower prizes and the than are now expected of a prince, duke, honourable mentions? They too would be athlete, or film star, the attractions of whom well worth winning, and would stimulate they would in a manner combine. They many ambitions, including that of reverswould lead a strenuous life and one highly ing the original verdict and surpassing the competitive, but glorious, and would from original victors. Thus, insensibly but contime to time be re-examined and re- stantly and inevitably, the thoughts of all appraised, in order that the committee of would be turned in the direction of eugenical eugenical judges might estimate how far excellence, and gradually but surely, their they had judged aright, and whether the thoughts would influence and improve their prize-men were availing themselves of their acts. It is safe to predict that sooner or
opportunities. When their education was later an enlightened public opinion thus concompleted, they would go out into the world verted to eugenics would compel every as distinguished men ready made, with a State to take over the private enterprise of national reputation, greater and better de- improving the race, and to extend and en-
served, because more in accordance with force it by legal sanctions. And then biotheir intrinsic merits, than those of the logical evolution might get under way again, characters with which I have compared and man might grow into a being as far them. Every profession would be open to superior to his present type as he now is to them, and their success would be practically the gorilla and the chimpanzee.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 2.

