WE are indebted to General Osborn and to the Planned Parenthood Federation of America for permission to publish this address, which was delivered- by General Osborn at the Federation's Annual Luncheon held on May 7th, 1953 in New York City.
IT will be seen that some of the arguments advanced by our President, Sir Charles Darwin, in his book The Next Million Years provided a theme for General
Osborn, whose address is followed (p. 161) by some comments from Sir Charles
Darwin.
THE views of Fellows and Members of the Society on this discussion are invited.

THE CONTRIBUTION OF PLANNED PARENTHOOD TO THE FUTURE OFAMERICA*

By FREDERICK OSBORN,
Secretary, American Eugenics Society

W E are here today because we are deeply concerned with the wellbeing of our fellows. As Americans
we can meet with a certain satisfaction, because in recent years we have seen a great improvement in the general conditions of life in this country. We have great hopes
for the future. But if we are hopeful, we are also fright-
ened. Our world is full of dire prophecies that man's efforts to improve the world he lives in will be frustrated by overpopulation, famine and race deterioration. Not even Scrooge in the awful presence of the Spirits invoked by Dickens could conjure up a more dreadful end. Yet this spectre is outlined for us by some of our best scientists, and we had better take a good look at it just as they have drawn it for us. Charles Galton Darwin gives us the picture in his recent book, The Next Million Years.t It is about as follows:
Darwin assumes that the natural rate of ncrease for man is such that he should double his numbers in a century. He believes it is evident that no increase of food pro-
*A speech given at the annual luncheon of the
Planned Parenthood Federation of America, New York City, May 7th, I953.
t Hart-Davis. 1952.

duction, however fantastically imagined,
could cope with the natural increase of mankind for more than a fraction of a million
years, and that, though there may be occasional golden ages, as that in which we
are now living in the United States, most of
the time and over most of the earth there will be severe pressure from excess populations, and there will be periodic famines. The fact has to be faced, says Darwin, that it will be starvation that limits the numbers
of the human race.
Darwin believes that the limitation of population (by famiJy planning), if it were fully established, would be an unstable condition, which cannot persist. That people with a natural instinctive wish for children would tend to have larger families than the rest, and would hand on the same instinctive wish to a greater number in the next generation. He thinks that a new balance of population pressures would result, and would not take very long to become established, perhaps thousands of years, rather than hundreds of thousands.
Darwin comes therefore to the following conclusions: That widespread wealth can never be common in an overcrowded world, and so in most countries of the future

'55

I56 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the government will inevitably be auto-
cratic or oligarchic, in other words-dicta-
torships. That there is no reason to foresee
that war in the future will be any less dreadful than it has been in the past. That
there will be a callousness about the value of the individual's life, and often there will
be cruelty to a degree of which we do not
willingly think.
All these are not my words; they are
the words of the grandson of Charles Darwin. Charles Galton Darwin goes on to say that
the prospects do not seem at all good for
improving the hereditary qualities of man.
He ascribes to civilized life a tendency to
sterilize its ablest citizens. He believes that
this is the experience of nearly all countries
which enjoy even a passable degree of prosperity; that the whole thing is a catastrophe which it is now almost too late to prevent; that it is an example of what
happens when a country succeeds in avoiding the Malthusian threat of overpopulation, and that for a million years we have got to put up with all the defects in man's nature as it is now. These again are Darwin's words, not mine.
Now this is a serious picture, which is
drawn by many scientists today. It com-
prises the major rational arguments against planned parenthood. It has many variations. Most French scientists, for instance, believe that the general use of family limitation will rapidly wipe out the race that practices it; so they oppose contraception and urge larger family allowances. This would remedy some evils but enlarge others. It is a gloomy
picture. Now to go back to Dickens. When the
spirit of Christmas Yet to Come finally pointed to the lonely grave, Scrooge in anguish asked it, " Are these the shadows of the things that Will be, or are they shadows of things that May be only ? "
The spirit indicated, as you know, that Scrooge himself could provide the answer. In a very real sense the dark shadows we face today can be dispelled if you, the women of planned parenthood, can achieve your aims. The most recent findings of science do not spell out the doom of man.

You have it in your hands to alter man's
future for the good. Here are some of the
reasons.
There is no evidence that there is a
biological urge forcing women to have more than five or six children when they find it
hard to rear those they have. If women
everywhere have only the number of children they can adequately care for, and in propor-
tion to the reduction in the death-rate, overpopulation will no longer be so threatening. Recent changes in popular attitudes in
India and in Japan have shown, I think,
that there are greater possibilities than we have previously realized for voluntarily
reducing the proportion of overly large
families among poor and uneducated people in overpopulated areas, even though their
point of view about many things is very different from ours. This reduction in presently unwanted children will not necess-
arily happen, but it can happen if it is properly handled. Your efforts to spread
planned parenthood can be made to succeed. I am not afraid of Darwin's argument
that we would soon build a race of people who would want children so much that births would again become unlimited. It seems to me that the new race would be more likely to lavish its increased affections on three or four children properly cared for, rather than bring five or more into the world
to starve.
With a reduced proportion of families of five or six or more, births in high birth-rate areas are likely to gq, down towards the replacement level. If better means of contraception are devised, as they surely will be, and if wisdom is used in their introduction, people will use them voluntarily, not to avoid having children, but to avoid having too many. This process of cutting down the unreasonable proportion of overly large families may be fairly rapid all over the world if planned parenthood is intelligently handled.
There are far greater dangers facing the planned parenthood movement in dictatorships accustomed to authority than in democracies where people are accustomed to sensible voluntary decisions. Dictators will

CONTRIBUTION OF PLANNED PARENTHOOD

I57

want larger populations than those which to their- resources multiplies their problems

would be sought in democracies, because the and puts a heavy load on the United States

optimum population for purposes of power to prevent their starving. It would seem to

is higher than the optimum for purposes of me that in the long run the French were

human welfare. But beyond a certain point, benefited, rather than hurt, by the early

a country gets weaker, not stronger, by start their people made in family planning.

having a large population. If too many are Quite apart from the example of France,

hungry, the population is way past the the experience of the United States since

optimum of power, and becomes a threat to the last war lends strong evidence for the

its rulers. Smart dictators will learn that belief that the increasing spread of con-

they will stultify themselves if their peoples traception does not necessarily reduce the

increase too much.

birth-rate below replacement. In the middle

In some of the European democracies, the thirties, during the depression, the birth-rate

partial use of family limitation has at times went for the first time below that needed for

reduced the birth-rate below that needed replacement; ten or fifteen years later, after

for replacement. As a result, most French the war, the birth-rate went back to a point

scientists seem to believe that, if effective well above replacement, even though family

means of contraception were available to planning had in the meantime become more

everyone, there would be danger of the race widespread. The increase in births since the

dying out. -The situation which has pro- war has been greatest among the people who

duced this belief in France is probably used contraception most, and the increase

unique. For a number of generations least among the people who were least open

French laws for the inheritance of agricul- to any form of family planning. Evidently,

tural lands have put pressure on French psychological and economic factors play a

farmers not to have more than one son to large part in the birth-rate. We are justified,

inherit the farm; and this together with the I think, in believing that, as family planning

French tendency to thrift engendered by becomes more widespread, economic factors

many years of hard living resulted in the and psychological values favourable to

use of family planning in France earlier than having children can, if necessary, be devel-

in any other country of Europe. For years oped to offset the reduction in the number

France was pointed out as a decadent country of unwanted children.

because Germany and England outstripped The development of conditions which will

her in growth of population. Dreadful losses lead people to want and plan more children

of manpower in the first world war further will undoubtedly become one of your

reduced her relative numbers, and strength- activities as you approach your goal of

ened the belief that France was under- family planning for everyone. Meantime,

populated. But there are three important it might be well for planned parenthood to

facts to note about French reproduction; recognize that the cry of race suicide is still

after the first world war, the English as well used against you effectively. People too

as the German rate -dropped further below often get the impression that you are against

replacement than that of France; after the large families. What you are actually

second world war, the French rate climbed against is unplanned families and against

up to or above that needed for replacement; large unwanted families. It seems to me

and finally, the important fact that today, you should make this very clear in every-

of the three countries-England, Germany thing you put out. I know that you favour

and France-France is the only one with a large families where the parents want them

good enough balance between population and can give them adequate care. In certain

and resources to be practically self-support- cases, this may mean really large families.

ing at a reasonable level of living. This is No one would contend that the twelve

far from the case with either England or children of Mrs. Gilbreth of Cheaper by the

Germany, whose over population in relation Dozen fame were a detriment to the country,

E

i58 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

or that they suffered from being so many, is the proportion of -those who die befoire

or' that they were a handicap to their the end o'f their reproduction period. Among

parents.

this Io per cent, a considerable proportion

If society can devise means to encourage a may have some constitutional defect. For

sufficient proportion of large families within a-larger operation of selection, we must rely

a universal system of planned families, we on a selective birth-rate. There is no evidence

need not fear a decline in population; we that I know of which indicates that people

can even count on an increase when that with constitutional weaknesses have on the

seems desirable. The vital job of balancing average more children than do people who

population to resources can be done by are strong and healthy, though the notable

family planning by individual couples on a exceptions are often quoted.

voluntary basis, in the framework of an Studies which were made by the Milbank

advancing civilization. It is not inevitable Fund on the birth-rate of people with a

that population be balanced by starvation, tendency to tuberculosis in upper New York

plague and war, in the framework of bax- State indicate that With the introduction

barity and concentration camps. The task of family planning the birth-rate of the

will require all the brains, all the sincerity, tuberculous dropped sharply below that of

all the sense of purpose which you can their non-tuberculous neighbours. This re-

muster. But I know it can be done. The duction' was voluntary and made for purely

evil spectre raised by Darwin's recent book personal reasons. The reduction in births

and by so many others can be exorcised if would have been even greater if an attempt

we are so determined.

had been made to educate tubercular parents,

If we escape the dangers of over popula- or the doctors or social workers who worked

tion, as well as those of under population, with them, in the danger that their children

can we also escape the even worse danger of would be likely to inherit a tendency to their

race deterioration which so many people parents' disease. Such a process of education

prophesy ? Two different reasons are given is now getting under way. In the years

for the belief that the race is deteriorating since the war there has been an upsurge of

and will continue to do so. In the first place, interest in the subject of what is now gener-

it is assumed that because we save the lives ally called medical genetics, which should

of the weak who would otherwise die, we sharpen the selection already exercised by

are denying Nature's method of the survival reduced births among the sick and deficient.

of the fittest. But this argument is less -A number of heredity clinics have been

effective if properly stated. Natural selection established in the United States, some of

made for a strong race not because the weak them in connection with medical schools.

did not survive, but because they did not Books on medical genetics have recently

have enough children to spread their weak- been published for the use of the general

nesses. We need not be anxious about saving physician, so that he can intelligently advise

lives by modern methods of medicine, sanita- his patients on the risks they may be running

tion and public health so long as the birth- in having children when they are themselves

rate of those with constitutional defects or carriers of some form of weakness or defect.

weaknesses is sufficiently below that of the It should surely be possible for an informed

rest of the population. Natural selection people to make the birth-rate as selective

as practised -by Nature is very hit or miss. as the death-rate has been in the past, or

Nature operates on the law of averages. even very much more so. Personally, I

More of the weak die than of the strong; believe we may count on the medical pro-

but that does not mean that all the weak fession and the public health authorities

die, or that all the strong survive. In recent for just such a result. They may occasionally

times in this country we have so reduced need a little prodding, and we should bear

deaths that death selection can operate on that in mind. We should never for an instant

only io per cent of the population, which forget that family planning can be a major

CONTRIBUTION OF PLANNED PARENTHOOD

159.;

instrument in reducing the incidence of Charles Galton Darwin's argument for racial

constitutional weakness and defect.

deterioration has validity, then more planned

Those who believe that planned parent- parenthood, not less, is the answer. But

hood will bring about the deterioration of Darwin's argument is at best only partly

the race have another argument based largely correct, and not alone the extension of birth

on the so-called class differentials in births control, but more the manner of its extension

which exist today in all countries where will determine the future quality of the race.

birth control has been widely introduced. Undoubtedly the first great mission of

This argument is a good deal like the answer planned parenthood is to remove the dreadful

of the man who was brought into court burden of over population. But as you move

because a neighbour said his dog had bitten Atowards this accomplishment, another and

him. The man testified that the dog never even greater aim will present itself; the

bit anyone, that he was tied up the day the aim of raising the, level of all our people

neighbour was bitten, and anyway the dog to the level of the best human beings we*

had died the month before. It is true that know at present. You will be allied with

birth control is responsible for an increase geneticists to find and give information on

in class differentials when it is first intro- the familial basis of those hereditary

duced, because it tends to be used by the characters which form the pattern for a high

upper socio-economic classes before it gets intelligence, a strong physique and a

down to general use in the lower. But the balanced personality; with psychologists to

most careful recent studies indicate that the tell how genetic potentialities are moulded

average differences in hereditary potential by different types of environment;; with all

between social or economic classes, where types of social scientists to help determine

they exist at all, are very small as compared the social, psychological and economic

to the very large differences in hereditary influences which will result in parents quite

potential which are known to exist between unconsciously and voluntarily fixing the

family lines within the different socio- size of their families in some relation to the

economic classes. Birth differentials between probabilities of their genetic inheritance.

individuals of different types within each These things aro for the future. But even

socio-economic class would therefore be now you can be moving in that direction,

far more important than differences between Probably you are already doing so. Every

the classes, and until we know the trend of visiting nurse, every doctor, every social

birth rates among different types of indivi- worker knows that there are families where

duals within various economic and social more children should be encouraged, because

classes it is impossible to assess the changes the parents will give them a good upbringt

which may now be taking place in the ing, and the children have a better than

hereditary potential of the race from one average chance of becoming good citizens;

generation to another.

and at the same time everyone who works

But present conditions are probably tem- with families knows that there are parents

porary. As birth control gets more firmly who should be discouraged from having

established, and the practice of family more children, because they will not give

planning is more widely accepted, class them adequate care and the children will

differentials in births diminish. Recent grow up to be a burden on society. Under

studies indicate that among people all-of these circumstances, I feel certain that all

whom practice family planning with some those 'who are in a position to give advice

evidelice of success, birth differentials on contraception are already showing some

between classes not only disappear, but in bias. That is, they are exercising their own

most cases are reversed. People at the judgment in the advice they give as to size

higher income levels have- the most children. of family, because they do not want to see

The more successful college graduates have children growing up with the burden of a

more children than the less successful. If bad social inheritance. Probably they are

I6o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

quite tinconscious that such a selection of Julian Huxley says: "If we could raise, the

births would also favour the better genetic average of these characteristics [physical

strains. But it would be difficult not to vigour, less liability to specific defects and

believe that couples who give their children diseases, greater general intelligence, and

a good upbringing are on the average various special aptitudes] by even 5 or IO

genetically superior to couples who give per cent, an almost incalculable burden of

their children -a bad upbringing. Nature suffering and frustration would be lifted

works by averages, and not by individual from human shoulders.... What is more,

cases, and it is probable that this unconscious the geneticist knows that with appropriate

bias exercised by those giving family. methods such a result could be achieved

planning advice may be not far from being over a measurable series of generations."

as effective as the hit-or-miss natural This cause in which you are so deeply

selection which takes place under natural committed means more than alleviation of

conditions. It appears that, quite uncon- suffering in this present generation; in it

sciously, birth control is already beginning lies the hope of balancing the world's

to be used as a tool for the improvement population to the resources available to keep

of the race. You can imagine how much mankind well nourished, active and at peace;

more effective it will be when it is used and beyond that lies the final goal of a race

consciously, with a broader scientific under- of men and women more diverse perhaps

standing,. and after more study of its than now, but having in common a buoyancy

possibilities.

of physical well being, a keenness of intellect,

In his recent book, Evolution in Action,* a balance of personality and character such

as only a fraction of the human race possesses

* Chatto and Windus. 1953.

today.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLV, No. 3

