244 EUGENICS REVIEW.

of the Minority's recommendations, "to ignore the existing machinery in

dealing with the poorer classes." The believer in the Minority Report

will not be expected to agree with the main line of the book, though

even he will find much to be grateful for in so succinct and up-to-date a

statement of the Majority's point of view in general, and for many of the

suggestions as to the treatment of children, of widows with children and

the industrially incompetent, in particular.

Those on the other hand who take a more detached view of this

historic controversy may well agree with his fundamental principle,

that "the wages of the working man ought to be sufficient to enable

him to make proper provision for the welfare of his family, for his own

old age, and for times of sickness " (236). Before, however, assenting to

the suggestion that the greater part of recent legislation for the benefit

of old-age, for school hygiene and National Insurance is in reality a

system of " State doles," they will ask for a more discriminating analysis

of the present industrial situation. Granted the validity of the above ideal,

what are the main sources from which the wages may be increased to

enable us to realise it? What is the relation between the actual and what

we might call the real wages of labour, which include free education,

cheap tram fares, etc. ? What hope is there in the near future of the re-

quisite advance? And what in the meantime is the least " doleful " method

of assisting the labourer to this larger share of direct civic responsibility?

In view of these questions which ought to concern one who holds that

poverty is the result of the defects of our industrial system more than,

to judge from this book, they seem to do, is there not something to

be said for the policy which was the kernel of truth in the proposals of

the Minority Report, viz., that before we set about reorganising the Poor

Law authority on a large scale, we should do what is possible by school

medical inspection, improved industrial training, unemployment and

sickness insurance, improvement of workshop conditions, enforcement of

minimum wage, to reduce the problem of poverty to its real dimensions?

It must seem to many, besides the present writer, far too early to dismiss

the greater part of these efforts as merely disguised " assistance," and the

new system of taxation which has been devised, not, of course, by the

present Chancellor alone, to find the means for constructive social reform,

as a mere "rake's nropress."

T. H. MUIRHEAD.

Malinowski, B., Ph.D. The Family Among the Australian Aborigines. London. University of London Press; 19I3; price 6s. net; pp. 326.
FEW wild races have been more extensively and closely studied than the Australian Aborigines, yet the accounts rendered are mutually inconsistent and contradictory to an extraordinary degree. This is particularly unfortunate, since these natives are so valuable a document for the study of social evolution. Dr. Malinowski, in this valuable monograph, collates and analyses the whole literature of the subject, and has succeeded in producing order out of chaos. His aim is to arrive at the actual existing state of society. To carry it out he has followed the excellent methods of historical analysis and interpretation of evidence instituted by Langlois and Seignobos, and has avoided the temptation (responsible for much of the inconsistency of the records) to allow theory as to origins to colour presentation of facts.
Taking the much-vexed question of "group-marriage" as an example, we find the author's analysis inevitably long but very judicious.
He arrives at what is probably the true state of affairs, viz., that individual marriage exists and is the fundamental element, but that social interests have developed or allowed a certain amount of sexual communism, which is a very different thing. It is just the same in the economic sphere, every individual has a right to take toll from this or that individual. The author rightly insists that the sexual relation is not the whole of marriage, and he points out that the "grcup-marriage"

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

245

system is entirely sexual. As regards kinship, the view that the Central

Australians ignore the part played by the father in procreation is accepted

too readily by the author. Mr. Walter Heape's criticism of this view

seems to be final, viz., that for certain reasons (analogous to those which

produced the idea of the Immaculate Conception) the Australians have

intentionally ignored what they really knew very well. An excellent

feature of the author's study is that he takes into account the facts of

daily life, the emotional side of family relations, and the magico-religious

ideas about kinship and so forth. He quotes his documents at full length,

an excellent practice. The fascinating subject of Australian family organ-

isation, so difficult to follow in the multifarious literature, is here

presented in a most readable and well-digested form, and this one volume

gives the student the whole of the subject. It is indispensable to sociolo-

gists. Eugenists will find its data and inferences very valuable for a

study of the connexion between the morphology of the family and the

welfare of the race.

A. E. CRAWLEY.

Greenwood, ARTHUR. The Health and Physique of School Children. London. P. S. King and Son, 19I3 (for the Ratan Tata Foundation); price is. net; pp. xv. + 96.

THIS volume contains an account of an investigation commenced in the Economics Department of Huddersfield Technical College by Mr. George H. Woods, F.S.S., and completed by Mr. Greenwood, the head of the department. It is based on the records contained in the annual reports of school medical officers who give averages of the height and weight of the children under their supervision, arranged according to age. These records have been accumulating since the passage of the Education (Administrative Provisions) Act of 1907, and a statistical summary of a considerable proportion of them, such as is contained in the volume under review, should receive a hearty welcome, particularly from those who are in a position to realise the large amount of labour involved in its preparation. The number of children dealt with exceeds 8oo,ooo, so that it may be concluded that the general results obtained are based on sufficient data to be reliable. A system of index numbers is employed for the purpose of making comparisons between different districts with regard to the physical development of their children. These numbers are arranged in four series. Boys' height, boys' weight, girls' height,

and girls' weight are calculated measurement at that age for the

for each age by group dealt with

dividing the average by the corresponding

average for the whole of England and Wales and multiplying by zoo.

To make this process clearer we will take a particular case. Suppose

the average weight of seven-year-old girls in Berkshire is 47'9 lbs.; in

the whole of England and Wales it is 46-6 lbs. Therefore the index

number for the weight of seven-year-old girls in Berkshire is

100 X 47'9 lbs. + 46'6 lbs., or I02'8. Having calculated the index

number for each age the general index number for the group or district

can be obtained by taking the average of all ages. This process facili-

tates comparison between different districts.

Applying the method just described to the task of comparing the effects of town or country life we obtain the following table:

Index Numbers.

Boys' Boys' Girls' Girls'

Height. Weight. Height. Weight.
County council (rural areas) ... O1@4 ... 103'3 ... IoI-6 ... i03-I
County icouncil (urban areas),

i.e., small towns ... ... 100'2 ... I005 ... too6 ... roo'8

Manufacturing towns ... ... 98'7 . 97-9 ... 98'2 ... 97 0

This table shows that elementary school children are on the whole better developed physically in the country than in small towns, and in

