EUGENICS*

By LORD HORDER, K.C.V.O., M.D., F.R.C.P.

M Y first duty, and a very pleasant one, educated in England, spent most of his life

is to express my thanks to those of in Western Australia. Here his affairs pros-

my colleagues who invited me to pered to a degree which enabled him to give

deliver this lecture. I had no hesitation in £I,ooo a year towards the work of the

accepting the compliment, which I esteem Society for several years before his death in

to be a very high one. Nor did I hesitate in I930, and to bequeath for the same purpose

suggesting my subject, confident that the the residue of his estate, which was large

choice of a matter which demands a bold and enough to increase that subscription three-

an intelligent outlook for the appreciation of fold. I refer to Henry Twitchin. It is

its importance would meet with the approval appropriate that I should offer a tribute to

of the Australian Members of our Associa- the memory of this pioneer in the field of

tion, which in fact it did.

Eugenics.

I will confess at once that those of us who, Henry Twitchin's interest in Eugenics

at home, urge the claims of Eugenics even began, as he himself says in a letter which

upon thinking people, find ourselves for the he wrote to Major Leonard Darwin, a former

most part crying in the wilderness. We president of the Society, about the year I900,

plough a lonely furrow. But we believe that, when, to quote his own words, " the idea of

just as John the Baptist preached a gospel applying the principle we had for a long

which was followed by an epoch of momen- time made use of in improving our farm

tous consequences in the world's religious stock, to the improvement of the human

life, so will the gospel which we preach usher family, occurred to me just as originally as

in an epoch in the physical and intellectual it did to the founder of our Society . . . and

progress of the human race which will have no doubt to many others. This is not to be

comparably good results. Let me hasten to wondered at when it is known that I am

add that I do not come here as a missionary descended from a long line of countrymen at

in this matter. You in Australia have home, some of whom helped to make our

already ploughed your first furrow and it domestic animals what they are to-day" and

would not be like you if it were not a straight " that I have ... devoted my whole life to

one. If, by anything I say this evening, I the breeding of live stock in which . .

can stimulate you towards cultivating this under the best practice, the principle of

promising field, I shall be intensely gratified. Eugenics is the controlling factor. ...

Although my occupation alone would natur-

TRIBUTE TO HENRY TWITCHIN
There is a circumstance which makes my choice of this subject for an address in Australia all the more fitting. It is that the chief benefactor of the Eugenics Society, of which I have the honour to be president, has been for some years past a man of great enterprise and vision, who, though born and

ally have led me to this conclusion, it was the fact that I was born of unsound parents, and inherited their weaknesses, and consequently have suffered thereby, that first forced this question upon me."
Twitchin was prepared to advocate much more drastic measures than most enthu-
siastic supporters of eugenic reform considered practicable. " Applying the great

principle," he continues, " as I was con-

* The Popular Lecture, delivered at the Annual Meeting of the British Medical Association in Melbourne, September I935.

stantly doing in my work, it was natural for me perhaps to see no difficulty in doing the

277

278 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

same thing with men and women. And I was EUGENICS AND SOCIAL REFORM

then advocating the immediate introduction The definition of Eugenics handed down

of legislation in all civilized countries, pro- to us by Francis Galton, who himself coined

hibiting the propagation of the unfit from the word fifty years ago, is: " the study of

any cause." " But later," he " realized that agencies under social control that may

the great majority of the people were not improve or impair the racial qualities of

ready for so revolutionary a change, and that future generations either physically or men-

the best course to bring about the desired tally." Galton's aim was ambitious, so

improvement was to educate them, if possi- ambitious, indeed, that his outlook has been

ble, to see the inestimable advantage of regarded by most people as that of a vision-

adopting the principle and gradually enforce ary. Change the race ? Why, that is surely

control."

a fantastic idea, savouring of the Utopias of

" Believing in practice as well as in old. " It is too high, I cannot attain unto it."

principle " Twitchin never married, although And quite apart from that sympathy which

of course this abstention was not the only most of us have with the Irishman who

means at his disposal by which his hereditary asked "What has posterity done for me?"

tendencies to unsound health might be pre- we are in the main confirmed opportunists.

vented from tainting future generations. Surely our own mental and physical salvation

He was the last of his family, and as there is a sufficient objective, without considering

were no relatives having any claim on his future generations ? To say nothing of the

property, he made his will almost entirely shocks and long pauses introduced into a

in favour of the Eugenics Society-to use his single generation by wars and economic

own words-" for the carrying on of the hold-ups.

propaganda which I believe to be by far the And yet there are societies and organi-

most urgent and important work possible zations galore whose activities are con-

in human endeavour." Now had there been cerned with human betterment in our

in this country any institution dealing with day, and whose existence bears witness

work of a eugenic kind there is no doubt that to that urge that is inherent in so many

Henry Twitchin would have bequeathed his of us to do something to help our fellows.

money to it. He makes this clear. " There WVhether, and to what degree, this altruism

is no institution throughout the world," he springs from biological incentives, and is

says, "which is carrying on an active really an expression of the ego in sublimated

eugenic propaganda such as we should form, as the psychologists tell us, need not

desire to initiate had we the means; and concern us in this connection. It is sufficient

for any society to set a proper example in to note that there is a large body of good

this respect might produce beneficial results intention, backed by tradition and culture,

to posterity of incalculable magnitude." and supported by wealth, whether of the

And so it was the Eugenics Society which individual or of the state, available for social

benefited from the generosity of this great reforms. The question that does concern us

Australian.

at the moment is this-is all this expenditure

But it was not in the older countries of good endeavour directed into the channels

so much as in the new that Twitchin which are calculated to produce the most

placed his hopes. To quote his words once fundamental, and the most enduring, bene-

more: " Progress is slow, but the only way fits? Long observation and reflection have

is to keep pegging away like a patient convinced me that they are not. This does

fisherman, hoping for a bite sooner or later." not mean that schemes for social reform are

" I think we must look for the greatest intrinsically unhelpful, still less does it mean

developments in the newer countries, where that they should not be encouraged. All it

deep-rooted prejudice is not so strong as it means is that, in the view of the eugenist-a

is in [the old countries]; and yet it is there view which I share with utter conviction-

that eugenic reform is most needed."

the economic advantages, using the term in

EUGENICS

279

its widest sense, lie with efforts made every new life on as sound and sturdy a

towards racial betterment rather than with basis as possible is the greatest service that

social service in a particular generation. one human being can render to another.

Since the outlook between attempts at

improving the environment of the people, and attempts at improving the stock, are entirely different, there can really be no

A CONTRIBUTION MEDICINE

TO

PREVENTIVE

conffict between social reform and eugenics. If I may for a moment deal with the

Our attitude towards those critics who national stocktaking of life to-day-I speak

suggest such a conflict is to say: " These of conditions at home-I find these some-

things ye ought to do, but not to have left what disturbing facts. For years every child

the others undone." The psychology of the has been educated, the clever, the strong,

position must be faced, and those of us who the blind, the dull, and the feeble-minded.

feel impelled thereto must combat it. What For twenty years we have had National

cramps our style again and again is the lure Health Insurance, and the number of Mater-

of immediate results. It is a weak strain in nity and Child Welfare Centres has greatly

human nature. With the communist it takes increased. Much money has been spent on

the form of a lust for direct action, "and the needy, on housing and on a number of

damn the consequences." With the politician other things. Our bill for social services in

it is " ninepence for sixpence-and I hope England and Wales (only) during I930

no one will notice the slight economic amounted to £407,545,000. In spite of this,

fallacy involved." With the sick man it is it has been estimated that to-day one person

the bottle of medicine or an operation. out of ten is too dull or unhealthy to be

What are all these but expedients of the absorbed into industry; one in I20 iS

moment ? Temporary devices that can only mentally defective; one in 300 is certified

secure transitory and impermanent results. as insane, and large numbers in addition to

Too often, alas! tricks of the charlatan, this are uncertified.

whose sole motive is to be the chief actor What is wrong? We have forgotten

upon the stage. But though the eugenist has heredity, and that if heredity does not work

no sort of quarrel with the principle under- for us it works against us. We have concen-

lying social and environmental reforms when trated upon nurture and we have neglected

these are wisely conceived and efficiently nature. In Medicine we have tended to get

carried out, he is bound to notice that a back farther and farther in our outlook and

number of efforts in these directions seem to in our practice. From the cure of the indi-

be of the nature of tinkering. And since all vidual patient we have turned to the con-

such efforts mean expenditure of energy and trol of the disease and the increase of the

money, he naturally regards these as wasted patient's resistance to infection. We call this

in relation to the furthering of his own aims. preventive medicine, and we are all of us

Time does not allow me the digression convinced of the wisdom of this orientation

which would be entailed by pursuing this in medical science. We have attended more

point of view. Suffice it to say that the to the child and from the child we have

eugenist is more humanist than humani- passed to the infant and even to prenatal

tarian in his outlook and in his work. He life. But we must go back farther still, for

does not believe that permanent results will by the time the new individual is conceived

accrue from pampering the individual or in heredity has already stamped upon it, either

trying to lead his life for him. He believes the power to live healthily or handicaps from

rather that it is a divine prerogative for which, lavish our care upon it as we may,

every individual that he should live his own it may never be able to shake itself free.

life, and that for others to abrogate this Eugenics, in actual fact, is the soundest and

privilege is to do him a great disservice. On by far the most profitable form of preventive

the other hand, to do our utmost to start medicine.

280 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

CONTROL OF BIOLOGICAL FORCES do more than remind myself of the golden

To some here this evening all this may rule, and how specially applicable it seems

seem like beating a willing horse. They to me in the eugenic field.

must forgive me my emphasis, because they Then there are some critics who say that

must remember the lag that exists in the we have not as yet enough knowledge upon

minds of many others on this matter. There which to put eugenic principles into action.

is the attitude of the determinists amongst My answer to this is to admit in the first

us-those who say, "Why interfere with place that our present knowledge of genetics,

nature? She will see us through all right. that is, of the laws governing human

And, anyway, does not evolution arrange heredity, is certainly meagre. But I advance

these things over our heads ? " Granted the in the second place that until more observa-

vital forces of nature and of evolutionary tion and research are undertaken in respect

tendencies, these forces can still, we have of these laws we shall remain ignorant. We

reasons for believing, be brought under cannot employ the same methods in the

control. But though we all agree in striving study of genetics in the human race as we

to get control of things and forces which are can with domestic animals and with plants.

physical and chemical, we boggle at the idea And the characteristics to be observed are

of getting control over things and forces vastly more complex. But we know enough

which are biological. Why? This is a deep- to feel sure that there is a mass of unascer-

seated prejudice, and no doubt it has its tained facts that would prove of enormous

roots in the dim and distant past, when a value if we had them, and we have definite

new individual was thought to be a direct reasons for believing that the basic laws

gift, or burden-as the case may be-from which we know to operate in plants and in

the god of the race or of the tribe. That it animals operate also in human beings. In

is the product of two individuals, that it other words, it is highly probable that, if we

inherits physical, mental and even tempera- chose to do so, we could go a long way

mental characteristics from those two indi- towards encouraging dominant characteris-

viduals, and that these can be modified at tics that make for physical and mental

will, is knowledge of comparatively recent health, and discouraging characteristics that

origin.

spell physical and mental ill-health.

I suggest that civilization has advanced

far enough to encourage us to achieve A EUGENICS PROGRAMME

biological control just as actively as we seek But supposing the main principle of

to achieve physical control. I go farther, Eugenics to be accepted, and we wish to act

and suggest that efforts at achieving bio- upon it, what is it suggested that we should

logical control are overdue. Biological con- do?

trol in the human sphere, I mean, since no i. In the first place the study of genetics

one seems to question either the wisdom or should be encouraged in the universities and

the morality of achieving biological control schools and by the institution of scholarships

in the animal and in the plant worlds. We and research studentships. Both the material,

accept the principle in relation to our horses, and the questions needing answers, abound.

our cattle, our dogs, our corn and our 2. Genetics should be taught to medical

cabbages. But we gasp at the idea of accept- students. We are told, and we know by our

ing the principle in respect of men and own experience, that the medical curriculum

women. The principle offends the religious is already too full. But room should be made,

emotions and ideas of some of us. I do not and could easily be made, in the pre-clinical

propose to enter this particular arena. The subjects (e.g. physiology) by the omission of

degree to which a man's religion determines something far less important.

his views on questions of the kind I am 3. Then the compilation of family pedi-

discussing to-night must be settled in the grees should also be encouraged. These have

sanctity of his own secret heart. Nor shall I a value for the individuals who compile

EUGENICS

28i

them over and above their value to the the birth-rate is falling. Quite soon the

seeker after genetic information. The figures may be such as to cause alarm in the

Eugenics Society has prepared a schedule minds of those who have the interest of their

which is very useful in this connection, and nation at heart. The guiding tenet of

which makes the filling in of the particulars Galton is based upon qualitative lines, not

comparatively simple.

on quantitative lines. And we dare not

4. Pre-marital schedules have also been sacrifice quality to quantity. But there is no

prepared by the Society. Men and women reason why both of these desiderata should

intending to marry should be encouraged not be attained if the pnnciples of positive

to fill these up by mutual agreement. A eugenics are strictly followed.

healthy sign of the times is the increasing

number of people who consult their doctors NEGATIVE EUGENICS

prior to marriage. A man and a woman 8. But eugenic principles, if they are

should be proud of being found fit for thorough, involve a negative as well as a

parenthood.

positive, aspect. Negative eugenics have

5. But anyone should be proud of being attracted a disproportionate degree-of atten-

fit and of keeping fit. The maxim " know tion. This is because they are more easy, and

thyself " is very ancient-but few of us put it more immediate, in their attainment, and

into practice. It takes a war to stimulate also, it must be confessed, because they

most governments to carry out a national involve much less self-sacrifice.

stocktaking in regard to the physique and At the present time there are two practical

mental health of its citizens. And I am examples of negative eugenics. The first of

ashamed to say that some of them regard these is sterilization of the unfit. The

even the omission of the census as a form of Eugenics Society is a strong advocate for the

economy in times that are stringent. Surely provision of facilities for voluntary sterili-

the more stringent the times the more need zation, under appropriate safeguards, for

for careful stocktaking. What should we persons suffering from, or carrying, trans-

think of a shopkeeper who adopted methods missible defects seriously impairing physical

like these ? It should be possible for men or mental efficiency. It considers that,

and women, especially those of marriageable without introducing compulsion, valuable

age, to produce, if not a pedigree, then at results can be achieved by awakening

least a statement, kept up to date, of their throughout the community an enlightened

physical and mental fitness. Here, again, eugenic conscience. A strong and representa-

would be engendered a legitimate pride in tive committee is at present working at home

the fact of being a healthy citizen.

to try and get the necessary support for a

6. The positive application of the eugenics Bill in Parliament, which shall implement the

principle, however, takes us farther than recommendations of the Brock Committee, a

this. We must do our utmost, by cultivating carefully chosen body of men and women

a family conscience, to counteract the who reported recently to the Ministry of

selfishness of the childless marriage when Health on this subject.

both parents are healthy, and by combating No doubt the legal position in regard to

that " tendermindedness" which is so com- sterilization is the same here as it is at home

mon in these days in women who refuse to -a doctor who advises, or himself performs,

brace themselves to fulfil their main function an operation for sterilization has no legal

in life.

cover. He may be the subject of an action

7. And if the monetary status of the at law, and may, should a jury take an

parents is a real, and not merely a selfish, adverse view of his action, be mulcted in

bar against a family, we must help them by a heavy damages. This is scarcely an encour-

proper scheme of family allowances, whether agement to the doctor. Moreover, the

by the remission of taxes or by even more present state of the law throws a stigma also

direct assistance. In most civilized countries upon the patient. There are those who

z82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

consider that the safeguards proposed only proper use to which we consider the

hitherto in regard to the proposed Bill are practice of contraception should be put. To

unnecessarily severe and restrictive; there correct this misfortune of contraceptive

are others who desire to see compulsory methods not reaching the class for which

sterilization introduced. But the official they are most helpful, we advocate very

view of the Eugenics Society is that the strongly that instruction in these methods

greater hope of inculcating a eugenic con- should be provided by local authorities under

science lies along the path of voluntary, medical supervision, in properly organized

rather than enforced, sterilization.

clinics. We also advocate that such instruc-

A great deal of propaganda is still neces- tion should not be confined to women whose

sary to popularize this measure. Many lives are in danger from subsequent confine-

people do not know that the risk to life of a ments nor to those who are suffering from

sterilizing operation is very small indeed in gynaecological diseases.

the female and negligible in the male; that Need I, in this place, and in the year of

in the latter it can be performed under a our Lord I935, deal with those critics who

local anaesthetic and that in neither sex does advance as an objection to Birth-Control

it in the least degree impair health or change that its practice tends to the increase of sex

the sex function, except in the matter of promiscuity? Are we never to grow up?

conception.

Does anyone still seriously hold that men

9. The second form of practical negative and women can be made moral agents

eugenics is what is termed Birth-Control; through fear of contracting disease or of

though the more correct term should be producing illegitimate offspring? Did pro-

conception or pregnancy control, the words hibition make America a sober nation?

Birth-Control have become too popular to And, anyway, shall we penalize women who

be ousted in favour of the more accurate have dire need of help in the legitimate

expression.

spacing of their childbirths because other

Time does not allow me to deal fully with folk exist who would find it easier to break

the history of this measure of negative through the conventions that society and

eugenics. It is, of course, as old as Bradlaugh the sanctity of family life impose upon them,

and Annie Besant. It has had a chequered as the result of this knowledge that they

career. It has been blessed and it has been steal for their own ends? Surely there can

cursed. That it has come to stay seems only be one answer to this question.

certain, but that there is no method yet known which is free from some disadvantage SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

is equally certain. The disadvantage may be I have now put the case for Eugenics

physiological or it may be aesthetic or it may before you as well as I am able in the time

be no more nor less than that the method at my disposal. If I have brought coals to

is unreliable; the fact remains that so far we Newcastle I must crave your pardon. If I

have not found a method that is anything have not, I am glad of the opportunity of

like perfect. Research is necessary, there- offering some fuel for your mental combus-

fore, and such research is being actively tion. I propose to end my remarks by

undertaken by the Eugenics Society.

summarizing the aim of Eugenics as I see it.

We hold that the practice of Birth-Control The aim of Eugenics is to study the laws of

has, unfortunately, acted dysgenically rather heredity as they apply to human beings, with

than eugenically during the past fifty years, the practical purpose of using this knowledge

because it has been largely confined to for improving the physical and mental

persons of superior biological endowment, quality of the race. Eugenists believe that

and has not been practised by those who have no child should be born into the world who is

needed most some means whereby the births unlikely to have a fair chance. They affirm,

of their children might be spaced. And, I therefore, that anyone, man or woman, who

ought to add, this spacing of births is the undertakes the serious responsibility of

EUGENICS

283

parenthood, must be free from any disease, mental defect, or other disability that is
likely to be passed on by heredity and so impair the quality of future generations. Most intelligent people now share this view; indeed, many have too few children, because they wish to give the best care and attention
to each child. But the nation is endangered when fit people refuse to have children for selfish reasons. Our empire needs the best citizens it can produce.
But if it is agreed that people who are sound in body and mind should have as many children as they can afford to bring up, it follows that people who are ill-endowed in body or mind, and whose offspring are liable to be unhealthy or subnormal, should avoid having children. The next generation should be recruited from good stocks rather than

from bad. But exactly the opposite is now happening, for it is among the fittest stocks that the birth-rate is lowest and among the unfit that it is highest. We should not be content to allow this to continue. We should encourage the fertility of persons likely to produce healthy children, and at the same time prevent the waste and misery caused by the birth of children who are healthy neither in mind nor in body. These policies deserve the serious consideration of every citizen and especially of young people who are entering on adult life and beginning to realize its responsibilities.*
* In the preparation of this lecture I have made free use of literature published under the direction of the Eugenics Society, to which, therefore, and especially to the able pen of its General Secretary, Dr. C. P. Blacker, I make due acknowledgment.-H.

MARRIAGE HYGIENE

An International Quarterly

Vol. II, No. 2

November 1935

CONTENTS

Magnus Hirschfeld

Marriage in Christendom

Dangerous Slogans from Eugenics

Inhibitions in Marriage

Household Contraceptives

Abortion in China

Birth Control in Soviet Russia

Conditions of Rapid Population Growth

World News

Book Reviews

Norman Haire and Max Hodann George Pitt-Rivers Julius Bauer Owen Berkeley-Hill R. L. Dickinson Amos Wong F. P. de Caux Frank Lorimer Abstracts

Yearly Subscription 18/-, post free. Single Copies 4,'6

KODAK HOUSE, HORNBY ROAD, BOMBAY, INDIA
London Agents: H. K. Lewis & Co. Ltd., 136 Gower Street, London

B Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 4.

