THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Stevenson, A. C., Johnston, H. A., Stewart, M. I. P. and Golding, D. R. Congenital Malformations. A report of a study of series on consecutive births in 24 centres. Supplement to Vol. 34 of the Bulletin of the World Health Organization. Geneva, 1966. WHO. Pp. 127. Price 12s.
THERE HAS LONG been a need for a comparative study of the incidence of the major congenital malformations in different parts of the world. Although many individual studies have been published, differences of technique have seriously limited the drawing of valid comparisons. Many aspects of technique are matters of opinion rather than fact. What, for example, is the definition of talipes? Is pyloric stenosis a congenital abnormality? What period of follow-up is necessary to establish the incidence of congenital heart disease? Agreement upon such points, however arbitrary, is the first essential to a successful comparative study.
Such a study has now been completed under the auspices ofthe World Health Organization and under the direction of Dr. A. C. Stevenson. Twenty-four centres in sixteen countries participated, representing all the continents of the globe, although North America is represented only by Mexico, and Scandinavia is not included amongst the European centres. So far as possible, hospitals were chosen which had a minimum of 5,000 deliveries per annum and the entire study was completed in just over three years.
Although it would in many ways have been preferable to survey populations rather than hospital series, the organizers wisely decided to pursue the more practicable scheme and accept the limitations. The degree of bias introduced cannot be assessed because the report gives no indication of the proportion of births occurring in hospital in each centre. However, this is by no means the only possible source of bias, and the report must be taken as a pointer to the needs for further studies.
And there are pointers in plenty. Only one mongol was born to 66,000 Indian mothers in four centres. Are other chromosomal defects rare in this ethnic group? Neural-tube defects occurred most commonly in Belfast, with Alexandria second. This could be attributable to a high population incidence or to selective hospital admission (because of hydramnios and other pregnancy complications). It is known that in Belfast the population incidence is high: is this true also ofAlexandria? The section devoted to multiple births begs the question-is twinning a malformation? Certainly monozygotic twinning is an aberration of cell division, but it is in the dizygotic twinning rates that most interest arises. Alexandria has the phenomenally high rate of over 3 per cent-more than twice the rate of any other centre. Again, does this reflect population pattern or is hospital selection responsible?
The report helps to delineate the genetic and non-genetic contributions to individual defects. Neural-tube defects rarely affect both of monozygotic twins but their incidence shows a positive correlation with the incidence of dizygotic twinning as between centres. The distribution of cleft lip with or without cleft palate does not correlate with the distribution of cleft palate alone. This supports the contention that they are aetiologically distinct groups (although there may be a common factor in their causation).
All this and much more is to be found in this report and in the 400-page "companion data booklet" which accompanies it. Participating centres will no doubt be publishing their own contributions: indeed, the Shatby Maternity Hospital, Alexandria, has already done so. This study is ofgreat intrinsic value, but could prove even more worth while as a steppingstone to comparative population studies.
R. W. SMITHELLS
54

