The Nucleus in Relation to Heredity.*
By PROFESSOR DAME HELEN GWYNNE-VJAUGHAN, D .B .E ., LL .D., D .Sc.
One of the most remarkable phenomena of biology is the similarity of the nuclear structures and their history throughout the animal and vegetable kingdoms; there are innumerable minor differences, but the close resemblance in nuclear organisation, the close resemblance of the chromosomes, and the close resemblance of the germ cells and corresponding: products in nearly every form of plant and animal life, is so striking that great importance must be attached to it. It would probably be accurate to say that, with the exception of certain protozoa, bacteria and blue-green algae, all living organisms 'are built up of cells with the same essential characters. These characters, moreover, are so distinctive that they form a strong argument in favour of a common origin, and they suggest a common method of inheritance.
Let us take as an example the nuclear history of the Broad Bean, which I examined a few years ago and found particularly clear in many of its details.
As the telophase, or last stage of nuclear division, approaches in the somatic cell of a root, stem or leaf, the fourteen chromosomes collect at the end of the spindle (fig. 1) shorten and thicken (fig. 2), and comes into contact with another. The formation of the nuclear membrane begins and, as the nuclear vacuole enlarges, the mass of chromosomes loosens out, and they are found to adhere to their neighbours (fig. 3), both laterally and end to end, and to show fission or vacuolisation at irregular intervals (fig. 4). It must be remembered that the chromatin material is not solid, but of a relatively viscid, or semi-fluid consistency and capable of considerable change of form. The cross connections lengthen, the fission becomes more marked, and, by the time that the resting nucleus reaches its full size, the cutromatin has become spread just inside the nuclear membrane as an irregular network. (fig. 5).
The condition now reached may be permanent, or, after a longer or shorter interval, the nucleus may again prepare for division. The first sign of change is the breaking down of the cross connections (fig. 6), with the formation of a thread or series of threads (figs. 7, 8), which consists of the chromosomes of the last telophase, freed from one another laterally but, in many cases, still attached end to end.
As development proceeds, the thread breaks up transversely into chromosomes (fig. 9), their number is the same as in the preceding telophase, and there is good evidence for their identity; peculiarities of size or shape reappear, and, in many organisms, they can be seen, both at this stage and in the telophase, to be assorted in duplicate pairs. The longitudinal fission, which was initiated in the previous telophase and which has persisted through the resting stages, can be identified both in the thread and in the chromosomes, though it may
* An address given to the Eugenics Education Society oui April 17th, 1923.

THE NUCLEUS IN RELATION TO HEREDITY.

403

be obscured from time to time as the chromnosomes shorteni and thicken.
In some organisms the fissioni has niot been recogniised in the telophase, and is seen nowv for the first t,ime.
Dclicate strands of cytoplasm niext invade the nuclear area and constitute the spindle, about the circumference of which the chromosomes become arrainged; they are attached, in the beai. by one longitudinally split enid w-\Nhile tile other stands out at right angles tothe lonig axis of tle spindle (fig. 10). The tw-o longitudinalhalves of the chronosoine niext niio\c apart, beginniiing at the end in conitact withi the
spindle (figs. 11, 12), and are soon completely separated; they pass to
opposite poles of tlhCe spindle as daughter chromos1omnes (fig. 13), and
the stage is again reached wNhich was shown in figure 1. In thle sVomnatic cells of a species sexually reproduced thcre is
an eveii numnber of chromosonems, and the number is constant for the species, fourteen in the beani, thirLy-two in man, 1o0 or more in certai>i feris, and tw-o only in the rounid worm of the hqorsc. At the initiation of Ilc life historv of each new individual, fusion of two nuclei takes place, the pLternal and maternal clrolmosoimes be)CCOIngli mingled in a single ntucleuis, and vet the chromosome niumber is not increased %vitlh every stiieceding genieration. but remainis unalte 'ed, It is obvious, therefore, tlhat somewNhere in the life-history, the characteristic number, doubled in fertilisation, must be reduced by half. This reduction i3; aclieved in the two nuclear divisions immediately preceding the formation of the germ-cells in animals, and at a rather earlier stage in plants. It thus oc urs that, in animals, the germcells alone possess the reduced number of chroinosomes, but, in plants, suclh structures as the prothalli of ferns or the pollen grains of seed plants are also in this condition, and vegetati-e anid nuclear divisions take place in w^Nhich the redutced number of chromosomes:; is Vi.ible. The term haploid is conveniently u-sed for the niucleus wvith the reduced number of clhromosomes, the term diploid for that with the double
number.
In the beain, wliere we have already examined the somatic diploid divisions, reduiction takes place in the pollen-sac and ovule ol the flower. The first sigIn that sometlhing unulsual is about to occur is the
membrane)separation of the chromatin inetwork from the inuclear
along the inside of which it is spread (figrs. 14, 15), and its contraction into a dense kniot or ball (fig. 16). When, after a longer or shorter period, it begins to loosen out, the emerging loops and strands of chromatin are seen to be ,Arranged in pairs, joined end to end or lying side by side (fig. 17), while, infavourable cases, the longitudinal fissioni of the prevrioLus telephase can be iden-tified as in the chromatini thread of a
sonlatic d ivision. Gradually the thread become;; extended thlrough the wvhole nuclear
area (fig. 18) and the longitudinal fission becomes easier to recognise;
then a second contraction sets in, the thread shortens and thickens (fig. 19), and brealks up inito short; thick chromosomes; these are invariably arranged in pairs, recalling the pairs observed in somatic divisions, but with a muclh closer relation between the members of the pair, w!hich lie in contact or are twisted together (fig. 20), insteadof
being distributed at random through the nuclear vacuole. Each pair

I 2 ._ 3 ,,1!'^A94#
',IIII2 ,- 1) s
EXPLANATION OF FIGURES. 1-13 Broad Bean, somatic divisions. 14 ,, ,, resting somatic nucleus. 15-25 ,, ,, reducing divisions.

17 -

B fi |E13F0tR
c

26 ,, 27. 28, ,,
29 Fruit Fly,
30 ,,

,, 3 young pollen grains from a group of 4.
,, each showing a resting nucleus, division in nucleus of pollen grain; in fig. 27 note the 7 longitudanally split chromosomes.
somatic nucleius, showing 4 pair of chromosomes.
,, iiagram to show crossing over of chromosomes.

406 UUGRNICS RUVIUW.
consists of four parts, the two associated chromosomes, each longitudinally split into two.
In this condition the pairs become arranged on the spindle (fig. 21), and the subsequent stages separate not the logitudinaliy split halves of each chromosome, as in a somatic division, but the whole chromosomes which have been associated in pairs (figs. 22, 28, 24); in the bean each pole of the spindle shows, therefore, not fourteen daughter chromosomes as seen in fig. 1, but seven chromosomes, one from each of the seven pairs, in each of which the logitudinal fission still persists, giving the chromosome a V-formi.
Almost before the daughter nuclei have been formed, a second division supervenes, and on the second spindle the longitudinal fission of the chromosomes is completed (fig. 25) and seven rod -shaped daughterchromosomes pass to each pole. In this way four nuclei are produced (fig.26) in each of which the chromosome number is half what it was in the somatic cells. The process suggests that, just as an ordinary division is about to begin, some appropriate impulse induces the first contraction, knotting up the chromatin mass and bringing the members of each pair of chromosomes into closer contact; they emerge from the knot in association, and so remain till they separate on the spindle of the first reducing division, leaving the separation of the daughter chromosomes, formed by longitudinal fission, to be completed on the second .
In animals the immediate products of the reducing division; are the nuclei of four spermatozoa, or of the egg and its three polar bodies; in plants a varying number of ordinary divisions intervenes between reduction and the formation of the germ-cells. In the pollen grain of the bean for example, two further nuclear divisions take place before the male nuclei are formed, in each of these divisions seven chromosomes only are to be seen (figs. 27, 28), and whereas, in divisions in the root. stem, or leaf, chromosomes occur in duplicate pairs, here a single set only is present; this is well shown in such a plant as Galtonia, where the pairs are easier to identify than in the bean. Anothe point of special interest in Galtonia is the way in which someof the chromosomes are lobed, a condition which may also be observed in the bean (figs. 1, 13), though less often.
But perhaps the best of all examples of paired, somatic chromosomes is that cause celebre of cytological investigation, the fruit fly, Drosophila, the recent study of which, both from the genetic and cytological points of view, we owe to Professor Morgan of Columbia University and his pupils.
The somatic chromosomes of Drosophila fall into four well-marked pairs (fig. 29), two long, one medium, and one very short; in each of the sexual nuclei there are only four single chromosomes, one member of each of the four above-mentioned pairs. When two sexual nuclei unite, a complete set of pairs is once more provided. Thus each individual bean, or fruit-fly, or man inherits two complete sets of chromosomes, one set from the paternal and one from the maternal side, the zygote possesses a double outfit of whatever characters the chromosomes may carry, and each gamete only a single set. This is exactly what the Mendelian hypothesis requires, and it would be surprising

THE NUCLEUS IN RELATION TO HEREDITY.

40r

indeed if the two groups of facts, those derived from cytological ob. servation, and those from Mendelian experiment, did not bear some
relation. One of the main difficulties has been the fact that the number
of characters inherited from one parent is often in excess of the number of chromosomes in the nucleus of the germ cell. Recent work has
shown, however, that apparently unrelated characters are frequently
grouped together, so that, for example, long pollen and purple colour are inherited in association in sweet peas, and gold feathers and femaleness are carried by the same germ-cell in Sebright Bantams. This phenomenon was first studied by Messrs. Bateson and Punnett and is known as "couplings" in this country and as "linkage" in America. The number of characters grouped together may be considerable, and in no case has the number of groups been, found to be larger than the haploid number of chromosomes in the
germ-cells of the organism in question. Coupling is not absolute, ana, if sufficiently extensive breeding experiments are carried out,
occasional cases will be found when the usual groups are broken up
and an alternative grouping is formed, thus, among 6,952 sweet peas, 6,169 were found to have the usual coupling of purple colour and long pollen or the alternative coupling of red colour and round pollen, due to the absence of both, while, in 783, purple colour was associated with round pollen or red colour with long. The new association, moreover, was just as intimate and as apt to be inherited as the original grouping
had been. The fruit-fly, Drosophila, breeds very rapidly and readily, and
possesses a great number of easily recognisable characters inherited on Mendelian lines. These characters are coupled or linked together in groups; there is one minute group of three characters, there is one medium group which includes the sex-character, and there are two, larger groups, each including a considerable variety of characters. The four groups correspond both in size and number with the four chromosomes, already referred to, which are found in the germ-cells of the fruit fly. In this case, as in the sweet pea, dissociation occurs; some characters being much more readily dissociated-or some linkages more readily broken-than others; and it is remarkable that in Drosophila dissociation only takes place in connection with the inheritance of characters through the female.
In the early stages of the reducing division in the immature egg of Drosophila, though not in the mother-cell of the sperm, the chromosomes of each pair are observed to be twisted together (fig. 80, a, c, f,), a very common condition which is well known in other animals and plants (fig. 20, 21). It has been suggested that, while entangled in this way, the chromosomes sometimes break at the point where they cross one another, and that the upper part of one becomes attached to the lower portion of the other (fig. 30, b, d,). If the two intertwined chromosomes carry the characters A, B, C, and D, and a, b, c and d, respectively, then a break and re-attachment occurring between A and B, would produce the groupings A, b, c, d, and a, B, C, D, instead of the usual arrangement. Breaks and re-attachments at other points would produce A, B, c, d; A, B, C, d, and other corresponding

408 8EUGENICS REVIEW.
arrangements, and a double break would produce A, b, c, D, as shown in figure 30, g. Since A and B are nearer together, it is more likely that they will remain in association than A and C. Professor Morgan and his pupils have studied linkage and dissociation from this point of view, and have been able to prepare a map of each chromosome or linakge group showing those characters which are most closely associated as nearest together. Both the facts of heredity and the details of chromosome structure and behaviour suggest a similar possibility in other animals and plants and the segmented chromosomes in figures 1 and 18 may indicate cases in which dissociation can readily occur.
Many characteristics depend for their manifestation on the interaction of two or more hereditary characters. This is the case with colour, both in animals and plants, with the walnut comb in fowls and with many other physical peculiarities; it is probably very often the case with mental characteristics.
Interacting characters may be associated in the same chromosome or they may be independently inherited. In favourable circumstances, such as the crossing over described in the chromosomes in Drosophlia, an old linkage may be broken down or a fresh one established.
It seems, then, that recent studies on the physical basis of inheritance suggest that there may be created afresh from time to time com binations of characters so linked as to form a new and valuable element in inheritance

