84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
" I cannot but feel that this is a small and and love in which he was held by all who most inadequate tribute to one of the greatest knew and worked with him, Lady Rolleston
and most beloved figures of our time. May I will find some compensation for her great
add the hope that in the honour, reverence loss."

THE ORDER OF MERIT: THE HOLDERS AND THEIR KINDRED*
By B. S. BRAMWELL, M.A., LL.B., F.R.S.E.

M}[ Y subject deals with a small research
in positive eugenics. Demography
has naturally bulked largely in our recent proceedings. It is well to remember, however, that our primary concern is quality and not quantity. One Lister may be worth much more to humanity than many ordinary medial p&actitioners, and one ordinary practitioner than many members of the social problem group.
The Order was founded in I902 to reward exceptionally meritorious service in the Navy and Army or in the advancement of Art, Literature and Science. The number of awards is very small-I think seventy to date. In his great work, Hereditary Genius, Galton had to select his eminent people. In his study of British Genius, Havelock Ellis tried to avoid personal selection by taking only names given a definite amount of space in the Dictionary ofNational Biography; but he had to abandon this system and supplement it with personal selection, as he found that much greater space was given to people of recent date. We here have our material given to us; it is fresh material, not that appearing in the two works mentioned, and it all concerns people still alive or who were alive in this twentieth century.
The Order is confined to twenty-four holders. The civil branch outnumbers the
* The substance of a lecture at a Members' Meeting
of the Eugenics Society on February 22nd, 1944.

military by more than three to one. It is given a high place in the scale of precedence,
ranking directly after the Grand Cross of the Bath and before the Grand Cross of the five lower orders of knighthood. Vacancies are not filled up as they occur. At present there are only fourteen living holders. This must enhance its prestige. No one by holding office has a vested expectation to be appointed to it. Lord Salisbury, when someone asked him why he had appointed Alfred Austin to succeed Lord Tennyson as Poet Laureate, is said to have answered, " I don't think anyone else applied." Application has to date been foreign to the Order of Merit.
No doubt many of us will say " So-and-so" should have had it. Kipling is a name often mentioned. But I don't think any of us can lay a finger on any one name and say, " That
was a job." In the forty years of its existence we have had Conservative, Liberal, Labour and Coalition Governments; so in this small matter our democracy seems to have worked
well. As between the different branches of learning, the scientists probably rank highest
in world reputation. It is difficult to imagine the name of Lister dropping out of the history of medicine. J. J. Thomson and Rutherford took us a great step forward in our knowledge of the constitution of matter-a subject
which had been under discussion for over
2,000 years-when they showed that matter was only a balanced system of energy. The

THE ORDER OF MERIT: THE HOLDERS AND THEIR KINDRED 85

names of Bragg and Gowland Hopkins will

TABLE 2

also live. In literature, two works stand POSITION OF HOLDER IN THEI FAMILY

out as having an influence far beyond our

Birth order

Number of Holders

shores. In The Golden Bough, Frazer has set all religions much to ponder over; in The American Commonwealth, Bryce introduced

Only son ... ... ...

Eldest ... ... ...

Second ... ... ...

Third

... ... ...

4 25
10
2

to many Americans for the first time the intricacies of their own system of govern-

Fourth ... ... ...

Fifth

...

...

...

Sixth

... ... ...

I
3
3

ment. As regards the arts, can we say more than that the holders will have a creditable

Ninth

... ... ...

Youngest I... .. ...

I1

reputation in the much narrower field of Undoubtedly, eldest sons easily head the

Britain ? Florence Nightingale is the only list, being more than one-half of the number

woman holder.

traced. Unfortunately, we do not know how

many were the eldest children: it would not

Personal Characteristics

be an unfair inference to say one-half.

From what sort of families do they spring ? As regards size, the answer is easy: normalsized Victorian families averaging, where I can trace, about 5*75 children. The details are set out in Table i.

Second sons easily take second place. We must remember, as regards the remainder, that third, fourth and later sons are far fewer
in number. Our findings are in accordance
with those of Havelock Ellis, who found that eldest sons and younger sons in large families

TABLE I

most often exhibited talent. He put it down

FAMILIES OF FATHERS OF HOLDERS to variation from the mean, as they also

Children in Family Military Civil Total more often exhibit imbecility and idiocy.

Only child ... ...

--

As regards longevity, holders of the order

Two

...

...

2 2 live to a good old age. But in such a selected

Three ... .. ... I

Fout ...

...

Five ... ... ... 2

4
6
I

5 7 3

group this is not surprising. Galton said that no man under 50 would be regarded as

six

3...

...

...

ISeven ... ... ...

Eight ...

...

2
4
2

5 eminent. I do not know that a1yone has

5 2

been appointed to the Order under this age.

Nine ...

...

I 2 The holders have, therefore; suctessfully

Ten

... ... ... -

Eleven ... ... ... -

Twelve ...

... ...

I

I

passed or avoided the dangers bf youth. I think, however, they survive to a greater

Thifteen ...
Many ... At least two
Only son

....
...
...
...

..
...
... ...

-
5

22
II 8 I3 I? I

age than one would anticipate from expectation of life tables for a group of the age of 50. The median age in the military branch is 77

Untraced

... ... 3

I8 21

Only gon with sisters ...

34

The rather large entry (I3) of " at least

two " should be noticed. This simply means

that the D.N.B. describes the holder as

eldest son or second son. It throws no light

on the possibility of other brothers and is

silent as to sisters. There is no reason to

suppose that these families fell below the

average. I found no trace of the phenomenon

Dr. Fraser Roberts found at Bath, of excep-

tionally able children coming from very small

families.

and in the civil branch 8i. This difference is not surprising, looking to the rigours of life on active service.
Bodily activity is perhaps best indicated by addiction to sport and athletics. The military branch indulged in these, physical
fitness being essential in the services; but they did not do so to excess, or with out-
standing prowess. In the civil branch the only outstanding performance I know is that of Lord Kelvin, who won the Colquhoun Sculls at Cambridge. Arthur Balfour won the Parliamentary golf tournament, but I

Table 2 shows the holder's position in the think this was played on handicap. Lord

family, where I could trace it.

Bryce ascended Mount Ararat, which is

86 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

higher than Mont Blanc, and Lord Haldane Is the reason physiological? We can rule

and G. M. Trevelyan were great walkers in out such causes of male infertility as gonor-

their youth. But as a group I think it fairly rhea and mumps. There is another physio-

safe to say that they were probably below logical theory sometimes put forward. The

the average.

blood has to carry nourishment to the internal

Table 3 gives details as to the marriage organs, the skeletal muscles, the brain, and

and the offspring of holders.

the reproductive organs. If one demands too

TABLE 3

much, the others suffer. Dr. Zuckerman*

FAMILIES OF HOLDERS

told us that when the number of sperms per

Civilstatusand Military Civil Total Fathers' c.c. falls below a certain concentration the

no. of offspring

families (for comparison)

result is generally sterility. So there may be

Unmarried ... ... 3

7 IO

-

a certain measure of truth in this theory.

Mamred but childless -

One child ... ... 2

Two

2...

...

15 I5
57
II 13

What of the fifteen wives ? Did they desire 2 offspring? I think we need a large research

Three

5...

...

Four ... ... 2

Five ... ... I

Six 2... ... ...

7 12
24 34
2

5 carried out exclusively by women, in all

7 3

classes, at all ages and in all religions, to

5 find out what proportions of women desire

Seven Eight Nine

... ... ...

... ... ...

-

II
-

5 no children, a few children, and a large

2 2

family.

Ten ... Eleven
Twelve Thirteen

...
...
...
...

.. -
...
...
...

-
-

But probably the matter is largely psychoI logical. Havelock Ellis took this view: in 2 his British Genius he refers to two groups, an

Untraced ... ...

22

21

It will be seen that ten, a large proportion,

were unmarried. In the military branch all

the marriages (I4) resulted in offspring.

As a group they were replacing themselves.

In the civil branch things were far other-

wise. Fifteen marriages were childless, in

five cases there was one child, and in eleven

two children. The only large family, one of

eight, was that of an original holder, born so

long ago as I8I7. Three-fourths were far

from reproducing themselves. The average

family of the civil group was only about

I -5, one child less than the military. The

average family of all holders was certainly

four children less than that of their fathers.

Why all these childless marriages? The

reason is certainly not economic. John

Morley left over £70,000; he was in a much

better financial position than his father, the

abnormally infertile group and another group rather more fertile than the normal. Among the former, he mentions Dalton the chemist as typical. He often talked of getting married but never found time for it. In later times the more fertile group has disappeared, probably owing to artificial
restraint.
As regards the families of two or three children, which seem to be three times more numerous than larger families, I think it is a very fair inference to say that these able people, after weighing up all the factors, such as age, health of mother, prospects of the children (though these should weigh less with them than with less able people), size of house, economics, companionship, have concluded that these are the most satisfactory and comfortable numbers to have.

Burnley doctor who had four children; To sum up: The holders come of normal

Lord Kelvin left just under this amount; his sized Victorian families; they are long lived;

father, the Glasgow professor, had seven they probably take less bodily exercise than

children; Steer, the artist, left over £80,ooo. the average; their families are woefully

According to the Evening Standard, Barrie small. The comparatively low fertility of the

left £170,000, Hardy £90°,00, and Gals- group may be to some extent physiological

worthy £80,000. It is idle to suggest that but is probably far more psychological; it is

Arthur Balfour and R. B. Haldane refrained certainly not economic.

from matrimony for economic reasons.

* EUGENICS REVIEW, 28, 47.

THE ORDER OF MERIT: THE HOLDERS AND THEIR KINDRED 87

Inheritance of Intelligence

Commodore and Director of the R.M.S.P.

We may now turn to something quite Line. On the civilian side, no fewer than

different-the inheritance of intelligence. I eight had fathers with a place in the

have not tried to delve into the past. Four D.N.B. I have notes of five other cases of

of the holders come of well-known intellec- interest. So about one in four seems to have

tual strains. These are Balfour, Cromer, had a father of eminence. Galton found that

Haldane and Trevelyan. I must refer those two out of every eleven of his eminent men

interested to Mr. Gun's excellent book, had fathers of eminence, that is I in 5*5.

Studies in Hereditary Ability. I confine myself Of course the holders of the Order of Merit

to a review of fathers, brothers and sons. are of a higher degree of talent or ability

This, unfortunately, leaves out inheritance than his eminent men. But after all, exact

from the mother's side. The fathers of measurement is impossible.

Balfour and Haldane were not particularly When one comes to brothers I have a note

distinguished, though they had distinguished of 2I, and of one sister, Mrs. Sidgwick, Head

ancestry. Their mothers' ancestry was very of Newnham, who achieved marked success

notable. Kitchener's and Rayleigh's maternal in their careers (see Table 5).

grandfathers are in the D.N.B. Herbert

TABLIE 5

Fisher's grandfather and William Words-

SIBS OF HOLDERS

worth were first cousins. We want some standard of ability corre-

Holder

Profession, etc., of eminent sibs

Admiral Sir G. 0. Keppel D.N.B.

Lord Fisher ... ... Admiral

sponding to Galton's " eminence " for the Lord Roberts ...

fathers of the holders. It is impossible to get an exact measure, but one standard not very

Lord Kitchener ... Lord Chetwode Lord Kelvin ...

... Major-General ... Lieut.-General
... Admiral; K.C.B. ... Professor; F.R.S.

different is " Mention in the D.N.B." Table 4 Lord Cromer ...

sets out, in brief, some facts bearing on the abilities of fathers of fifteen of the holders-

H. Jackson ... Lord Haldane ...

... Created Peer
... Canon; Wrangler ... i. F.R.S.
2. Crown Agent for Scotland

i.e. their professions, outstanding academic Lord Balfour ... qualifications, and whether or not they had

... i. Fellow of Trinity, President, Board of Trade
2. Fellow of Trinity, F.R.S.

a place in the D.N.B.

3. Head of Newnham Sir A. Geikie ... ... Professor of Geology, F.R S.

TABL13 4

F. H. Bradley ... ... i. Headmaster, Marlborough,

FATHERS OF HOLDERS

Holder

Profession, etc., of Father

Lord Roberts ... General; D.N.B.

Lord Jelicoe ... Commodore & Director, R.M.S.P.
Lord Kelvin ... Professor; F.R.S.; D.N.B.

Lord Lister ... Business; F.R.S.; D.N.B.

Lord Cromer ... M.P.

Lord Bryce ... Schoolmaster; Geologist; D.N.B.

Sir W. Hooker ... Director of Kew; F.R.S.; D.N.B.

Sir G. 0. Trevelyan Governor of Madras; D.N.B.

F. H. Bradley ... Parson; D.N.B.

G. A. Grierson ... LL.D.

G. M. Trevelyan.., O.M.; D.N.B.

H. A. Fisher ... Tutor to Edward VII

Dr. Adrian ... Local Government Board; C.B.;

and Dean of Westminster 2. Professor English Litera-
ture, Glasgow and Professor of Poetry, Ox-
ford M. James ... ... Headmaster of Malvern G. M. Trevelyan ... President of Board of Edu-
cation H. A. Fisher ... ... I. Admiral
2. Tutor, Christ Church 3. Chairman of Barclays
Bank
Lord Baden Powell ... Traveller; M.P.; D.N.B.
It is difficult to state what proportion this
is. Seventy families of six would give some

K.C. Gilbert Murray ... President Legislative Council,
N.S.W.

2IO sons. Deducting the 70 holders, this leaves 140. But what proportion of these

Lord Baden Powell Professor; F.R.S.; D.N.B.

died young ? A very considerable number

Lord Roberts's father is the only instance before the age of 50. I took down two

of " Mention in D.N.B." in the military biographies of holders at random; one does

branch. Eleven holders were the sons of not get these details in the D.N.B. In one,

naval and military officers. The only other three brothers had died in childhood; in the

father of interest was Lord Jellicoe's. He other, one had died at the age of 20. And

was in the Merchant Marine and rose to be how many dying young, had given promise

88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of success? I know that one, a Bradley, a scholar of New College, was drowned in the Cherwell as an undergraduate. So probably we have to compare the 2i with some total between 70 and ioo.
Only thirty-five, one-half of the holders, had sons. In five or six cases the sons are too
young for any reliable estimate to be made of
their talent, but Table 6 sets out what data I
have been able to assemble.

TABLE 6

SONS OF HOLDERS

Holder

Profession, etc., of eminent sons

Admiral Sir G. 0.

Keppel ... Admiral; G.C.V.O.

Sir G. 0. Trevelyan Master of Trinity; O.M.

Lord Rayleigh ... FBellow of Trinity; F.R.S.; R.S.

medallist

Sir J. J. Thomson Professor; Nobel Prize; F.R.S.;

R.S. medallist

Sir William Bragg Professor; Nobel Prize; Head of

Cavendish Laboratory, R.S.

medallist

Lord Cromer ... G.C.B.; G.C.I.E.; G.C.V.O.

Sir G. M. Trevelyan President of Board of Education

David Lloyd George Fuel Controller

Lord Fisher ... I.C.S.

EarI Jellicoe ... Scholar of Trinity; D.S.O.

Earl Beatty ... M.P.

Lord Roberts ... V.C.*

Sir A. Geikie ... Home Civil Service*

Sir W. Houldsworth Post Graduate law Studentship,

Christ Church; stroke of Oxford

Boat*

These show some very remarkable achieve-

ments. First, the present Master of Trinity, himself an O.M. Then Sir Laurence Bragg, Nobel Prize winner, Royal Society Medallist and Head of the Cavendish Laboratory; and two other Royal Society Medallists, one of whom is also a Nobel Prize winner. I think there are eight sons of holders who will certainly appear in the D.N.B., and others who may do so, such as the present Lord Jellicoe, a scholar of Trinity and a D.S.O. in this War. Death at an early age has removed
another three of promise.

With regard to fathers, brothers and sons, exact measurement of intelligence is im-

possible. The following test might be tried. The holders were all selected for their own meritorious service, not for that of their

families. Let us take seventy consecutive names, say, of parsons from Crockford,

* All these showed promise of a fine career, cut short by death.

doctors from the medical directory, baronets, stockbrokers and members of the T.U.C., and find out what their fathers, brothers and sons
have achieved. There is an interesting point with regard to
the arts, including the lighter side of literature, such as poetry, fiction and playwritin: holders eminent in these fields, about a
quarter of our total, do not seem to havoe eminent fathers or brothers. So far as sons are concerned, there are hardly any to be eminent. Poeta nascitur non fit. But is a poet not only not made but not bred? We can trace sometimes an origin for the career but not for the eminence. Watt's father was a skilled maker of musical instruments, Elgar's an organist, and Lutyens's an artist. But whence came the creative inspiration?

Education The data are set out in Table 7.

TABLE 7 EDUCATION OF HOLDERS

UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER

EDUCATION
Military

Civil

Oxford ... ... I Cambridge ... .. x. 8

Dublin ... ... 2
Edinburgh ... ... 3

Glasgow ... ... 3

London ... ... 2

Manchester

... 2

Oxford ... ... IO

R.M.A., Woolwich I R.M.C., Sandhurst i Art Schools ... 4
No university ... II

SCHOOLS

Military Civil Total

Bedford ... ... ... ... I - I

Charterhouse ... ... ... -

33

Cheltenham ... ... ... - 4* 4*

City of London ...

... -

I

Clifton ... ... ... ... - I I

Dulwich ...

. ....

...

...

- 1 II

Eton ... ... ... ... 2

46

Harrow ... ... ... ...

33

Marlborough ... ... ... -

* I*

Merchant Taylors ... ...

22

Rugby ... ... ... ... I

I

Shrewsbury ... ... ...I

I

Westminster ... ... ...-

II

Winchester ... ... .

I

K.W. College, I. of M.

... -

Dumfries Academy ... ...I

II

Edinburgh ... ... ...

-

Glasgow High School

... -

2

* F. H. Bradley at Cheltenham and Marlborough

THE ORDER OF MERIT: THE HOLDERS AND THEIR KINDRED 89

Larchfield Academy ... R.H.S., Edinburgh ...

Military Civil Total

... -

I

... I

5 29 34

Colonial Schools

... ...

2

Abroad ... ... ... ...

I

Britannia, etc. ... ... ...

8

Grammar School ... ...

I

Private School ... ... ...

I

Educated privately ... ...

12

Not traced ... ... ...

10

EDUCATION
Military Art Litera- Science Unclasture sified
University ... I I 21 I2 2 Public School 5 I I8 7 3
As regards the military branch little need be said. The services provide their own higher education. When we come to the civil branch, a university education is nearly always essential in literature and science but not in art.
As regards schools, the table gives a brief abstract. The intake of the public schools is only about i per cent of the total number of boys. Yet they have provided over 50 per cent of the holders of the O.M. This is most pronounced in literature, where they have produced over two-thirds of the holders; in science, where they have produced about one-third; whereas in the arts they have produced only one holder. I show a table of the schools.
The L.C.C. says that the independent public day and boarding schools are in the widest sense educationally (mark the word) undesirable. They would have some difficulty in establishing that case. They apparently want a uniform State system controlled by politicians. This surely is a mistake. The greatness of Britain in Elizabethan times was, of course, not built up on our present public schools. Sir Wasey Sterry has shown, in his recent volume on the first 250 years of
Eton, that only eighty sons of peers were pupils, one every three years. The aristocracy were then educated privately, and very well educated too. Lords Wolseley, Kitchener, Cromer and Sir Charles Parsons in our list were so educated. But this is the antithesis of what the L.C.C. suggest. We are at present all discussing how to undo ten years of Nazi education of the young; what guarantee

have the L.C.C. that in fifteen years' time their uniform system might not be dictated by a Moseley? We have heard that science must be Bolshevist science or Nazi science. Five hundred years ago it had to be Vatican science and you might be liquidated for saying the earth went round the sun. Biological progress and evolution are based on variation, and so is intellectual progress. Let us not barter away that small measure of intellectual freedom we won by the Reforma-
tion.
Inspired Teaching
How do we account for high ability when there is nothing remarkable in the ancestry ? It may be just a favourable selection from the ancestral repertoire ? If I toss ten pennies into the air I am not likely to toss ten heads. But the chance is still there, one in I,024. If I do it a million times I will toss ten heads nearly a thousand times. Now if nine of my pennies have heads on both sides (very favourable ancestry) I will toss ten heads
every second time. Another possibility, but this is hardly
eugenics, is inspiration of the teacher. We hear much of educational reform, of curriculum, of years which should be spent at school, occasionally of the high moral qualities of headmasters, but little of the zest and enthusiasm for the subject occasionally implanted by the teacher in his pupils. This is something other than the communication of facts which can be got from books. It opens up the spirit of inquiry. Some of the old Scotch professors had it and easily held the interest of their very large classes. It is perhaps more recognized in the teaching of medicine.
A friend of mine wrote to me on this subject: " Kilkenny (celebrated for its cats) has also a little grammar school. Jonathan Swift, Bishop Berkeley, Farquhar the dramatist, and William Cosgrave, were all boys there together." Swift was, of course, a cousin of Dryden. Of the others' relatives I know nothing. The Anglo-Irish are often of high intellectual ability, but this group suggests inspired teaching.
A trio of the holders of the order had the

go THE EUGENICS REVIEW

same schoolmaster: Lecky, Morley and the classical medal and then, instead of going

Jackson. Their fathers were a barrister and to the University, switched to Woolwich,

two doctors of no particular eminence. They where he won the prize for mathematics; he

went to three different universities. R. E. died, unfortunately, at the age of 32, a sapper

Francillon in Mid-Victorian Memories has major. Dobson's great grandson, Antony

left some record of their teacher, William Dobson, recently passed in first into Wool-

Dobson. He was educated at Charterhouse wich, where they still placed people in order

and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he of marks. Dobson does not appear in the

was third classic and a Fellow of Trinity. D.N.B.

When he came to Cheltenham he had no There seems something catalytic or like a

previous experience of teaching boys. He primer in inspired teaching which releases

chose his subordinates well and left them latent forces. I do not know how far it can

entirely alone. He devoted himself entirely be studied with advantage, or communicated

to one task, to train his first form for uni- to others. One might have called this study

versity scholarships, I5 boys out of 6oo. He " psychical research," but that term has

was unsociable though his daughters were become involved with the question of sur-

not; in orders, but he never preached. He vival after death, which the Royal Society

was indifferent to games. He spent his leisure do not include in their subjects of study,

in solitary country walks. Four years in although certainly two of their Presidents

succession his top boy won a Balliol Scholar- and several of their members have been

ship when only one, or possibly two, were keenly interested. I gathered from Sher-

given. In Francillon's time Henry Jackson rington's Gifford lectures that mere thought

was top; he became third classic, Fellow of as opposed to thought and action cannot be

Trinity and Vice-Master and Regius Pro- traced as liberating energy and therefore falls

fessor of Greek; Frederick Myers, a queer outside the scope of science as generally

fellow, was second. A poet in his early youth, understood. But one cannot conceive of

second Classic at Cambridge and Fellow of intelligence without thought, and intelligence

Trinity, and devoted in later life to Psychical seems to be governed by the ordinary laws

Research, he wrote Human Personality and of inheritance.

its Survival after Bodily Death, rather a Perhaps we have something here akin to

classic in its way. Third came F. Brandt, those bursts of intellectual activity which at

the only one of the group who played games, times overtake cities and communities, only

which he did to some purpose, becoming to die away later. Here come to mind Athens

captain of the Oxford XI. He was a scholar at its peak, Florence of the Renaissance,

of Brasenose, got a first in Moderations, went Elizabethan England, and Edinburgh at the

into the I.C.S., and on retiring was Professor end of the eighteenth and the beginning of

of Oriental Languages at Cambridge. In the nineteenth century. To take the last and

spite of his cricket he married Dobson's the least, there was no corresponding burst

daughter. F. W. Raper, Fellow and Vice- of intelligence in Scotland in Elizabethan

Principal of Trinity, Oxford, came fourth in times. Outside politics, which were certainly

the list.

very rife and active, I can think of only two

To train boys to win scholarships doesn't names, George Buchanan and John Napier.

sound very inspiring, but Dobson must have Two centuries later, when the full activity of

passed on something more valuable than Edinburgh appeared, the English universities

facts. I don't think his boys were prigs, were very much in the doldrums. Matricu-

witness Henry Jackson's criticism of De lations at Cambridge were rarely one-half

Maupassant's Bel Ami: " Written by a cad of what they had been I50 years earlier. As

about a cad for cads to read, but devilish in such previous periods, the wideness of the

good reading all the same."

range is one of the striking features. To

Dobson transmitted some of his intefli- mention a few names: in art Raeburn, in

gence to his offspring. His eldest boy won architecture Adam, in history Robertson, in

THE ORDER OF MERIT: THE HOLDERS AND THEIR KINDRED 9I

literature Scott, in law the Dundas family
and G. F. Bell at home, not to mention two Lord Chancellors given to England, in medicine Bell, in science Hutton, in philosophy Hume and Dugald Stewart, Palmerston's mentor, who partook of the omniscience of

Whewell. And some of their work lasts, the Raeburn portraits, the Waverley novels, and the new town of Edinburgh, by far the largest and finest work of town planning in the country. Ex nihilo, nihil fit. Whence came
this ?

C. B}.CW.
CONSTRUCTIVE BIRTH CONTROL
SocIETY AND CLIC FOUNDED BY DR. MARIE STOPES IN 192I
The oldest Birth Control Clinic, the first to establish Birth Control Case Sheets and collect scientific data; C.B.C. Clinics are still the onlyfree clinics: the only birth control clinics dealing from the first with all aspects of birth control, i.e. prevention of detrimental births, spacing of healthy births and inducing potentially desirable pregnancy in sterile women, and general marital help.
THE PIONEERS OF THE CLINIC MOVEMENT Libraty, Museum and Clinics open daily, 10-6 (except Sats.)
Books and Racial supplies may be obtained direct. TECHNICAL DEMONSTRATIONS for MEMBERS of the MEDICAL PROFESSION
First Thursday each month Applications to The Hon. Secretary, Headquarters Clinic,
IO6 Whitfield Street, W. I

