THE VERY REVEREND W. R. MATTHEWS,
K.C.V.O., D.Lit., D.D., DEAN OF ST. PAUL'S.
Eugenics and the Family
The National Marriage Guidance Council's Herbert Gray
Lecture, October i8th, I96I
T HE WORD " EUGENICS" denotes con- soon man will be able to take a decisive part in cern with and study of the conditions the evolution of the human race-to look needed for the production of well-born ahead and plan the generations that will come
children. It is common knowledge that in recent after him. And further, we are presented with years the biological sciences have made such the startling proposition that the evolution of great strides that now, for the first time in man may still be incomplete; a further stage in human history, we are told it is theoretically evolution may lie ahead in which man, by his possible, within limits, to plan the biological intelligence and co-operation in planned birth future of the human race and to direct, again control, may raise himself to a higher type of within limits, the course of human evolution. human being. The dream of the Superman may In this lecture I shall attempt to outline some be more than a dream after all. As we shall see, of the problems which seem likely to arise in there are eminent biologists who warn us that connection with this new development of human we are now at a critical moment in the depotentialities, with special reference to the velopment of the human race, at a parting of the family. Perhaps we have hardly yet begun to ways, for they contend that, in present circumcomprehend the radical change in outlook stances, the human race is slowly deteriorating which our children and grandchildren may be and must now take measures to reverse that confronted with as the results of the researches tendency. We cannot stand still; we shall on heredity and related subjects come to be either degenerate at an increasing rate or set applied in practical life. We have been brought out on a climb to a nobler and better-born up in the tradition of Christian civilization, humanity. which in the main has believed that birth and death, the qualities and character of children, Utopias and Utopians are in the hands of Providence, that "children Obviously all this claims the attention of and the fruit of the womb are a gift that cometh anyone who values the family and its stability, from the Lord" and that it is our part to accept for it is only too clear that almost any plans for with thankfulness the children whom He the improvement of the quality of children, and provides. Up to a short time ago, the theory of certainly any directed evolution, must directly evolution, though of course it had serious affect the traditional family. As I have said, the bearings on the doctrine of providence, did not situation in which we find ourselves is ungreatly disturb this traditional attitude, because precedented. There is no real analogy to it in the process of evolution was conceived by most the past from which we might expect to get people as one which carried on in an impersonal guidance, and we shall encounter moral probmanner. To the majority of those who thought lems which have never before been considered. about evolution at all, it seemed to resemble It would not be true, however, to say that a natural law, like gravity. The radical eugenics had made its appearance now for the change that we have to envisage is that very first time on the horizon of social thinkers. So
'93
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1962,53,4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

far from that, it plays a major part in the most
important theoretical designs for the betterment of human existence. The long- list of Utopias
would give us numerous examples of quite fundamental proposals for the reform, or abolition, of the family in the interests of human welfare. The greatest of all, Plato's Republic, goes beyond anything that the most reckless modern scientific eugenist would dream of advocating. The utopian imagination aims at
providing an ideal of society-a perfect city or a perfect state. Only the more superficial thinkers delude themselves that a mere rearrangement, or
reorganization, of the political and economic
conditions can be enough. Sooner or later, the utopianthinkercomes up against the obvious truth that an ideal city demands ideal citizens. The two go together and the problem is really to produce the kind of persons who could create and keep in existence a truly good city. Thus Plato's Republic, and many other utopias, have been largely treatises on education-how to train the citizens. But no one can think seriously about education without coming to the prior problem of the initial quality of the children to be educated. Even the most skilled and dedicated teachers can do little with poor human material. Nurture and nature are both elements in the situation and we need not only citizens who are well educated, but those who are well born. Nor is it a new idea that some qualities are hereditary and that, on the whole, the children of intelligent parents have a better chance of being intelligent than the children of the dull or half-witted. H. G. Wells's Modern Utopia, no less than Plato's Republic, depends upon a specially selected and bred elite-the Samurai.
It is perhaps worthy of note that all the important utopias are, in some sense, "aristocratic," that is they are societies in which the Elite rule and the rest obey. I think it might be almost impossible; to imagine a democratic utopia, though whether this is a condemnation of democracy or of utopias I will not venture to decide. Plato develops his eugenic proposals in connection with the "Guardians"-the governing and directing class. They alone in his ideal city have no family, they do not know who their parents are, nor do they know which

children are their offspring. The main reason for this total proscription of the family is to remove from the Guardians all family ties, all family pride and loyalty and all family love. The Guardians are to have no private or personal attachments which might distract them from their civic duties. They are to be wedded to the city. The eugenic motive, however, plays an important part in Plato's scheme, in answer to the question how to provide a steady succession of Guardians. The argument begins with a discussion of the breeding of hunting dogs and game birds and proceeds to apply the same principles to the breeding of men. "The best of both sexes ought to be brought together as often as possible, the worst as seldom as possible; we should rear the offspring of the first, but not of the second, if our herd is to reach the highest perfection. And all these arrangements must be secret from all save the rulers if the herd of Guardians is to be as free as possible from dissension." This is followed by plans for popular deception by statesmanlike myths, for the rigging of the lots for "marriage" and for the ruthless slaughter of the children of inferior parents.'
Before we leave this historical introduction, we may briefly notice H. G. Wells's Modern Utopia, which within limits might be called Plato after Darwin, though it falls far short of Plato's inhumanity. Wells has his elite governing class whom he names the Samurai, but he extends his eugenic proposals to include the whole population. He proposes severe penalties on the begetters of biologically inferior children, the segregation of all individuals who do not conform to the rules laid down for the begetting of children which have been made for the biological improvement of the race. Though Wells does not set out to abolish the family (and in this respect differs significantly from Plato) it is obvious that his Utopia envisages a profound change in the conditions of family life.
The Population Explosion and its Control The eugenic problem has now emerged from the pages of imaginary utopias in the form of a menace to the future of the whole human race. The one aspect of this which is almost universally

194

EUGENICS ANDPTHE FAMILY

recognized is the "Population Explosion," a an effect upon the family as an institution and

striking name for a. formidable phenomenon. we may agree with Mr. Fagley that "the larger

The sudden increase in the world population crisis of our time is reflected in families through-

raises the question: what will happen if this out the whole wide earth."

increase continues? The experts on this subject Control of this population explosion is not

have issued warnings about the future which are impossible. The obvious means to that end is

not vague and conjectural but based upon family planning on a wide scale. As we all

statistics and careful calculations. To take only know, this is already in operation to some

one: it is estimated that, if the present trend extent in most civilized countries and research

continues,

will probably discover new methods of birth

Six hundred years from now the number of human beings on earth will be such that there

control which will facilitate it in less advanced countries. So far, however, the effect on the rate

will be only one square metre for each to live on. of increase of the world population has been

It goes without saying that this can never take place, something will happen to prevent it.2

slight and there is reason to fear that its operation may on the whole have a dysgenic influ-

The causes of this population explosion are ence. The intelligent and self-controlled are

not at all obscure. They can be summed up by more apt to adopt family planning than the

saying that our civilization has weakened, or ignorant and more instinctive types. After all,

even suspended, the effect of those forces which, it requires a certain development of reason and

in a state of barbarism, kept the population on public spirit for parents who by culture and

the whole in equilibrium with the food supply. tradition regard large families as guarantees of

Our civilization has two characteristics which respect and security to limit their offspring in

differentiate it from all others: it is scientific the interest of the public good. There is, there-

and it is humanitarian. Our science has enabled fore, a danger that the reckless and unthinking

us to preserve the lives of multitudes who in will breed with much greater fertility than the

former times would have perished at birth, and wise and prudent. One suspects that many

to prolong the lives of many who would have parents who ought to have many children have

died young. The "survival of the fittest" has only one or two, while very many, whose con-

ceased to work with its former cruel effective- tribution to the upgrading of the human race

ness. And our moral feelings and principles, is likely to be negative, have all too many.

largely derived from Christianity, have led us to
view with horror the pagan procedures such as the exposure of unwanted children and the abandonment of the aged to uncared-for dissolution. The inevitable consequences of the rapid increase of the world population are already apparent. Though the food supply has been increased by the scientific improvements

The Importance of Quality We are confronted with the question of quality. Sir Julian Huxley puts the point succinctly:
I would say that the ultimate motivation for
family planning is to secure an improvement in the quality of life-to realize more possibilities of fulfilment for more people; while the immediate

in agriculture and, no doubt, is capable of con- motivation is the necessity to secure a reasonable

siderable further increase, the prospect that it future for the human species before it is too late.'

can keep pace with the increase of population The phrase "quality of life" invites reflection.

seems most unlikely. Even now a large pro- It is, I suppose, almost self-evident that the

portion of the world's inhabitants is on the desire of all high-minded parents is to bring

verge of starvation. President Eisenhower was into existence children who are capable of a high

not exaggerating when he said, "In vast stretches quality of life and to provide the best possible

of the earth men awoke to-day in hunger. opportunities for them to develop it. Clearly

They will spend the day in unceasing toil. And the quality of life will depend to no small degree

as the sun goes down they will still know on the environment of the child-social as well

hunger. They will see suffering in the eyes of as physical. The earliest years in a loving and

their children."3 This state of affairs must have harmonious family will begin the process in the

195

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

happiest way and the later education will, if wisely adapted, continue the good work. We must not allow eugenics to blind us to the influence of the home on the child's personality. Psychology has taught us much on this; we should heed it no less than biology. But the original endowments of nature have an equally fundamental importance and the effects of education and environment are limited by the inherent capacities which are due to heredity.
Nor can a high level of civilization be maintained by a population of sub-standard individuals.
Is human evolution now on the down-grade? Can we detect a trend of degeneration which will become a serious danger unless measures are taken to halt it? Here we enter upon a contro-
versial territory in which only the expert has a
right to speak. The question at issue, however, is of universal concern and it behoves us to try to form some opinion on it. I will briefly refer to an important paper by an American biologist, Dr. Hermann J. Muller, which bears the significant title, "The Guidance of Human Evol-
ution."5 Dr. Muller accepts the dogma held by nearly all European biologists that acquired characteristics are not inherited and, therefore, everything depends on the genes which are
modified by mutations and not by any influence from the body in which they are situated. Mutations are very numerous and of every degree of importance. In a state of nature, a certain equilibrium is maintained by the fact that individuals who suffer from an unfavourable mutation either manage to counteract its effects or perish without offspring. Thus an individual who was born with a defective thumb might have difficulty in handling a bow and arrow; and this might diminish his chances of survival or of having children, so the unfavourable mutation would not be passed on. In Dr. Muller's opinion, the civilization which we enjoy has the defect that, quite rightly, we care for the handicapped individuals, alleviating their disabilities and guiding their lives, with the result that unfavourable mutations are not eliminated but are built up. He does not claim that the damage to the species is as yet obvious, but he holds that over a long period it may become a serious menace. Another authority,

who agrees with Dr. Muller, conjectures that in 600 years the situation will be serious and in 10,000 years the human race may be in danger of extinction. It is only fair to note that other authorities do not agree with Dr. Muller's somewhat pessimistic conclusions. But let us hear the end of his story of the possible future. He thinks that the process of degeneration, if unchecked, will lead to a state of things in which human beings will be no longer able to sustain civilized life and its complexities and then, with the collapse of the civilized order, the state of nature will come again and the human species be saved from extinction by reverting to a condition of savagery. From all this, of course, he deduces that, before it is too late, we should plan births by various means to which I will refer later.
The Control of Future Evolution The prevention of degeneration, however, is not the only end which we may have in view. Why should not we aim at breeding better types of humanity and hope that the future of mankind will be adorned by beings who surpass ourselves? Dr. Muller writes:
Why should we or anyone else who has become aware of the marvellous advances that have been made in biological evolution consider it sufficient merely to keep things as good as they are, if we can do much more than that? Certainly the majority of mankind have come to set their objectives much higher in the case of cultural evolution, now that they have learned how astonishingly amenable it can be to their own contrivings. It seems almost inevitable, if civilization avoids its present opposite pitfalls of mutual extermination and overpopulation, men will want to utilize also, for their own benefit, the vast, though more unwieldy, possibilities of their own biological advancement.6
The most important of the means proposed to achieve this "biological advancement" is artificial insemination of the kind technically described as A.I.D. Dr. Muller is not blind to the probable reactions of many to his startling suggestions, though he dismisses feelings of dismay as due to superstition and prejudice. We too may experience revulsion, but that should not prevent us from looking carefully at what he has to present to us. The method of raising the biological level of the species must be by ensuring that parents of high mental

I96

EUGENICS AND THE FAMILY

capacity have as many children as possible, and that can be done effectively, and in a comparatively short time, by artificial insemination. I need not go into details, but it is well known that now it is technically possible for one man to have an almost indefinite number of children by many women and, moreover, the semen can be preserved for some time so that a man may have children after he is dead. Dr. Muller envisages a time not far off when it will be a normal and recognized thing for a family of husband, wife and children to include sons and daughters not begotten by the husband but by A.I.D. He thinks, indeed, that, so far from disrupting the life of the family, this technique would conduce to its harmony and happiness, and that public-spirited and idealistic men and women would feel joy and pride that they have contributed to the great cause of biological advancement. I must add that, in my opinion, it is quite unjust to accuse Dr. Muller and other geneticists who agree with him of treating human beings as though they were cattle or sheep. Though the techniques have been developed in connection with cows and sheep, there is no suggestion that they are to be imposed on human beings. It is presupposed that all these modifications of sexual behaviour and family planning will be freely accepted and practised by intelligent persons who believe that they are furthering the general good. I must also put on record the fact that the Eugenics Society and its President Sir Julian Huxley do not advocate the adoption of Dr. Muller's measures as a practical policy. A reference to the published literature is enough to convince anyone that their proposals which would have immediate effect are within the bounds of what reasonable persons, who do not want to disturb the normal family life, can regard as acceptable.
The Importance of the Family Unit Before I pass on to some general observations on the problem of eugenics and the family, I will quote some words uttered by the chairman of a conference on the subject in New York, at which the theories of Dr. Muller and others were discussed:
If the dignity of mankind is to be preserved, we must proceed with ever increasing caution ... the

spiritual, artistic and emotional qualities in man will long seem far more important than disease resistance. There is even a bare possibility that disease susceptibility will conduce to these high qualities. Our greatest human beings have not always been perfect physical specimens. We must never forget the divine spark that characterizes man at his highest if not always his healthiest.7
I will take this quotation as a kind of text for what I have to say on the moral and religious principles which are relevant to eugenics and the
family. And first a few words on the obvious need for preserving the family. The family is based on biological fact. As we know it in our Christian tradition, it is the group consisting of one man and one woman and their children. The normal family, the paradigm family, is
bound together by the recognition that the children have been brought into the world through the mutual love of husband and wife. As we know, there are many exceptions to the rule: there are happy homes in which the children are adopted, but would this continue if the normal family was no longer of the accepted pattern and test-tube babies were so common as not to appear unusual? I find it hard to believe. Nor do I think that any substitute for the family as we know it is likely to be equally effective as a place of moral education. In the life of the family, the virtues of lovingkindness, consideration for others, loyalty and tolerance have their seed plot and it would be courting disaster to undermine it. The environment is a factor in the development of human beings and the family is the natural environment of the young. It is possible to have genetic excellence frustrated and warped by environmental squalor or resentments. We know by experience that inherited intellectual gifts are only too often wasted by lack of opportunity or perverted by misdirection arising from environment. Al Capone, I imagine, was not biologically inferior.
But we must leave the discussion of details to consider some wider questions. The growing knowledge of heredity and genetics has really opened to us a new moral horizon and confronted us with duties which were unknown to
previous generations. Formerly the birth of children was regarded as almost entirely beyond

'97

ER-C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

human power to control or direct. As I have ence to which would constitute righteousness; as

already remarked the idea that by human St. Paul puts it, love is the fulfilling of the law.

contrivance some influence could be exercised But "who is my neighbour?" was the critical

on the kind of children that are born is revo- question put to our Lord by the lawyer, to

lutionary. And this is true whether we are con- which he replied by the parable of the Good

cerned with the religious outlook or the purely Samaritan, implying that my neighbour is

secular. To the Christian, children were gifts anyone who crosses my path who is in need of

of Providence, "an heritage and gift that cometh my help. As time has gone on, the richness of

of the Lord" and therefore "to be brought up this maxim of conduct has revealed itself by

in the fear and nurture of the Lord." To the proving applicable beyond the neighbours in the

secularist they were products of evolution, but literal sense. We have enlarged the area of com-

evolution was thought of as a natural process passion and concern, so that the good man is

with which we could not interfere in any sig- ready to respond to calls for aid from China or

nificant way. Now we are conscious that within Africa, as well as from his home town. Love

limits some direction of evolution is possible. has learned to leap over the wall of space; the

What shall we say as Christians to this? Does question now is whether it can leap over the

it follow that the belief in Providence is out- wall of time and feel concern for those who shall

modcd and man will, so to speak, step into be born long after we are dead?

the place formerly assigned to God? Are chil- This question needs more reflection than it

dren then in no sense an heritage and gift to be has had. It does not resemble very closely the

accepted with gratitude? If that is the con- question: "Ought I to be concerned for

clusion drawn by the majority, the progress of persons in distant lands ?" because we can form

genetics and eugenics will have a deplorable a relatively clear idea of what distressed for-

effect on human thought by diminishing rever- eigners are like and of their needs, but we

ence for life and the feeling that birth is sacred. cannot do the same with persons who may be

But for my part I would draw no such con- living say 200 years from now. As we well

clusion. We do not have to give up the belief know, we feel no difficulty in being concerned

in Providence, rather we have to enlarge our for our children or our grandchildren, and we

conception of the working of Providence and may even cherish some of the same sentiment

of our relation to it. The development of human for our great-grandchildren, but beyond that

knowledge, with its consequences in the increase our emotion and our imagination fail. It is

of our power to influence the future, is itself a astonishingly hard to care very much about

providential event, for, if we believe in God, we remote generations who, after all, may never

are bound to believe that His guidance was not come into existence. This failure of concern is

absent from the whole wonderful scientific leap not wholly one of emotion and imagination-

forward in the last 200 years. May it not be it has a rational ground. We cannot foresee

that the method of Providence is to provide the conditions of life even a century ahead,

new opportunities for the enhancement of life we cannot tell, when the length of time is

which we may seize wisely and courageously, increased to five centuries, what evolutionary

or fail to recognize and so incur unnecessary changes may have taken place in the human

trouble? So I think we must regard it.

race itself, so that we simply do not know what

to hope for them. This does not mean, of course,

The Future of the Human Race

that we should be indifferent to the eugenic

It follows then that "new occasions bring new considerations which bear upon the probable

duties." The new duty now is to care for the course of evolution, but it does mean, I think,

future of the human race. This too raises an that we must preserve a sense of proportion.

interesting question, particularly from the Love your neighbour is the basic principle;

standpoint of Christian ethics. To love our our primary duty is to those who are near us in

neighbours as ourselves has been acknowledged time and space and it is possible to become

as the supreme principle of conduct, full obedi- like Mrs. Jellyby, whose children suffered

I98

EUGENICS AND THE FAMILY

because of her interest in the natives of Borrio- way, produce a large number who have high

boola-Gha, by having our interest so con- I.Q.s, we may reasonably assume that we are

centrated on the world as it may be, centuries doing good. But even here there are doubts.

hence, that we do not notice the troubles of the As the quotation which I have used as a text

world to-day.

suggests, it is possible that some highly valued

This is not a merely theoretical discussion. In qualities of mind and spirit are connected with

my opinion, it has a direct bearing on how we weakness or malady of the body. It would be

ought to judge some proposed eugenic schemes. easy to compile a list of persons, particularly in

Some of the more drastic seem to run the risk the spheres of art and literature, who are among

of sacrificing the present generation to the the great geniuses of the world and were phys-

supposed interests of those to come. I do not ically below normal. In some cases it is arguable

accuse any of the writers known to me of that their genius was connected with their ill

intending explicitly to do this. They are, as I health. John Keats is a familiar example and it

have tried to make clear, men of liberal and is hard to say whether he would have been a

humane views and are particularly careful to great poet if he had not suffered from tuber-

avoid any encroachment on human dignity and culosis. I prefer, however, to take another

freedom. If they were in charge, we need have example, that of a great personality who, in

little fear. But will they be in charge? Will his own fashion, was deeply concerned with the

eugenic measures be always on a voluntary creation of a new type of man-I mean St.

basis? I doubt it. Hitler made some blundering Paul. He was certainly not the kind of being

efforts to breed a master race. Totalitarian states whom eugenics would have looked upon as a

are still with us, and it is unlikely that in them success. His frame was evidently not impressive

eugenic measures will be left to the voluntary or attractive and he suffered from some per-

choice of individuals. The prospect of some manent disability which he calls "a thorn in the

"Big Brother" dictating to a conditioned flesh"; some scholars have thought that he was

citizenry what kind of children should be born epileptic. In any view, however, he was a man

causes dismay when we remember the lengths who played an outstanding part in history and

which Plato went to in his ideal city and his made a unique contribution to the cultural

plans for a master progeny. There are prices too tradition of the Western world, while in the

high to pay for biological improvement under Christian view he was much more, he was a

the guidance of eugenics, and one of them is the vehicle of Divine revelation and the greatest of

sacrifice of the finest fruits of culture and the Apostles.

Christian civilization: personal freedom and

moral self-determination.

Spiritual Values

The aim of eugenics is to encourage the birth The mention of St. Paul introduces the last

of better types of human beings. Expressed point which I wish to make. As I have said, he

in these general terms, it must have the sympathy too was concerned with the making of improved

of all men of good will, but when we ask what men, or rather he would say with making new

we mean by "better," we run into some awkward men. His own experience led him to this, for

questions-and one fundamental one, what is he felt himself to have been transformed from

our conception of a really good man? That within, by a creative spiritual experience, and he

perhaps is too large a subject for discussion believed that this same experience was possible

now, but what qualities do we recognize as for all. This is not the occasion to dwell on the

plainly desirable and as susceptible to treatment significance of the conversion of St. Paul or on

by eugenic measures? I suggest that those which conversion in general, but we are reminded by

are, to some extent, measurable will naturally him that there is another factor in the develop-

have prior claim, such as physical health and ment of human beings, the factor which was

intellectual ability. If by eugenics we can hope to referred to in the quotation from the Chairman's

breed men who are immune to some of the more address as "the Divine spark." The fascinating

serious diseases, and if we can, in the same study of heredity and environment is certainly

'99

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the highest importance and it would be folly This lecture is under the auspices of the

to ignore the great benefits which may be Marriage Guidance Council and commemorates

derived from the science of eugenics, but it is a Dr. Gray, who was a pioneer in this field of

dangerous fallacy to suppose that we are com- voluntary social service. The relevance of

pletely determined by heredity and environ- eugenics to marriage guidance is obvious.

ment, or that we are and can be nothing but The question whether or not responsible parent-

what they make us. Our heredity is given and we hood would justify the procreation of children

cannot alter it, nor for the most part can we in cases where some transmissible defect is

choose our environment, but we may make present in the potential parents must often

something good and valuable out of the given present a serious moral problem. The heredity

material or something worthless and mean. of haemophilia and diabetes for example has

Which we shall do depends on our spiritual been studied and much is known about it. There

nature, on the "Divine spark" within us.

are other diseases of which less is known but

We have been talking of eugenics and the which may be passed on to children. Sometimes,

family and St. Paul has a word for us on this. again, the fear that heredity will work against

He believed that the spirit of man thrived in a the well-being of the children is unfounded and

family, and he conceived of the Church into should be dismissed. To make knowledge of

which he recruited his converts as the great these matters available to those whom it con-

family of God in which all the members were cerns is a real service to them and to the com-

bound together in love. The family, I suggest, munity. Marriage Guidance Counsellors never

has a unique function in eugenics; it is the attempt to dictate, or impose, a solution to

natural environment in which children most problems, but always to help the persons con-

easily develop as free spiritual beings, so that cerned to work out their own. When genetic

we may assert that the last thing a wise eugenist fears are involved in the problem surely the same

would wish for is the decay ofthe family; on the policy is to be commended. The counsellor

contrary, he would do all he could to preserve will help by knowing the scientific established

it and to make it more like its ideal.

facts, or by knowing where to look for them,

and thus be able to provide the data on which

Conclusion

a free and responsible decision can be reached.

I fear that my lecture has wandered over many

REFERENCES

fields and raised many questions without many clear and definite conclusions. My excuse must
be that the subject is so vast and the data are still being assembled, so that we must keep open minds on many of the problems. I hope we are all convinced that we have a duty to inform
ourselves on the subject and to consider candidly the proposals of the more sober-minded eugenists, represented by the Eugenics Society, which are within the bounds of practical politics and voluntary choice.

1. Plato's Republic, v. 459. 2. United Nations. 1958. The Future Growth of World
Population. Quoted in R. M. Fagley, The Population Explosion and Christian Reponsibility, 1960, p.18. 3. Address at Columbia Plan Conference. Quoted in The Population Explosion, p.22. 4. Population and Quality of Life. The Sixth International Conference on Planned Parenthood. New Delhi, 1959. 5. Tax, S. (Editor) 1960. Evolution After Darwin, Vol. 2. Papers presented at the Darwin Centennial Celebration, Chicago, 1959. 6. Op. cit. p. 18. 7. The Times, 21.7.61. "Genes and Environment."

200

