SAFEGUARDS IN EUGENIC STERILIZATION

By EDWARD MAPOTHER, M.D., F.R.C.P.

TO me it seems that the chief need of practice restriction would be unworkable if the eugenics movement is patience. the presence of neurosis or liability to this
The only matters one wants to make could be pleaded as an adequate ground. quite sure about are that some progress is The first group of grounds for sterilization
occurring and that it is not in the wrong in connection with severe mental disorder direction. The spirit of the time is wholly in may be called the therapeutic (implying the favour of man taking control of his destiny, immediate or future benefit of the individual unchecked by anything except reason. One sterilized). This might include cases in which thing that is more likely than any other to not only the brief strain of pregnancy or arrest progress and provoke reaction is an childbirth has been shown liable to produce attempted replacement of general vetoes by a breakdown, but also those in which a general compulsions based on half-baked severe psychosis seems likely from more science. We must avoid driving into opposi- prolonged troubles, such as fear of pregnancy, tion the people with truly scientific minds. or the economic stresses involved in bringing
These are the general principles in the up a growing family. Such forms of sterilizalight of which must be decided what is tion for the direct benefit of the patient reasonable and politic to propose about hardly need discussion here, because such sterilization in connection with mental operations are legal now, granted that evidisorders. I shall confine myself to the dence of the dangers is sufficient. It is to be forms of these disorders, usually termed hoped that no legislation will interfere with
psychoses, which, whatever the extent to existing rights to sterilize for therapeutic
which they depend on inborn factors, reasons, or subject this to fresh safeguards.
become manifest after infancy.

SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS FOR STERILIZA-

STERILIZATION LIMITED TO SEVERE TION

DISORDERS

The two main grounds for sterilization in

In the first place, I should say that it is connection with severe mental disorder

only in connection with personal liability to which really need discussion have as their

really severe mental disorder, or the liability common basis the liability of the offspring

to transmit such, that at present one should themselves to be affected with such mental

advocate that sterilization be legalized. I disorder. Of these two, one, the truly

am fully aware that many persons suffering eugenic ground, consists in fact that true

from neuroses and minor grades of mental inheritance of the liability to psychosis tends

inefficiency which disqualify them for em- to occur. The other consists in the poss. -

ployment show a complete incapacity to bility that the offspring of the psychopathic

limit their families to a size that would be are themselves likely to become psychotic in

in the best interests of the parents, the virtue of contact with the psychopathic

children and the community. But the parent and other conditions of upbringing.

dividing line between neuroses and minor Taking together the evidence for steriliza-

grades of mental inefficiency on the one hand, tion in connection with mental disorder on

and normality on the other, is almost these two latter grounds, it seems to me,

indefinable. If one is to concede at all that first, that this evidence renders the present

limits to the permission of sterilization are wholesale veto justifiable; secondly, that

necessary, one must recognize that in it fails to prove that any form of compulsion

I5

i6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

would at present be justifiable; and thirdly, THE PROPOSED SAFEGUARDS

that it strongly favours legal voluntary
sterilization with safeguards. The next question which arises is this.
If it be granted that some form of voluntary birth control is to be permitted or even
encouraged though not enforced, why will not contraception suffice ? The following are reasons for legalizing voluntary sterilization as well as contraception: (i) All contraceptive measures to be taken at the time of coitus are distasteful to many persons, and those who feel this (if permanent sterility of their marriage is certainly advisable) are entitled to have their prefer-
ence considered. (2) There is no form of contraception at present known which does not at times fail, and fear of such failure may
be very detrimental. (3) Contraception is useless in the case of irresponsible persons who can be got to see their duty sufficiently to accept voluntary sterilization, but cannot be trusted successfully to carry out contra-
ceptive precautions.

It seems to me that all dangers would be met if the following principles were observed. Sterilization of one or other party to an actual or intended marriage should be permitted upon the written application of both parties to it, provided, (i) That two medical certificates were obtained vouching for the fact that, in the light of the best scientific evidence at the time available, the mating of the two parties was likely to result in a supernormal proportion of mentally disordered offspring. (2) That such medical certificates were submitted to an established authority, for example, a department of the Ministry of Health or the Board of Control. Let us consider the dangers and the safeguards against them one by one.
(a) I believe that in order to ensure in the fullest degree that application for sterilization is voluntary, it should never be permitted in the case of patients under any order sanctioning detention, nor upon premises where other patients are detained. Not only

compulsion but pressure, and the very

PITFALLS TO AVOID

suspicion of either, should be avoided. On

The possible dangers in connection with
sterilization against which safeguards might have to be provided are the following:
(i) The danger that application might not
truly be voluntary or might be thought not to be so. (2) The surgical dangers. (3) The danger that, to save trouble, one, or both, of a young couple might be sterilized in

the other hand, it should certainly be permitted to those who are carriers of psychopathic inheritance as well as to those who have definitely had a breakdown. Otherwise, the prospect of anything but the most trivial influence upon incidence of psychoses is negligible.
(b) Surgical risk should be almost elimin-

haste and repent at Jeisure. (4) The danger
that even collaboration between operator

ated by giving the central authority power to insist on operation by a surgeon of

and another doctor, such as is now customary recognized standing and on approved prem-

in respect of therapeutic abortion, might not ises. Here it may be said that the necessary

guarantee sufficiently expert opinion as to chance of psychopathic inheritance. (5) The
danger that if sterilization were Jegalized in connection with liability to occurrence of

operation might be performed with consent of either party to a mating or of both, regardless of through which the transmission was likely; and the idea should be encour-

severe mental disorder in offspring, this permission might be misused for reasons not within the meaning of the Act; in other words, sterilization might possibly be fostered for mercenary reasons, or that at least

aged that it is preferable to have the man sterilized owing to the greater simplicity and freedom from danger of the operation on the male. Of course, this would alter if a simple method were discovered in the case of

the prevalence of such a practice might be women.

suspected, and thus bring sterilization into (c) The danger of what one may term

disrepute.

frivolous sterilization would disappear if there

SAFEGUARDS IN EUGENIC STERILIZATION

17

could be devised a method of securing temporary and repeated sterilization (applicable at times other than that of coitus). In absence of such method the danger can be met by requiring medical certificates to be submitted to a central authority.
(d) The danger that the medical evidence required might not adequately indicate the necessity of sterilization could be met as follows. One of these certificates should be from the usual medical attendant or family doctor of that one of the couple who was the probable transmitter; the other should be from a psychiatrist of recognized standing. It might well be required that he be specially approved as for the purpose of the Mental Treatment Act. If so, the approving authority might also require that he should hold a diploma in psychological medicine or an equivalent qualification. This would ensure that knowledge of the kind needed to qualify for such approval was given in the course and tested at the examination for the diploma.
(e) Submission of medical certificates to a central authority seems to me advisable as a safeguard; it would protect not only patients but practitioners. The question has been discussed whether certificates should merely be submitted for registration, or whether the actual approval of the central authority should be essential. I see no objection to the latter arrangement provided it can be ensured that approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The question would also arise whether the approving authority should be the Board of Control or the Ministry of Health for questions involving mental deficiency or disorder. The Board of Control might seem obviously more suitable, but patients who had never been certified might object. Further, the Act might legalize sterilization in connection with liability to transmit physical diseases, which would be out of the province of the Board of Control; possibly a joint body representing both the Board and the Ministry would be best.
NO RIGID STANDARDS
No explicit definition should be attempted as to what constitutes an adequate ground

for permitting voluntary sterilization in virtue of the probable quality of offspring beyond that already indicated. The criterion should be the elastic one that in the joint opinion of the two certifying doctors, one an expert, and the central authority, and in the light of best scientific knowledge of the time, the facts pointed to the probability that an abnormal proportion of the offspring from the mating in question would be mentally disordered in a serious degree. This would make qualification for voluntary sterilization a matter for contemporary expert judgment (as certifiability is now) and allow of practice being progressively adapted to increasing knowledge.
The one thing above all others to be ensured, and not only for tactical reasons, is that sterilization shall be voluntary in the fullest sense of the word.
These two principles-namely, that all eugenic sterilization shall be voluntary and that the decision as to suitability should be made in each case on its own merits, i.e. on the individual pedigree, underlie the practice of sterilization in Switzerland, which has there been legal for 50 years and is almost a model of how it should be done. In Nazi Germany the general principles applied are compulsion and selection of cases according to their exemplifying some clinical syndrome. This almost perfectly illustrates how not to do it.
THE GERMAN LAWS CRITICIZED
It should be noted that just as voluntary sterilization and individual decisions are related so are compulsion and general rules, for compulsion necessarily involves proclaiming certain classes to whom the law must be applied. But definition of such classes in a way that is scientifically defensible is at present impossible. The conditions which in Nazi Germany render a person liable to compulsory sterilization are: mental deficiency, schizophrenia, manic depressive psychosis, Huntingdon's chorea, deaf mutism, and severe alcoholism. Let us confine our attention to the first three categories.
Of mental deficiency it leaps to the eye that it is not a unity, that it includes cases that are of germinal and environmental

U

i8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

origin, and that sterilization of the latter on cures in which inheritance of liability to

truly eugenic grounds has no scientific schizophrenia is found has never been

justification whatever. I venture to suggest reconciled with any Mendelian formula, and

that in the case of mental disorder exactly this might well be due to the fact that

the same is true of each of the clinical figures are drawn from a heterogeneous

syndromes, manifestation of which renders group. It has even lately been suggested

the patient liable to compulsory sterilization. that in a proportion of schizophrenics the

We should speak not of schizophrenia but condition may be the result of infection with

of the schizophrenias as we should of the a modified form of the tubercle bacillus, in

epilepsies. Likewise, we should speak not of the same sort of way as general paralysis of

manic depressive psychosis but of the the insane results from infection with the

syntonic syndromes. It is quite certain to spirochete of syphilis. Most of what I have

my mind that each of these groups-the said applies with little modification to manic

schizophrenias and the syntonic psychoses- depressive psychosis or to use the better

is heterogeneous, including some cases in term, the syntonic syndromes.

which an hereditary factor plays a very

large part, and others in which it is negligible. SOME RESULTS OF COMPULSORY

Schizophrenia, as I have said, is not a STERILIZATION

unity. The anomaly may be present in such I am given to understand that the results

a mild degree that it may be said that there already seen in Germany even in anticipation

is every gradation from normality to its of the law which became effective on January

grossest degree, and it would be very hard Ist, show the disastrous effects of compulsion.

to decide as to its presence or absence. It This renders liable to sterilization every non-

may often co-exist with and colour other segregated person suffering from amentia,

forms of mental abnormality. Its clinical schizophrenia, manic depressive psychosis,

course is extremely variable. Though most severe alcoholism and certain rare conditions.

commonly insidious and progressive, it may It makes it obligatory upon any doctor

come on abruptly; and then usually the diagnosing one of these conditions, even in

patient recovers, at least for a considerable consultation outside an institution, to notify

time. It is not only possible but almost the case just as a doctor is obliged to notify

certain that such differences of course infectious diseases here. Such notification,

correspond to differences of causation, as, if the patient is not segregated, must be

for example, do similar differences in acute followed by examination at a court composed

poliomyelitis on the one hand and progress- of a judge and two doctors, with a view to

ive muscular atrophy on the other.

sterilization. At the same time there has

Investigations as to the incidence of been passed a law legalizing castration of

schizophrenia have appeared to show that criminal sexual perverts.

this is unduly high among the offspring of The results of this legislation are briefly

selected schizophrenic parents. But this these. The two laws are being confused and

might be due to perfectly honest and sterilization is being regarded as punishment.

unconscious selection of those very schizo- Diagnosis in private practice is being entirely

phrenics in whom heredity was the main falsified. Patients with mental disorder are

causal factor, and ignoring of others in whom being frightened out of recognized institu-

it was otherwise. Such an error might well tions and are being treated in secret wherever

occur as the result of the very attempt to this is possible. All inquiry as to heredity is

ensure that the schizophrenic nature of the impossible and accurate information upon

illness in the parent was unquestionable. which scientific practice might be based is

It is to be noted that the proportion of becoming unobtainable.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI No. 1

