THE GALTON LECTURE, I946

39

DICKINSON, R. L. (I938) Control of Conception. - and BEAM, L. (I932) A Thousand Marriages.
DOLLARD, J. (I935) Criteria for the Life History. ELLIS, H. (I933) The Psychology of Sex.
EXNER, M. J. (I932) The Sexual Side of Marriage.
FLUGEL, J. C. (I934) Men and Their Motives.
(I935) " Psychological Aspects of Marriage and the Family," in Psychology and Modern Problems.
FOLSOM, J. K. (I942) The Family and Democratic Society.
FROMM, E. (I942) The Fear of Freedom. HAMILTON, G. V. (I929) A Research in Marriage.
HARDING, E. (I933) The Way of All Women. HORNEY, K. (I937) The Neurotic Personality of
Our Time.
HORST, P. et alia (I94i) The Prediction of Person-
ality Adjustment.
KIRKPATRICK, C. (I937) Am.J. Sociol., 43.
LAZARSFELD, S. (I940) Woman's Experience of the Male.

LONDON SCHOOL OF ECONOMICS (I935) New Survey of London Life and Labour.
LUNDBERG, G. A. (1942) Social Research. LYND, R. and S. (I929) Middletown. MANNHEIM, K. (1943) Diagnosis of Our Time. MEAD, M. (I938) Coming of Age in Samoa. MOWRER, H. (I935) Personality Adjustment and
Domestic Discord.
MYRDAL, A. (194I) Nation and Family.
OSBORN, F. (I940) Preface to Eugenics. POPENOE, P. (1938) J. Soc. Psych., 8. PRATT, G. K. (1930) Am.J. Psychiat., 9.
STEKEL, W. (1926) Frigidity in Women. TAWNEY, R. H. (I92I) The Acquisitive Society. TERMAN, L. M. (I938) Psychological Factors in
Marital Happiness.
and BUTTENWIESER (I935) J. Soc. Psych., 6.
THURSIONE, L. and T. G. (I930) J. Soc. Psych., 1.
WALKER, K. (I 935) Sex and a Changing Civiliza-
tion.
WILLOUGHBY, R. R. (I934) J. Soc. Psych.. 5 and 6.

THE GALTON LECTURE, 1946
Presentation of the Society's Gold Medal

O N Februiary I4th, I946, before a large gathering of Fellows, Members and guests at Manson House,
London, Lord Keynes, on behalf of the Eugenics Society, presented the first Galton Medal to Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders " in recognition of outstanding contributions to the study of eugenics and unremitting service to the Society extending over thirtyfive years"; and following this agreeable ceremony Professor Godfrey Thomson delivered the Galton lecture under the title "The Trend of National Intelligence."
Award of Galton Medal
Opening the proceedings, Lord Keynes said:
It is a satisfaction to take part in the presentation of the first Galton Gold Medal, both in piety to the memory of the great

Galton and in recognition of a worthy and appropriate recipient of a medal established in his name.
I say " appropriate," because the virtue of Carr-Saunders as of Galton lies in his belonging to, and overlapping, several
branches of relevant knowledge instead of over-specializing in one, and having, in particular, reached sociology and eugenics, not from the economic side, but from the
side of biology and Darwinianism. It is, I think, suitable to preface the
presentation of this medal by a few words of piety and remembrance to Francis Galton. His various and peculiar genius-so different from that of his kinsman Charles Darwinlay, not in continuous concentration of mind, but in continuous diffusion; not following
a single inspired idea to its logical and experimental conclusion, but striking out sparks in every direction, many of which

40 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

never became a flame and of which the rest
had to be nursed and blown upon by the hands and breaths of others. For my own
part, as I make no doubt was the case
with Carr-Saunders, it was very early in life
that I became fascinated and amused with
the work of Galton. I confess that I found
the very characteristic Statistical Enquiries
into the Efficacy of Prayer more fun than the
far more valuable work on Finger-prints.
I used to like that map of Bradshaw he
carried about; and the little episode of the
lion and the donkey in what I still think
one of the most charming of all his works,
but now I suspect little read, The Art of
Travel.
Galton's eccentric, sceptical, observing, flashing, cavalry-leader type of mind led
him eventually to become the founder of the most important, significant and, I would add, genuine branch of sociology which exists, namely eugenics.
Which leads me, by a natural transition, from Galton to his worthy and distinguished disciple Carr-Saunders, who is in common estimation to-day the most distinguished sociologist in the country. He and I were, I believe, at school together not far short of
fifty years ago. But I was just that much senior, which prevented my knowing him then. Anyway Carr-Saunders was a slow
beginner. He did not know what he
wanted. Almost by chance, I gather, he got started on zoology, so far as his head was concerned, whilst his heart was set from the beginning on social and political affairs; a combination which led, not by chance, but inevitably, to precisely that mixed training which is go essential for a mixed scientist. Charles Darwin incidentally repaid a debt. 'Whilst Darwin was first led to his theories by reading Malthus, Carr-Saunders was led to Malthus through Darwin. Problems of population became his main concern, but essentially approached through the biological background of man and his habits and customs and not primarily through the economic approach. Although it has all ended up in Carr-Saunders becoming the head of one of the leading economic faculties in the country, it was through this " other "

approach that the peculiar value of his
various contributions has largely arisen. In addition, in the true Galtonian spirit, he has
cast his net wide, and a book such as CarrSaunders's on The Professions would, I am sure, have appealed to his forerunner not less than his signal contributions to the
problems of population and eugenics. It is an honour and a pleasure to be the
instrument of handing the Galton Gold Medal of the Eugenics Society' to Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders.
The presentation was then made amid general applause, and Sir Alexander CarrSaunders replied as follows:
I wish to thank the Eugenics Society most
warmly for the very great honour which has been conferred upon me. Nothing has
ever given me more pleasure; from my undergraduate days I have believed that in the long run nothing matters more to the human race than the possession of a sound genetic endowment. In the midst of so many immediate problems it is a great thing that the Society should continue to press this view. I hope that the Society will never be deterred by disappointment because it
does not seem to be making headway. If
it persists, and if human affairs are conducted in the light of knowledge, the day will certainly come when the matter of genetic endowment will be a major preoccupation of men.
It puzzles me to know why I have been judged worthy of the honour. One service indeed I have rendered to the Society; I have paid my subscription regularly for thirty-six years. As a member of the Council of more than one society I know how valuable faithful supporters are-not cantankerous enough to threaten resignation when things do not please them, and not shrewd enough to take out life subscriptions when young. It was in I9IO, so far as I can remember, that I joined 'the Society. Sir Francis Galton, to whom we owe the word " eugenics," was then alive; indeed, he died in I9II at the advanced age of 89. Membership did, however, bring one into contact with one man, so outstanding that

THE GALTON LECTURE, I946

4I

I must mention him, Major Leonard Darwin. more directly concerned with advances in

He had true greatness of character; that social investigation. Only when we have an

no one who knew him can doubt. He had analysis of social structure and of the

a sure insight. into men and things. It was changes occurring in it, is our knowledge of

this insight which led him to give unwaver- genetics of use to us in relation to our broad

ing support to the Society at a time when interests. In this matter thirty-five years

the ordering of its affairs was not easy, and ago, as in the case of inheritance, all was

to conduct them with such success. It is guess-work. We could do no more than

proper that the Eugenics Society should be hazard the opinion that certain social groups

proud of its lineage, and what ancestry were distinguished by the possession of

could be better than that which traces itself particular inheritable characteristics, and

back to the cousin and to the son of Charles that these groups, relatively to the whole

Darwin ?

population, were on the up or down grade.

Those years round I9IO were difficult; In this sphere also a great change has taken

the first enthusiasm had passed-generated place. Though there has been no dramatic

by the acceptance of Charles Darwin's unveiling of the secrets of nature, we have

explanation of the origin of species and lead- witnessed the elaboration of methods of

ing to the simple programme that man measuring characteristics, of the application

should take the guidance of his own evolu- of these methods on a large scale, and of

tion into his own hands. Doubts had arisen; the assessment of changes in the proportion

what after all did we know more than that which groups having measurable character-

like tends to produce like-a vague generali- istics form of the whole population.

zation upon which to found a programme. I have in mind especially the elaboration

But since those days the mechanism of in- of the technique of testing intelligence and

heritance has been laid bare-due largely of its application to the problem of the re-

to the work of T. H. Morgan and his pupils. lation between fertility and intelligence

Those amazing discoveries give us sure which has always been foremost in our

ground where all was insecure before. We thoughts. No one has contribwted more to

have no longer to meet the charge that no the solution of this probtem than Professor

more is known about one of our chief in- Godfrey Thomson, the Galton Lecturer this

terests, namely inheritance, than was known year, holder of the chair of Education in

to herdsmen ever since the domestication of the University of Edinburgh, and Director

animals began. It is quite true that the of Studies at the Edinburgh Training Centre

identification of genes and the determina- which under him has become famous as a

tion of their behaviour has hardly begun, so centre of research. Twenty-five years ago

far as the human species is concerned; this he began to investigate the connection

work is impeded in many obvious ways, between intelligence and fertility, when he

such as the impossibility of experiment, but made a notable inquiry in Northumberland.

also in a manner not so obvious at first sight Though many other important problems

but still more important, and that is by the have also been engaging his attention, he

present small size of the human family. has continued to advance our knowledge in

But this does not mean that we do not know this particular field, and he has inspired

how in general inheritance works in the pupils whom he has trained to follow up his

human race. Quite the contrary is the case; work. As members of this Society we are

we do know, and this knowledge, and not greatly in his debt. We are well aware that

the detailed knowledge which still eludes us, the conclusions reached by investigators in

is what we need in order to understand the this field are often distasteful, since they run

biological importance of social change.

counter to the bias of the day. It is perhaps

The latest advances in knowledge of only fair to say that some of the investigators

genetics are of profound interest to us. As have not always been free from bias them-

members of this Society, however, we are selves; at least they have tended at times

42 TIHE EUGENICS REVIEW

to trail their coats. But this does not apply a great compliment to say, and I am sure

to our lecturer. His manifest freedom from that you agree with me, that the Galton

bias, his obvious scientific integrity and his Lecture of to-day has never been sur-

clarity of exposition command attention and passed.

respect wherever and whenever he speaks. Differential fertility is far and away the

We look forward to his lecture on " The Trend of National Intelligence."

most important issue in practical eugenics. And it is important not only in itself; its

The Galton Lecture
The Galton Lecture, published in full
elsewhere in this issue, was generally acclaimed as among the finest of a most distinguished series. Notwithstanding the difficulty of the subject-matter, Professor Thomson kept the audience completely absorbed, reducing the complex data to simple and readily intelligible terms and speaking throughout with rare spontaneity and only a very occasional recourse to notes. The prolonged applause at the end was a
tribute not less to the lecturer's manner than
to his choice of theme. In moving a warmly accorded vote of thanks, Dr. Fraser-Roberts said:
The Galton Lecture is the most important occasion of the year in our Society. In previous years lecturers of great eminence
have given us magnificent addresses on a

study will provide, in my opinion, the most useful clues in understanding and coping with the whole problem of the future of our population. Professor Godfrey Thomson
has presented the subject in a masterly fashion; I have never heard or seen a more
adequate or lucid exposition.
Professor Thomson as a psychologist, a mathematician and an educationalist has been one of the leading contributors of our time to scientific progress. And during the course of his work he has made a host of friends. Those of you who are meeting him for the first time to-day will, I am sure, have realized something not only of his scientific quality but of his human quality also. It gives me great pleasure to propose, on your behalf, a most sincere vote of thanks, and I ask you to show your appreciation in the usual way.

variety of notable topics. It is a high There was renewed applause when Pro-

standard which has been set, and one of fessor Thomson made a brief reply, bringing

which the Society is proud. It is, therefore, a memorable Galton anniversary to a close.

