IDENTICAL TWINS

The Differences Between Those Reared Apart

By PROFESSOR H. H. NEWMAN, Ph.D.
(Professor of Zoology, University of Chicago.)

LONG ago Galton discovered the value of this cannot be done. Hence twins can no

twins as material for the study of the longer be of any great value in the study of

relative potencies of heredity and en- heredity and environment.

vironment, in determining the differences in This was the conclusion at which we

physical and mental traits of mankind.

arrived when we first came to understand the

/ Since Galton's time it has been generally workings of the asymmetry mechanism in

(assumed that identical twins are derived the process of twinning. Later, however, a

from a single zygote and therefore have method was evolved by means of which the

identical genes, while fraternal twins are effects of the environment could be separated

derived from two zygotes and are as different from those attributable to the asymmetry

genetically as ordinary sibs. When, there- mechanism. This consists of a comparison of

fore, identical twins exhibit certain physical identical twins reared together with identi-

and mental differences, these differences are cal twins reared apart. Here we have an

commonly assumed to be due to differences ideal scientific set-up. The control material

in environment, pre-natal or post-natal. consists of identical twins reared together

Another factor, not strictly genetic and and the experimental material of cases of

yet not environmental, is undoubtedly re- identical twins reared apart. Here each pair

sponsible for a considerable share of actually of twins, control and experimental, is geneti-

observed differences between identical twins. cally alike. In each pair the asymmetry

This fact is the asymmetry mechanism, mechanism has operated to produce some

which has doubtless a cytoplasmic basis and differences, but no more in the experimental

is probably traceable to a cytoplasmic asym- pairs than in_thicontrols. Hence we may

metry of the undivided zygote. This is the conclude that the greater extent of difference

same factor which makes a single individual found in identical twins reared apart as com-

different in the two antimeric halves of the pared with the average differences of identi-

body, with respect to all sorts of particulars cal twins reared together must be attributed

which need hardly be enumerated here.

solely to differences in environment.

The point of the matter in hand is just this, that when the single embryo divides to

MATERIAL AND METHODS

form two twin primordia, one of these As an indispensable pre-requisite for this

primordia is not entirely equivalent to the study it was necessary to accumulate a large

other, and hence the twins cannot be said mass of data on a group of identical twins

to have arisen from identical materials. and a group of same-sexed fraternal twins,

This being the case, to what extent does both groups sufficiently large to be statistic-

the asymmetry factor disturb the two factors, ally adequate. Calculations indicated that

heredity and environment, and how can we data for 50 pairs of fraternal twins and 50

distinguish between differences due to the pairs of identicals would yield a satisfactory

environment and those due to the asymmetry base line to which we could then refer the

mechanism? The immediate answer is that cases of identical twins reared apart. The

29

THE EUGENICS REVEEW

number of strictly mental tests given these ioo pairs of twins was necessarily limited for
lack of time, and consisted of the StanfordBinet Test, and the Otis Self-Administering Test. One temperamental-emotional test was used, but it was found difficult to give it a satisfactory quantitative rating. The fact that, when quantitative ratings were
used, the average differences between fraternal twins and those between identical twins were so nearly the same, indicates that such
tests are useless as quantitative indicators of
the characters they are designed to measure. Intelligence tests such as the Stanford-
Binet and the Otis Self-Administering Test, while not perfect measures of innate mental
ability, are as good as any available. This is not the place to criticize intelligence tests,
nor are we in a position to offer criticism, but we are aware that the best of them fail to
distinguish fully between innate and acquired mental powers. Taking the results as they stand, however, we find that we can obtain certain more or less reliable data.
Average differences between 50 pairs of identical twins reared together, and between 50 pairs of same-sexed fraternal twins reared together are as follows for the two tests used:
Stanford-Binet Test: In this test both mental age average differences and I.Q. average differences were obtained. The aver-
age mental ag-differnce Atwe-en ideticals was 8.4 months, between fraternals I5.9 onths. The average '-Q7 difference be-
tween identicals was g. points, between fraternals, 9.9 points.
Otis Self-Administering Test.-In this only I.Q. differences were obtained. The average I.Q. difference between identicals
was 4.5 points, bNtwieenfraternals 9a points.
In general it will be seen that the average difference between fraternals was about twice that between identicals in both tests. This is apparently not a very striking difference, but is quite consistent.
Let us now proceed to examine our three pairs of identical twins reared apart, assuming that we have ample grounds for our decision that we are dealing in each case with true identical twins.

CASE I.-TWINS " A ""AND "0"
These are twin girls, born in London,
England, and left orphan at eighteen months of age. One twin, "A," was adopted by foster parents living in Chelsea and the other twin was taken out to Canada and brought up in a small but prosperous Ontario town. Both twins had essentially the same amount of training and both were
trained for clerical work. After being separated for eighteen years the London twin, " A," moved to Canada and has lived since with her twin sister, " O," both employed in the same offices. At the time we made our study of these twins they had been a year together, so that the English twin had had an opportunity to become adjusted to the changed environment. At the time the test was given " O," the Canadian twin, was in considerably better physical condition, weighing I02 pounds as compared with 92 pounds for " A." Ten pounds make a great difference in such small persons. But there was less difference earlier in life. Even in the last month " A " varied four or five pounds. In stature there is but an eighth of an inch difference in favour of " O, " less than an individual varies in the course of a day. In circumference of parts of the body and limbs there are slight differences everywhere, the greatest being in the thigh, in which that of " 0 " is one and one-half inches greater. There is always less difference in parts that are less covered with flesh, such as ankle and wrist. "O's " head length is 4 mm. greater than " A's," and her head width is 2 mm. greater. This is interesting in view of the fact that the larger head occurs in the right-handed individual and is associated in this case with higher mental capacity. The cephalic index is .777 for " A " and .77I for " O," which is as close as is usually found in identical twins.
As a child " A " was naturally lefthanded, but has been largely trained out of it. There is then, in handedness, a distinct reversal of asymmetry between the twins, a situation very common in monozygotic twins, and especially characteristic of the less strikingly similar pairs.

IDENTICAL TWINS

3I

In facial expression there is a marked among our 50 pairs of identical twins reared

difference, that of " A " being a little harder together, five cases, or io per cent. of the

and more sophisticated. The mouth is some- whole group, that show an equally great

what more set, the jaw a little firmer, and the or slightly greater difference in I.Q. (as

eyes are kept a little more closed. Whether based on the Stanford-Binet Test), than do

this difference is due to different experiences "c A" and " ". "A " and " 0 " showed

in life or is merely the same in kind and a difference of I2 in I.Q.; while the five

origin as are differences in the two sides of pairs of identical twins reared together show-

the face of a single individual (which are ing greater differences run as follows: I2.6,

commonly quite considerable*), it is impos- 12.9, I3.0, I3.9, and i6.o. It might also be

sible to say. But it seems more probable, said that five pairs of our 50 showed o.o

owing to the fact that monozygotic twins difference in I.Q. as based on the Stanford-

reared together sometimes show equally Binet Test.

great differences in expression, that in the Since, then, differences in intelligence as

present case the difference is the result of an great or greater than that shown between

internal asymmetry mechanism.

"A " and " 0 " do occur in some cases of

Stanford-Binet Test: "A " showed a identical twins reared together, it might be

mental age of I3 years 7 months; "0 " of concluded that these differences are of no

15 years 6 months, a difference of 23 months. great significance as criteria of the effective-

This difference is not only more than two ness of different environment and training.

and a half times as great as the average of It should be emphasized, however, that in all

identical twins reared together, but exceeds of the five cases of twins, just referred to, in

by over 7 months the average of fraternal which there was an unusually wide discre-

twins reared together.

pancy in I.Q. as tested by the Stanford-

The difference in I.Q. between " A " and Binet Test, there was much closer correspon-

"0, was I2 points in favour of " 0," a dence in all other mental tests given. In

difference over twice as great as that for the contrast with this is the fact that our twins

average of 50 pairs of identical twins reared " A " and " 0 " are consistently far apart

together and 2.1 points greater than the in all the scores derived from pure intelli-

average of 50 pairs of fraternal twins reared gence tests, and " 0 " is always distinctly

together.

superior.

Otis Self-Administering Test: " A" In contrast to the very pronounced diffe-

showed an I.Q. of 93 and " 0 " of iii, a rences in mentality proper, stands the fact

difference of i8 points, four times as great that " A " and " 0 " appeared to be re-

as the average of 50 pairs of identical twins markably similar temperamentally and emo-

reared together, and nearly twice as great as tionally. All of the several tests given

the average of 5o pairs of fraternal twins emphasized the similarity of temperament

reared together.

and tended to minimize the differences.

There can be little, if any, doubt that

these twins have been derived from a single CASE II.-TWINS " E " AND " GY" zygote and are therefore genetically identi-

cal. The question arises as to what are the These twin girls were separated at a year

factors responsible for the rather marked and a half of age and did not meet again

differences between them. Lest it be thought until they were 2I years of age. Neither

that the mental differences, great though knew of the other's existence until a former

they be, are unparalleled among identical acquaintance of "E " met " G " and mis-

twins, it should be stated that there are took her for " E ". When they met and

compared their papers they found they were

$ Notice particularly, in any full-face photograph, the entirely different characters displayed by the right and left sides of the face of Mr. George Bernard Shaw.-ED.

twins. The environmental differences were again rather great. " E " was adopted by people in moderate circumstances but rather

32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

elderly. " E " went to school only till she still undifferentiated by the asymmetry

had finished fifth grade and then stayed at mechanism. Therefore, whatever differences

home in order to help her elderly foster appear in their physical and mental make-

mother, who was in poor health. At eighteen up must be very largely attributable to the

years " E " started to work as a dentist's differences of environment or training, and

assistant and has continued ever since at this since the environment in general seems to

job. " G " was adopted by rather young have been very similar for both, the diffe-

foster parents. After three years the foster rences in training must be the modifying

mother died and " G " was sent, at the age factor. This is in contrast with the pair

of six, to a parochial school where she " A " and " O," whose education was prac-

finished seventh grade. From there she tically the same, but whose social environ-

went to a Roman Catholic Academy for girls ment was very different. Also, there is a

where she continued till she was graduated. contrast with respect to the effects of the

After that she took a two years' normal asymmetry mechanism, in that the twins

course for teachers, and taught school for " A " and " 0 " must have separated em-

two years. She also studied and taught bryonically relatively late, for " A " is left-

piano. When " E " and " G " met it was handed and shows other evidence of having

decided that they would live together. So been derived from the inferior side of the

" G " obtained a position in a physician's original embryo.

office in the same building where " E " Stanford-Binet Test: "E " shows a men-

works, and has continued there up to the tal age of io years 6 months, "G" of I2

present. Both of them, now in similar occu- years 5 months, a difference of 23 months,

pations, consider they are doing the kind of strangely enough the same as that shown

work to which they are best adapted.

between twins " A " and " 0 ". Also there

It is remarkable that the twins now occupy is the same difference in I.Q., I2 points, as

essentially the same sort of positions, one in " A " and " O." In this case " G," the

in a dentist's and the other in a doctor's more highly educated twin, is superior.

office, and both consider their work almost Otis Self-Administering Test: " E " has

ideal. an I.Q. of 69, " G " of 84, a difference of iS

There was little difference between the points, 3.3 times as great as the average

social environments of " E " and " G ". difference between 50 pairs of identical twins

The foster parents in both cases were un- reared together, and even 5.8 points greater

educated, or slightly educated, working than the average difference between 5o pairs

people. The home environments offer no of fraternal twins reared together.

tangible contrasts. The striking difference These twins, remarkably similar after

in the two histories is, of course, in the being separated at eighteen months of age

amount of education received, " E " having and unknown to each other for nineteen

nothing beyond the fifth grade, and " G " years, have been profoundly modified by the

seven additional years, through normal very different educational careers. In every

school. There seems to have been very little test of mental capacity, whether of so-called

difference between these twins in the matter native ability or of achievement, " G," the

of informal education.

more highly educated twin, has distinctly

It should be emphasized here that this the superior mind. Obviously mental train-

pair of twins would be classed among those ing improves the ability of an individual to

monozygotic twins in which the separation score well on any sort of test, even such an

of embryonic primordia in twinning occurred one as the International Test in which no

very early and before the establishment of language is used and only degrees of bright-

asymmetry between the right and left sides ness or mental alertness are supposed to be

of the original single embryo. They are tested. In this test " G " was as superior

therefore derived not only from genetically over " E " as in most of those tests involv-

equivalent primordia, but from materials ing achievement. In the Stanford Achieve-

IDENTICAL TWINS

33

ment Test and in the somewhat advanced head and usually shows signs of asymmetry

Otis Test, as might be expected, the scores reversal.

of the twins were most different and in The two had essentially the same amount

favour of the more highly educated twin. of education. The home life of " C " was

In contrast with the great difference in more favourable in several ways. The chief

mental power stands the fact that in all the environmental difference consists of the fact

tests of emotional traits and of temperament that " C's " life has been spent largely in

the twins give the impression of being re- medium-sized cities and " O's " has been

markably and unusually similar. These spent largely in the country and in small

tests are, in their very nature, open to wide towns or villages. The main difference now

fluctuations of performance. The same per- is one of personality. " C " is more urban

son on different days or at different times and sophisticated, " 0 " more countrified

of the same day would produce different and naive. The difference of expression,

scores, and these differences would not in- carriage, etc., is marked. " C " is consider-

frequently be as great as are those of " E " ably better in physical condition.

and " G ". In a word, then, these twins Stanford-Binet Test: " C " shows a men-

show a very much greater similarity tem- tal age of I5 years ii months, " 0 " i6

peramentally than they do intellectually. years 2 months, a difference of 3 months,

Temperamentally, as shown by all tests, very much less than the average of identical

these twin girls are even more strikingly twins reared together. " C's " I.Q. is 99,

similar than are twins " A " and " 0 ". " O's " ioi, a difference of only 3 points,

Also they are more similar physically, in considerably less than the average of iden-

that they are in equally good physical con- tical twins reared together.

dition. They represent nearly identical Otis Self-Administering Test: "Cc"

personalities.

shows an I.Q. of iio, " 0 " of ioo, a diffe-

rence of io, over twice that of identical twins

CASE III.-TWINS "C" AND "0"

reared together and even slightly greater than the average of fraternal twins reared

These twin boys were separated at two together.

months of age and met again for the first There is not much contrast either in edu-

time when they were about 24 years of age. cational careers or in home environments in

Neither had known of the other's existence these twins. " C " has had about a year

until " C " found a reference to his twin more of formal education than " 0 " and

brother in some old papers that came into possibly in larger and more efficient schools

his possession. They met on a public holi- for the most part. " C" was an onl child.j

day when " C" paid a visit to " 0 " at the "0" one of three7 has Iied-ii_h'

latter's home.

more in-cities of medium size; " 0 " has

" C " is in nearly every respect, height, seen little of city life and appears much less

head size, and in many other parts, a shade sophisticated. The whole environmental

the larger of the twins. Although both complex of these twins is in general similar

twins claim to be purely right-handed, "O" rather than different. This circumstance

shows by tapping tests, especially in wrist does not detract seriously from their value

tapping, that he is probably a native left- as objects of study, especially as they may

hander. That he is one, trained to be right- be used as a check on those cases in which

handed, is borne out by the fact that his left the environment of the twins shows stronger

biceps and left ankle are both larger than the contrasts.

right. The fact that he has also the smaller In general, twins " C " and "0" are

head and is the less vital and forceful of the more nearly similar intellectually than are

pair accords with the general rule for identi- the other two pairs of twins. The resemb-

cal twins, that the twin derived from the in- lance, however, is not so great as it appears

ferior side of the embryo has the smaller at first sight, for it is shown in only one of

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the tests given, the Stanford-Binet Test. In separate cases. These three cases came to

the Thurston Psychological Examination, light all within a few months. Two other

the difference was i8 points; in the Inter- pairs were reported to us, one pair of which

national Group Test there was a difference on investigation proved to be fraternal twins,

of io points; and in the Stanford Achieve- and the second pair, although surely identi-

ment Test there was a difference of i6 cal twins of just the kind most desired,

months in mental age, a difference two and a proved refractory and would not consent to

half times as great as the average of 50 pairs be studied. It now appears unlikely that we

of identical twins reared together and con- shall have any further cases to report.

siderably greater than the average of 5o Hence we may be justified in discussing the

pairs of fraternal twins reared together. In material actually in hand as a more or less

each case, the advantage was with the city- definitive body of data.

bred twin, " C."

One other case has been studied, that of

It now appears that each case of identical Muller, published about two years before our

twins reared apart offers a distinct and pecu- studies began. This case is not comparable

liar situation that must be studied as a prob- with ours as none of the same tests were

lem in itself. This is especially true of the given. Hence it seems best to omit it from

present case, which emphasizes more sharply present discussion. *

than the others that it is quite impossible to The most striking features of our results

generalize about the effects of environment will already have been noted. Certainly in

and training upon the hereditary make-up of Cases I and II, and in all but one test in

twins reared apart.

Case III, not only are the differences be-

In this case the environment and train- tween the twins at least twice as great as the

ing of the twins were closely similar in average differences between identical twins

general, at least in so far as we were able reared together, but they are at least on the

to ascertain the facts. Yet the ' personali- average equal to those of fraternal twins

ties " of the boys are utterly different. So reared together. From this it appears that

opposite is the impression made by them difference in environment and training may

upon all the observers that we were forcibly cause as great a divergence in mental capa-

struck by it from the beginning. Yet the city between twins with ideiitical heredity as

only test that adequately expresses this exists between twins with different heredity,

obvious difference is the Pressy X-O Test. fraternal twins, reared under the same en-

The one outstanding difference is in vironment. In other words, the effects of

their general personalities. The feminine different environment on like heredity are

observers of these twins feel more strongly essentially equal to the effects of like en-

attracted by " C " than by " 0 ". This vironment on different heredity.

may afford a clue to some unrecorded en- Some may see in this statement justifica-

vironmental agencies that have had to do tion for the conclusion that heredity and en-

with moulding these two very different vironment have equal effects in producing

personalities.

differences in mental characteristics of

human beings. Personally, we should pre-

DISCUSSION OF RESULTS

fer for the present to let the facts speak for themselves and not to attempt a generaliza-

When work was begun on identical twins tion based on three cases.

reared apart we decided to refrain from gene-

ralizations until an adequate number of pairs had been studied and reported as

* Briefly, in Muller's twins there was remarkable
mental resemblance and more than ordinary temperamental difference.-ED.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 1.

