THE CO-ORDINATION OF THE RECORDS OF BIRTHS, MARRIAGES AND DEATHS*

By D. CARADOG JONES, M.A.

PART I
INTRODUCTION
mHERE are occasions in the lives of all
individuals comprising the population i of this country when an official of some department of the central or local government registers certain facts concerning them. An infant is weighed and measured in an infant welfare clinic of the public health authority. A school-child is inspected and records are kept of the condition of the teeth, sight or hearing. Particulars of the occupation and industrial history of an insured person are noted through the medium of the employment exchange. Inquiry into family income is made of applicants for public assistance. These are a few of many examples which might be cited, but none of these records embraces the whole population. In this they differ from the decennial census which takes in every family in the land. It was understood that, starting from I936, the Census would be repeated in some measure every fifth year-but that is now a hope deferred. Here then is a vast accumulation of valuable material produced periodically or spasmodically. But, owing chiefly to the manner in which the various departments came into being, some quite independently of the rest, with a few notable exceptions no attempt is made to co-ordinate the publications which issue from them and the consequence is that their realised value is very much less than their potential value. Had the different departments all started together, no doubt such co-ordination would have been achieved. Apart from the national Census, in the
* An account of the proposals contained in this article as originally drafted was given on November 23rd, I934, to a small Group Meeting of the Manchester Statistical Society, and a summary of them has been published in the records of the Group Meetings.

experience of each one of us at least two and possibly three outstanding events are registered officially. We have all been born; we shall all die; and between the alpha and the inevitable omega there is a more problematical event: we may or we may not marry. Since I875 the registration of these three events has been compulsory, in the sense that penalties could be imposed for failure to register, and my purpose is to show that, by taking these records and amplifying them slightly with a view to linking them together, it should be possible in course of time to amass information that would throw a flood of light on many social problems. The further possibility of a closer co-ordination between the registration and the Census returns, and between them and other central and local statistics, is evident but the present discussion will be confined to proposals for making fuller use of the registration material alone as a first step.
EXISTING REGISTRATION SYSTEM
At present the registration of a birth, a marriage, or a death is an isolated event, although in any selected district the same officer is usually responsible for registering births and deaths and he may be responsible for registering marriages also. In a large area several registration officers are appointed, each in charge of a sub-district but all working in consultation with a superintendent registrar who is responsible for a group of sub-districts, and whose business it is to check the entries which are made on the registration forms. Such records, with corresponding data from other districts, form the basis of important tables which the Registrar-General presents to the public in Quarterly Returns and an Annual Statistical Review.
These tables give us the totals of births,

I97

198 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

marriages and deaths, or, in conjunction with copy of the birth registration form were

information derived from the Census, their required it would be made by a member of

rates in relation to the population, by sex and the General Register Office staff on payment

age from year to year, and in regard to death of the usual fee.

a mass of detail as to alleged causes. But the The procedure in regard to deaths and

attention throughout is focused on the marriages is very similar; for these also an

individual as unit-it is the sum of individual alphabetical index is compiled, which again

births, marriages and deaths that is deter- gives a cross reference to the volume and

mined; whereas, by directing attention to page of the death or marriage register where

the family as unit, fresh results of great detailed particulars of the event are to be

interest might be derived from an analysis found.

of much the same material.

Under present arrangements all births are A FAMILY REGISTER

recorded locally, in the order in which they Regarding the family as the pivot on

are registered, in bound volumes each con- which the extension of the present system is

taining 500 names and the volumes are to turn, it is proposed that, in addition to the

stored on shelves in order of date. Copies, three existing registers of birth, marriage and

certified by the signatures of the local regis- death, a fourth register should be maintained

trars concerned to be true copies, of these which might be called the Family Register.

records are sent to the Registrar-General It would differ from the other three in that

once a quarter on loose sheets containing it would have its origin at the Central General

five birth registrations to a sheet. These Register Office; it would be built up en-

sheets, bound together and arranged by tirely from information derived from these

year, quarter and district, form a duplicate other registers; it would contain no clue to

permanent register of births which is kept in the identity of the individuals to whom it

the vaults of Somerset House. The virtue of related: to discover who they were it would

this second register is that it is centralized be necessary to refer back to the original

whereas the original is scattered.

registers; and it would be filed on a card

In addition to the certified copy of the index system, one card for each separate

birth registration sheets sent to the Registrar- family. It will be immediately seen that the

General at the end of the quarter, two carbon new system is not revolutionary: the inten-

copies are sent up monthly of all completed tion is not to scrap existing machinery but

sheets. One set of these carbons is used to to develop it and make fuller use of it. One

compile periodical vital statistics; by means or two additional questions are proposed at

of the other, a set of abbreviated copies, each registration, but otherwise no essential

a beginning is made with the methodical alteration is suggested in the form and con-

arrangement of the births from all districts tent of the Birth, Marriage and Death

throughout the country for each quarter in Registers.

alphabetical order according to the surnames If the family cards were filed by the year to

and the Christian names of the infants. Any which they relate, and, within each year,

member of the public who wishes to trace a alphabetically by district where registration

birth, knowing the name and the date when took place, comparison would be possible

the birth took place, will readily find it by between one year and another and between

means of this admirably simple device of an one area and another. In this respect they

alphabetical Index which, when completed, would conform exactly to the general plan

records also the names of the parents and defining the order of arrangement of the

gives a cross-reference to the volume and other registers. Within each district or

page of the Central Register containing full division of a district the cards could be

particulars of the birth. It should be added arranged alphabetically by surname and

that the public have direct access to the Christian name(s) of the male head of the

Index but not to the Central Register. If a family. Finally, individuals with the same

CO-ORDINATION OF THE RECORDS OF BIRTHS, ETC.
initial letters, married in the same district and complete and accurate; that being so, there within the same quarter-year, could be num- should be no difficulty, as will be seen when bered in the order of marriage registration. the birth registration form is discussed, in
Each family card when complete would tracing, with the help of the Index to Marcontain particulars of the birth, marriage riages, the family card of the parents of the and death of the man and woman who by newly born infant. On the front of this their union founded the family; it would family card certain particulars about the contain particulars of the birth of each child; birth would then be recorded, and at the and it would also contain particulars of same time a cross-reference would be given either the death or the marriage of each child on the back of the card to the volume and whichever event occurred first (if both page of the Birth Register whence the inoccurred). As soon as a child grew up and formation had been abstracted. In the same married, he (or she) would found a new way, when any member of the family died or family and his (or her) story would then be married, the death or marriage registration continued on a new card. In the same way, form would be sent to Somerset House and to pursue the history of the parents back- these forms, if adequately completed as in wards in time from the date of their marriage, the great majority of cases they should be, it would be necessary to refer to the cards would contain clues to the related family containing records of the two families founded cards and the family cards could thus be by the four grandparents. Every person in brought up to date in regard to these events, short would appear on the family card of his cross references to their source being given (or her) parents and, in addition, on the at the back as before. family card which he (or she) in turn initiated It should be observed that a death, like a on marriage. If more than one union were birth, would only need to be recorded on one contracted by the same person, that person family card: the death of an unmarried should appear on three or more family cards. person would be recorded on the family card
The procedure contemplated would be of his (or her) parents, but the death of a somewhat as follows: At the end of each married person would be recorded on the quarter, when the certified copies of the family card relating to his (or her) own (last) marriage registers reached Somerset House marriage. A marriage would normally be from different parts of the country, after the recorded on the family card of the parents of Marriage Index had been compiled and the both the married persons, and at the same usual statistical analysis for the quarter was time it would start a fresh family card on its completed, the records before being filed own account. In short, by the plan above away would be sent to the department outlined, the term family would be restricted responsible for the preparation of the new to parents and their children-two generafamily register so that a family card might be tions only-and, when their vital history made out for each marriage. On the back of was complete, the family card would contain, the family card would be marked the volume on the back, cross references to the birth and and page of the Marriage Register-the death (or subsequent re-marriage) forms of source of the information about the marriage the two parents and the birth and marriage given on the card. In due course, if children (or death) forms of each child. Except by were born, the birth registration forms would going back to these registration forms there also reach Somerset House, and, when all would be no means of identifying the family that is now done with these forms had been concerned. The precise nature of the indone, they in turn-along with all the birth formation to be found on the front of the forms relating to the same quarter-would card will be explained presently. be sent to the Family Registration Department. It will be assumed for the moment that BIRTH the answers to the questions asked when It will be convenient now to turn back to the birth was registered were reasonably consider the questions asked when a birth,

200 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

marriage or death is registered. It is proposed that the information required at the registration of a birth should be as follows:
REGISTRATION OF BIRTH
i. Date 2. Place (full address) 3. Live or still 4. Single or multiple
5. Sex. 6. Name 7. Name and surname of father 8. Name and maiden surname 6f mother 9. Marriage of father and mother: place (name
and address of church or registry office) and
date io. Occupation and industry of father at birth of
child (If unemployed, give last occupation) ii. Occupation (if any) and industry of mother at
birth of child
Answers are required to questions I, 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8 at present when a birth is registered. Also the occupation of the father is given, but with a view to greater precision it is suggested that the industry should be stated in addition; for example, a man may be employed as a clerk in a bank, or a shipping office, or a retail store. For co-ordination with the Census and Ministry of Labour records it would be reasonable to adopt the same broad classification in regard to occupation and industry as that which is used for these other purposes.
The registration of still-births has been compulsory only since I927, and they are recorded in a separate register; in due course, as these statistics accumulate, they may throw important light on factors affecting general infant mortality. Incidentally, it is worth noting that the definition of a stillbirth is not the same in all countries and this in consequence affects the comparability of statistics of live births. Through the medium of the International Statistical Institute a standard classification of causes of death has been agreed by statisticians and is in use in the more important European countries: it would be well worth while to aim at corresponding agreement in regard to the definition of still-births, and in fact the whole subject and machinery of registration.
Returning to the list of questions proposed at the registration of a birth, question 4 is i mportant because suitably directed research

on twin and multiple births has helped and may still further help towards the solution of problems which are of peculiar interest to biologists. The answer to question 9 should make it possible to connect the birth of the child directly with the marriage of the parents by reference to the Index of Marriages; and answers to the last two questions would indicate whether any change had occurred in the occupational class of the parents since their marriage. When there had been prenuptial conception there might be hesitation in giving the date of marriage. The question of the date, however, need not be pressed; the parents might indeed be informed-if they showed any reluctance in replyingthat the answer to this question was purely voluntary. Hesitation would only be likely if marriage had occurred within the previous nine months, and in all probability the marriage would be registered in the same district as the birth and could be traced locally. The registrar could indicate this type of case by a note attached to the form. Knowing the place and approximate date of marriage, and the names of the contracting parties, it should be a simple matter at the Central Office to trace the marriage certificate.
Parents should be informed that a copy of the birth certificate might have to be produced at death, or marriage, or on some other important occasion in the life of the individual, and they should be encouraged therefore to take and carefully keep a copy. It could be given to them free of cost or the customary small charge could be made for it.
MARRIAGE
In the Marriage Register it is suggested that the following particulars should be recorded:
REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGE
i. Date
2. Place (name and address of church or registry office)
3. Name of husband (A.B.) 4. Name of wife (C.D., late C.E., previously
C.F., previously C.G., formerly C.H.) 5. Occupation and industry of husband (If unem-
ployed, give last occupation) 6. Occupation (if any) and industry of wife

CO-ORDINATION OF THE RECORDS OF BIRTHS, ETC.

20I

7. Birth of husband, date and place

of important problems of human heredity.

8. Birth of wife, date and place 9. Relationship of husband and wife, if related
by blood
IO. Previous marriages* of husband:

Answers to questions io and ii should prevent confusion between different marriages contracted by the same individuals,

i. date and place

and the history of these earlier marriages also

ii. date and place

could be explored once the dates when and

ii. Previous marriages of wife:

the places where they took place were known.

i. date and place

The home address of each partner to the

ii. date and place

marriage is also required at present and this,

I2. Last home address of husband

though not essential, may still be useful in

13. Last home address of wife

order to make contact with husband or wife

The first four of the foregoing questions again if necessary. A copy of the Marriage

are asked now when marriage is contracted. Certificate should be given to each of the

Also, the rank or profession of husband and contracting parties on registration either free

wife, their ages, and the occupations of their or at a nominal charge. If a marriage is

fathers have to be stated; questions 5, 6, legally dissolved, otherwise than by death,

7 and 8 are designed to elicit, in part in- it should be the duty of some official of the

directly, this same information in a more law court concerned to send to Somerset

satisfactory manner. Questions 5 and 6 are House a note of the names of the parties to

in line with the corresponding questions the marriage, the date and place of marriage,

asked at birth and death and they are and the date and court of dissolution. The

expressed in the same form. Questions 7 fact could then be recorded on the Marriage

and 8 would suffice not only to give the Register and the family cards.

ages of husband and wife at marriage,

but would enable them also to be traced DEATH

in the Birth Registration file, which would give in addition information as to their parents including their occupational

Proceeding now to the Death Register the following questions are proposed:

class. It is probably of greater interest to

REGISTRATION OF DEATH

know the rank or profession of the parents I. Date (age at death)

at the period when their children are born than at the period when their children marry. Both partners to the marriage might

2. Place (full address) 3. Sex 4. Name and surname
5. Cause

well be required to produce copies of their 6. Occupation and industry at death (If unem-

birth certificates for inspection when the marriage is registered. If this were done one could be reasonably sure that the answers to
questions 7 and 8 were accurate. Assuming a

ployed, give last occupation)
7. Date and place of birth and name at registration of birth
8. If married, date and place of (last) marriage; or, failing this, full name of partner to

somewhat hazy knowledge of date and place

marriage (if dead), giving place and year of

of birth, the local registrar might offer his

death.

services for a small fee in tracing the particulars. The fee could be fixed by regulation: it should not be much more than the
cost of search at Somerset House. Question 9 has been included because a systematic
study of the offspring of consanguineous matings is calculated to assist in the solution

Answers to the first five of these questions are supplied already at death. Also, the (last)
occupation of the deceased is stated, but for greater accuracy, as before, the industry has
been included in question 6. The registrar could fill in the answers to questions 7 and 8 if it were required that a copy of the birth cer-

* Illegal unions, if they have resulted in the founda- tificate, assuming the deceased person single,

tion of a family, should be included under (zo) and (ii) or the (last) marriage certificate, assuming

when the information is available. The appropriate date and place would in such cases be the date and place of birth of the first child to the union.

the deceased person married, had to be produced for inspection within a few days of the

202 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

registration of death. To avoid delay the ILLEGITIMACY

local registrar himself might send for a copy of the certificate to Somerset House, if the relatives were unable to produce one, and charge a small approved sum for his services. The parents or other relatives would in most

The case of an illegitimate birth requires special consideration. Any union, whether legal or otherwise, that results in issue must be regarded as the foundation of a family, and a fresh family card should be made out

cases be able to state the place and year of birth of an unmarried person. In the case of a married person, assuming one partner to
the marriage still alive, the place and year of
marriage would almost certainly be known. If the other partner to the marriage were not alive, it would serve the purpose equally well
if a copy of the death certificate of the part-

for every such additional union.* An ille-
gitimate union should be registered as starting at the date of the birth of the first child to the union. Question 9 in the Birth Register would be left blank unless and until the parents subsequently married. In rare cases of illegitimacy it might prove impossible to fill in replies to more than one or two

ner first deceased were produced; the year questions on the form. Quite frequently the

and place of death would be more likely to name of the father would not be disclosed. be known to the surviving relatives than the It follows that the " family " card relating year and place of marriage: given the place to an illegitimate union would in many cases

of death, it should suffice indeed if the year be incomplete though not by any means

were known even approximately.

altogether without value.

There would undoubtedly be some elderly

persons, married and unmarried, with no THE FAMILY

known living relations, for whom it would We are now in a position to consider the prove impossible to insert the particulars nature of the information to be recorded on

desired on the Death Register, but the pro- the family card. It is to be specially noted portion of such cases is not likely to be large. that all its contents are obtained shortly It could not be expected indeed that every after the occurrence of a birth, marriage, or

record would be complete and accurate in a death, and as soon as the forms recording

scheme which was of universal application, these events reach the Central Office and can but a closer approach to completeness and be dealt with there. The time lag between the

accuracy might be anticipated year by year- event and its registration on the family card that has been our experience with the exist- should be as short as possible. ing records of vital statistics. Moreover, the It is suggested that the card might be fact that some of the returns could not be designed on the following lines, taking a

used would not make the rest valueless. If we had waited to calculate birth and death rates, marriage and sickness rates, until our
returns were complete we should be waiting
still. It would certainly make for greater accuracy if birth certificates had to be pro-

purely imaginary illustration:

REGISTRATION OF FAMILY

i. Date 3. Rel. C.C.
5. M1 F1 F2 F3
6. H. 27-9

2. Registration district 4. Mar. H. (I div.); W. (o)

duced at marriage and if birth or marriage W. 22-6; 23-II, 25-8, 28-7, 32-IO

certificates had to be produced at death. This is not an unreasonable proposal, nor is it one that would inflict any very great hardship or inconvenience on those concerned;

7. H. taxi-driver; taxi-driver, motor mechanic,

ditto, ditto; pen.

W. shop assistant (grocery stores)

8. H. reg; U, reg, reg, cas.; cas.

9. H. 67-4

cause of death

marriage and death are both important events in a person's history and it is right that the regulations governing their registra-

W. 72-I

M1 I9-2 cause of death cause of death F, I-3 cause of death

tion should be strict enough to ensure the * The distinction drawn here between an illegal union

accuracy of the records so far as is humanly possible.

and a marriage is that a family card is to be made out for every marriage, whether children are born to the marriage or not.

CO-ORDINATION OF THE RECORDS OF BIRTHS, ETC.

203

io. M., fitter (engineering) reg.

it true that more mothers die because the

iI. F1 23-5

F2 27-8

postman (reg.) general labourer (U)

first confinement is the most difficult, and there is an increasing proportion of first

A marriage takes place at a certain date and is births because families are smaller than they

registered in a certain district. These two facts are recorded first. If husband and wife were cousins,
that would be indicated in (3). The man may have been married before and divorced as shown in (4).

were? It would be a simple matter, by taking a random sample of family cards, to determine the proportion of maternal deaths

Ages of husband and wife at marriage (27 years at first, second, third, and subsequent

9 months and 22 years 6 months, respectively) are confinements.

given in (6). The occupations of each, also at
marrage, appear in (7), and if the husband's work
was of a kind that would be normally classed as
regular, that is recorded in (8). As children are

Again, to what extent do marriages occur between persons of different social class and is there any sex difference in this class rela-

bom-one boy, followed by three girls, assumed in tion ? Do persons tend to re-marry in certain

this case- that is shown in (5); the age of the wife occupational groups more frequently than in

at each birth is recorded in (6), and the occupation
of the husband in (7). The fact that the husband was
unemployed at the birth of the first child is noted in (8). The ages of husband and wife at death and cause

others, and what relation has age to remarriage ? More attention has been paid in
the past to the statistics of birth and death

of death are given in (9). The same information is than to marriage statistics. Consequently

given also for any children who die before marriage;
here it is assumed that the son and one daughter die young. The father was in receipt of a pension at
death (See (7)) but was still engaged in work of a
casual character (See (8)). The son's occupation at

there is a rich harvest here waiting to be garnered, especially when we consider also the
data that might be analysed in regard to human fertility for which suitable statistics

death is given in (io); also the occupations of the on a large scale are scanty. How does the

husbands of the two married daughters at the time of marriage are shown in (i i).

chance of a birth depend upon the age of the wife ? That seems a simple question and

MATERIAL FOR RESEARCH

the answer to it has a greater influence upon the size of family than is appreciated until it

On the back of the card, as already ex- is examined; yet only one large sample of

plained, would appear the cross-reference really reliable English figures exists on the

links with the birth, marriage and death- subject and it dates back to the I9II Census.

cards of the various members of the family. But, assuming that records were assembled

A random sample of the family cards could in a Central Office on the plan here outlined,

therefore be taken from the file and analysed it should be possible to collect within a com-

by a responsible authority, interested in some paratively short time comprehensive data

special problem, without any knowledge by establishing the average relation of fertility

name of the particular families whose vital to ages of both husband and wife, the mean

history is recorded on the cards: the in- intervals of time after marriage between

vestigation would be quite impersonal. In successive births, the variation with age in

due course one could measure with greater the tendency to single or multiple, live or still,

precision than is at present possible the births, and the effect upon all such figures of

relation of the decline in the birth-rate-if differences in the ocupational class of the

it continue to decline-to the ages of the parents. The association between fertility

parents, the duration of marriage, occupa- and age among married women is clearly of

tional class. What is the difference in such the first importance to statisticians trying

respect& between one generation and the to estimate the future population, and now

next ? Is it consistent within each class ? that we are approaching the stage of a

Similar inquiries could be prosecuted in serious decline in population the problem is

regard to death-rates, and, in particular, one that is bound to receive public attention.

infant and maternal mortality. What is the We take stock of our material possessions

bearing of the decline in births upon the from time to time; still more ought we to

rate of mortality of infants and mothers ? Is concern ourselves about the quantity and the

204 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

quality of the people who are the true wealth different countries to come to an agreement

of the country.

to interchange data in regard to migrants on

ESTIMATED COST OF SCHEME

some common plan. Preliminary steps have been taken to achieve this with some measure

It may be worth while to add a rough of success through the initiative of such

estimate-and it can only be rough-of the bodies as the International Labour Office

cost of the additional clerical work in the and the International Statistical Institute.

Central Office called for by the proposed new But it will be well to devise a scheme which

development. In Great Britain in I93I there does not assume as a practical possibility any

were 724,30I births, 555,859 deaths, and agreement so comprehensive as to embrace

344,5I6 marriages, making a total of all countries in the immediate future.

I,624,676 registrations in the year. Alowing

48 weeks of 5r working days in the year, this TRAVELLERS

would give a total of 264 working days. The scheme must clearly differentiate

Hence the mean number of registrations per between persons who enter this country (or

working day would be 6,I54. Each registra- who go abroad) only as visitors, on business tion would involve the insertion of a few or pleasure, who may be termed travellers, straightforward entries on an old or new and those who enter (or leave) the country family card. If we suppose that one clerk with no intention of returning-the true

could be responsible for an average of 6o registrations in a day, it follows that the

migrants. It is suggested that every person entering (or leaving) Great Britain on a visit

number of additional clerks required would by sea or air should be required before

be about ioo. The labour would not be leaving the port of landing (or departure) to

highly skilled. If the pay were estimated at complete a Traveller's Identity Card, copies

£3 a week, the total cost would be about of which should be obtainable in every British

£I5,ooo a year.

passenger boat or plane and at every British

But this procedure envisages one clerk sea and air port. Exceptions should only be

undertaking the several stages relating to made in the case of crew and officers en-

each registration, whereas in practice it gaged in navigating or piloting ship or

would no doubt be possible so to organize and plane, and in the case of passengers leaving

subdivide the work as to reduce the labour and returning to a British port by the same

and cost appreciably. Supervision and estab- ship or plane in the one voyage. The master

lishment charges are not included in the or chief pilot should be responsible for

above estimate.

reporting particulars of any change in crew

or passengers in such a case.

PART II

TRAVELLER'S IDENTITY CARD

MIGRATION
The case already made out for the coordination of the records of birth, marriage and death can be discussed on its merits quite apart from the proposals which follow in regard to Migration. But, in order to make the scheme theoretically watertight, while fully recognizing the practical human limitations t6 which it is subject, I have been tempted to go on to explore the problem of registration as it is affected by people entering or leaving the country. For a really adequate system to meet all difficulties it would be necessary for the Governments of

i. Date of registration 2. Sex 3. Name 4. Name as registered at birth 5. Date of birth 6. Place of birth (full address) 7. Home address 8. Visiting address 9. Probable duration of visit, if likely to exceed
six months.
For his own protection the traveller might be advised to include also his photograph and finger prints but this would be purely voluntary.
Identity cards would have code numbers stamped on them to distinguish the port of

CO-ORDINATION OF THE RECORDS OF BIRTHS, ETC.

205

departure (or arrival) and, on completion, answers to some of the questions relating to

they would be kept in a special Travellers' immigrants would be less trustworthy,

File, one for inward and one for outward because the facts would be recorded some

visitors, alphabetically by name and by time after the events to which they refer.

date of birth for persons of the same name. For instance, an adult should be able to give

Each traveller should receive a duplicate date and place of birth and names of parents;

copy of his card which would serve as his but date and place of marriage of parents

passport on leaving (or re-entering) this and their occupations might not be known

country later. If he should lose it, he should with certainty. If the parents had been

be obliged to pay, say, five shillings and married in this country, the year and place

complete a fresh card, giving the same par- being known, the particulars could be

ticulars as before. To impersonate a traveller readily checked; on the other hand, if,

should be regarded as a serious offence liable as would be more likely, the marriage was

to result in imprisonment or a heavy fine. contracted abroad, the date would be of less

The duplicate (or the copy of it, as the case interest and their uncertainty of less im-

might be) should be cancelled along with the portance. In that event, questions 9, IO

original form after establishing correspon- and ii on the Birth Registration Form might

dence between them on the traveller's be omitted altogether without much loss,

return. The files should be inspected the word A broad being stamped against

periodically, and a courteous communication them to cancel them.

(with prepaid postage for reply) sent to each Assuming the immigrant himself married,

person more than three months overdue,* his marriage, too, was either contracted in

asking for the new home address should this country and the facts concerning it

there be no intention of returning to the should be entered already in the Marriage

previous home. Assuming no reply received Register; or it was contracted abroad, and

after a further three months, the traveller most, if not all, of the particulars desired

should be provisionally treated as a true about it should be within the knowledge

migrant, but every effort should be made to of the parties to the marriage; although

confirm permanent residence.

again, owing to the lapse of time between

the events and the recording of them, it is

IMMIGRANTS

probable that there might be an element of

The true immigrant is a person who enters uncertainty about some of the entries.

the country with the intention of remaining In order to secure prompt registration,

permanently, and in practice it is not un- attention should be drawn to the forms-

common for Governments to define " per- which, like the travellers' cards, should be

manence" as meaning a period longer than available on board all British ships and

a year. The responsibility should be laid planes carrying passengers and at each port

upon such persons to complete, at or before of landing-and facilities should be provided

entry, a birth registration form and also, if for completing them before the passengers

married, a marriage registration form, assum- land or before they leave the port for their

ing no such forms had already been completed inland destinations.

as the result of residence in the country at Assuming the forms were not satisfactorily

some earlier period. No change need be made completed in any essential particular, the

in the ordinary birth or marriage registration immigrant should be required to state his

form to suit the particular case of immigrants, address and to present himself once a week

but their family cards for a period of years at the office of the nearest Superintendent

should be filed separately in order to Registrar until the required information

facilitate analysis. It is probable that the was obtained. Failing this, he should be

treated as an alien and reported to the

* For this purpose travellers who did not answer question 9 should be treated as due to return three months after the date of departure (or arrival).

police. An appropriate penalty should be exacted from anyone convicted of neglecting

206 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to take steps to complete registration within it would be unnecessary to duplicate their

seven days' residence in the country or birth or marriage forms if already made out

knowingly making any false statement in before emigration. They would, therefore,

registering. If such procedure were not be required merely to call at the office of the

considered to be a sufficient safeguard nearest Superintendent Registrar to arrange

against the " dumping" of undesired aliens for the completion of their registration.

in this country, photographs and finger-

prints could be taken before they were THE RELATION OF VITAL STATISTICS

permitted to leave the port of landing.

TO OTHER LOCAL RECORDS

I have intentionally confined my remarks

EMIGRANTS

in this paper to the subject of registration,

The true emigrant who intends to leave but a moment's reflection will suggest the

the country permanently should be required almost unlimited scope for research which

to fill up a form exactly similar to the would follow by combining these foundation

Traveller's Card already described, except statistics, once they were in suitable and

for the last three questions.

accessible form, with other records in the

EMIGRATION FORM

possession of different departments of the

i. Date

national or local authorities. One could

2. Sex 3. Name 4. Name as registered at birth 5. Date of birth 6. Place of birth (full address)

pick out all the cards relating to families of a particular class in a given district, where,
for instance, the head of the family was in receipt of public assistance or unemploy-

7. Last home address

ment insurance, or where the children were

8. Future home address (i.e. town or district and getting free dinners or had gained free places

country)
9. Occupation and industry (If unemployed, state last occupation)

in school, and they could be studied from various angles. This more intimate type of

These forms should be forwarded direct to the Central Register Office and filed in a separate file. The following particulars, in regard to themselves or their children as the
case may require, typed on a thin yellow card and clipped to the appropriate family registration card, would then explain why there was no entry later recording the deaths of the individuals concerned.

inquiry could only be made, of course, with the clear understanding that no information
would be disclosed in regard to any individual family. The use of the family cards for the
purpose would really ensure this. General principles and controlling factors alone would be explored and their average effects exposed. Answers to such questions as those previously suggested (See page 203) concerning the birth, marriage, and mor-

Emigrated to (destination) on (date) Occupation and industry at date of emigration
(If unemployed, state last occupation)
The yellow clipped card would make the cards containing entries relating to emigrants easy to identify. Should an emigrant decide later to return to this country it would still be possible to insert any necessary particulars on the original family registration card. Also, a note could be added to the emigration form:

tality of a random sample drawn from the normal population-would provide standards with which the experience of the random sample drawn from a selected class could be
compared.
It is unnecessary to elaborate further the immense variety of problems which might be discussed as a result of the co-ordination and centralisation of the raw material of our main vital statistics. Enough has been said,

Returned to Great Britain (date)

perhaps, to emphasize the lack of economy in

Such persons could be readily distinguished making the laborious collection of registration

from travellers because no Traveller's Card data on a universal scale compulsory, and in

would be made out for them. They would the failure to take the short additional step

accordingly be treated as immigrants, but essential to get the full benefit out of it.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 8.

