HEREDITY AND MORTALITY

Family History in Connection with Life Assurance By W. PALIN ELDERTON, C.B.E., F.I.A.

N May i6th, I904, Francis Galton standard of honesty, or possibly from a dis-

gave a lecture before the Sociological like of being found out when defence is im-

Society in the School of Economics possible, it is our general experience that

Political Science (London University) correct information reaches the insurance

" Eugenics: Its definition, scope, and company so far as it is within the proposer's

." All sorts of important people sent own knowledge. The information he gives

tten communications or spoke, and, for is, intter alia,

ereason that I have never known, I was Age. ted to be there. I was asked to speak- Occupation.

ibly because Professor Pearson whom I Personal history (illnesses, etc.).

w was in the Chair-and I made a few Family history-i.e. a statement of the

arks about the effect of heredity in life

ages at and causes of death of his father

ance and suggested that it might be and mother, brothers and sisters, or, if

ble to throw light on the relation, if

alive, a note of their state of health.

between specific diseases and fertility A general statement as to whether certain

the help of information obtained from

diseases are in the family.

archives of life assurance companies.
is some time back in my life; but those o value Galton's memory will understand wish to refer to the incident and will
understand my joy over a kind remark made about my little speech in his reply the end of the discussion and over the uragement he gave me when he came up talk to me when the meeting was over.

Most of the proposers are examined by a
doctor, but medical examinations are now
regarded as less important than they were thirty years ago, and many offices dispense with them for people under forty-five for small cases, or for certain kinds of life assurance, provided the information given
in the proposal is regarded as satisfactory.

haps it is not inappropriate to take up SELECTION OF PROPOSERS

subject again and to see what insurance titics have been made available since

Now, before we go into anything else let us set down the reasons why insurances are

Perhaps the easiest way to begin is to say w words about life assurance practice to ble the reader to follow more easily the stics and my remarks on them. When a
n-usually a man, so when I require
noun I shall use the masculine-wishes
obtain life assurance, he has to give pars about himself to satisfy the insur-

effected:
(a) To provide for wife, children, or dependants.
(b) To provide money for death duties,
etc. (c) To provide pensions (d) As a convenient method of saving.
(e) To secure loans.

-company that his life can properly be Except for (e) the objects are such as
ed. According to the law of the land, appeal to the thrifty, thoughtful part of the

ust disclose any information that might community; and broadly speaking the

ence their decision, and either because ' ne'er-do-weels ' and the derelicts, mental

knowledge of the law, or from a general and physical, do not seek life assurance. In

129

I30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

other words the part of the population seek- which may affect the duration of life, he w

ing life assurance is not what statisticians regard the case as requiring special trea

call a random sample of the population: the ment, or, in extreme cases, as having to

part that actually obtains life assurance is declined. The consequence of this attitud

still less a random sample, because the in- has been that a large proportion of the cas

surance offices eliminate the worst cases. Of with a bad family history, already showin

recent years the proportion eliminated has a defect, never appear in the life assuranc

been less than of old. Offices quote special statistics.

terms for invalid lives more readily than in We will now look at the statistics th

the past, and some offices try to quote terms have been obtained in recent years and s

for almost all the cases that come to them. what can be concluded from them. Th

In a sense, everyone is insurable, on terms: principal investigations have been those

the difficulty is to assess terms that are fair the Prudential Assurance Company*

both to the under-average life himself and England and the Medico-Actuarialt I

to the healthy lives assured on ordinary vestigation of the American and Canadia

terms. It would not be eugenic to admit to Companies.

insurance the unhealthy or damaged on the same terms as the healthy or undamaged.

THE TUBERCULAR GROUP

This brings us to the way cases are con- We may begin by taking the Prudenti

sidered when they come for assurance. A experience of all the lives assured which h

fair proportion (I should estimate it at a any family history of a death from tuber

half) of the cases provide us with no record cular disease,+ whether in father, mothe

of past illness likely to shorten life, with brother, or sister or in more than one. Th

satisfactory family histories [in which the method adopted was to calculate the numbe

collaterals are alive and the parents are of deaths that would have been expecte

healthy or died at ages over sixty, or under among those at risk according to the the

that age from accident] and with no special standard table (O[Ml). This table w

occupational risks.

formed from " with profit " " whole-li

Then there is a proportion (say one- assurances " in the years I863-93 (sat fourth) that has had some illness that may I878) and over-estimated the normal mor

have been important from the insurance tality because:

point of view (a severe operation, ear (i) The Prudential experience was fro

trouble, rheumatic fever, etc.), and many of

I893-I9I0 (say I902) or twenty-fo

these, after being examined, are taken at

years later, and mortality had bee

the ordinarv rates.

improving among assured lives dur

There is perhaps one-fifth of the whole where there have been some early deaths, or

ing that period: a 20 per cent. or 3 per cent. reduction in mortality woul

tuberculosis, or insanitv in the family that

not be an unreasonable assumption.

require special consideration, and some of

these again are taken. About 5 per cent. * E. A. Rusher and C. W. Kenchington. An

of the whole will raise some question owing to occupation, residence, etc. Probably about nine-tenths are taken at ordinary

Investigation into the effects of Family and Persona History upon the Rates of Mortality, etc. J.I.A., XLVII, 433 etc. (J.I.A. is written for Journal o the Institute of Actuaries.)

rates. Imagine for a moment the position of the
insurance man deciding on a case that comes to him with some doubt as to family history.
Naturally, if he starts with information

t Abstracts of these reports can be seen conveni ently J.I.A., see especially Vol. XLVIII, i86, et XLIX, 158.
t " Childbirth " was assumed to be " Consum tion." Experience has shown that a large propo tion of deaths honestly stated by laymen as " child birth " should be described as " consumption.'

showing that there is a defect in the family
history, and finds on examination a similar

The cause of death is only known from hearsa and the decline in health that preceded or followe the birth is attributed, naturally but incorrectly

defect in the individual or another defect to the birth of the child.

HEREDITY AND MORTALITY

(2) The endowment assurance experience i863-93 showed only about 75 per cent. of the mortality of the 0[M]: partly because it entered on the average at a later date, and partly because
the " better " lives were more likely to take insurances of that kind.
Further, the Prudential "normal" experience may have differed from that of the offices generally.
Logically we should have for comparison a normal Prudential experience for the same term: in the absence of this we might not unreasonably take 75 per cent. of the
O(Ml figures for the normal whole life mortality, and 55 per cent. of the O[M] figures for the normal endowment assurance mortality.
With these figures in mind we may examine Table I, in which are shown the actual deaths, the expected deaths by the O[M] table as given by Rusher and Kenchington, and the roughly adjusted expected deaths to allow for the probable change in mortality.
The table is divided into the first ten

years after the assur'ances were effected and the subsequent period. The idea being that owing to the selection of the lives by the office, the mortality at any age is lowest in the first year of assurance and gradually works up to a rate of mortality almost, if not absolutely, independent of duration.*
It will be noticed that in the endowment cases and the whole life cases in certain groups the Prudential lives assured with tubercular family history showed lighter mortality than the then standard table. The altered view when we make the arbitrary adjustments that I have already explained is interesting.
SUBDIVISION BY KINSHIP
The cases included in this table were subdivided according to the members of the family who had died of the disease, and the
* This theory of ' selection ' in life assurance mortality data is unproved. In common with many other actuaries, I doubt if the interpretation implied by the tables based on the I863-93 experience is satisfactory. For our purpose here, the statistical rates and not their interpretation are all with which we need concern ourselves.

Table 1.-Number of Deaths with Family History of Tuberculosis (Prudential Experience)

Whole Life Assurances.

Endowment Assurances.

Age at entry.

First ten years of assurance.

Expected. By [M] | Adjusted.

Actual.

Expected. By OEM] Adjusted.

37 * . I67 I45 2I6 I,630 896

38-52 .. .. 284 213 324 725 398

53-62 .. ..

50

38

46

Actual.
I,222
458

Ages attained.

After first ten years.

3o and 35

| 13

9 i6 I47 8o 97

4o and 45 .. 123

92 125 450 247 274

50 and 55 .. 287 2I5 263 403 222 276

6o and over ..

407

305

423

I05 5 8

93

I32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

results as regards parents are worth men- garded as sub-standard for physical condi-

tioning in general terms. When only the tion or personal history was excluded, but

father had tuberculosis, the mortality was cases sub-standard for family history alone

heaviest. The next heaviest mortality was were included. It-was thought that the

mother, when the mother had died of child- weight of the proposer was important, so

birth; theni, continuing down the scale, the data were sub-divided in this way.

when only the mother had tuberculosis, and Table II gives an abridged example of

the lightest-though the numbers are very the result of one group.

small-was when both parents had the The expected deaths are based on the

disease. The differences between the groups American experience and may be taken as

were not significant, but a priori one would properly comparable with the actual deaths.

have expected the heaviest mortality when The lighter mortality at the older ages

both parents were affected. The explanation at entry, except in the overweight class, is

is that the office would be particularly care- noticeable. It is probable that this was

ful in such cases, and would only pick those largely due to severe selection on account of

in which it was satisfied that the proposer family history.

for assurance was not tubercular.

Similar tables were given for other de-

Among other information given by the grees of family history and, without sub-

Prudential experience was the mortality of dividing, according to weight. The results

those with various personal blemishes-e.g. are given in Table III.

tuberculosis, rheumatic fever, and a group The results are not comparable with those

that might be called " doubtful habits," in- of the Prudential because of the exclusion of

cluding the obese, gouty, and formerly in- cases regarded as sub-standard for some

temperate. All these groups showed a high reason other than family history. The

mortality-appreciably higher than that of variations in America according to class of

the tubercular family history group. But policy seem to be negligible.

in all these groups we are not dealing with Are we to conclude from these statements

the real mortality of the class to which they that tuberculosis in the family betokens-

relate, but with the mortality of a selected little effect on mortality except perhaps at

part of that class.

the early ages? I think all we can say is

The American and Canadian Life Assur- that there is an extra mortality even in the

ance experience was arranged on rather cases that come before a life office but that

different lines. The tubercular family his- the insurance companies have succeeded by

tory cases were divided into seven classes, medical examination and otherwise in elimi-

but three of these proved too small to be nating the worst cases. Moreover, a person

of value. These involved the more extreme actually suffering from the disease would be

tubercular family histories. Any case re- unlikely to try to obtain life assurance.

Table II.-North American Experience. Deaths: Tuberculosis in One Parent

Underweight Groups.

Age at entry.

Over 20 lbs.

Less than 20 lbs.

Expected. Actual. Expected. Actual.

Overweight Groups.

Less than 20 lbs.

Over 20 lbs.

Expected. Actual. Expected. Actual.

I5-29

47

59 532 658 454 475

63

7I

30-44

282

302 I,00I

91I

76I

670

2I6

2I6

45- 222 I56 465 357 450 359 I45 I7I

HEREDITY AND MORTALITY
Table III.-North American Experience. Deaths: Tuberculosis in-

I33

One parent. Age at _ entry.
Expected. Actual.

One parent and brother or sister.
Expected. Actual.

Two or more brothers or sisters.
Expected. Actual.

One brother or sister.
Expected. Actual.

I5-29

I,096

1,263

54

85

7I

94 995 I,3I2

30-44 2,260

2,099

266

30I

423

457 3,o96 2,947

45- 1,282 I,043 246 242 456 412 2,482 2,056

MORTALITY AND HABITS
When discussing the Prudential experience I mentioned the ' habits ' type of case, and in the American-Canadian investigation the statistics of the mortality of cases with syphilis was examined. A summary is

high from cirrhosis of liver, Bright's disease, pneumonia, and suicide, and in some groups from diabetes.
In studying defective family history the American Canadian investigation gave the following:

as follows:

Table VI

Table IV
Expected deaths. Syphilis surely: Thoroughly treated. Two years' continuous

Actual deaths.

Family defect of two or more

deaths from

Expected.

i. Apoplexy or Paralysis 347

2. Heart Disease ... ... 207

3. Insanity ... ... ... 39

4. Cancer ... ... ... 87

Actual. 374
233 29 69

treatment. One year's freedom from

The death rate from cerebral haemor-

symptoms ... ... 53

I00 rhage, apoplexy, and suicide was twice the

Syphilis surely:

Not thoroughly treated

or no details of treat-

ment ... ... ...

Syphilis doubtful:

...

100
49

normal in group (i); and in (ii) the deaths

from heart disease were distinctly above the

I74
67

normal. The figures in (iii) indicate a very careful selection by the offices, especially as

The Gotha Insurance Company in an

a note is made that the " death rate from suicide was high. " It is interesting to

experience (i852-I904) found a similar high mortality, and other published data agree.
In the study of alcoholic habits, the follow-

remark that there were only four cancer deaths among the 69 in group (iv).
Another type of extra mortality in which

ing table is interesting:

a special risk may arise in connection with

Table V

family history is in respect of diabetes, but statistics are specially difficult to get.

Exrpected. Occasional excessive use of
alcohol ... ... ... I90 * Steady, free, but moder-

Actual. There is little doubt tliat, in the past,

289

cases of diabetes or cases with the early signs of diabetic tendency which could be

ate users

... ... I,460

Steady, free, but not im-

I,725 detected by medical examination (e.g. glyco-

moderate users ... 374

698

Reformed from intemperance without treatment ... 286
Took cure-total abstainer

377

* "Steady free use " was subdivided into the
two groups indicated. In the " not immoderate

users " section were placed the risks of those com-

since

... ... ...

58

79

panies which than Anstie's

used limit

a standard as high as or of two ounces of alcohol

higher a dav,

The death rate in these cases was generally

while the companies

" moderate " included the that used a lower limit.

risks

of

those

'34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

suria) were excluded wholesale. In modern A proposal is made for life assurance by a

conditions a few offices have tried to find person aged thirty and the family history

methods of accepting such cases, but those discloses that both parents died of cancer

accepte(d have been the best of their kind, between fifty-five and sixty. The proposal

and this implies that cases with a bad family is for an endowment assurance payable at

history and early signs of diabetic trouble age sixty or at death before, or perhaps at

are ruled out altogether. We are left, there- age fifty-five or at death before. Now these

fore, with cases with a diabetic family his- assurances are of the kind most commonly

tory showing at the moment of examination effected in life offices. An investigation into

no physical signs of the disease. A study the heredity of cancer would in such circum-

of the inheritance of diabetic tendency would stances be meaningless. These policies

be valuable, but I do not remember seeing would never throw up sufficient cancer

any statistics from life assurance work that deaths to help in such an investigation.

can be of help in this study.

Again, from the mere insurance point of

THE VALUE OF INSURANCE FIGURES

view deaths from cancer above sixty for any young entrant are relatively unimportant

The summary of the matter is that the even for a whole life policy, and if a man

offices eliminate the doubtful cases. If they die of cancer at a still older age the import-

find a bad family history they are specially ance to a life office is still less. I do not

careful; and the experience of the offices mean to say that if cancer could be elimi-

does not really show, and can never I think nated altogether and everybody could be

show, the intensity of heredity in the same relied on to live to an older age, that the

way as a random sample of the population premiums for a whole life assurance could

will show it. It can indicate that even with not be reduced-of course they could-but

a careful selection of the lives there is an it does mean that the premiums for endow-

extra mortality and that such cases need to ment assurances would not be in any way

be charged something different from those modified, and, as I have already said, this

which do not show a similar defect.

is the major part of the business.

There is another difficulty, because if It must not be inferred from these re-

people insure in early manhood their marks that I believe cancer in man to be

parents may not have reached the age when inherited: I have not seen statistics that

a particular disease is likely to show itself. appear to me to be convincing. On the other

In a few cases it may be possible to obtain hand, in excluding the importance of cancer

information about grandparents; but anyone from the life assurance point of view, I do

who has taken the trouble to ask people the not wish it to be supposed that an office

cause of their grandparents' deaths, must would ignore the possible implication of a

be aware of their lack of knowledge, and it weakness if a large proportion of the family

is clear that as a matter of business no use- died at early ages-some of the causes being

ful purpose is served by pressing for in- cancer. A large proportion of early deaths

formation that may create difficulty and in a family may, and generally does, be-

even cause irritation.

token something weak in the stock, and I

think every insurance company would be

MORTALITY FROM CANCER

careful in such cases.

Another practical difficulty arises in deal- It will have become clear that an insur-

ing with a disease such as cancer, when, ance office has to deal with various kinds of

broadly speaking, the disease attacks people sub-standard risks, and that it does not

after the age of fifty-five. Now let us accept those cases on the same terms as stan-

assume, merely for argument, that it is in- dard cases, but on special terms which are

herited and that the offspring will die at the arranged either by an increase in the pre-

same age as their parents who suffered from mium or by a temporary deduction from the

the disease.

sum assured. These deductions are most

HEREDITY AND MORTALITY

I35

suitable when the extra risk is such as to vened, and at the present time the two

be heaviest in the early years of the assur- actuarial bodies have been devoting their

ance and to tend to run off later. In any energies to the examination of the general

cases in which we know the mortality, we mortality of annuitants and insured lives

can calculate a deduction from the sum as- without detailed sub-division such as had

sured or an increase in the premium with been attempted in North America. Possibly

almost equal ease; though it is possible that some day something similar to the American

when the calculation has been made, a re- work may be done on this side, but the

sult may be useless either because the experiences to which I have referred make

figures are too unattractive or because the me think that the examination of the

initial risk is so large that a level premium diseases and their effect may have to be ap-

does not cover it. The difficulty in practice proached in some new way, if results of

is that there are so many kinds of special general interest are to be obtained from life

risk that several cases have to be treated assurance.

as isolated examples.

In the meantime the insurance offices will

Some years ago The Institute of Actuaries continue to be cautious about cases with a

and the Faculty of Actuaries in Scotland bad family history, and this caution implies

had in hand a scheme for making a general a belief in inheritance, even though the

investigation of the effects of various actuary may not be able to give a measure

diseases upon mortality, but unfortunately of that inheritance from the statistics of life

before it could be put in train the war inter- assurance.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 2.

