THE MEASUREMENT AND INHERITANCE OF SKIN COLOUR IN MAN'*

By G. AINSWORTH HARRISON, B.A., B.Sc.

Anthropology Laboratory, Department of Human Anatomy, University of Liverpool

IT is becoming increasingly recognized
that within a species the old tenet of com-
parative anatomy that similarity indicates phyletic affinity can no longer always be
held, since differences of environment involving different selective forces can produce striking divergence in related groups and similarity of environment involving similarity of selective forces can effect an equally striking convergence in unrelated groups. The realization of this power of selection has important implications in the study of human skin colour for there can be little doubt that differences in this character in different human populations have been
produced by natural selection. The selective advantages of a particular skin colour in a particular environment are not always fully clear but heavy pigmentation in regions of intense solar radiation certainly provides a
protection against the burning and carcinogenic effect of actinic rays and the depigmen-
tation that has occurred in Western Europe may, as Coon, Garn and Birdsell (I950) suggest, favour the manufacture of vitamin D in a cloudy environment. The heavy pigmentation of the forest negro is not however explicable in these terms and unless he is a very recent migrant from neighbouring savannas some other cause for his heavy pigmentation must be sought. Despite the absence of physiological evidence it may well be that in an equatorial forest environment with high humidity but dry bulb temperatures below that of the body a black skin facilitates heat dissipation; in which case the " yellow of the northern mongoloids, in other features ideally adapted to the cold, is a compromise between protection against arctic insolation and conservation of heat. In any case it is apparent that similarity between populations in skin colour need not necessarily mean a close phyletic relationship but
* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the
Eugenics Society on March 20th, I957.

merely a similarity in their climatic environ-
ments. Indeed, no one closely relates the Amazonian Indian, the Australian aboriginal
and the African Negro with each other
although all are heavily pigmented and there is evidence that even the Melanesian and the African Negro had no heavily pigmented common ancestor. If darkness of the skin has been evolved a number of times in man there is no necessary reason for the genetic basis to be always the same. Indeed, even if the same genes for skin colour are present in two equally pigmented populations, if other differences distinguish them, it is unlikely that the same phenotypes will occur on hybridization with a differently pigmented population, since the expression of particular genes is profoundly influenced by the rest of the genotype.
The Nature of Human Skin Colour
It has, however, been shown by Edwards and Duntley (I939) that the chemical and physical basis to skin colour is the same in all races of man. Four pigments, haemoglobin, carotene, melanin and melanoid, and the colour produced by the scattering of incident light from the skin, are involved. Although differences in- vascular supply alter the haemoglobin contribution in different individuals, in different skin areas of the same individual, and in the same anatomical position under different physiological conditions, there appears to be no significant differences between races in this component and under conditions of constant tempera-
ture and activity, the vascular supply- to
such areas as the medial aspect of the unexposed upper arm is very constant. The contributions of carotene and scattering to skin colour appear also to be constant and are in any case small, and in a number of sites such as the medial aspect of the upper arm even in dark skinned peoples the amount of melanoid is negligible. It is, therefore, variation in the amount of melanin, located as dis-

73 THE EUGENICS REV July, I957. 49, 2.

74 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

crete particles mainly in the basal layers of the components this method of measuring colour

epidermis but also in the dermis and super- was not used in the field until Weiner in I952

ficial layers of the epidermis, that is mainly re- realized the suitability of the Evans Electro

sponsible for differences in human skin colour. Selenium Ltd.'s portable instrument. Reflec-

The Measurement of Skin Colour
A pre-requisite of a genetic analysis of this character is an accurate measure of the amount of melanin in the skin. Since the pigment cannot be extracted from the living subject, only indirect methods can be used. The most easily measured function is colour, and although the establishment of a relationship between a particular measure of colour and the amount of pigment present is not
always possible the two are necessarily
related in some way. Unfortunately until recently the actual methods of measuring
colour were themselves extremely crude.
Most of them involved a visual matching of the skin colour with a set of colour standards such as the series of vitreous enamel tiles devised by von Luschan or the paper standards used by R. R. Gates. Skin colour however is a continuously varying character in a hybrid population between two differently pigmented peoples, and the use of discrete standards therefore introduces an unnatural discontinuity in the variation; the number of classes recognized depending on the number of units in the standard series. A more reliable estimate of colour is provided by the Milton Bradley colour top in which black, red, yellow and white discs are arranged as segments of a circular platform round the top and the size of the segments adjusted until a match with the colour of the skin is obtained when the top is spun. Although the top provides a measure of colour on a continuous scale it also suffers from the subjectivity of the visual matching and from the difficulty of combining the different proportions of the coloured discs exposed into a single meaningful measure of colour. (In practice the percentage of the black disc exposed was usually used though a correction had to be made when Todd and van Gorer (I929) discovered that the red disc also contained some black.)

tance spectrophotometry involves the measurement of the amount of light reflected
from a surface illuminated at different
wavelengths relative to the amount reflected
from a pure white standard such as is
provided by a smooth magnesium carbonate block. The Hardy (I935) instrument mea-
sures reflectance over the whole visual spectrum, the less cumbersome instruments at
a number of wavelengths- which effectively sample the spectrum. A reflectance curve
obtained by plotting the-percentage reflec-
tance against the dominant wavelengths of
the colour filters used gives complete data regarding the colour of a surface and this curve or some abstraction from it has been used by Weiner (1952), Lasker (I954) and Gamn, Sleby and Crawford (1956) for describing differences in human skin colour.
Harrison and Owen (I956) have also shown that in vitro the reciprocal of the reflectance of a melanin dispersion is linearly related to the melanin concentration and since they have further shown that this relationship is independent of a constant back- or fore-ground there is no reason why the same relationship should not hold in vivo. Because this relationship exists over a greater range of concentrations at the red end of the spectrum than at the blue and because variations in the haemoglobin contribution to colour affect the reflectance values least at a wavelength of 685m,u the measurement of the reflectance of red light
provides the most reliable method for determining the melanin concentration in skin.
Reflectance spectrophotometry then provides an accurate, objective and meaningful method of measuring skin colour on a continuous scale and has largely supplanted the other methods but since its suitability has onlyrecently been recognized most of the studies of skin colour inheritance have been based on observations made by visual matching.

Although Edwards and Duntley (I939) had The Genetics of Skin Colour

used the Hardy reflectance spectrophoto- Skin colour is a continuously varying

meter for analysing skin colour into its character with no clearly defined phenotype

THE MEASUREMENT AND INHERITANCE OF SKIN COLOUR IN MAN 75

FILTER 601 602 603 604 605 606 60?

L 609

classes and there must therefore be more
than one gene pair involved. Davenport and Danielson (I913) who made on the coloured

population of the West Indies the first

systematic study of the mnode of inheritance,

postulated as a result of their colour top 60 observations on hybrid families, a 2 gene pair

system in which the whites were sstt. and

I50 negroes SSTT. and the genes responsible for

increased pigmentation had equal and addi-

tive effects. Such a system provides five

classes of skin colour and unless environmen-

NEGRO PARtEN'THM

tal and age effects contribute much more to

the unexposed skin colour phenotype thara

30I'

L

FIGURE 1.

THE REFLECTANCE CURVES OF A NEGRO X WHITE FaAmTMILY. [E.E.L.]

f ILTER 100 601 602 603 604 605 606 607

b08 609

is normally supposed such a system is totally inadequate to explain the great variability observed. Barnes (I929) reanalysed Davenport's and Danielson's colour top data, transformed to allow for the black component

in the red disc, along with family data

obtained by Herskovits in the North Ameri-

can Negro (I926) and concluded that

WAVELENGTH Ml-

although there was a little evidence for a

slight degree of dominance no simple genetic TER400CPOAOFTRHEFE5L0E0CTANCE CURV6EN00S GOFOAXWI7F00 model could be fitted to the data.

This same data has recently been elegantly

NE X

WHITE FIGUtPRRENEN.EI.

used by Stern (I953) to establish an observed
population frequency distribution of skin

colour in terms of percentage black on the

colour top with which to compare the

distribution expected on models involving

FILGTER 2-7, I0 and 20 gene pairs with equal and

0-05 -~**I~~*

additive effects. Blood group frequencies indicate that 30 per cent of the genes in the

hybrid population are derived from non-

601 602 603 604 605 606 607

606 609

IL
TH REIROA

OF THWH~~~RIGEURELN3.CAC

CUVSO

Africans and assuming the establishment of
genetic equilibriumn Stern finds that the
models based on 4, 5 and 6 gene pairs fit the observed distribution most closely. As

Stern realizes the very nature of the American

THE EFFECTSD.OFFFERENOEGRO PARNB D

Negro population precludes a more exact

analysis, since apart from the complications

introduced by the American Indian compo-

nent in the hybrids and the variability of the

ancestral Europeans and Africans themselves for which no allowance can be made, the

assumption that the genes for skin colour

have equal and additive effects on a linear

colour top scale of percentage black can only

THE SKIN ON THE REFLECTANCE CURVE OF AN EURO- be tested on family data in which, the

PEAN. [EE.L.]

genotypes of the parents are known and in

76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

this long existent population the relationship between any individual and the original ancestral hybrid stock can rarely be discovered. The same considerations limit the validity of the model proposed by R. R. Gates (I949 and I953) in which three gene pairs are involved with unequal effects.
In Liverpool on the other hand, although there is a large population of West Indian ancestry, there has also occurred during this century an ever increasing immigration of West African Negroes who have frequently married locally born women. As yet only first generation hybrids are common but an ideal population is forming for the study of human skin colour genetics and Harrison and Owen (unpublished) have begun observations with the reflectance spectrophotometer. Families have been contacted through the school children and records of colour made on the medial aspect of the upper arm. This provides a convenient site since it is easily accessible yet usually protected from sunlight. It has further been shown that this region tans less easily than most other accessible parts and has little melanoid.
Provisional results indicate that the genes responsible for skin colour in this hybrid population are additive on the reflectance scale (R) and on the log of the reciprocal of
the reflectance (log,01/R) at a wavelength of 685 mp as determined by a comparison of
twice the backcross to the negro mean (BN)
with the sum of the parental negro (PN) and
first generation hybrid means (F1). The reciprocal of the reflectance (I/R) gives a less good fit for additive scaling on this test, but
gives the best fit in the formula, 4F2=Pw+
PN+2F1.
Although it is certain that the reflectance scale- at a wavelength of 425 m,u is a very poor one, the BN and F2 means are as yet based on too few individuals to decide which of the three scales, R. I/R, log10I/R at
a wavelength of 685 mu is the best for a
genetic analysis. However, at this wavelength on each of these scales the mean of the first generation hybrid children in a family deviates significantly from the midparent in the direct ion of the white parent which

indicates an overall dominance relationship of the genes from the white parent over those from the black. If selection for depigmentation has been strong this result though mainly unsuspected is not surprising.' Some of Gates' pedigrees provide confirmatory evidence.
Harrison and Owen have also found that the variation in skin colour in the whites is very much smaller than in the negroes. This may be due in part to the fact that whereas the whites have come from a very restricted locality the negro sample includes representatives from all over West Africa but it is also probably due to the absence of a substrate in the depigmented population on which modifiers can act. The high variability of the total first generation hybrid sample would support such an explanation but the similarity between the within family variance of first generation hybrids and subsequent generation hybrids which has also been
recognized by Little (I943) is anomalous and
requires further investigation.
Acknowledgments 'I am grateful to Mr. J. J. T. Owen for
allowing me to summarize our unpublished results and to Mr. D. J. Kidd for preparing the graphs.
REFERENCES
Barnes, I., I929. Hum. Biol., 1, 32I.
Coon, C. S., Garn, S. M. and Birdsell, J. B., I950. Races, Thomas. Ill.
Davenport, C. B. and Danielson, F. H., 1913. Skin Color in Negro-White Crosses. Publication i88, Carnegie Institution of Washington.
Edwards, E. A. and Duntley, S. Q., 1939. Am. J. Anat., 65, i.
Garn, S. M., Selby, S. and Crawford, M. R., 1956. Am. J. Phys. Anthrop. n.s.v. 14, Ioi.
Gates, R. R., I949. Pedigrees of Negro Families.
Blakiston Co., Phil.
Gates, R. R., 1953. Int. Anthrop. and Ling. Rev., 1, 15.
Hardy, A. C., I935. J. Optic. Soc. America, 25, 305.
Harrison, G. A. and Owen, J. J. T., 1956. Proc. of ist Int. Cong. in Hum. Gen. (in print).
Herskovits, M. J., 1926. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. Wash., 12, 587.
Lasker, G. B., 1954. Am. J. Phys. Anthrop., n.s.V. 12,
"I 5.
Little, K., I943. J.R.A.I., 73, 57.
Stern, C., I953. Acta. Genet., 4, 28I.
Weiner, J. S., I952. Man., 253, I.

