THE
EUGENICS\_REVIEW
SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE
IN FRANCE DURING THE WAR.
By LUCIEN MARCH.
NEXT to unfortunate and heroic Belgium, France is the country upon whih the War falls most heavily, eleven of her most populous and richest departments having suffered invasion and its accompanying atrocities, not to speak of those which have been subjected only to bombardment. In these departments, one part of the population has fallen under the yoke of the enemy, and the other has been driven out, often ait a moment's warning. Who has' no,t seen this lamentable exodus of families filing along the roads or arriving at the stations, carrying some remnant of their worldly goods-often in their haste having seized upon the most useless instead of the most necessary articles-obliged to sell the cattle they have driven, for lack of fodder, passing tragically from easy circumstances to' misery, or, what is worse, compelled sometimes to fly again after having returned and resumed their occupations in the hope of having seen the last of such horrors .I ..I ND one who has not witnessedt these tragic scenes, and who does not realise the attachment of the French peasant to his farm, can grasp the full measure of the suffering of these families, forced to. abandon what they hold most dear, to forsake the home which h.as always sheltered them and the goods they have amassed with such slow care.
In what state do 'these families arrive in. the localities ready to
welcome them, where every endeavour is made to soften their loss ? In what state ha.ve the I,200,000 refugees from the invaded districts (not including the military) returned, and the 400,000 repatriated, after crossing the country of the ene-my? And what conditions obtain in those ever-growing communities in districts, formerly almost entirely rural,
those enormous concentration's of people of the most diverse races, some from abro'ad, some from the Colonies, some from the Far EAst, which fill
the faoctories hastily erected to supply the necessities of war? It may readily be imagined that the sanitary state of regions, in which
the population has been so p!rofoundly transformed, is open to serious dangers. The devotion and skill of local authorities, under the enlightened guidance of the central administration of the ministry of Interior, have prevented these shiftings of the popiulation from giving rise to epidemics or even to excessive morta-lity. The genemus co.-operation. of the Allies has aliso conitributed in equal share to warding off disaster.

196 EUGENICS REVIEW.

In spite of the peculiarly unfavourajble circumstances just

enumerated, the population of the regions exposed to the attacks of the

enemy hats preserved nornal conditions of healIth, as compared with

those which have been recorded iin other belligerent countries.

Natural,ly, no exact numerical comparison is possible between the

general conditiqn. of the popu.lation of France before the War and the pr;e-

senit one., since part of the territory has been seized by the enemy and the

population scattered for four years. One can, however, bring forward

some terms of comparis-on in order to show the weak pointis and des-cribe

the efforts which have been made towards racial hygiene. This is what

I propose to do in this 'article, wi.th refe-rence to' the general mortality

rates, alcoholism, tuberculosis, venereal disease, and depopulation.

The-se are aJt the moment the principal points on which eugenic

action should be ta.ken, action whlich, it must be confessed, has only just

begun.

GENERAL MORTALITY.

As stated before, it is not easy to compare -the genral mownoetaity rates i'n France during the War and before, on account of the retduction in territory oin which the observations must be made and alsO because the changes in the numbers of inhabitants within the territorial divisions have not been verified by any census returns. We must limit ours-elves to' considering the death curve in the unin.vaded regions or in those in which one may suppose the shifting of the population to have been negli.gible.
In the belligerent countries the general mortality of the civil population was on the whole higher in 1914 than in I913. lit increased considerably in 1915, returned to, a lower rate in I9I6, and rose ag.ain
in 1917.
Thus, if one takes IOO as Trepresenting the number of deaths in. I9I3, in each of the countries specified below (not including combatants), the numbers proportionaltely applicable to the successive yelars' would be:

I913 I914 I915 19I6 1917
England anid' Wales ... ... IOO I02 114 I05 I05

Scotland ... ... ... ... 100 101 III 97 95

Irelaind

...

...

...

... ioO

95 I02

95

99

Germany (towns of more than

15,000 inhabitants) ... ... 100 I I62 140 11 30 I463 Fraince4 (76 departments) ... 100 112 io8 102 Io6

In Germany the deaths of soldiers in the interior of the country are
included with those of the civil population. The same is true of France, where the death curve appears to be comparable to that of other countries, viz., rising from 1913 to 19I5, a'nd falling in the following years. In the
countries quoited (with the exception of ITeland) the increase of civilian
mortality may be attributed to the fact that a great numiber of men

1 Bulletin de la Statistique gne'rale de la France, juillet, 19I8.
2From Bulletin No. 3 of Selskabet for Social fot ker af krigers folger. 3 Calculated from the figures of the first half-year.
4 Rates of mortality calculated according to the number of inhabitants, estimated on the 3oth of June yearly.

SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 197
between the ages of I9 and 50 are at the front; on th-e other hand, in France the migration of populations from the invaded districts, including many old people and young children, has been an importan.t factor in thel increase of moirtality in 1917. Thus in s.pitie oa particularly unfavourable circumstances amoing the cividiian population, the mortality does not se-em excessive when one cqmptares it with that of the other belligerents. In short, th,ere has been no epidemic, and the food conditi.ons, in spi.te of restrictions, have not caused any undue privation.
In all the belligerent countries, deaths occuning among fighting soldiers are aidded toi the returns in 'territories beyond the fighting zone.. It may be reckoned that each year of war has resulted in, a loss to ea.ch of the countries engaged of 7 per cent. of its effectives, i.e., an increase of about 6 per cent. beyond the normal rate. This would amount after five years of war to an additional loss of human life which, for all the belligerents, would amount to} between nine and ten millions. If one adds to this the increase of deaths among the civiilian. population, as compared with the normal rate, the total loss for the five years would reach twelve millions.
Now if we reckon the populations engaged in actual war, omitting neutral countries, it may be estimated that they represent more than
x,400 million inhabitan,ts, among whom in five normal years 200 million
de.aths would occur. The surplus attributable to the War would not exceed the variations which are observable from one year to another a.s the result of climacteric causes.
But this surplus is superimposed on others, and, what is most important, it fal.ls upon the most active, the most intelligent, and the most advanced sections of the populations under consideration.
Tov the loss occasioned by mortality must also be added the decrease in the birth-rate, which will be dealt with later. Nor is this all, for the losses by death -are not the only ones which the War involves. The wounded do not reoover the full use of their faculties, the possibilities of work are reduced in the case of the crippled, the blind, and the inivalided to a varying extent. To these victims of war must be added those who, although unwounded, have suffered seriously in. general health, owing to war conditions, e.g., the neurotic, the tuberculous, etc., the total number of these representing perhaps three-quarters, if not more,
of the number of the dead.
The loss to humanity is therefore a heavy one, bu.t humanity possesses resources for its reparation, and this will be the work of peace, if indeed thie trial has really fortified our spirit. It is always the case that side by side, with the mo,st lofty sentiments and the noblest human qualiities, which are to be found among those most richly endowed, War brings oult, in many ways, a return to low and unrestrained instincts. Not to speak of cruelty, of which one category of the belligerents has had the mo.nopoly, the lus-t of pillage, or at least the obliteration of the respect for r.ights; the temptationts to drink and licentiousness have often been the result of the strain upon everyone of the one absorbing idea of war and its necessities; changes of fortune have occurred in all

I98 EUGENICS REVIEW.
classes of society and often to the individuals least prepared and least likely to m-ake a good use of the favourable opportunities afforded.
Nevertheless, it does not seem evident that, in making allowance ftr the upsp.ringang of fine qualities, the general level of the mass of the population has fallen during the War.
To use a phrase much favoured by the founder of this REVIiEW, war increases the expansion of the curve, or the pyramid, of human qualities, widening it both at the summit and the base. Undoubtedly the lengthen-
ing o'f the summit exceeds the lessening in depth. Then again, social restraint ha.s weakened in face of -the necessities of -the moment; when the social stays are solidly timbered, useful reactions arise from time to time. In this connection, one may no-te a certain progress in France in public action with regard to, three fatal enemies of eugenics and race hygiene, viz., alcoholism, tulberculosis, and venereal diseases.
ALCOHOLISM.
France is a great producer both of wine and agricultural commodities. Distillation is one means of extracting profit from these comnmodities and in spite of the taxes, alcohol for consumption finds a more ready market and at more remunerative prices than commercial alcohol. There is, therefore, anta.gonism between the interests of public health or the welfare of the race, and thbse of a considerable number of manufacturers and middlemen. Much of the difficulty of the struggle against alcoholism in France is due to the fact that the oppositio-n is often masked under declarations of unimpeachable principles.
Thus the efforts of the public authorities and administrative b.odies, although not very vigorouns, are stiltl praiseworthy.
The fact has frequently been verified tha.t if one estimates the anmount of alcohol con.tained in wine and other fermented drinks, France before the War was the country which consumed the largest quantity of alcohol per head. It also ranked among the largest consumers of distilled alcohol. It has been justly remarked that the action of alcohol varies very considerably according to the nature of the drink-io centilitres of alcohol at iooO taken in i liltre of wine, or in the fo,rm, of brandy, or absolulte, will not have the same physioloigicail effects upon the
organism, and these effects will be very different according to the nature of the essences and the impurities which are mixed with the alicohol.
The quantity and the regularity of the habit, however, also play an important role apart from the quality, more especially in the permanent effect of -alcohol on the constitution o.f the individual and so ultimately upon t'he race. It may be admitted that the habit of taki'ng a small quantity of wine, or even of go'od alcohol, is advantageous to the mental activity and the development of the organism. It seems established tha-t the absorption of very large quantities upset.s the nervous system and gives rise to troubles from which 'the offspring are not immune. Is it perhaps for this reason that in the districts of Southern France, which are almost exclusively vine-growing, where drunkenness is hardly ever seen, but where the men drink freely every day, the woimen are accustomed to abstaiin allmost entirely? Unfortunately, the reverse is the case in the West, whe-re alcoholism is due to the distilled product.

SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 199
For twenty years the official consumption of distilled alcohol has, however, somewhat lessened in France, though to a smaller extent than in. many other countries. Thus from I89I-3 tO 19II-I3, it hias decreased
frrom 41 litres per head to rather less than 4 litres in France, while in
the United Kingdom the decrease has been from 22 li-tres to s0 litres per head.
Since the War the fight against alcoholism has bee.n carried on more persistently than ever by temperance societies founded before the War; petitions have been circulated, posters have been placarded, and deputations to autho.rities have been organised.
The most effic.acious measures, many of which, however, it has not been possible to enforce, were first taken by the military authorities, who, either in virtue of powers conferred on them by a state of war, have regulated the sale of liquors, or in virtue of their own essential powers have forbidden the frequenting of certain public-houses or hindered the consumption of alcohol by the soldiers by prohibiting the use of cafes eind restaurants except ait meal times. The Mini-ster of War in I9I and 19I6 made a similar regulation in the case of mobilised men and those engaged in national war work of any kind, as well as soldiers on leave. A law passed on February igth, I9I7, ratified these injunctions.
Mention should also be made of the circulars issued by the Ministry of Munitions as to disciplinary measures necessary to put a stop to the increase of alcoholism, in the arsenals. For the rest, alcohol being a necessary ingredient in works connected with national defence, the miitary authorities have arranged for powers of requisition; some use has already been made of these powers and this has affected the price o alcohol. In the same way the raising of the duty on alcohol, whic.h has increased since the War to 400 francs per hedtolitre, has naturally formed a barrier to its consumption.
A circular of the Minister of Public Instruction drawing teachers into: t.he -struggle against alcoholism, and a circular from the Mini-ster of the Interior, asking the prefects to forbid the retail sale of spirits, either to everyone at certain hours of the day or to women and children at all hours, have hald a certain amount of influence, but it must not be forgoten that the regulation of the sale of drink depends first of all upon the municipal authorities elected.
As la matter of fact, pre-war legislattion would have been to some extent effective if the law of January 23rd, I873, which allows of the punishment of drunkards, ias well as of the retailers who supply drink to men aliready intoxicated, or to minors, had been conscientiously caxxied out, but as its application vvas left in the hands of the local police, it was never enforced with any energy. A law of October Ist, 1917, repealing it has strengthened its chief clauses; in -addition, it forbids the employment o'f women under I8 for the sale of drinks and punishes retailers who offer facilities 'for prostitution. Another l.aw, passed on August 6th, I917, forbids the introduction of alcoholic drinks other than wine, beer, etc., in commercial establishments and forbids persons in a state of intoxication to rem.ain on th.e premises. A decree of October 23rd,

200 EUGENICS REVIEW.
1917, completes these measures by ordering business m agers to limit the supply of drinks sent in for meals taken on the premises.
It now only remains to mention two laws affecting trade and the production of alcohol. The first, of November gth, x9I5, h-as imposed vari,ous restrictions in place of those of the law of i88o, with reference tot the opening of new liquor shops. The same law fo.rbids the opening of new houses for alcoholic drinks to be consumed on the premises except liquors with a basis of wine of less than 230. Every retail business which has been closed for more than a year is suippressed, and the removal o-f an old one is only authorised wi,thin a radius of 150 metre.s and during the year following the closing.
In the second place, a law of June 3oth, I9I6, has put an end Provisionally' to the privilege in virtue of which landowners with vineyards or orchards escape to a certain extent the control of distill-ation. This should put an end to illicit distilling, -at least, during the W.ar; the fact that the grower.s have.always the righ,t to Io litre.s of alcohol free of taxajtioin has left the way open. tot certain albuse.s. There is neverthelless ground for hoping that after the War the new regulation wilil be " consolidated." For the rest, the clause of the law und,er discussion at the moment tends towards vesting a moinopoly of the distillation of iindustrial
alcohol in the Stalte.
The numerous and varied laws, of which we have selected the most important, show how well inten-tioned are the public authorities in their struggle with the complexities of the question, for on the one hand it is very difficult to differentiate between use and abuse, and on the other the interests involved are both numerous and powerful.
In spite of that, the fight against alcoholism will be con,tinued in view oif the damage which alcothol causes, not only to' the presient gene.ration but to posterity.
Speaking of the work of -the English Government in' its fitht against opium, M. Cl'emenceau concluded: "Will the French do less for France
thian. the English have done for India? '2
TUBERCULOSIS.
The fight against tuberculosi.s had begun in France long before the Wa,r; but the means put in operatioln were clearly not effectual. The prevalence cof the malady may be best apprehended by a few figures.
In 1911-12 the proportion per io,ooO inhaibitants of deaths certified as due to tuberculosis in one or other of its forms was 21.7 in France, as compared with 14.4 in England and Wales; I5.7 in the United States (in districts where it was registered); '5.4 in Belgium; I6.i in Italy; i8.8 in Denmark. In Paris during this peniod 3I deaths per io,ooo were returned, while in New York (Manhattan and Broinx) the correspondiing proportion was reduced to x8.
It is by no means sure that these proportions are strictly com'p'ara;ble. Medical statistics are only of value as far as diagnoses amnd certificates a-re cotncerned. Particulaxrly in the case of pulmonary tuberculosis, the
' Till the end of year following the cessation of the hostilities.
' Preface to "4Alcohol," by Louis Jacquet (Masson, 1912). M. Jacquet quotes the
words of Galien, valuable in present conditions, " Plures occidit gula quam gladius."

SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 20r
symptoms a-re sometimes confused with those of other maladies, such as chroinii,c bronchitis; in the matter of diseases, the, purely medical sympto-ms are often contradicted by physiologi.cal examinaition.1
The changes in the mortality rate are more. significant th.an its defiaite numIlbers. Now, from the period I89I-95 tO the period I9Il-12, there was a decrease in the death-rate from tuberculosis which reached 32 per cent. at least in England and Germany, 54 per cent. i,n Belgium, 25 per cent. in French towns of more than 500 inhabitants, and 17 per cent. in Italy. The reduction was from 49 per cent. in Paris and from 34 per cent. in New York.
I,t will be -seen that if the decrease obtained in the capital of France is satisfactory (taking into account the make-up of the population) it is not so in other French towns where the decrease ha.s been very slight. Before the War the fight against tuberculosis had given rise to various schemes, to some reforms, and to heated dis,cussions, notably on the questioin o-f compulsory notification. The practical recommen,dations emanating from the writings of variou.s specialists and important commissions broughit about certain partial reforms, especially in hospitals, workshops, institutions and schools, and with reference to sani,tary con-
ditions in dwellings. More than a dozen sanatoria, with a thousand beds and 50 ant'i-
tuberculosis dispensaries (30 of which were i.n the department of the Seine) were. started-a small effort when one compares it with what has been accomplished in other countries.
The War and the ca.ll to arms of all hea,lthy adults caused the problem to, assume a new aspect. The calling-up of the young recruits, those most exposed to risks, the life at the front of mein with weak constiktutions under peculiarly trying conditions, forced ithe War Ministry to send back a large number of proved caises of tubercular trouble, and these men, plunged abruptly into civil life aind left to themselves, constituted a danger to the civil population by their ina!bility to take proper care of themselves. As the result of a resolution in the Cha.mber of Deputies, inumerous inst-ructions from the Ministry of War provi-ded for a certain amount of attention to these discharged tuberculous soldiers.
But the most effective solution of the difficulty was the proposal put forward by the leaders of the anti-tuberculosis campaign in France, such as M. Leon Bourgeois and Professor Landouzy, for the establishment of a number of well-equipped sanatoria and san.i;tary station's where these sold-iers could receive the necessary treatment. Fun;d.s we-re accordin,gly approp,riated for this purpose by Parliament on October i8t'h, 1915, and by degrees sanatori;a were opened in various districts. In addition, in the majo.rity of departments, committees were organised foir the assistance of soldiers discha.rged from the sainiatoria when the! cu.re had to be completed in their own homes. These committees attended to' the provision of the necessary nursing, etc., the ensuring of prophylactic
I According to the Italian Journal of Military Medicine, of 924 soldiers sent back from
the Italian Front as tuberculous in i916-17, 394 have been found not to be so, according to the verification of the diagnosis, not including IIO cases of arrested tuberculosis. Even greater divergencies have been observed in France.

202 EUGENICS REVIEW.
measures in the home, of suitable nourishment, and the rest essenti!l to their restoration to health.
A law passed -on April Isth, I9I6, regulated the organisation of public dispensaries in connection wit;h social hygiene and the prevention 4of consumption. These were intended especially for consultations and included a laboratory for analysis, medical aid, visiting hospital attend-
ants capable of giving hygiene instruction to families, etc., while the hospitals and the sanatoria received the soldiers as in-patients for treatment for a period of three months.
At the end of I9I7 there were 17 of these sanatoria with nearly 1,200
beds, 5o hospitals or their equiva.lents, all under military control and wi-th accommodation for more than 8,ooo. In addition, there were 40 sanatoria under the Minister of the Interior, aocomniodating 4,000 patients, intended for the use of discharged soldiers.
In short, the committees, which were at work in nearly all the departments, completed the task of looking after these sol-diers and discharged soldiers stricken with tuberculosis. They formed themselves into an associatisn, known as the Naftional Committe-e for the Care of Tuberculous Soldiers, with a Central Cornmittee, which was created on April Ist, 19I6, and which links up the committees of the departments with all the other anti-tuberculosis societies. Civilians repatriated in the invaded districts, who are recognised as tubercular on their journey to the frontier, are admitted under the same conditions as the military.
Independently of this organisation, which, in spite of its rapid development, still requires to be greatly extended in order to meet the growing need, the co-operation of the American Red Cross has also been at our service as well as a commission organised by the, Rockefeller campaign. The former has given its assistance to hospitals and sanatoria, already in existence, has facilitated the creation olf new hoispitals for the refugees, and finally, in conjunction with the Rockefeller commission, it has instituted a campaign of public education which should prove of the greatest assistance in the fight again.st tuberculosis.
These efforts on the part of public authorities and charitable institutiions are, however, not the only ones which deserve mention. It is certain that the organisation, the activities of which we have just been describing, will not restrict its supervision to the military and the victims of war. At the conclusion cof hostili;ties, if sufficiently developed, it will be ready to take the whole population under its wing.
Great industrial unions have allready realised that the economic future of a country is partly dependent upon stamping out, or at least reducing the incidence of diseases which cause deterioration in the race.
A special association h.as been formed for the administrat.ion of antituberculosis regulations in the metal and mining industries, and also in the building trades. Thus, after the War, a whole series, of antituberculosi.s instiVtutions, which have arisen to meet the needs of war, will be at the service of the civil population.
In addition, a. project is on foot and has been put before Parliament to give a new impulse to the erection of public sanatoria, subsidised by

SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 203

the State, and to bring the private sanatoria to a certain ,extent under State control. All these measures imspire one with the hope that after the War France will be dowered with a neetwork of insti.tutions, which formerly only existed in a rudimentary stage, where all tubercular complaints may be systemtically treated.
This organisation has also a certain prophylactic value si:nce it tends to the isolation of the more serious cases, and above all, to spTread the knowledge and the practical ap,plication of hygienic measures for the prevention of infection. But it is to be feared that it will be difficult to
put these measures into practice as long as tuberculosis is not compulsorily no-tifiable, as in other countries; that is to say, undee the coinitrol of doctoTrs working in well-equipped laboratories and with the necessary means for discovering and treat,ing the disease at its first inception. The Academy of Medicine has expressed itselif as in favour of compulsory notification, but it has met with. keen opposition, and the medic.al profession are, generally speaking, hostile to such notification, at least, in the present state of sanitary organisation.

VENEREAL DISEASE.

Owing to the fact that venereal diseases are only certified as the

cause of death under exceptional circumstances, no conclusions as to their

incidence can be arrived at from a study of the death rates. All that can

be done is to note their occurrence in certain sections of the population, in

the Army for example, since in France no data exist as to their preval-ence

among the general population. But on the other hand, the figures for the

Army, in France 4t any rate, may be considered as giving a fair estimate
for thoise of the civil popul.ation also, since the disease is chiefly contracted

at the age of military service.

Before the War venereal diseases were not very prevalent in France.

For the period of 1903-7 there were 671 cases of syphilis among I00,000

soldiers, as compared with 444 in the German Army, while in England the

proportion exceeded 3,ooo, and the specific mortality was also higher in

other countries, in Italy and Austria-Hungary for example, than in France.

In the case of gonorrhcea and soft chancre, there were 2,200 cases

among ioo,ooo soldiers as compared with I,800 in Germany, and nearly

6,500 in England.1

Moreover, during the last 25 years there has been a decrease in all these

countries, and notably in England.

N

The War has naturally led to a recrudescence of venereal diseases,

both in the ATmy and the civil population, more especially the latter, and

particularly in industrial centres, for the absence of the heads of families,

night work, the presence of colonial and foreign workers are all contributory

causes to sexual irregularities.

The Mindister of Interior has issued vairious recommendations to the

Prefects during the course of I914, I9I6 and 1917, urging the local

authorities to take precautionary measures against the spread of venereal

diseases, move especially by enforcing the registration of lodging-house

-keepers, ret;il wine shops, prosti.tutes, etc.

' The figures for disease among soldiers can only be compared with many reservations, owing to the varying conditions of recruiting and the customary billeting system of the troops.

204 EUGENICS REVIEW.
A new and more efficient organi-sation was set on foot by the Minister of the Interior.'L In, importoant centres (at least one in each department) a special ouit-patient department was to be created and attached either to an ordinary hospital or some welfare institution, where free consultations could be obtained, preferably with medical specialists in localities with the necessary facilities. Towards the end of- 1917, there were already
65 of these centres distributed among So departmenits.2
In addition, in I9I8, Parliament voted, on the proposition of Dr. Merlin, an annual credit of 8oo,ooo francs for the installation in the large towns, for the use of soldiers, of centres for the prophylactic treatment of venereal disease as practised in the American Army and founded an the researches of Metchn:ikoff.
The incidence of venereal disease is coincident with the increase in prostitution, and with regard to this no new measure has been taken in FTance since the War; the system of regulation, and of registering the prostitutes and the licensed brothels, have remained as before the War. An extra-parliamentary Commission has issued a Report con.demning the present system of regulation, but the Administration seems to consider it essential to the natioal health, and the policing of the streets, in spite of
its alleged inadequacy.
Iit is indeed, when freed f;rom the discretioniary powers of the municipialities, of.ten carried out under deplorable conditionis, while on the other hand, it is of little efficacy. In Paris, for example, among ioo,ooo inhabitants,
the number of prostitutes known to the police reached 300 in i855, and
more than 40 per cent. of them were from licensed brothels. In I890 the
number fell to 200, of whom only I5 per cent. were in licensed brothels. In
I9II there were still 200, but less than 7 per cent. in licensed brothels. A corresponding decrease occurred in the number of Tegistered prostitutes subject to periodical medical examination.3
As for the infected prostitutes, their number calculated proportionally to the total number known in Paris, had decreased at the
end of the igth century; it has now risen again, and more especially since
the War. It is, too, a matter of observation that venereal infection seems to proceed in cycles.
To justify the System of regulation practised in France, one might quote the giretater prevalence of syphilis in -the English as compared with the French Army, since prostitution is not under a similar system of control in England. But the argument falls to the ground on the Teflection that, from the suppression of regulation in English garrison towns in I886, the incidence has steadily decreased from nearly 300 cases of venereal diseases per i,ooo in ig8i, to ioo in I900.5
If wair has not modified the system of prostitution, in France, it
ha's increased the number of those infected with venereal diseases among
' Circular of February 4th and June 5th, 1917.
2 Revue dHygiene et de Police Sanitaire. Sept.-Nov., 1917, p. 666. (Article by Dr. Faivre.)
3 However, in the brothels, the frequency of venereal diseases is less than among prostitutes of the street. (See Art. of Miss Rout in " Public Health," September, I9I8.
4 Observations made at Copenhagen (Handw8rterbuck der Sozial Hygiene.) Handw6rterbuck der Sozial Hygiene.

SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 205
prostitutes under police supervision in PaTis, tihe proportion having ben nearly doubled between 19I3 anid 1917.
It would therefore be an opportune moment for a vigoTous reformation of the " regime des maeurs," anmd the public control of venereal diseases. But it is difficult to deal with the problems of prophylaxis, and of prostitution, when medical opinion is opposed to notification in any form.
DEPOPULATION.
The fourth scourge, which in some aspects includes all others which may fall upon a nation, is depopulation.
Before the WaT, there was no depopulation strictly speaking, at least in the country taken as a whole, for the rural districts were emptied to the profit of urban ones, so that what really occurred was that the population came to a standstill.
In the 40 years between I873 and 1913, the population had not increased by io per cent., while in Italy the increase had reached nearly 30 per cent., in the United Kingdom 43 per cent., in Belgium 54 per cent., in Germany 55 per cent., in the United States nearly I40 per cent.
But war and invasion have now undoubtedly led to a real depopulation. More than a tenth of the country is either in the temporary possession of the enemy, or has been evacuated. Among civilians in the devastated territory murders, accidents and disease have wrought havoc, while the exiled families could not increase, nor could new families arise. On the territory free from invasion, although the civilian mortality has not risen above the noTmal r,ate, the heavy lo,ss, among the defenders of or soil and our natiomadl life, has created voids which cannot be filled by a ocnpensating birthrate. Many families that might have increased are deprived of their heads. Oin the other h1and, the public would scarcely condemn a man for
avoiding procreation. jiuring the War, in his desire to save his wife from
the buirden of these children in case of his death, instead of thinking that the void created by his death should be filled. Thus the reduced birthrate, and the increiased mortality-this balance-sheet of all the belligerents, brings in iits fatal traifn that depopulation which, before the War, was only just warded off.
At the very least, we must strengthen every measure for infant welfare, and for the building up of the future population; and the principal measures will now be enumewrated, which have either been already taken or are
under way, dealing in turn with thle campaign against mortality, against
abortion, and against the limitation of births.
Infant Mortality.-A comparison of the number of chilidren who die during their first year, with the number of children born living, shows
that during the period between I876-80, the num!ber of deaths per I,000
births was 145 in England and Wales, I55 in Belgium, 205 in Prussia,
209 in Italy, and i66 i.n France. Thirty years later these numbers had becorme II7 in England, 141 in Belgium, I68 in Prussia, 1I2 in Italy, and 126 in France.
France, therefore, has not done badly during these last 30 years, taking into account her climate, and the fact that the decrease in infant mortality has been really considerable.

200 EUGENICS REVIEW.

Since the War the infant mortality rate has varied in different countries, thus, in the course of I94-I5-I6,1 it increased from log to ii5, and then fell to 95 in the urban districts of England, while in German towns of more
than I5,ooo inhabitants it steadily decreased (155-144-133). In France the
variation is comparable to that which occurred in England, for example:

Environs of Paris ... ... ... I47-i6o-I52.

Seine-et-Oise ... ... ... 130-I43-126.

Rhone

... ... ... ... io6-I45-io6.

Seine Inferieure ... ... ... 173-206-174.

In 1917 infantile mortality was gre;ater than in I9I6 i,n the three first

departments.

To sum up, the War has not had that effect upon infant mortality which might have been anticipated, partly owing to the decline in the birthrate, since there is always a certain correlation between the birthrate and infant mortality. In the case of France the fact must be taken into account
that the refugees from the invaded districts often arrive in other departments either with newly-born infants, or about to give birth to children, and under disastrous conditions.
In spite of this, the institutions started before the War for infant welfare-milk centres, maternity centres, crEches, etc.-have -continued their work ian the tow;ns where th-ey.were already in existence, notwiithstanding interruptions due to lack of medical assistaints. The ratioing of milk has been oTrganised in such a way as to guarantee a regular supply. Shortly before the War a law of June i7t'h, 19I3, had provided for a period of rest both before and after confinement, by financial help equivalent 'to a salary being given to these women, either in the factories or aft home. This law was altered a few mconths later (January 23rd,
1917) to include women i-n receipt of military allowances, even if they
had no salaried occupation, as well ais the women driven out from the invaided districts, and finally (December 2nd, 19I7) every woman lacking sufficient means of support.
Since the War the employment of women in industrial occupations has been greatly increased, and it has been found necessary to take further hygienic steps for the improvement of the factories. Regulations have been promulgaited in favour of women who are pregnant, and apart from the
question of rest and assistance as just stated, a law of August 5th, I9I7, compels employers to give facilities to mothers for suckling their children, and to provide rooms for this purpose in works sufficiently large to render it necessary. Many manufacturers and some municipalities, such as at Lyons, have of course, through their inspiration, Srganised efficient institutions for maternal and infant welfare.

These rather tardy measures are intended to benefit mothers and newlyboirn infants and to encourage matera-l nuLrsing, which, unfortunately,
has not yet recived', as in other countries, special and direct allowances, for the fact remains thiat infant mortality is still very high in France.
Still-births and Miscarriages.-Natural miscarriages include children
dead before having drawn breath, or more accurately, dead before

'From Local Government Board Report: Infant Welfare in Germany.

SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 207
eg.istration, whi-ch is compul.sory within t.hree days after birth. Failing
more exact legislation o.n this point, a foetus of six months' development is registered as still-born.
New hygienic conditions have a great influence upon the frequency of still-births; it would not, therefore, be surprising if, during the present War, as under similar conditions on previous occasions, notably during the siege of Paris in I871, the relative number of still-births had increa,sed in France since 1914.
However, in 1914 and 1915, they were fewer, in comparison with the number of births, than in 1913. In I9I6, however, there was a considerable increase, which was especially marked in industrial districts, and was doubtless due. to the rapid increase in the ranks of female labour; but in 19I7 there was again a decrease.
Insufficient figures would be of little interest in regard to this matter, and no comparison of international figures of still-births would be of value until a similarity of definitions and methods has been arrived at.
The frequency of premature confinements and miscarriages in certain
Parisi-an lying-in hospitals appears to have been coincident with that of still-births, reaching a maximum in i9i6.
In the case of abortions there are of course no official figures. In many districts doctors have notified a recrudescence of criminal abortions.
The Academy ot Medicine and other Societies have urged stronger legislation against this form of murder, but of this we shall sDeak later.
Birthrate.-For a long time Fran-ce has had the melancholy privilege
of being quoted, with Ireland, as the country with th,e lowest biirthrate. From I906-I0, for every Io,ooo inhabitants there were 263 living children
born in England and Wales, 247 in Belgium, 327 in Italy, 3I6 in the German Empire, 337 in Austria, as against I99 in France. It is true that for 40 years the fall in the birthrate has been universal, and no greater in France than in many other countries, but as our ilevel was already the lowest, our relative position has remained the same.
Since the War the dangers dealt with above have led to a fresh decrease. The same phenomenon has occurred in the other belligerent countries, but the extent of the decrease has varied, being less in the colonies than elsewhere.
In France, during the War, the fall iin the birthrialte was considerable. If one represents the number of births in I913 by I00, the oorrespoinding nuamber for the uninv.aded departments is decreased to 94 in 1914, 6o iIn 1915, 50 in i9i6, 55 in 19I7. The reduction was less marked in Germany, anid much less in the United Ki'ngdom. The reduction is much more marked among the legitimate than the illegitimate births. The former was due in great p.art to the lowering of the marriage rate, which wais veiry conside'rable. in I9I5, but since then it has tended to increase.
The slight fall in the number of illegitimate births cannot be regarded as a sign of improvement in the general morality, for there is much evidence to show that the voluntary limitation of births has played a very important part.
This is indeed very probable in the case of legitimate births; for if a calculation is made of the number of births in one year, and the number

2o8 EUGENICS REVIEW.
of marriages celebrated two years previously, there is a certain correlation which is relatively fixed, but this was very slight in 19i5, and considerably lowered in I9I6 in the great majority of departments.
Tihe voluntary limitation of births which has been prevalent for a lon,g time in France, appears to have increased still more during the War, and -this has been brought ab-out in two ways, by alborton aind by contraceptive measures..
It is obviously impossible to make allowance for abortion, which *s a crime punishable by law. But the evidence of doctors reveals a recrudescence of this criminal practice.
Let us now summarise what has been done to try and remedy the
lamentable situation which menaces the future of France.
In orde!r to, increase the birthrate it is obviously necessaxry first to faciilitate marriage. Although before the War the formalities had been simplified, yet, in certain resp-ects they still renained intricate. Itt is true that marriage should be regarded as a serious business, not to be lightly entered upon, and in which, up to a certain age, the young people stand in need of the advice and support of their relatives. It should never become a simple field for experiment, from which one may escape by the gate of divorce; but on the other hand it should not be unduly hampered by legal formalities; and it is on this point that simplification is possible. Since the War this difficulty however has been considered in the case of soldiiers on active service. A law of April 4th, 19I5, authorised, for soldiers -only, marriages by proxy, i.e., without th.e husband bering present. It is probable that this law has affected the marriage rate.
Nothing more has been done in the case of illegal unions. Before the War a law of 1907 had facilitated legitimisation and increased the rights of illegitimate children. During the War it has onlv been possible to call attention to the administrative measures qualifying the mistresses of mobilised soldiiers and their illegitimate chil:dren to receive, under ceirtain conditions, the allowances due to families whose bre.adwinner is a soldier (CirculaTr of August 23rd, 1914).
Mention might be made here of the rather fantastic theories launched by the Press, although not to such an extent in France as in other countries, in order to obtain, by an increase in the illegitimate birthrate, some compensation for the dimninishing legitimate one. If it is a fact that everything possible has been done to, faicilitate marriiage, then the greater part of any increase in the illegitimate birthrate would occur by the disorganisation of legal marriages; the dreams of comp-ensation would therefore be illusory, apart from the general lowering of the moral tone resultant upon this form of polygamy which has been advocated by certain theo-rists.
Now the increase in the birthrate can be obtained bv the normal means of the fertility of marriage. A hundred years ago, when the population was chiefly rural, there were more than 400 living children born to every huindred maririages, while in the years pre&eding the War, there were scarcely 220.
If we admit that the number of heads of families will be reduced as the result of waT to two-thirds of the pre-war figures, the customary number of

SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 209
children, a hundred years ago, in these families, would give rise to a birthrate considerably higher than the pre-war one, and sufficient, allied to further hygienic progress, to restore the population to its normal level.
Again, it is universally recognised to-day that the reduction of the birthrate during the course of this present century has been voluntary, that the limitation of offspring has been brought about by contraceptive measures and by abortion, and that the principal motive at work- has been the fear of parental responsibility.
Numerous discussions have taken place both before and during the War with reference to the suppression of criminal methods. Reference has been made above to the suggestions put forward by the Academy of Medicine during the latter part of 1917. The French Penal Code contains an articleL which inflicts heavy penalties on the woman who practises abortion, and those who furnish her with the means of doing so. But just because the penalty is extreme, and the nature of the crime leaves this penalty to the verdict of a jury, the law is often not carried out. One of the thief necessary reforms is to bring criminal abortion within the range of the pQlice magistrate.
The necessity for more efficacious supervision of midwives and nursing homes must also be recognised, and the need for censoring advertisements
and all incitements to abortion.
Following on the proposition of a law brought forward by Professor Lannelongue ifn i9io, the French Senate received a repo,rt and a legislative draft covering the points just dealt with. But this draft has not yet come up for discussion in the Assembly itself.
It enforc,es the notification of all miscarriages at whattever stage, while at present no notification is 'compulsoxy, unless the fretus is in a stage of development at which it can be described as a still-born child. It also makes it obligatory for doctors and midwives to give evidence under oath when they have any proof of abortion having taken place.
Finally, suppression of contraceptive propaganda, and the distribution or sale of articles furthering this propaganda is advocated. Unfortunately the proposed law has not yet cone up for discussion.
The siame ,fact holds good with reference to the more numerous proposals for a law aiming at lightening the finaincial burden imposed' on parents by the upbringing of children. Everyone nowadays is agreed as to the necessity of such a measure. A law of 1913 provid-ed for monthly allowances up to the age of 13 for all children born after the third. But these allowances are only payable to families whose resources are considered insufficient, and they are paid by the Bureau d'assistance, so that they are thus tarred by the brush of charity. But the question of a public contribution to the cost of children has no connection with charity. Such a contribution is already
made in the case 'of elementary education (in some countries, e.g., the
United States, for secondary education also). It is essential at the present moment to take a wide view and at the same time to be strictly practical.
When it is stated that the birthrate is under voluntary control, the psychological factor is implied and also the motive power of an idea. At all times the will in this connection is itself determined by the responsi-
I Art. 317.

210 EUGENICS REVIEW.
bilities involved in the upbringing of a family, and the results of a campaign of ideas will be very small if it does not offer material advantages.
History and observation of people of various civilisations both go to prove that the number of children in a family is dependent upon whether they represent a profit or a burden. And, since modern civilisation tends to prevent parents from benefiting bv their children, it is only just that society, which itself reaps the benefit, should also, to a certain extent, share the burden. There is some show of reason in H. G. Wa<lls' assertion that maternity is tending to become a social function.
This principle, now almost universally admitted, brings the following consequeance in its train: Society, having need for a certain number of children at the 'least expense, shoul-d fix the rate of compensation by the oost
of those which can be most economically and healthily reared. That is to say, social action should especially favour children born in rural surroundings, from the double point of view of health and economy. And this result might be obtained if the allowance per head was uniform for all, wherever the place of abode, and whatever the number in the family, as long as the child lives on up to the age when the law permits it to become of economic value.
Among the numerous proposals brought forward in Parliament, both before and during the War, there is one, that of M. L. J. Breton, which embraces these and other eugenic questions. It has been favourably reported upon by the Parliamentary Commission appointed to examine into it, but it, too, has not yet come up for discussion.
If nothing has been done since the War in the sense of direct allowances for lightening the burdens of large families; if indeed financial measuTes have been passed which increase that burden, such as raising the duty on sugar, on the other hand, the increase of the income-tax and death duties have been rescinded in such a way as to benefit large families or at least those which are liable to these taxes.
So far as the taxes and the supertax are concerned, the income on which the tax is based not only admits of an abatement at the lower end of the scale, increasing with the number of persons lia!ble to pay it, but also of an abatement on the estimated tax, which increases automatically with the number of these people, until it reaches half of the tax.
With regard to the death duties, the law of December 3ISt, I9I7, first fixed a progressive tax on the net capital inherited, where the deceased did not leave at least four children living or represented by their heirs. This tax is progressive, both in proportion to the amount of the inheritance and to the number of children as this decreases from four to none.
Finally, the duty on the net portion is reduced proportionally to the number of children beyond the third which each heir has at the moment of succeedinrg to the inheritance.
The allowances granted to the families of the mobilised men include a daily sum for each child, the advantages granted to soldiers who are heads of families (quicker discharge, employment outside the fighting area, more frequent leave) may be considered as favourable to large families and as indications of an admirable spi-rit which tends to look upon each child as a unit among the charges which it is the duty of the nation to support.

SOME ATTEMPTS TOWARDS RACE HYGIENE IN FRANCE. 2 I
The same rule holds good with reference to the allowances for the increased cost of living to officials whose salary does not reach a certain figure, allowances which are increased according to the number of children. It is to be regretted that the same consideration has not always been extended to the decisions in the cas;e of employees and workmen in private firms, with regard to bonuses for the same purposes. However, many private firms or industrial associations, like the Chamber of Commerce of Niatncy, have voluntalrily undeirtaken to pay allowances (maternity, con-
finemeint, infant welfare) to the employees, and these measures are, as stated, an indication of a certain change of outlook upon the question of large families, a change which is consonant with simple justice.
Will correspondingly practical measures be taken in order that the birthrate of France may rise to the extent essential for the future of the race ?
There is room for doubt. In the first place, among the measures likely to take immediate effect, the right of the family vote in the elections, has been taken away.
And, secondly, the other measure likely to have a universal and immediate result, i.e., the direct compensation for family expenses1 has not yet been the subject of a debate in Parliament.
Thus the financial arrangements of which mention has been made. only affect a small section of families, and in many cases, those who under no circumstances would have many children, so that the sacrifices made by the State in their favour cause it to refrain from coming as liberally as it should to the aid of those more likely to rear large families, that is to say, the rural population.
The protagonists of large families have perhaps a certain responsibility for this state of things, first, because, as a rule they form part of the section of the population which is to be benefited and, secondly, because they give a ready welcome to theories which are a priori unverifiable, for example, it is aisserted that the limitation of births is influenced by example, and that it would be sufficient for certain families to set a good example, for a general imitation of their conduct to follow. Or else it is urged that every encouragement should be given to obtain a uniform number of children in each family, say three or four, and that this solution of the question is more satisfactory than that which dwells upon larger families. Briefly, the value of religious belief is exaggerated in a country where the religious spirit has never been very strong; it is ignoring also the fact that the religious spirit has risen to its greatest heights, when it has been associated with tendencies bearing on the welfare of the majority.
In conclusion, although France may be one of the countries in which the War has wrought the greatest havoc, and, at the same time, the country in which for a long time past, the population problem has been most serious, it does not appear that the efforts made to improve the situation, to remedy the ills which threaten the vitality of the country and of the race, have been on a sufficiently large scale when one reflects on the voids
I In hi3 report to the Academy of Medicine Professor Richet said: "There are neither pathological nor physiological reasons for our falling birth-rate ; there is only one reasonthe economic. But that is all-powerful and decisive."

2I2 EUGENICS REVIEW.
to be filled, and, above all, when one knows the measures -taken in other countries less stricken.
Except in the question of tuberculosis, perhaps, and even there great progress is stil.l necessary, especially with regard to prophylaxis and home treatment--professional interests, theoretical discussions, and financial coasiderations, have erected barriers against those pra.ctical solutions which should hfave been dealt with first of all.
Under varying foirm-s, is it the principle of the leiast effort which, where sustained and persevering action is abo,ve all essential, has too o,ften iintervened to arrest efficient action ? Howeve;r, one may believe
that the necessary mean.s will not be lacking in a country capable of
strong reactions and oif heroism and generosity. October, 19&

