NATURE AND NURTURE IN MENTAL HYGIENE*

By H. CRICHTON-MILLER, F.R.C.P.

T HE subject of our discussion to-day is seem to have proved beyond a doubt that

both difficult and important. My memory is a congenital faculty incapable of

natural qualifications to open the dis- genuine modification. I can accept that

cussion are admittedly inadequate. But my scientific claim because I have suffered from experience in life has been such as to qualify an unreliable memory all my life. When I even a dull observer to express serious views was an undergraduate I put rnyself through

on the subject, and that for two reasons.
First of all I am professionally engaged in assessing the sources of maladjustment, neurotic or psychotic, and endeavouring
thereby to assess how much of the patient's trouble is inherited and irremediable and how much is acquired and perhaps curable.
In the second place I have had the unusual advantage of studying at very close quarters the interplay of nature and nurture, of heredity and environment, of breeding and rearing in six healthy members of the race. Their ages are 24 to 34 and they have all survived the process.
Now we all know how hard it frequently is to differentiate between inherited and acquired characteristics. I suggest that in no field is this differentiation more difficult than in matters of thought, feeling and behaviour. We may accept the blood type and hair section as invariably inherited, but eye colour would seem in some cases to be modified by environment. An ear for music is rarely acquired, though there are enthusi-
asts who claim that they can train the tonedeaf to recognize pitch. But in behaviour, normal and abnormal, the frontier is fre-
quently open to dispute. Take memory, for example. We are constantly confronted in the advertisement columns of the weekly press with the assertions of grateful pupils

a course of so-called memory training. As a
result I was able to recite in 91 minutes
without a single mistake the value of 7r to 750 places of decimals. But for ordinary purposes my memory remained as it was. In
short, heredity defied education, nature was stronger than nurture. Or to take an example from my own field of work; how often has a patient claimed that his insomnia was inherited from his father-or, more likely,
from his mother. In most cases it emerges
that, of the many complex factors that can contribute to the disturbance of the sleep function, hereditary factors counted for little or nothing, whereas identification, or other morbid emotional cause, accounted entirely for the symptom. Or let us take
asthma: I remember a well-known authoress
who suffered from this distressing complaint.
When it was suggested that she should resort to psychological treatment she said naively, "That would be no good because I inherited it from my mother." Now while it was true that the mother had been a life-long sufferer
from asthma it was also true that her daughter had nursed her for many years and had only developed her own asthma on the mother's death. It was difficult to escape from the inference that powerful emotional
factors, rather than heredity, were accountable for the condition.

that their memories have been miraculously So much for the complexity of our problem.

improved by this or that system of memory Now let us turn to the hereditary side of

training. Yet the academic psychologists mental health, in other words, mate-selection. Man's unique distinction from all sub-human

*The substance of a paper read at an informal luncheon of the Eugenics Society on November 25th,
194I.

species lies in his ability to control his instinctive behaviour in accordance with a

121

122 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

chosen purpose. In other words, mating for of them is blind and ruthless. But in a

man can be a conceptual as opposed to a Utopian community mate-selection would be

purely perceptual issue. Or to make it based upon spontaneous attraction con-

simpler still we may say that the ape bases trolled by scientific records. We. are so,

his choice of a mate purely on the relative accustomed in this country to grant to every

attraction of the available specimens and individual complete freedom of choice that

that without any consideration of the prob- we hesitate even to discuss any procedure for

able resultant progeny. Man on the other limiting that freedom. Then we hotly discuss

hand can, if he will, bring reason, science and voluntary sterilization of the unfit, a measure

imagination to bear on the choice. Jack may, so partial in its possibilities as to be almost

for instance, resist Gertie's blandishments negligible. We don't want mate-selection to

because he has seen Gertie's mentally defec- be shorn of its individual and romantic

tive brother. If he does so he will be showing qualities, but we do need to inspire the

a perfectly understandable concern for the youths of our land with a parental, that is a

future generation. And for this he deserves eugenic, outlook. Such an outlook should

credit. But if Jack were a really informed ideally induce a young man not merely to

man he would not terminate his suit at that eschew the mate of doubtful pedigree. It

point. He would recognize that mental should have its positive aspect as well. The

defect may be attributable to causes other highly artistic should realize that it is

than' heredity, and that a scientific investiga- dangerous for two of them to mate, just as

tion of the brother's condition should be the the progeny of the profoundly repetitive

only basis for a final decision. But what type are liable to be repetitive to the point

would Gertie's parents say if the attentions of dullness. Two people who have epilepsy

he had paid to Gertie were to cease abruptly ? in their families, though not in the immediate

Maybe they would despise Jack as a laggard ancestry, should know that their progeny

in love; or else they would blame themselves would stand a poor chance, not necessarily

for not having buried the brother in an of developing epilepsy, but of inheriting the

appropriate institution instead of exposing psychasthenic temperament, which always

the skeleton in the domestic cupboard.

reacts badly to the difficulties of this exact-

In short the desirable attitude to marriage ing world.

should be dominated by the spirit of pro- In short, the youth in my Utopia would be

gressive adventure, the spirit in which a inspired by an informed idealism that

great enterprise in the unknown is under- resulted in a sort of genetic longsightedness

taken with every rational precaution and to take the place of the narrow vision- and

yet with burning enthusiasm. Instead of false ideals that enter into mate-selection in

that the average marriage partakes of the so many cases to-day.

nature of an irresponsible speculation in- Now let us pass from nature to nurture.

tended to serve as an escape from frustration I have referred to the difficulty of estimating

and boredom. What would we say of a the relative factors of temperament and

stock-breeder who acquired his bull and his experience that go to produce abnormalities

heifers on a basis of appearance only without of function and behaviour. Medical psycho-

troubling to investigate pedigrees? What logy has in the last thirty years enabled us to

would we say of a man who invested all his revise our views on these matters. We know

capital in a business without stopping to now that distortions of branch or bough

examine the firm's books? For years an formerly attributed to heredity are but the

eminent psychiatrist-Colonel Goodall-has logical development of the bent twig. We

been advocating the necessity for pedigrees know now that character formation at the

on a nation-wide scale. But what is the use university is a highly limited process com-

of pedigrees if no one is disposed to use them ? pared to what goes on in the school, and that

At present they are only used, as far as I development at school is negligible compared

know, in Germany and there the use made to the paramount importance of the first five

NATURE AND NURTURE IN MENTAL HYGIENE

years. We realize to-day that the only child
of well-mated parents is handicapped for life; that the child who recognizes that it is un-
wanted has- to cope with such a burden of
devaluation as to make normal development hardly attainable; that the psychology of the orphanage can outweigh hereditary
advantages and disadvantages, and that the
witnessing of parental strife in early years
never fails to leave a permanent scar. Let us then think of environment as
related to mental health, in terms of these
highly important first five years. And let us
be assured that if the child reaches his first school with a sound heredity and a sound home development he is likely to become a
good citizen even if his subsequent school environment and experience are only mediocre.
First of all then, what is our rough idea of the good citizen and his character equipment ? I suggest for the purposes of brevity two main criteria.
i. He should be able to adjust his passions and desires to reality.
2. He should be willing to face the intolerable burden of consecutive
thought. By the first of these I mean to indicate that every escape from reality is a weakness. And in this connection I have but to indicate the tone of the press, not in this country only but in all countries where the press is free. The uncongenial and the depressing however true are omitted or glossed over. Why?
Because the mass of newspaper readers cannot face stark reality but must have news, and particularly headlines, that coincide with their hopes and wishes.
And as for the burden of consecutive thought I ask you ,what evidence have we that the mass of the people display any readiness to make the necessary effort ? The average cinema programme is presumably adjusted to the demands of the average citizen. Can anyone claim that it represents anything but an escape from the effort of thinking? Ask the B.B.C. authorities if the items that demand thought are popular in relation to those that are a mere escape. I
think I know what their answer would be.

Well now, what have these first five years
to do with the mental health of the adult
citizen? Believe it or not, a great deal. Schooling no doubt counts for a lot but the habit of facing reality or escaping from it,
and the habit of making effort or running
away from it-these habits are formed to a
great extent before the alphabet has been mastered. Therefore I say that in the first
five years a child should learn that life in
general is trustworthy and that effort is
worthwhile. Without the first of these lessons he will never achieve complete
independence, he will never stand up to reality in its more painful or exacting aspects, he will never be at ease with truth, he will never develop a spirit of true adventure. And unless he learns early that effort is worthwhile he will never make his peace with the school's demand for learning, nor with the world's demand for honest contribution, still less with life's stern demand for clear thinking. After all suggestibility in the individual and in the mass is the greatest enemy of social evolution. And it is before he reaches school much more than later that
the child develops a bias towards mental dependence or mental independence.
And what are the main conditions of a
child learning these lessons? I think there
are three: security, valuation and freedom, and in that order.
The sense of security more than any other factor conditions all development towards reality. Insecurity begets fear, distrust, suspicion, evasion. The child who has learned to make himself scarce when he
hears father's step on the stair is the child that only learns his lessons to escape punishment, only works to earn wages, only refrains from crime to avoid the police.
Valuation comes next to security in importance. A child that learns that it is
illegitimate is devalued for life. No legislation can erase that feeling. It is usual to conceal the fact of illegitimacy by false explanations. That is all very well till the falsehood is discovered. Then the double
affront bursts on the child: " They never wanted me and mother has been lying to me all this time." I need not stress this point.

124 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
But there are minor degrees of unwantedness vainly trying to command mother's attenthat are very important. I remember the tion. In the nursery the child feels that he passionate exclamation of a woman who had is in a safe sort of haven and unless the nanny attempted suicide: "How could they have is much worse than most of her breed, he has waited a seventh daughter and a ninth additional valuation from her, he has less child?)" Then there is the not unusual necessity to make his presence felt, he has attitude of otherwise well-meaning parents more freedom to follow his own interests. represented by the familiar ciches: " If you But the British nursery is disappearing and knew what I went through before you were the population of our public schools will bor.n .m. " You don't remember how undergo a radical change in the quality of much it costs to feed and clothe you "- their boys, and the old school tie will stand " You're a proper nuisance and you wouldn't for a different class of citizens, a class whose be here if I had had my way," and so on. early years have been far less favourably Trivial, did I hear you say? Not really conditioned than those most of us remember. meant in earnest ? But these. and similar I commend this line of thought to your remarks are quoted in our clinics and con- consideration. sulting rooms by grown-up people who have The time is far spent and I cannot discuss failed to live down the crushing sense of the value of freedom to the child; let me but devaluation. And in this connection I would repeat that it is well-nigh worthless where like to direct your consideration to the follow- there is neither security nor valuation. ing problem. We hear a lot nowadays of And in conclusion let me return to my the " Old School Tie." According to the original thesis. If we are to achieve a higher view of the speaker the class thus designated level of mental health in our citizens we must is either winning the war for us or in process have long-sighted parents-parents who have of losing it. I am going to suggest that the, come together not merely to give each other class referred to, with all its virtues and a good time, not merely to breed a child or failures, is in a position of leadership not two from good stock, but parents who realize because of the playing fields of Eton nor the that the business of parenthood can be the public school tradition but because it began most exacting as it can be the most rewardlife in a nursery. Now this probably sounds ing of human enterprises, parents who will to most of you arrant nonsense, but I am not realize that education outside the home, speaking without considerable opportunities whether provided by the State or acquired of observation. The child in a servantless at a great cost, can never make up for the house is the child of a busy woman. The deficiencies of home life. In short we want more children the busier the mother is. From to see a change in the centre of gravity in all
birth his life is subordinated to the exigencies breeding and rearing, a change of emphasis of adult life in the home. He is either com- from the individual that is seen and temporal peting with brothers and sisters or else he is to the race that is unseen and eternal.

