MATERNITY AND CHILD WELFARE WORK AND THE POPULATION PROBLEM*
By C. P. BLACKER, M.C., M.D., F.R.C.P.
(General Secretary of the Eugenics Society)

I. FAMILY WELFARE SERVICE AS PART OF it is likely to do in the next four or five years,

POPULATION POLICY

public opinion will become more uniform and

I N the course of the last three years the attitude of the general public towards the population problem has undergone a
noteworthy transformation. Up till I936

there will be a clamour for counter-measures designed to raise fertility.
There has already been a demand for a
Royal Commission to investigate the matter

the belief was prevalent that there were no and suggest remedies. For certain under-

limits to the power of growth of the popula- standable reasons this demand has not yet

tion of this country, and that our economic been met; but it can be taken as almost

and social evils were mostly attributable to certain that, in the next few years, such a over-population. The remedy was to be Royal Commission will be appointed. In the

found in reducing fertility by spreading a kmowledge of birth control.
The writings of such authorities as Carr-

meanwhile the matter is receiving considera-
tion by two unofficial committees, a Population Investigation Committee, which is

Saunders, Kuczynski, Glass,, Charles and the chairman of the National Association of

concerned with the diagnosis of the causes of the fall of the birth-rate, and a Population

Maternity and Child Welfare Centres and for the Prevention of Infant Mortality, Dr.

Policies Committee (jointly set up by the Eugenics Society and PEP), which has the

McCleary, have popularized an opposite view. They have shown that while it was

task of devising appropriate policies for raising fertility. The two committees are in

true that the annual number of births still the closest touch with one another.

exceeded that of deaths, fertility has never- What are the measures which might be

theless fallen to such low levels that, in the taken to this end ? Many-perhaps the most

absence of massive immigration or of a very important-are economic in character. Some

drastic change in people's reproductive have been adopted in certain European

habits, a decline in our population is soon countries. Among such measures are family

inevitable. Opinion as to what is desirable allowances, marriage loans, differential taxa-

now ranges between wide extremes. At one tion giving substantial rebates for children,

end of the scale are those who would like to educational reforms designed to lower costs,

see our present population (about 40 millions and various housing schemes such as would

in England and Wales) substantially in- establish facilities for families containing

creased; at the other end are those who children. But there is another measure which

believe that this country would be better might be of special interest to the National

off if our numbers were reduced to those of Association.

Elizabethan England, at which time they probably stood at about 7 millions. When our population actually begins to decline, as

There exists, I understand, under the
"umbrella " of the National Council for Maternity and Child Welfare, a number of

* The first part of this paper is the substance of an important organizations dealing with various

address given on March 27th, 1939, at a meeting of the executive committee and the council of the National

aspects of the family. The intention of all

Association of Maternity and Child Welfare Centres these bodies is, I take it, primarily humani-

and for the Prevention of Infant Mortality. For kind permission to publish it we are indebted to the Editor of the National Association's Journal, Mother and Child.

tarian. The need for promoting the health and welfare of mothers and children exists

9I

92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whatever the demographic position; these requirements claim our attention whatever the population may be doing-whether its numbers are going up or remaining stationary. When, however, there are prospects, as at present, of an actual decline in our numbers, a new social background, distinct from and additional to the humanitarian, is disclosed. Against this background the family comes to have a new significance and importance.
The need becomes apparent for an organization which we might call a " National Council for Family Welfare," wherein would be co-ordinated the activities of all the associations which are now working independently for the various interests of the family. Indeed, such a central organization might assume some new functions which are not yet covered by existing associations. The following might be among the activities of our proposed " National Council for Family Welfare."
Sterility
We know approximately how many childless marriages there are. But we do not know how many of these marriages are childless because of contraceptive measures deliberately taken by the parents or because of an involuntary sterility of one or both parents. Is involuntary sterility increasing ? What part (if any) is it taking in the decline in fertility ? These are questions which call for an answer. In the meantime it has been recognized that the diagnosis of the cause of sterility and its treatment are complicated procedures in which two people are involved -the woman and her husband. Though the subject is now being actively discussed in the columns of the medical press, it has probably been more systematically investigated in the United States than in this country. There is room for an organized service for the diagnosis and treatment of sterility, with branches all over the country.
Marriage Guidance
There appears to be a demand among engaged and young married couples for guidance on the physiological and psycho-

logical problems of marriage. Indeed, there has recently been formed a Marriage Guidance Council, which tries to meet this need by organized lectures and individual advice. The subject is a difficult one by reason of the multiplicity of human types and of the uniqueness of each marital relationship. It is, however, possible that, underlying this complexity, there exists a common denominator of ignorance and a common need for guidance which springs from the uniformity of the elementary instinctual equipment of humanity.
Eugenic Advice
To an increasing degree the public are being made aware of the existence of hereditary abnormalities which are transmissible to later generations. There is a consequent demand for guidance on genetic problems which has the closest bearing on the welfare of the family. There is as yet little uniformity of opinion as to how these problems should be approached by the doctor, and simple Mendelian principles are commonly regarded as having a wider application than is in fact the case. If, moreover, the medical profession could be educated in this matter, and an adequate service established throughout the country for dealing with problems of human genetics, a satisfactory machinery would be created for implementing therecommendations of a recent Departmental Committee on Sterilization, if these were translated into law.
Birth Control
This subject arouses controversy; all, however, agree that there are numerous reasons of health which justify the doctor in advising against pregnancy. It is at present the common practice of birth-control clinics to advise a combination of chemical and mechanical methods which necessitates a speculum examination of the cervix. In this way are discovered numerous minor gymecological disorders-erosions, early stages of prolapse, discharges-which are amenable to treatment, but which are not sufficiently serious to bring the woman to hospital. A useful opportunity is missed by

MATERNITY AND CHILD WELFARE WORK

93

these clinics of doinggood if these conditions abortifacients and the practices of abortion-

are not dealt with. The recognition of this ists might be substantially curtailed.

fact has induced the more enterprising of the birth-control clinics to establish gynaeco- Other Activities

logical sessions, at which the opportunities In the National Council for Maternity and

for early diagnosis given by the routine Child Welfare there are already co-ordinated

speculum examination are put to their best other activities which are in the interests of

use. There is no reason, moreover, why, at the family, such as the movements for

these clinics, advice should not be given as creches, day nurseries, nursery schools, child

to the use of the so-called " safe period" guidance and mothercraft training. The

which is permissible to all those persons for importance of diet to healthy maternity

whom the use of " appliance methods " is might be further stressed by an organization

forbidden on moral grounds. While it would concerned with family welfare.

probably be going too far to say that con- If all these functions were effectively

ception was impossible during the pre- centralized in an organization concerned

menstrual week, it is certainly true that the with the social no less than the individual

chances of conception are then substantially aspects of the family, special qualifications

lower than in the preceding week. In any would be called for in the medical staff of the

case, advice on the regulation of pregnancy centres. The diagnosis and treatment of

is clearly called for on certain grounds of sterility, the giving of eugenic advice and

health, and is in the interests of the mother. marriage guidance call for special know-

ledge; and there would be an obvious need

Pregnancy Diagnosis

for a more than average proficiency in gynaecology, padiatrics and obstetrics. It

It is well recognized that, apart from might be desirable to create a special

pregnancy, there are many causes of Diploma in Family Welfare comparable to

amenorrhoea. Women approaching the the other diplomas taken in post-graduate

menopause frequently find that the expected courses.

onset of the periods is delayed.

For many such women the prospect of 2. ROLE OF EUGENICS IN FAMILY WELFARE

another child is highly unwelcome. The

SERVICE

mistaken belief can easily arise that a I have urged that the provision of an

pregnancy has occurred, and in many cases integrated Family Welfare Service should

the woman tries to procure an abortion. form part of an organized population policy.

Well-advertised abortifacients are bought What part could be played in such a service

and consumed, or the services of an abor- by eugenics? It seems to me that it could

tionist may be enlisted.

perform an advisory and educational func-

Much mental stress and ill-health resulting tion.

from these practices might be avoided if a
regional system of pregnancy-diagnosis ser- I. Advisory Functions of a Eugenic Depart-
vices could be established. By the Friedman ment

or Zondek-Ascheim tests, pregnancy can be In the measure that a eugenic conscience

diagnosed much earlier than by clinical spreads throughout the community, there

examination, and the expenses of these will be an increasing demand for guidance on

tests could be greatly reduced if arrange- personal problems of a genetic character.

ments for their performance were compre- Such a demand would be stimulated if a pre-

hensively organized. If the public could be marital medical examination were made

educated as to the very high degree of compulsory or if sterilization and/or abortion

reliability of these tests, and could be with medical safeguards were legalized. The

induced to avail themselves fully of such presence of hereditary abnormalities in

pregnancy-diagnosis services, the sales of candidates for marriage (especially if the

94 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

partners are cousins) or among their relatives may raise the query " Ought I to get married? " Or the question may take the form: " If we get married, ought we to have
children ? " There should be established adequate
facilities on a regional basis for dealing with these problems. According to my proposal, this would mean that medical officers of a department of Family Welfare should be trained in how to deal with eugenic problems. There should be placed at their disposal a simple Manual of Instructions which they could give to patients (or " applicants "), explaining what information about their pedigrees the patients should obtain in order to provide the material for a prognosis, and also explaining how the results
should be set out. The medical officers should, furthermore, be acquainted with the principles of eugenic prognosis: that is to say, that they should have some idea as to how much importance should be attached to simple Mendelian ratios in the interpretation of human pedigrees, to the desirable qualities shown by the applicants' families as a whole and to those of the couple concerned. These questions are now receiving consideration from the Sterilization Committee of the Royal College of Physicians and its final report may well contain some useful recommendations of which full use should be made.
2. Educational Function of a Eugenic Department and the Social Services A eugenic service could exert an influence
on the whole Family Welfare Movement. The nature of this influence is well expressed by the Statement of the Aims and Methods of the American Eugenics Society:
"The conditions of society as a whole may greatly affect the freedom of decision of parents as to the size of their family. Eugenists therefore believe that the good social order must provide such conditions and motivations that parents of sound heredity will of their own volition have more children than at present whereas parents of inferior heredity will have fewer.

". . . Good heredity is indicated by the personal qualities of the individual and of his home far more than by the class of society in which he is found. Desirable qualities are evidenced by the character of the home environment which parents provide for their children, by the personal interests and attainments of the parents, by their services to the community and by their capacity for living happily. These criteria provide an approximate measure of an individual's hereditary endowment when, and only when, they are used in comparing individuals who have enjoyed essentially the same environmental opportunities. For the present, while biologists and psychologists are discovering more exact methods of measurement, such criteria constitute a practical means of comparing the eugenic value of different individuals. They form a much needed supplement to the imperfect biological methods thus far available. They have the added advantage that changes in the distribution of births, if made in accordance with these criteria, would make for larger families in the homes which provide the best environment for the nurture of children in every class of society and in every racial and regional group."
The existence of a eugenic department of a Family Welfare Service would serve to propagate this point of view. It has a special bearing on the members of the so-called " Social Problem Group." The group is
admittedly irl-defined; but social workers
nevertheless concur that it exists and that a typical social problem family is easily recognizable. The sifting of undesirable parents must develop through the work of various social agencies, which come into contact with individuals; these are in a position to discover persons with hereditary defects and to assist (or persuade) them to avoid parenthood. But a eugenics department could exert a favourable influence on the social services, not only in the direction
of helping to limit parenthood in appropriate ways but also in that of promoting parenthood. It could lend its support to the

MATERNITY AND CHILD WELFARE WORK

95

various movements which will probably be set on foot to further this end-such as graded family allowance schemes, housing and educational reforms, etc. It would also
be in a position to encourage research into the causes of differential fertility. It might,

for instance, assist the Population Investigation Committee in the use of its questionnaire. Through the agency of social workers it might also encourage parent-
hood in families where home conditions are good.

*SOCIOLOGICAL REVIEW

EM JOURNAL OF THE INSTITUTE OF SOCIOLOGY

Editorial Board:
A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, ALEXANDER FARQUHARSON and MORRIS GINSBERG

VOL. XXXI, No.2

APRIL 1939

*
Dq

CONTENTS

The Causes of War

Morris Ginsberg s

0 The Correlation between Fertility and Intelligence within Social Classes

]

[0 Pearl Moshinsky [

[0i An Anthropologist's View of Mass-Observation

Raymond Firth 1

Bs Enrolments at German Universities since 1933

Charlotte Luetkens E

[0] Psycho-Analysis and the Study of Politics

T. Maling [e

nnAual Subscription £1 ls. Od., post free. 5s. 3d. per copy, post free.
tbe Se jMao? touse jDress,
35 GORDON SQUARE, LONDON, W.C.1

Review, Vol No.2.

