REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

65

ground for each associated area in which all defectives should spend some six to twelve months before being drafted to the other homes or colonies, in accordance with the opinion formed as to their aptitude.
In regard to this scheme, there is a good deal to be said against putting the lowest grades of defectives into entirely separate institutions from the middle and higher grades; in the first place, the work becomes extremely monotonous and depressing for those who are entirely confined to the lowest grades of case, and there is not the same opportunity for utilising the work of the more capable defectives in regard to the domestic requirements of the very helpless. Moreover, too much specialisation leads to a narrow outlook on the part of those in control and makes for a stereotyped rather than an elastic classification in which ready interchange should be possible; for these reasons there is much to be said in favour of separate departments rather than separate institutions for the different grades.
So far as one can gather, it is proposed to retain all classes of defective for from six to twelve months in the central filtering institutions; this seems rather a long probation if the objections to this system are as great as is suggested; it would also probably lead to an undue choking of the filter.
Dr. Douglas is of opinion that industrial colonies are more likely to provide what is wanted, and to be economically successful than farm colonies. No doubt Darenth forms an excellent example of the former, and one cannot at present point to a similarly successful example of the latter type at present in this country but it is rather early to judge; certain forms of farming may be made very remunerative, but it will probably be necessary to select carefully the cases for this work, as obviously the difficulties of supervision and control are greater.
R. LANGDON-DOWN.
Wormald, J. and S. A Guide to the Mental Deficienzcy Act, 19I3. Lon-
don. P. S. King and Son; 1913; price 5S. net; pp. I45. As Mr. Edmund Harvey, M.P., says in the preface to this book, the authors have special qualifications for their task. Mr. John Wormald, besides being a lawyer, has been for many years Chairman of Industrial Schools and the Special Schools, Boarding-out and Care Committees for the Mentally Defective in Leeds, and there is ample evidence in the work of intimate and practical acquaintance with many aspects of the problem of the mentally defective.
After an introduction there are sections dealing in turn with (i) the
operation of the Act, (2) the authorities under the Act, (3) the administration of the Act, (4) offences against the mentally defective, (5) finance and
statistics, (6) conclusions. This part of the book, which occupies 95 pages, is followed by the
Act itself in an appendix and an index to the first part of the work. The authors have not confined themselves to a bare legal commentary
on or explanation of the Act; they have dealt with this, but have also made many useful suggestions as to how the measure may be put to the best use with appropriate references to the Report of the Royal Commission, and to work that has already been done in this field both here and abroad.
There are some matters of opinion on which one might be disposed to take a different attitude from that of the authors, particularly in regard to the question of boarding-out for these cases, but as a rule the views expressed are in accord with practical experience.
In regard to the history of the recent movement for legislation, the authors have fallen into some confusion. The first Bill to come before Parliament was the Feeble-Minded Persons Control Bill of Mr. Gresham Stewart on behalf of the Eugenics Education Society and the National Association for the Care of the Feeble-Minded. This Bill was read a second time without a division, which was a surprising result indicating

66 EUGENICS REVIEW.
an unexpected readiness on the part of Parliament to deal with the question.
The essential feature of that Bill was that it endeavoured to set out the absolute minimum requirements with the least possible interference with existing machinery, and it had the great merit of leading to the prompt production of the Government Bill. The little Bill was framed on these lines in order to rouse attention and because it was hopeless for any private measure on any broad lines to have gone very far.
It is only fair to say that there are some independent authorities who still think it would have formed the basis of a very useful Act.
It seems altogether premature to speak of the defects of lunacy administration in a new and distinctive branch of work, and many well acquainted with lunacy administration are by no means so lacking in confidence in it as the authors appear to be.
The Mental Defect Bill introduced by Mr. Hills on behalf of the Charity Organisation Society's Committee was never read a second time and was too big a measure for either the Government or a Private Bill.
These remarks on this historical point seem called for here owing to the active share taken by the Eugenics Education Society in this matter, and it would be a pity to allow the mistake to pass unnoticed.
The book is very readable and interesting. One may express the hope that the authors will take the earliest opportunity of removing the last syllable of the word " stigmatum " on page 94. In general the work is one which should be extremely useful to members of local authorities at the present moment and to all interested or engaged in the matter.
R. LANGDON-DOWN.
Montessori, MARIA. Pedagogical Anthropology. Translation by F. r. Cooper. London. Heinemann; I913; price 14s.; pp. xiv., 506.
THIS is not an easy book to review. Considered from the standpoint of biology, of physiology, and of anthropometry, it contains a considerable amount of information. There are chapters on mendelism, craniology, pigmentation, statistical methods, biographic charts, and other similar topics. The matter is compiled from the works of Broca, Qu6t6let, Sergi, Lombroso, and numerous Italian anthropologists. No claim is made that it embodies more than a modicum of original research, and the abovementioned chapters contain no more and no less than is to be found on these topics in current handbooks. Still the compilation is a useful one as bringing together into one volume a good deal of heterogeneous matter, although the presentation is so uncritical as to make some of it dangerous reading for the novice.
It is evident, however, that to write a mere compilation of anthropometric methods was not Dr. Montessori's chief aim. As readers of her previous work on education will realise, she takes herself very seriously as an educator, and in this book is at pains to show how a knowledge of all the facts that anthropometry can give about the young child are of value to those responsible for his education. Here the book fails, because, though it is evident that all knowledge about the physical development of our pupils is to the good, Dr. Montessori does not bring out in detail what its precise value is, or what may be expected from it in the near future. It is true that she points out, and the statement is suggestive, that cerebral exercise develops the brain, that while blind children and deaf mutes up to the age of seven or eight have normal craniums, by the age of fourteen or fifteen the volume is subnormal, and that this inferiority remains; thus showing the effect of education on brain development. But when she proceeds to discuss the difference between the cranial measurements of clever and of stupid children and to ask " In school can we be sure that the child whom we judge the most intelligent is really so?" (p. 252) it is clear that she is wholly ignorant of a great deal of contemporary work and thought that bears on her question. She says " We

