Eugenics in International Affairs. *
BY C. E. A. BEDWELL, House Governor, King's College Hospital.
After the first International Eugenic Congress was held in London in 1912 an effort was made to establish a permanent international
committee to continue its work, but its activities were interrupted by
the War. The result, however, of that international disturbance has been
to develop what may be called the international sense among the peoples of the world. Scientists, who had already appreciated that national boundaries do not place the limit to their researches, may naturally welcome this more general recognition of the international character of knowledge. Undoubtedly the Congress in New York will mark a step forward in this direction among eugenists. The process of evolution of international organization varies, but follows certain broad general lines. Its basis is a desire to meet fellow workers in the same field, who have been known to each other, perhaps for years, by their writings or other researches and an appreciation of the value of union in a common effort. From such a gathering there results, as from the Congress of 1912, a movement to create steps to maintain that connection. So there gradually arises a permanent organisation-bureau, office, council or committee,-housed after a time, in a permanent building. Such a centre facilitates collective effort by means of combined investigations, statistical inquiries,
bibliographical information and publications. Steps are taken to
make the personnel more representative and in due course the central organisation is sufficiently appreciated to secure Government recognition by the appointment of an official representative. From that stage the acts of the international body become more important and may even be followed by national enforcement through the laws of some countries or receive the imprimatur of an international convention to which all give their assent. Mr. F. C. Hicks the brilliant librarian of Columbia University, is fully entitled to claim that by such means international co-operation "has tended to offset the dangers of unrestrained state of ambition."t Moreover, many on the other side of the Atlantic as well as on his own are willing to support his cointention that such co-operation "may turn out to be more important" than matters like disarmament, arbitration, and the Assembly, Council, and Secretariat upon which the protagonists of the League of Nations are disposed to lay more emphasis.
*Paper read at the International Eugenics Congress, 1921.
tThe New World Order, p. 15.

188 EUGENICS RWVI8W.
It is desirable, therefore, to consider what may be the position of eugenics in international affairs. At first sight it may be thought that as the primary object of eugenics is the improvement of the race, so its natural place is in connection with the international health organisation, but the programme of the second congress shows that the subject has a wider bearing. The third section is to consider in connection with human racial differences the migration of races, and the influence of racial characteristics on human history. The United States and the British Empire alike are faced with problems of far-reaching importance due to racial conflict. It is not too much to say that there is no subject of more vital importance at the present time to the nations of the world and it is certainly a question to the solution of which eugenics may make a contribution. May we assume "the unity of the human race and the absence of any inherent superiority or inferiority in any division" and that "the several racial types are variations round a normal human type and express the results of natural mutations preserved by favourable environments, "* Or can science maintain the Aryan claim to superiority over savage races. Settlements of international problems may be reached by statesmen and polhtici ns but ultimately the deciding factor is the capacity of different nations to live in unity and no settlemient of two peoples within one territory can be permanent nless intermarriage is possible and the conditions which make it so are within the province of the student of eugenics. The fourth section of the Congress also in its discussion of eugenics in relation to the State, to society and to education will be dealing with matters of importance in international affairs. It is clear, therefore, that an affiliation of the International Eugenics Congress to the International Health Office would only represent a portion of the contribution which eugenics may make to the progress of humanity.
Sir John Macdonell in one of those suggestive papers, for which he was so justly noted, presented to the English Eugenics Education Society some years ago,t so.ne points which may be recalled in this connection. He summed them up in his concluding peroration:
"Sho ld scientific research tend to show that there are no valid reasons against unions between certain races, physically different; should it go further and say that new unions are desirable and propitious; should it declare that certain stocks would be enriched and strengthened by infusions of blood of less advanced people, then the outlook for races now dying out brightens; then, perhaps, we should all be in a new sense "citizens of a better world"; then the unity of humanity would have a new, and, perhaps, for the first time real
meaning. There will then be, also for the first time, a ratione 1 ju,
connubii such as neither Roman law nor any other conceived. Hitherto men have walked as to these matters in darkness. Who knows but that your science may show how by wise crossing, the backward races may be levelled up without the advanced being debased? Who knows but it m4y be the solvent of the pride and intolerance of race and may one day send a message of hope to people now apparently doomed to disappear?"
*The Round Table. March, 1921, p. 821, tEuGNmqcs REVIEW, January 1916, p. 245.

EUGENICS IN INTERNATIONAL ArFAIRS.

189

Accordingly the development of the Eugenic international organisation must be on a wider basis than the Health Office. Such an organisation would aim to be sufficiently strong ultimately to make its influence felt in the counsels of the League of Nations and the PanAmerican Union.
It would be desirable to establish direct relations with both bodies. National Eugenic Societies would naturally co-operate with the international centre and each other. For the purposes of bibliographical Tecord their publications should be filed with the Union of International Associations at Brussels. In the present condition of financial stringency an elaborate new organisation does not readily commend
itself to many minds. Moreover the study of eugenics i, one which
may profitably be allied with corresponding researches, so that the -policy may be suggested of working so far as possible in conjunction with other associations.
No doubt, the international committee will continue the useful work, which has already been done in formulating plans for international action. The object of this brief paper is to put the matter forward so that the members of the National Societies may be enabled to envisage eugenics in its international aspects. It is true that national variations of conditions often seem to vitiate the value of comparative studies but the interchange of information, the discus-sion of methods of propaganda, and the nature of popular criticisms can all have useful results. In such work the efficiency of the international centre must largely depend upon the loyal co-operation of national organisations, which in their turn, rely upon the support of public opinion to further their work.
The task before the present generation of eugenists is one requiring a large measure of faith. From the circumstances it is inevitable that they will not be able to see the fruit of their labours or even appreciate the bearing of facts collected with scrupulous care. But it may be claimed without fear of contradiction that they have a direct con-tribution to make towards securing the peace which the leading civilised nations are anxious to obtain for the world. They do not desire pugnacity or bloodthirstiness as prevailing characteristics in the races of the world. The ideal of the eugenists is to gestate a properly balanced being in whom spiritual aims are accorded their value in a frame endowed with physical strength and mentally equipped to take its part in the service of humanity.

