ANNUAL REPORT 1939-40

IN this Report, the accounts relate to the his investigations on " The Approach to

period December 3Ist, I938, to Decem- Marriage" at the end of the first year, and,

ber 3Ist, I939. The rest of the Report having accepted a Commonwealth Scholar-

covers the period from March 3ISt, I939, to ship in the United States, did not apply for

March 3ISt, I940.

a renewal of the Fellowship. His agreement

with the Society was therefore concluded in

APPOINTMENT OF EMERGENCY COMMITTEE August 1939. The Society is now awaiting

The dislocation of all activities which his completed Report. It has been decided followed the outbreak of war at the begin- not to offer any further Fellowships during ning of September did not leave this Society the war.

untouched. Dr. Blacker was called up for Problems of Population.-The necessary

active service with the R.A.M.C. on Septem- curtailment of the activities of the Population

ber Ist, and went overseas on the I5th. At Investigation Commnittee has resulted in a

the President's request an Emergency Meet- suspension of the enquiry into Fertility by a

ing of the Council was called on October ioth, questionnaire upon the preparation of which

and it was then agreed that the work of the much time and trouble had been expended.

Society should be carried on at 69 Eccleston Of the two full-time Research Workers, Miss

Square, and that an Emergency Committee, Leybourne accepted a Government appoint-

consisting of nine members able to attend ment in the autumn when her agreement was

regularly, with power to co-opt, should be terminated, and Mr. Glass has left for

empowered to act on behalf of the Council America, having been offered a Fellowship

for the duration of the war. The present from the Rockefeller Foundation. Mean-

composition of this Committee is as follows: while, the publication of his book on Euro-

Lord Horder (Chairman), Sir Charles Arden- pean Population Problems has been under-

Close, Mr. Cecil Binney, Mr. B. S. Bramwell, taken by the Oxford University Press, and

Mr. C. F. Chance, the Hon. Mrs. Grant Duff, is now in proof. Miss Leybourne's book on

Mr. W. T. J. Gun, Mrs. E. M. Hubback, the Relation between the Size of the Family

Dr. A. J. Lewis, Mr. Radcliffe Martin, and and the Cost of Education has been pub-

Mr. R. M. Titmuss.

lished, and a contribution towards the

At a meeting on April 2nd, 1940, the cost of publication has been made from

Committee resolved that, since it appeared the grant of £250 voted by the Eugenics

undesirable in present circumstances to have Society for I940. Dr. Kuczynski has made

elections of Members of Council, the pro- considerable progress with his Report on the

cedure should be modified for the current Investigation into the Demographic Prob-

year by the suspension of the annual election, lems of the British Colonial Empire, and

and that Members of Council who had hopes to complete and publish a full Report

consented shall remain in office without this year. This investigation is being

further election for that period with the financed by the Carnegie Corporation of

powers vested in them.

America. The Carnegie United Kingdom

Darwin Research Fellowships.-Owing to
the war, Dr. Dora Ilse was unable to pursue
her " Genetic Analysis of Psychological and Physiological Characters with Special Refer-
ence to Twins," and her agreement was therefore terminated at the end of eight

Trust also made a grant, which enabled the
Committee to commission Dr. Elsas and Dr. Moshinsky to make investigations into
the relation between population and housing policy. It is hoped that their reports will be published in due course.

months.

The work of the Population Policies

Mr. R. H. Pear had practically completed Committee, appointed by the Eugenics

32

ANNUAL REPORT I939-40

33

Society and P.E.P., has been carried on in
spite of difficulties resulting from the war. Mr. Lafitte's Report, which it was arranged
should be submitted in February I940, has been delayed and will not be ready until
July or August. The Committee has not yet
decided whether or not it will be published during the war. Mr. Lafitte was asked to
undertake at some future date, on behalf of the Eugenics Society, the study of Family Allowances from the eugenic point of view. The Committee felt that since the Report
would in fact cover this question, research
on this point could be included in the work on the Report, if an additional month were allowed for this. The Emergency Committee agreed to this proposal and Mr. Lafitte will prepare for the Society a full-length study of
the consequences of differential fertility, a
summary of which will appear as a chapter in the Population Policies Report.
Education Department.-The activities of this department, formerly the Propaganda
Department, are controlled by an Education
Committee. In the summer lecture season 33 lectures
were given-25 on heredity and aspects of
eugenics, and 8 on population problems and voluntary sterilization-with a total attend-
ance of about I,722, an average of 52 persons
per lecture. The Society's Exhibit was shown at the
Merchandise Centre, Oxford Street, London, the West Hartlepool Health Week, the Royal Sanitary Institute's Health Exhibition, and Orpington Health Week. The estimated attendance was 7I,392. The Exhibit, which included two new diagrams, was awarded the Bronze Medal for the third year at the Royal Sanitary Institute's Exhibition.
At the Merchandise Centre the film "From Generation to Generation " was
shown twice daily for two weeks to audiences totalling approximately 12,000. Both the film and the introductory talk aroused great interest. Sound and silent copies are
now in increasing demand for schools and colleges and letters of appreciation are being received from biology masters and head-
masters.
Members of the Eugenics Alliance (annual

subscription 2s. 6d.), formed for those who cannot afford the ordinary subscription to
the Society, have received a quarterly News
Sheet. Owing to the war, there has been a slight reduction in membership which now stands at 2IO individuals and 20 affiliated
societies.
The two educational pamphlets written
by Dr. Blacker-" Sex Education for
Children " (price 3d.) and " Mating and the Birth of Children" (price 2d.)-continue to
have a ready sale. The National Council for Maternity and
Child Welfare.-The Eugenics Society is now affiliated to this organization, and it is
hoped that much good work will result. The Family Planning Association.-This
name was adopted for the organization
which includes the National Birth Control Association, the Birth Control International
Information Centre, the Birth Control Inves-
tigation Committee and the Society for the
Provision of Birth Control Clinics. New branches have been formed in four districts, and seven new voluntary clinics have been opened. Thirty-five additional local authori-
ties have taken action since last year to provide contraceptive advice on medical grounds. On the international side, work is now being carried on in India, and includes a
practical investigation into the usefulness
of tropical " Volpar." Superseding the Birth Control Investigation Committee, a Scientific Advisory Committee, with Lord Horder as Chairman and Dr. Blacker as Honorary Secretary, has been formed, but owing to the war has only been able to hold one meeting. The Association continues to occupy the second floor at 69 Eccleston Square, the Eugenics Society remitting the rent for the period of the war.
Finance.-The usual statement of Income and Expenditure, Balance Sheet and List of Investments are included at the end of this Report, with corresponding figures for the previous year. It will be seen that the excess of expenditure over income is £i,890 I3S. 7d. It is regretted that, owing to the war, the value of the Society's investments continues to show a depreciation. The Society has received notification of a legacy of £ioo from the late

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Mr. C. J. Bond, whose death is recorded May i6th, I939 (Annual General Meeting).

elsewhere in this Report.

-" Some Problems of Population," by Mr.

Library.-The Library has been increased A. M. Carr-Saunders, M.A.

by seventy volumes, the total now being June I7th, I939.-" The Approach to

2,796. The number of books received for Marriage," by Mr. R. H. Pear, B.Sc. (Econ.).

review has fallen considerably since the Three lectures, arranged to be given

outbreak of war. The Society is again respectively by Mr. Block, Dr. Blacker and

greatly indebted to Miss Corry for her Dr. Penrose in October, November and

valuable work in connection with the Library, December, were cancelled on account of the

and it is much regretted that, being now war.

out of London, she is not able to devote so
much time to it. Review. - With the growth of the
Society's activities, the REVIEW has exercised a correspondingly greater influence and is now widely read outside as well as within the
ranks of the Society. The American Eugenics

January 25th, I940.-" The Health of Working Women and its Significance in War Time," by Mrs. Margery Spring-Rice, M.A.
March igth, I940.-" Abortion-Right or
Wrong," by Mrs. Dorothy Thurtle.

Society takes 500 copies of each issue and Obituary.-We regret to announce the

the Eugenics Societies of Canada and deaths of the following: Mr. C. J. Bond,

Victoria (Australia) take Ioo copies each. Mr. A. E. Brown, Dr. Stanley Colyer, Mrs.

At the present time the REVIEW iS giving Daman, Mr. Havelock Ellis, Prof. Mapother,

particular attention to the changing demo- Mr. E. P. Poulton, and Miss Florence Rich.

graphic situation and to the eugenic implica- Register of Fellows and Members.-An

tions of measures proposed or adopted for analysis is presented of the Society's Register

the prosecution of the war. It is very much for the period April Ist, I939, to March 3ISt,

hoped that Fellows and Members qualified I940:

to review technical works and periodicals will communicate with the Editor, stating both their specialities and linguistic equip-
ment. Galton Luncheon and Lecture.-Owing to

Life

Fellows Felows Members Total

Total, March 3ISt,

I939 ... ... 73 254 297 624

Elections I939-40

6 i6 22

the war, the Galton Dinner arranged for February i6th was cancelled, and it was decided that a Luncheon on the 17th should take its place. The address at this luncheon, which was held at the St. Ermins Restaurant
and attended by fifty-eight members and their guests, was given by Lord Horder, who took as his subject the Society's activities in war time.

Less Deceased ... Resigned ...
Lapsed ... ...
Total, March 3ISt,
I940 ... ...
Affiliated Societies

73 2
-
7I

260
2 2I 3 -
234

3I3
4 22 6
28I

646
8 43 9
586
4

Members' Meetings.-The following have As recorded elsewhere, the Eugenics

been held:

Alliance has a membership of 230.

