THE BERLIN POPULATION CONGRESS AND RECENT POPULATION MOVEMENTS IN GERMANY*

By D. V. GLASS

IT is impossible for any one observer to That brings me to the second point-the

give a complete account of the Berlin quality of the papers themselves. Apart

Population Congress. With the meetings from numerous instances of prejudice, which

of the four different divisions being held at I shall mention later, what struck me most

the same time, it was difficult to cover more forcibly was the staleness of so many of the

than one, and though I occasionally attended papers. Dr. Burgd6rfer, for example, natur-

the sessions on Population Biology, and on ally gave a very sound analysis of nineteenth

Social, Economic and Psychological Prob- and twentieth-century population develop-

lems, my remarks are in the main confined to ments; but surely every serious student of

the papers read at the plenary meetings and population problems must have been familiar

at those of the Population Statistics section. with these beforehand. True, the most recent

Nevertheless, conversations with other dele- events in Germany are of great interest and

gates showed that the disappointments which we need all the information we can obtain

I encountered in my own section were re- about them; but, instead of providing any

peated in theirs, so that this report possibly new material, Dr. Burgd6rfer gave less than

applies to the Congress as a whole as well as anyone could have read before in at least five

to one part of it. If that is the case, then from of his articles, as wellas in his excellent book.*

the scientific point of view the Congress was The same criticism applies to Monsieur F.

not altogether a success.

Boverat's paper on " La perequation des

The purpose of a scientific congress is, as I ressources aux charges de famille." It was

see it, to keep workers in a particular field of interesting, but it had already appeared in

-investigation in touch with the most recent the form of a pamphlet entitled, " Les

developments therein, especially by discus- encouragements materiels i la natalite,"

sions of those questions on which further which was published in I934.

light needs to be thrown. But at the Berlin The fact that these papers were read at

Congress there was no real discussion, plenary sessions is, perhaps, some excuse for

largely because there was no time for it. At their nature, but even at the sectional meet-

conferences of this nature, the papers should ings most speakers appeared to assume that

be and frequently are distributed beforehand, the audience knew very little of what had

and the speakers may assume that the audi- been happening to population in the last

ence is conversant with the matters to be hundred years. There was, for instance, no

considered. But on this occasion only mention of Dr. Leybourne's or Dr. Charles's

synopses of the papers were available, and estimates of future population, nor of Dr.

these but a few minutes before the sessions Kuczynski's new method ot showing true

were due to begin. Add the fact that eleven mortality rates. Dr. Wieth-Knudsen of

or more papers were read at each sectional Drontheim analysed trends in the Scandi-

meeting, and it is easy to see why there was navian countries without speaking of Myr-

no time to consider their contents. This was dal's new book or analysing the social

a pity, for a good deal of debatable material measures which the Swedish Government

was read.

is undertaking to combat the fall in the

* Mr. D. V. Glass attended this Congress on behalf

of the EUGENICS SOCIETY.

*Bevdlkerungsentwicklung im Dritten Reich.

207

208 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

birth-rate; while Monsieur Serpeille de Gobi- physiology-quite apart from the instinctive

neau merely formulated another version of the Malthusian principle. Nor was the information on Hungary and Poland much more valuable.

reasons against such marriages. The offspring of these marriages often show, it is true, a so-called 'luxuriance' in the first generation, but subse-
quent generations tend to reveal, in a striking number of cases, grave signs of degeneration,

In the long list of papers to which I particularly in psychiatric respects."

listened, I can remember only three of real
interest-that of Dr. Linder of the Swiss Statistical Office, which gave the results of the first fertility investigation in Switzerland, showing the net reproduction index for the country to be only o * 84; that of Dr. Winkler of Vienna, giving the results of the I934 Austrian census, according to which the average number of children per marriage in Austria was only I' 8; and that of Dr.
Griesmeier of Stuttgart, which gave the con-
clusions drawn from the I934 Wiirttemberg inquiry into the distribution of the increase of births by social and vocational status in

Dr. Alois Scholtz, headmaster of a boarding-school near Vienna, used similar arguments for urging racial political education in schools, such as that initiated in Germany by the decree of January I935. Perhaps the most emphatic paper on these lines was that on " Nordic and ' Verbal ' Culture " given by Professor E. B. Almquist of Stockholm, from whose summary it is interesting to quote at length.
" Verbal (i.e. non-Nordic) culture is characterized by more or less set doctrines, and by words and formulw. Some of these are even sacred. The doctrines differ, but all of them are fairly rigid.

town and country.

Here we do not encounter our (Nordic) respect for reality and the actual facts. Scholasticism has

RACE AND POLITICS It is perhaps not surprising, apart from the

remained their science; they speculate, explain things hypothetically, and speak of cause and effect, even with regard to religious questions....

intellectual poverty of the material pre- Like all convinced dogmatists these (non-Nordic)

sented, that the dominant note at this conference-despite the auspices under which it was held-should have been the manifesta-

men feel themselves to be superior and seek forcibly to convey their doctrines to others. In doing so, they demand solidarity. Hence they try, when organizing other peoples, to enslave them and con-

tions of race prejudice, not all of which were vert them into collective masses. We Nordics are

confined to the German delegates. The International Population Union expressly
states that its object is the scientific study of population problems, unadulterated by political and other dogmas. This organiza-

shunned by them as dangerous. . . . The history of the Middle Ages has been misrepresented by history-writing prelates who were not allowed to present the true facts. It is now even asserted that the documents in question were intentionally falsified at the end of the Middle Ages."

tion, to quote from the EUGENICS REVIEW
of July I935 (P. I47), " is bound to confine itself strictly to scientific investigation, and
to refuse to enter upon religious, moral or political discussions." If that is so, then much that was read at the Berlin Congress should have been excluded.
With the racial fantasies of the German
delegates I am not much concerned, since their professed faith is well known, but it is, I think, worth while to quote from speeches
of the other delegates. Dr. Stigler of Vienna,
for example, gave a paper on " State Matrimonial Agencies," in which the following statement occurred:

Much of this is rather difficult to understand, but what place has any of it at a scientific conference on population problems ?
One handicap to the Congress was that many of the authorities who spoke at the previous general assembly of the Union in
I93i did not attend this one, while others who did attend took no part in the proceedings. In particular, the United States section apparently boycotted the Congress, their only delegate being Professor Hankins of Smith College, who held a " watchingbrief " but did not read a paper.* This was rather unfortunate for it meant that Dr.
Clarence Campbell, the only American

" Inter-marriages with Jews are of equal

disadvantage for both parties from reasons of racial * See New York Times, August 30th, 1935.

GERMAN POPULATION MOVEMENTS

209

speaker, was assumed to be the official the heads of large families when allotting

American representative. His paper at the places in the central and local Government

second plenary meeting, on " The Biological medical service and in the distribution of jobs

Postulates of Population Study," was a model by labour exchanges, as well as the provision

of Nordic self-approbation, and since he was of child-allowances by individual towns, the

described by the Volkische Wille* as the institution of a family-allowance system for

President of the American Eugenics Society doctors and dentists employed in clinics, and

(a position which I can find no record of his the settlement of workers' families in newly

holding) his paper carried a good deal of built villages provided with small holdings

weight in Germany. The intellectual temper and allotments.

of the Conference was most clearly displayed Since, however, most of these measures

when Dr. Dalsace, a French delegate, read a did not come into force until late in I934,

paper against compulsory sterilization. It they could scarcely have had any part in

was almost followed by a riot, but still there raising the marriage- and birth-rates to the

was no discussion!

extent shown in Table I. The Act that has

probably had the greatest influence in that

THE STIMULATION OF MARRIAGE- AND direction is that of July I933 (coming into

BIRTH-RATES

force August I933) for the provision of

But now, since the main reason for my marriage loans. Under this Act, I50 million

visit to Berlin was to collect material on the marks per year are to be spent in giving loans

present population position in Germany, I to some 275,000 couples who wish to marry,

should like to give a very brief account of but who cannot themselves afford to furnish

recent developments. t Readers of the a home and buy the necessary household

EUGENICS REVIEW are aware that since equipment. The grant is obtained from

June I933, when Dr. Frick gave his address revenue raised by means of income-tax and

to the population and race-political experts the loans, which at the maximum are i,000

gathered together in Berlin, the German marks (the average loan for the period August

Government has initiated a large number of ist, I933, to February 28th, I934, was 620

measures to stimulate marriage- and birth- marks) are given in the form of coupons

rates in the country.+ These measures cover which may be exchanged at various shops for

a very wide field, ranging from such small certain kinds of household goods-furniture,

aids as the transference of mothers and linen, kitchen utensils, wireless sets, and so

expectant mothers to better-class railway forth.

carriages during the " rush hours," to important modifications in the inheritance THE INFLUENCE OF MARRIAGE LOANS

and income-tax laws in favour of large The idea of the Act is twofold-not only to

families. They include giving preference to encourage marriage, but also to withdraw

women from industry and commerce and so

* Vo5lkische Wille, September 5th, I935. t I must emphasize in advance that my analysis of
German population movements is by n,o means a

to provide more employment for men. In fact it is hoped that by this means 200,000

general criticism of the statements made by Dr. employed women will be replaced by men

Burgdorfer or by the government officials connected with the application of the various National-Socialist measures for encouraging population growth. On the

each year.* Consequently the loans are given only when the women to be married have

contrary, it is based largely on material which these been employed for at least nine months in

have kindly allowed me to use. All the officials admit explicitly that the increase in marriages and births in I933 and 1934 was due, to a significant extent, to

the previous two years.t Allthese regulations imply that, although no upper income limit

specially favourable circumstances. My criticism is concerned only with particular points of interpretation. * It is also hoped to stimulate the various household

+ " Ansprache des Herrn Reichsministers des Tnnern goods industries by confining the expenditure of the

Dr. Frick auf der ersten Sitzung des Sachverstandig- loans to products of these types.

beamts fur Bevolkerungs- und Rassen-politik am 28 t If the woman has been engaged in household tasks Juni I933 in Berlin." (Schriftenreihe des Reichsaus- at home, the grant of the loan is conditional upon her

schusses fiur Volksgesundheitsdienst, Heft I.)

replacement, when married, by a domestic servant.

2IO THE EUGENICS REVIEW

is stipulated, the Act applies only to the
working class and to the lower middle class ;*
it is important to bear this fact in mind when analysing the increase in births. The couples who borrow the money have to repay at the rate of i per cent. per month-no interest is charged-and an inducement to have children early is given by the clause that a quarter of the initial loan is cancelled with the birth of each child. Note also that the loans are to be discontinued at the end of I938, after which date repayments will be used to
provide various child welfare services.t
Returning to the population movements, the table below shows that the marriage-rate has risen almost continuously since the second quarter of I933, and that the birthrate has been rising since the first quarter of 1934. By the end of I934 there was an increase of 343,075 marriages as compared with I932, while during the same period the number of births increased by 203,3II. That is, the marriage-rate began to increase before the Act for providing marriage loans had actually come into force. The increase in births began considerably later, and the birth-rate for I933 was, in fact, lower than that of the previous year.+~
* Applicants must fulfil eleven racial, domiciliary,
and medical requirements. In particular they must be "Aryans " and have no taint of hereditary illness.
t For details of the various measures see Burgdorfer's Aufbau und Bewegung der Bev6lkerung, Section B,
Chapters I-III; Peretti, " Zusammenstellung der bevolkerungspolitischen Massnahmen in Deutschland" (Archiv fur Bevolkerungswissenschaft, August I935) Quante, " Das Einkommensteuergesetz von i6 Oktober 1934 und die familienpolitischen Fbrderungen" (Archiv, Jan. 1935); Klein, " Ein Jahr Ehrenpaten schaften der Stadt Berlin" (Archiv, March I935) Vermogensteuergesetz von i6 Oktober and Einkommensteueygesetz (both published by the Reichsfinanzministerium); also ErlUuterungen zum Gesetz iuber Forderung der Eheschliessungen (pamphlet issued by the Reichsminister der Finanzen, Feb. I935). It should be remembered that the race-biological motif runs through all these measures so that they apply only to " Aryans," and, further, only to those " Aryans" who are not carriers of an inheritable disease.
I Dr. Burgdorfer (" Der Kampf um die Wiedergeburt
des Volkes und seine Erfolgaussichten," A rchiv, October 1934) explains the low birth-rate of I933 as due to the decrease in the number of illegitimate births, which in turn was caused by the abnormally low number of females aged nineteen years. Legitimate births had only dropped from 864,379 to 856,ooo. But note that between August 1933 and January 1934 there were 13,603 loan-repayment cancellations in respect of the

TABLE I*

1933 Ist quarter 2nd ,,
3rd ,, 4th

Marriage- Index Live Birth- Index

rates per (Same rates per (Same

I,OOO total quarter of I,ooo total quarter of

population previous population previous

year = Ioo)

year=Ioo)

5 -8 93.5 15-2 95 9 7 ii6-9 14.9 97

9 7 13I-I I4-6 IOO

I13.5 142-2 14-0 99 3

Averageforyear 9 7 I22-8 14'7 97.3

1934 Ist quarter 2nd ,,
3rd ,, 4th

8-5 146-6 12-0 i23-7
0*9 I22 4
113'3 98-5

17-2 113 3 i8 i iir5 i8-3 I25-4 i8-6 I32-8

Average for year II I I II4-4 i8-o 122-4

The question is, what factors have been responsible for the change in the situation ? Dr. Burgdorfer's analysis at the Population Congress was as follows:
" This change is no doubt partly due to the various forms of State-action to encourage population growth. In particular the granting of marriage loans has stimulated the marriage- and birth-rates. Sixty per cent. of the increase in births comes from marriages which were concluded with the help of loans. But these external measures are not the sole reason for the change. The decisive factor is the new outlook brought about by the nationalsocialist revolution, the fundamental transformation of the political and intellectual (geistigen) atmosphere, the improvement in the economic situation, clearly shown in the fall of unemployment from over six millions to one and threequarter millions, in short, the return of confidence on the part of the people in the political and economic government of the nation."t
While it is impossible to subject all these suggestions to an exact scrutiny, some of them, at least, can be analysed more closely.
We must immediately acknowledge that

birth of children. But for the marriage loans some of these births would have been illegitimate, while others would have been prevented by abortion.
* The figures are from Burgdorfer's BevOlkerungsentwicklung im Dritten Reich, and the rates of increase have been computed from them.
t Burgdorfer, " Bevolkerungsentwicklung im abendlautischen Kulturkreis mit besonderer Beriicksichtigung Deutschlands." I have not been able to find statistics showing an improvement in the economic situation. Foreign trade has declined considerably, while the reduction in the unemployment figure is at least partly due to the transference of unemployed workers to
labour camps.

GERMAN POPULATION MOVEMENTS

2II

marriage loans have very probably played an important part in changing the position. For many members of the working-class and of the lower middle-class, a loan of i,ooo marks to be repaid in ten years is, if not a positive inducement, at least a factor helping to remove some of the barriers to an intended marriage. The effect is, therefore, to speed up marriages and thus also first births. But there are other points to be considered in this connection. In the first place we cannot say, as Dr. Burgd6rfer has done, that the loans are responsible for 6o per cent. of the increase in births. True, the couples who received loans produced I82,355 children between August 1933 and April I935, but there is no way of estimating how many of these children would have been born if there had been no loans. And secondly, we cannot tell how many marriages were only concluded because of the provision of loans, although there are two facts which throw some light on these problems.
OTHER FACTORS CONCERNED
The years I930 to I932 saw a marked falling-off in the marriage-rate, due partly, at any rate, to the economic depression. Taking into account the age-composition of the population and the marriage-rates in previous years, there was, by the end of I932, a deficit of some 330,000 marriages.* But most of these marriages had only been postponed, and Dr. Burgdorfer himself quotes the proverb, " Aufgehoben ist nicht geschoben." Even without the provision of loans there might, consequently, have been a considerable increase in the number of marriages in I933 and I934. There is no justification for saying that the increase of 343,075 marriages in I933 and I934 was entirely or even mainly brought about by the " Gesetz iiber Forderung der Eheschliessungen," merely because 366,I78 loans were granted in the same period.
The second fact is this: Dr. Griesmeier's investigation in Wiirttemberg shows that the increase in births which took place in I934 and I935 was common to all economic
* Wirtschaft und Statistik, 1934, No. 22.

classes, and not confined to those whose members received marriage loans. The birthrates by classes are given in Table II, and are calculated as the number of live births per I,OOO married men twenty to fifty years of age.*

TABLE II

BIRTH - RATES IN WURTTEMBERG IN I934 AND IST
QUARTER OF I935

(No. of Live Births per I,ooo Married Men aged 20-50 years in the following Classes)

Employed on Officials and

Own Account General

Salaried Class

1934

... ... 145 6

II8*I

1935 (Ist quarter) ... 163-7 I37'4

Workers
134*0 I52-0

In so far as it is possible to compare the whole of I934 with the first quarter of the next year, the rate of increase is greatest among the salaried class, not among the workers. Dr. Griesmeier maintains that in respect of employment and the age and sex composition of the population, Wiirttemberg is typical of Germany in general, so that it is probable that similar rates of increase are to be found in other parts of the country.

THE DECLINE IN ABORTION
Looking more closely at the general increase in births, we find that the decrease in abortion must have been a very important factor. The extent to which abortion has fallen off is indicated by the examples given in the tables below, and the fall must have been due in part, at least, to the granting of marriage loans.
Between August I933 and March I934 there were part-cancellations of loans in respect of the birth of 43,1OI children, who must have been conceived before marriage, and referring to this, an article in Wirtschaft uend Statistik (March 2nd, I935) acknowledges that " Ein gewiss nicht geringer Teil diesen Geburten durch Abtreibung verhindert worden waren, wenn die Eltern der Kinder nicht durch die Gewahrung von Ehestandsdarlehen in die Lage versetzt worden waren, zu heiraten oder ihr Heirat zu beschleunigen."

* Dr. Griesmeier, " Die Geburtenhaufigkeit in Wur-
ttemberg im Jahre 1934 und im ersten Vierteljahr 1935, nach Beruf und Soziales Stellung." Dr. Griesmeier very kindly gave me a copy of his paper.

c

2I2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE III

OUTLOOK FOR THE FUTURE

A. Berlin (Ortskrankenkasse)*

But whatever the reasons for the increase

Abortions per in births, the fact remains that the popula-

Normal Births

Known ioo Normal Abortions Births

tion situation in Germany showed a marked

1929

5,900

6,0O

I03 4

improvement in I934. In that year, for the

August 1934 1,464 46I 31 .5 first time since I926, the number of births

December 1934 February 1935 April I935

I,560
1,729
I,873

349 306 267

22.4 17.7 I4.3

was sufficient to maintain the population at its existing numbers. According to the

method which Dr. Burgd6rfer explained in

B.t his book Der Geburtenri2ckgang und seine

DRESDEN (Allgemeine
Ortskrankenkasse)

LUBECK (ortskrankenkasse)

BERLIN
(Kasse der Allgemeinen Elektrizitatsgesell-
schaft)

Bekdmnpfung (I929), the annual number of live births necessary for keeping a stationary population of 65 * 579 millions-the mid-year population of Germany in I934-is I*o72

8

8

.2 0~~~~~8~,

million.* Since the actual number of live births for that year was i * i8i million, a more

than adequate replacement had been pro-

vided.

But this does not mean that the potentially

fertile female population was replacing itself.

I930 3,685 2,244 6i 1,933 899 47 248 240 97 1931 2,902 I,694 58 r,728 878 51 178 I6i 90

On the contrary, a stationary population of 62*579 millions, given the mortality rates

1932 2,439 i,668 68 1,591 I,036 65 IO8
1933 2,304 1,329 58 I,568 749 48 8i
I934 3,090 I,179 38 2,126 7I4 34 2I7

95 88
85 I05
89 41

.shown by the I933 German Life Table, would contain only I4 I million women aged

I5 to 45 years, instead of the i6* II2 millions

To this extent, therefore, the marriage loans have had a positive success, particularly as they are reinforced by an increased severity in the application of paragraph 2i8 of the Criminal Code concerning abortion...

present in I934. Nor is there any assurance that the annual numbers of live births in the future will be sufficient even to maintain the I934 total population. Apart from the question of how much effect the government's measures have had and how long that effect

* Burgdorfer, Bev&lkerungsentwicklung im Dritten
Reich, p. 82.
t Table B is compiled from unpublished data kindly
provided by Dr. Burgd6rfer. Statistics of abortions in the period prior to I930 are given by Dr. Hertha Riese, " Abortion and Suicide in Germany " (193I Report of International Medical Group for Investigation of Contraception).

will last, there is the fact that the number of potentially fertile women is declining every year. So that to maintain a constant annual number of births means an ever-increasing
fertility-a state of affairs that is contrary to
the experience of the last sixty years.

t Oberregierungsrat Dr. Linden, of the Reichsminis- * See the I933 German Life Table, Sonderheft zu

terium des Innern, believes that anti birth-control Wirtschaft und Statistik, No. I5, pp. 62-3, and the

legislation will be passed in the near future.

Expectation of Life Table, p. 6o.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVII, No. 3&

