368 EUGENICS REVIEW.

prehistoric archaology there is room for much diversity of opinion, and

it is not to be expected that an author and reviewer should agree upon

all points. Nevertheless, the present writer can cordially recommend

the book to those who desire an introduction to these fascinating subjects,

indeed, he has already done so with happy results. As was to be

expected, the author has followed Penck in his co-ordination of certain

flint industries with particular phases of the glacial period, and has

adopted his estimated chronology. The reader should remember that

most French archaeologists make a different co-ordination-making

paleolithic man appear somewhat later-and are satisfied with a con-

siderably less antiquity. The author rejects the oligocene flints, but

accepts " eoliths " from the Upper Miocene at Aurillac, which, by the

way, are very different in type from the Kentish " eoliths." A brief

account is given of Klaatsch's ingenious plan of the origin and dispersal

of human races and apes, and it wisely concludes with the statement,

" It would be well, however, to take the theory, cum grano salis." The

book forms an excellent, short, popular, and up-to-date introduction to

our knowledge of palaeolithic man, and is adequately illustrated with

capital fizures.

A. C. HADDON.

Gluffrida-Ruggeri, DR. V. Homo Sapiens, Einleitung au einem Kurse

der Anthropologie. Wien u. Leipzig. A Hartleben; I9I2; price

5 marks; pp. i98.

THE author points out that zoologists seeking to explain the various pro-

cesses which have led to differentiation have found it advantageous to

draw their material from the greater divisions or families of the animal

kingdom. These processes are not manifested only in crude differ-

ences between relatively remote species, but rather persist throughout the

genealogical tree even to its ultimate ramifications. Hence the justifica.

tion for the examination of the differentiation of the primates from the

standpoint of their influence on the production of the forms of man, fossil

and living, as we know them at the present day.

Having set this ideal before him, Professor Giuffrida-Ruggeri seeks

to carry it out with the most painstaking thoroughness, with the result

that the volume ably summarises our knowledge up to last year, though it

must be admitted that the author's scholarship and immense special

knowledge, combined with an extremely condensed style, make the book

difficult reading.

It is only possible to touch on a few points which appear to be of

special interest in this country at the present time: The modern mathe-

matical school of biologists is perhaps treated rather summarily; it is,

however, all to the good that its exponents should be reminded of the

necessity that the factors which they introduce into their equations should

have been determined by previous biological analysis.

A good deal is said concerning the newer forms of polygenism which

have been promulgated recently by the author's countryman Sergi as well

as by Klaatch in Germany. With these views the Neapolitan professor

has no sympathy. Not only does he consider the derivation of the different

early stocks of mankind from gorilla-like and orang-like ancestors absurd,

but he refers to Keith's conclusions that there is nothing orang-like in the

Combe-Capelle (Aurignacian) skull, and substantially agrees with the

views set forth by von Luschan in a paper read at the Peace Congress- in

London two years ago. It is not then surprising that Tetraprothomo

and Diprothomo are not accepted, and it is impossible to avoid a feeling

of regret that Eoanthropus was dicovered too late to come in for the

author's careful, if sometimes caustic, discussion.

C. G. S.

Walling, WM. E. The Larger Aspects of Socialism. London. Macmillan and Co.; 1913; price 6s. 6d.; pp. 406.
MR. WALLING'S earlier book on " Socialism as It Is " aimed at giving a descriptive account of a movement which has attained large proportions

