REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

I67

risk of exciting interest just in those matters where it ought to be as long

as possible dormant, unless the teaching is assimilated to the general

teaching of the home.

Next, it should be recognised that the special instruction required

about the age of 12 is very little, but it should be quite plain and to the

point. Here, of course, a difficulty arises. The father does not know

what form of words to use. The best plan, therefore, is to choose a

short flyleaf or little pamphlet, such as those sold by the St. George's

Press, Dover, and for the father to give one to the boy to read in his

presence; and at the end all that is needed is to exact a promise that if

the latter gets into any trouble at school he will be sure and tell his

father at once; or, if he has any further questions to ask he will ask them

of him and not of his school-fellows. This is not a perfect system, but it

gets over many difficulties and is free of the danger of exciting undesir-

able interest or of wearying the mind, which very likely may be quite

unable to take any lengthy teaching in, or to keep it in its right per-

qnective_

E. LVTTETLTON.

Clouston, SIR T. Before I Wed. London. Cassell; I913; price 2S. 6d.;

pp. 130.

THIS book differs widely from many which we have read on the same sub-

ject. It is not an exhortation addressed to growing youths, but an essay

on the moral and scientific aspects of adolescence. The tone is elevated

and free from cant and professional jargon, and there are some statements

as to the effect of continence on health which, coming from an eminent

medical practitioner, are weighty and valuable.

It is, however, not easy to say for whom it is written. The author

as a rule shows himself too scientifncally minded to be able to handle the

subject with anything like burning conviction; or in the tone adopted

with striking success by the late Sir Andrew Clarke. And it is clear that

no other tone will have much effect on young men who are face to face

with sexual passions. There is something in these pages which smacks

far too much of the philosopher in his study when the need is for an

Apostle or Prophet. It is a disquisition, lacking in trenchant force and

directness, and not likely, we fear, to give much support to those who are

wavering on the edge of the precipice.

Mloreover, as a disquisition, it is inevitably exposed to the danger of

mixing up science, morals and religion. The prevailing tendency of all

such writing is either to utter familiar scientific truths well within the

domain of science, or to stray outside the limits and lay down propositions

which are either platitudinous or disputable, or unintelligible. Some of

each kind could be found in this book. On p. 30 we read " Science, no

doubt, points to repression being necessary under certain conditions and

from physiological, social, legal, ethical and religious motives." But if

it deals in any of the last four kinds of motive it ceases to be science.

Later on in the same page, what are we to make of the following:-

" Hence the value, if we are to understand the philosophy of marriage,

of studying its psychology and higher meaning and of tracing out every-

thing connected with it "? This is very loose writing and conveys no dis-

tinct meaning. On p. 42 an astonishing proposition is found. " This pro-

cess of strengthening inhibition . . . . should be the bed-rock of religion

and the chief aim of all religious teaching." Is it conceivable that this

statement is introduced with the words: " I would lay down the proposi-

tion on scientific principles that the chief aim of all education . ...

should be the strengthening of the power of inhibition "? But how can

scientific principles show what the bed-rock of religion is If, too, one

thinks what inhibition means, all precision of language is set at nought

when it is connected, as above, with religion. Indeed there is a great

deal of very confused thinking and writing all through the book. On

the other hand, a very prevalent kind of exaggeration is avoided in the

last chapter.

E. LYTTELTON.

