SOME ASPECTS OF WORLD POPULATION AND FOOD RESOURCES*

By LORD SIMON OF WYTHENSHAWE, LL.D.

I. INTRODUCTION

emotions have great importance. There are

T HE subject of my address today is the any amount of books generally either con-

race between world population and fidently optimistic or very pessimistic.

world food supplies. Nearly all the Most of the optimists base themselves on

countries in the world have normally aimed faith in the marvels of science. The wisest

at an ever-increasing population and an ever- and most experienced of the scientific opti-

rising standard of living. The West (Europe, mists is probably Sir John Russell, who, in a

North America and Oceania) has been re- bookt shortly to appear, examines the tech-

markably successful in this over the last nical possibilities of increasing food supplies

century or two, with the result that most of all kinds in all countries. He is optimistic

people believe that this happy state of affairs as to the possibilities of very large increases

can continue indefinitely.

if, and only if, human beings take something

For some months now a strong group of like full advantage of the scientific possibili-

PEP, of which I have the honour to be chair- ties.

man, has been studying this matter and has An American geochemist, Harrison Brown,

produced a Broadsheet-World Population in a new book The Challenge ofMan's Future$

and Resources. The group is producing a second Broadsheet giving its recommenda-

looks much further ahead than Sir John Russell and is very optimistic indeed that if

tions as to action in time to submit to technology continues to develop at an in-

the UN conference on population at Rome creasing rate and if full advantage is taken

in September; a few months after that we of the possibilities, almost anything can be

hope to publish a thorough and full-length achieved. For instance, he believes that in

report on the whole matter.

the long run it should be possible to produce

My address is based almost entirely on the on this earth twenty-five times the present

work of the PEP group, but I alone am re- weight of food, and in the ultimate analysis sponsible for the statements of fact and for he believes that a large human population

any conclusions in this article.

could live on the ingredients that can be

I should like to begin by paying a tribute obtained from the air, from sea water, and

to the United Nations. The work of their from granite; all present in permanently un-

special agencies, particularly the Population Division and the Food and Agriculture

limited supplies. On the other hand, Harrison Brown is exceedingly pessimistic about

Organization, in collecting and assessing the probability of human beings making

statistics from all over the world has provided the great bulk of the basic data on

any effective use of these breathtaking possibilities.

which our group has worked.

There is a considerable tendency among

laymen to accept the scientific possibilities

The Optimists

and to forget the human difficulties. For

There is a great and crucial race between instance, in November I953, Sir Winston

the increase of population and the increase of Churchill spoke as follows:

food supplies, and although the importance of the subject is not yet widely realized there
are many groups who are passionately concerned. It is a field in which for some reason

There is no doubt that if the human race are to have their dearest wish and be free from the dread of mass destruction, they

* A paper read at a members' meeting of the Eugenics

t World Population and World Food Supplies. Allen
& Unwin.

Society on May 26th, 1954.

New York. The Viking Press.

9I

92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

could have, as an alternative, what many and mineral resources and have imported

of them might prefer, namely, the swiftest much from other countries. The U.S.A. has

expansion of material well-being that has consumed far more. For instance, the Presi-

ever been within their reach, or even within dent's Material Policy Commission reported

their dreams.... These majestic possibili- in I952 that " the quantity of most metals

ties ought to gleam, and be made to gleam, and mineral fuels used in the U.S.A. since the

'before the eyes of the toilers in every land, first world war exceeds the total used

and they ought to inspire the actions of all throughout the entire world in all of history

who bear responsibility for their guidance. preceding I9I4."

There was a debate in the House of Lords on April 28th when a dozen peers made speeches on world population and resources. The tone was set by Lord Samu'el who quoted many cases where scientists hold out possibilities of large increases of food. He was very optimistic: he explained the facts about the large quantities of plankton in the sea and concluded that plankton " can be had for the asking." But in fact there is no certainty yet that it will ever be possible to collect it in large quantities at a sufficiently low cost.
It is true that with the help of the marvels of science and by bringing into cultivation the new lands of North America and Oceania, and others, the West has for 2oo years achieved a steadily rising standard of living while rapidly increasing its population. And I am afraid that the general effect of the House of Lords debate was to indicate
that not only could the West continue to enjoy an ever-rising standard of living, but that the other four-fifths of the world could in coming generations hope to have the same sort of experience which the West has had in recent generations.

Nature took perhaps 300 million years to build up the world's available resources of coal and oil. We in our Golden Age are likely to use them up in 300 years. Each year we are consuming what Nature took a million years to build. No wonder that our Golden Age is beginning to be called a " robber economy." The Golden Age cannot last; we in the West are giving no consideration to the standard of living even of our great grandchildren, let alone of our descendants a few thousand years hence.
Sir Charles Darwin does not believe that mankind will ever be wise enough to plan its population; he is therefore most pessimistic and gloomy about the future of the human race. We should all be grateful to him for his important and stimulating book but I hope that most of us will not agree with his pessi-
mistic conclusions, and that in this matter he may in the long run prove to be completely
wrong. Malthus was filled with gloom when he
wrote his famous essay about i8oo: he pointed out that population was increasing in geometric ratio whereas food could only increase in arithmetic ratio. The population

The Pessinists
That is the optimistic view of the possible future of the human race if peace prevails. Our President, Sir Charles Darwin, in his brilliant and suggestive book The Next Million Years* takes a very different view. He says that we are now living in a Golden Age, in which we are recklessly consuming the resources accumulated in the crust of the earth over the last 500 million years, and at the same time recklessly increasing the world population. We have in this country already used up a large proportion of our fuel

must - therefore inevitably' swamp food.
Malthus's much criticized use of the phrase " geometric ratio " for population- as it happens proved extraordinarily accurate for the
world as a whole. He wrote about i8oo; in
the three succeeding periods of fifty years world population increased by roughly 200 milion, 400 million and 8oo million, and it is likely that it may increase by about i,6oo million during the fifty years constituting the second half of the twentieth century. The increase before i8oo was about ioo million
in fifty years; it has almost exactly doubled in each of the four succeeding periods of

* Hart-Davis, 1952.

fifty years.

SOME ASPECTS OF WORLD POPULATION AND FOOD RESOURCES 93

Malthus was almost uncannily right about Director-General said in his foreword to the

the growth of world population in geometric I953 report: "If allowance is made for quality

ratio. But he was wrong about future food as well as calorie content, the average per

supplies for the West because he could not caput diets of North America, Oceania and

foresee either the great technical advances in Western Europe are something like two or

agriculture nor the immense quantities of three times those of most under-developed

food that would soon be available from the regions."

newly opened territories. Together these Which is right ? Churchill's gleam or

two factors have provided the West with Darwin's gloom ? That is what we are trying

ample supplies of food for the last century. to answer in our PEP report; that is the

The result of all this was that though in question which I am endeavouring to deal

the first half of the nineteenth century there with in a preliminary way today.

was much pessimism about food supplies and What I propose to do is to consider what

Malthus was held to be right, from about is called the " population cycle " in England

I850 onwards food was freely available. and Wales; how and why the population has

Most people have therefore assumed that grown during the last 200 years; and to show

Malthus was completely wrong and that the that there have been similar developments

food problem was solved once and for all. in nearly all Western countries. And then to

try to consider on the basis of this what has

The Food and Agriculture Organization

been happening and what is likely to happen

Although most people are still optimistic, in two non-Western countries, Japan and

realization of the difficulties of providing India.

food for the increasing population has been

growing rapidly in recent years. FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) may fairly be said to have been established in a spirit of
fine optimism as a result of the Hot Springs Conference in I943. " Recent discoveries and developments," it was declared, " have made it possible under certain conditions for all men and all nations to achieve freedom from
want.... The West is bound to move to-
wards new levels of well-being which men have hitherto thought unattainable."
Unfortunately, these hopes have been gravely disappointed. FAO were forced to
say in their I952 Food Survey that, so far from steadily rising standards of food " not only has there been an appreciable fall in the
average calorie supply of the world as a whole, but also the large gap between the better and worse fed nations has widened."
They add that " the Far East, with its immense population and acute under-nour-

II. THE POPULATION CYCLE IN ENGLAND AND WALES
During the last 200 years there has been an almost explosive increase in world population, especially in the West. Pethaps the easiest way of explaining what has happened and why is to describe what is called the population cycle. I propose to take the case of England and Wales, where the facts are available and as reliable as any.
The population cycle has four stages as shown in Figure i.
Stage i. Stage i represents' the normal state of mankind before the scientific and
industrial revolutions of the last 200 years; it was a period of high birth rates and high death rates, both about 35 per thousand, with very slow and irregular increase in population. We call this the " high fluctuating" stage of the population cycle.

ishment, remains the centre of the world food Stage 2. About I750 in England and

problem." In the last twenty years, while food Wales the death rate began to decline rapidly,

production in the Far East has increased very while the birth rate remained constant for

slowly, the population has increased by 24 another I30 years. In the latter part of that

per cent, so that the food production per period the birth rate was about 33 and the

head in I952 was only 83 per cent of what it death rate about 20, giving an annual excess

had been twenty years before. Indeed, the of births over deaths equivalent to about

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
THE POPU'LATION CYCLE ENGLAND AND WALES

STAGE I

STAGE

: STAGEiM

HIGH FWCTUATING'

EARLY EXPANDING

:LATE EXPANDING

(HIGH BIRTH AND DEATH (H 1611 BIRTH RATES. DECLINING DEATH RATES) (DECLINING BRH:

RATREAS)E)4400

' AND DEATH RPAES):

STAGE V LOW FLUCTUATIN6
(LOW BIRTH AND DATH
RATES)

.

----

-- BIRTH RATE

30a -DEATH RATE

RATE PER THOUSAND

.a

201 \,:,,,

.I

130 Y-EARS - POPL.liNCREASE 300%

o 50 YEARS 3
|(POPL.INCR.54°/O),

DATES 1750 POPULATION 6-5
( MILLIONS)

1800
94

I3 per thousand of the population. We call this the " early expanding " stage.
Stage 3. About the year i88o, the birth rate quite suddenly began rapidly to decline; 50 years later it had fallen by more than onehalf to about i6 per thousand. Meantime the death rate continued to decline to about I2 per thousand. We call this the " late expanding" stage in the population cycle.
During the 50 years the population increased by over 50 per cent.
Stage 4. Stage 4 is the " low fluctuating" stage, with births of about i6 and deaths

I850 1880 1900 1930 1950
Isl 26 .32-5 40 '4355
about I2. There was in England and Wales, as well as in all other Western countries, a baby boom after the war which did not last long; most countries seem now to have settled down to a rather steady and small increase in population. Except the U.S.A., where births are still surprisingly high.
It will be remembered that during the 'thirties it was feared that the fall in birth rate was such that before long the population would begin rapidly to decline: we should reach what might be called stage 5, the stage of declining population. This now seems

SOME ASPECTS OF WORLD POPULATION AND FOOD RESOURCES 95

unlikely, at least within the next generation, (g) By emigration to the empty lands,

according to the figures given by the Royal

specially North America and Oceania,

Commission on Population.

we were able to found the British

Empire, and to help to develop im-

Results of the Population Cycle in England

mense areas of fertile land.

and Wales

The result of all these factors added to-

There have in Britain been four major effects of the scientific and industrial revolutions:
(a) Owing to the fall in the death rate, the expectation of life at birth has increased from about 30 to about 70 years.
(b) Owing to the reduction in the birth

gether is that we managed to achieve over
200 years an ever-increasing population at an ever-rising standard of living. Our population was increased six times, our standard of living was also increased probably about six times. We have indeed lived through a golden age unapproached previously in history.

rate, the average number of children

per family has been reduced from

about 6 to about 2.2.

III. THE GOLDEN AGE OF THE WEST

(c) Owing to the time lag of I30 years in the beginning of the reduction of birth rates as against death rates, the population in i8o years has increased six times, and in addition a number equal to twice the population in I750 emigrated.
(d) Owing mainly to technical advances in industry and agriculture, there has been a steadily rising standard of living throughout the 200 years. It has been estimated that the standard of living in 1950 may have been about six times as high as that in 1750.

The population cycle throughout the West
has been generally similar to that in England and Wales, though of course there are all sorts of variations, mainly in what may fairly be called detail.
Why is this ? It is clear that the population cycle depends exclusively on two things: the decline in the death rate and the decline in
the birth rate, and in particular on the dates when these two movements begin, the speed with which they develop and the distance to which they go.
In the early stages the decline in mortality was started by changes in agriculture and

Reasons for Britain's Success

communications which improved food supplies both in quantity and quality and which

(a) Owing to our being an island we have rendered periods of dearth increasingly rare.

suffered no wars on our territory.

Later on, death rates were reduced further

(b) Being just off the coast of Europe, we by public health policies and the develop-

learned much from the craftsmen of ment of medical science, whici resulted in

the different Western European coun- particularly striking falls of mortality in

tries during the Middle Ages.

childhood and young adult life.

(c) We had command of the sea and a large The reasons for the decline in birth rate

merchant navy.

are complex and not fully understood. A

(d) We had already developed considerable major factor was no doubt that in primitive

capital resources.

days children were an economic asset to the

(e) We had ample supplies of easily access- family: as countries became wealthier and

ible coal and iron.

the period of education was extended, chil-

(f) As a result of these, and no doubt other dren became an increasingly heavy burden

causes such as the inventiveness and on the family budget. At the same time, the

enterprise of our people, we were the emancipation of women caused an increasing

first country in the world to develop an revolt against excessive domestic drudgery;

industry of importance based on power and whereas in early days it was necessary to

and technology.

have about six children if two were to

E

96 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

survive, this became gradually more and

IV. JAPAN

more unnecessary.

Turning now to consider the rest of the

From the point of view of population in- world, I should like to begin by referring crease the vital factor is the lag in the fall of very shortly to Japan as an example of a

births as against deaths. We have seen that dangerously over-populated country. Japan,

in England and Wales births only began to as an island off the coast of Asia, is in many

fall I30 years after the decline, in the death ways comparable to Britain. When the

rate had begun. The period varies, but in all country was opened in i868 the Government

Western countries the delay has been sub- decided to make every effort to adopt Western

stantial; least of all in France, where the methods of science and technology, to

early decline in birth rate greatly reduced the develop their industry, and their military increase in population, and indeed threat- strength. But Japan had great disadvan-

ened a declining population a generation ago. tages as compared with Britain. She was a

It should be noted that death control has hundred years later in entering the industrial

always been exercised by Governments; all field; she has an almost negligible amount

Governments have made efforts to secure of iron and only produces a fifth as much coal

health for their people. Birth control has in as Britain; there were no longer any empty

the past never been due to Governments: lands available to her for emigration. On

Governments have in the vast majority of the other hand, she had Western technology

cases either been neutral or have made efforts (already well developed) to draw on; she

to prevent it; and organized religion has tackled her problems with outstanding

almost invariably been against, sometimes energy, ability and efficiency.

very strongly against, any use of contracep- By I902 she was strong enough to make an

tive methods. Birth control has been ex- alliance on roughly equal terms with Britain.

clusively due to voluntary action by parents. She defeated the Russians and attacked

To sum up, during the last 200 years the China; by 1940 she dominated Korea, For-

West has taken full advantage of its oppor- mosa, Manchuria, Inner Mongolia and much

tunities. In Europe the population has been of North China. Her strong and ambitious

multiplied by about five or six. The West Government had worked steadily for indus-

has developed a very powerful technology trial development and military power and

which will undoubtedly become more and had managed to secure loyal and devoted

more effective; it has attained a very high support from the people. In seventy years

standard of living on the material plane. In Japan had made herself into a first-class

the West as a whole there are still consider- industrial nation and a very powerful one.

able reserves of land not yet completely It was a remarkable achievement, both

exploited, chiefly in the new countries; there industrially and militarily.

are in the world large reserves of minerals on Owing to her defeat in World War II,

which the West is likely to continue to have Japan has now lost the whole of her Empire.

the first call.

The population in the West is still increas- Population and Resources

ing at a relatively modest rate; the annual Japan's population increased between

increase is estimated at about seven per i868 and I953 from 35 million to 86 million:

thousand. The West has learnt to control two and a half times. This is about the same

both deaths and births, and any country that rate as the population of Britain increased in

really wanted to could prevent further in- the first century of her population cycle.

crease of population, or indeed could reduce Japan is approaching the end of her cycle;

the present population.

her death rate is about equal to the average

Given peace and a limited population, the Western death rate but her birth rate,

prospects for a steadily rising standard of which is declining rapidly, is still an inter-

living in the West alone would appear to be mediate one, giving an annual increase in

good for perhaps another generation.

population of 4i per cent or-if million people.

SOME ASPECTS OF WORLD POPULATION AND FOOD RESOURCES 97

To feed these people Japan has only I24 50 million and with fair prospects of a con-

million acres of cultivated land and in tinued rise in the standard of living. It is

addition3miUion acres of permanent pasture. impossible to see a corresponding future for

Seven and a half million acres of cultivated Japan: Japan is undoubtedly the most hope-

land are under rice and are so skilfully and lessly over-populated great and powerful

scientifically worked that they provide the country there has ever been. Warren

necessary calories forover six persons per acre, Thompson, a distinguished American demog-

at the Japanese level of about 2,000 calories rapher, wrote in June I949 (Hungry People

per person per day. In Britain, from each and Empty Lands, p. I27): " In my judg-

cultivated acre we feed one person at a ment there is no physical possibility of pre-

standard of living which, allowing for quality venting the crowded people of the world

as well as quantity, is probably about twice taking the empty lands sooner or later."

as high as the Japanese. In spite of the relatively small quantity of V. THE UNDER-DEVELOPED COUNTRIES

food consumed per head and of the great

-INDIA

intensity of their agriculture, Japan is forced The problem of population in the West is

to import considerable quantities of food. for the time being neither urgent nor very

There is no reasonable prospect either of important, at least as regards food. The

lowering the consumption per head or of position in the so-called " under-developed

increasing agricultural output substantially. countries," which include three-fifths of the

As her population increases she will be forced human race, is very different. The popula-

to import more or go relatively hungry.

tion problem in many of these countries is of

Population Policy

overwhelming and almost desperately urgent importance.

Up to Pearl Harbour the Japanese By " under-developed " I do not mean

Government aimed at a population of I00 people who are in any way inferior. From

million as being suitable for a strong imperial- the point of view of morals, culture and reli-

ist Power. After the war this policy was gion, they may be superior to us, but they

changed and the Government has encouraged have not gone through our two scientific

birth control. Owing no doubt to the great revolutions: first, the revolution of industry

difficulty of rapidly making birth-control and agriculture and public services-the

methods effective, it is understood that there revolution that leads to wealth; and

are about one million abortions every year; secondly, the medical revolution which leads

even so, the annual population increase re- to health. About half a billion of the world

mains at if million. Naturally the Japanese population have been through those two
desire emigration, but it seems very unlikely revolutions, but about one and a half billion

that any countries will be willing to people in the under-developed countries have

accept any substantial amount of Japanese hardly begun to enter into them.

immigration.

India is perhaps the best example to quote.

The only hope at the moment would seem One reason for this is that we have valuable

to be an immense expansion of industry in information about India in the first Five-

order to provide the exports necessary to pay Year Plan published in I952 and in the

for increased imports of food which are Registrar-General's Report on the I95I

needed to raise standards of nutrition to Census, which, after dealing with the Census,

those prevailing in the West. There can be makes a courageous forecast of the probable

no doubt that the greatest energy will be rate of increase of population and of avail-

devoted to this end.

able food up to I98I. These two documents

Britain has to import a much larger pro- show that India is tackling problems of the

portion of her food than Japan. She is doing greatest difficulty with outstanding courage

this without undue difficulty. She has settled and imagination.

down happily with a population of about The other reason is that India has a

98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

particularly difficult task in front of her in population has already created serious

endeavouring to apply modern science so as trouble. The population has increased during

to secure for her people health and wealth the last thirty years by 45 per cent, from 250

equal to that in the leading Western countries. million to 360 million, or by a total of no

India has just begun her population cycle. less than IIO million. The production of

The last thirty years in India correspond food has not increased at the same rate and,

roughly with the first thirty years of declin- as the Registrar-General points out in his

ing death rates which began in Britain 200 report on the I95I Census, the food consumed

years ago and required i8o years for their per capita has therefore been steadily de-

completion. But India suffers grave disad- clining.

vantages as against our position at that time. And the rate of population increase is still

First, she is very poor; her standard of living accelerating; it now amounts to nearly five

is substantially below what ours was in I750. million each year. If death control should

Secondly, her population is immense; fifty be made as effective in India as it has been

times what ours was at that date, and she has in Ceylon, the annual increase would be not

relatively little additional land which she can five million but ten million. But, without

bring under cultivation. Thirdly, there are allowing anything for this accelerated death

no empty lands in the world to which India control, even if birth and death rates pursued

can emigrate in large numbers as we emi- a course in India similar to what occurred

grated to the North American continent and not only in Britain but in all Western indus-

Oceania from I750 onwards. They have been trial countries, the population would, at the

seized by whites, and are not available for end of the 200-year period, be about I 2

coloured immigration. Fourthly, whereas we billion. It is obvious that widespread star-

have been able to buy all the food we have vation would begin long before such a point

needed from food exporting countries at was approached.

prices we could afford to pay, there is no such

prospect in front of India. Fifthly, in industrial development India has a far more

The Five-Year Plan

difficult problem than we had; she has to rn I952 Mr. Nehru introduced the first

compete against the very efficient leading Indian Five-Year Plan. Like all such plans,

Western industrial countries who have had a its main aim was to raise the standard of

long start.

living by planned development of industry

Finally, India's problem is made still more and agriculture and public services. But,

difficult by the fact that the one aspect of unlike any other country, the Plan then goes

Western science which can be most quickly on to deal with population problems, and

applied in under-developed countries is the states: " The recent increase in the popula-

control of death by medical and sanitary tion of India and the pressure exercised on

knowledge. Recent inventions like DDT the limited resources of the country have

and penicillin have in the last few years, brought to the forefront: the urgency of

helped by the UN technical aid service, pro- family planning and population control. The

duced most remarkable results. They are application of medical knowledge and social

already saving an untold number of lives and, of course, every Government is doing its

* Probably the most striking example has been the almost complete abolition of malaria in Ceylon by

utmost to continue and strengthen this good the use of DDT. Birth rates in Ceylon have not begun

work in its own country with a great deal of help from the West. But this means that the

to fall; the death rate has fallen in the last few years right down to the Western level. The result is that the population is increasing at the rate of about 2-7 per

East can reduce its death rate, with all these
advantages of modern science, much more

cent per annum, about double the maximum rate of increase which ever occurred in Britain; this means, if it continues, that the population would double in

quickly than the West was able to do one or thirty years. This flood of population is bound to

two hundred years ago.* The recent rapid increase in the Indian

face the Ceylonese Government with very serious and, indeed, insoluble problems unless birth control is effectively applied.

SOME ASPECTS. OF WORLD POPULATION AND FOOD RESOURCES 99

care has lowered the death rate while the food for so immense a population without

birth rate remains fairly constant.... Popu- lowering standards.

lation control can be achieved only by the The present level of food production in

reduction of the birth rate to the extent India is about 70 million tons annually. The

necessary to stabilize the population at a Registrar-General examines in some detail

level consistent with the requirements of what additional output can reasonably be

national economy...

hoped for in the next thirty years through

All experience shows that population in- great additional irrigation schemes, through

creases slow down only with the develop- better farming methods (use of fertilizers,

ment of industry, wealth, urbanization, better seeds, etc.), and by a large extension

education, and the emancipation of women, of the crop area through double cropping

and in a country like India the development and bringing waste lands under cultivation.

of industry is the essential basis of this pro- He comes to the conclusion that the maxi-

cess. But this process cannot be effective in mum additional food which can be produced

raising standards of living if the increase of in foreseeable time is 24 million tons, making

population swamps the increased industrial a total of 94 million tons annual output. This

output. As the chairman of the great Tata would be sufficient to meet the needs of a

Iron and Steel Company said at the annual population of 450 million, but not more. If

meeting in September I953:

this number is exceeded he warns that the

Our population is increasing at the rate food supply might break down as it did at

of nearly five million a year. Even if we the time of the Bengal famine in I943. He

sought only to maintain the existing popu- even talks of the possibility of " catas-

lation on its present low standard, we trophe " with " famine and epidemic dis-

would have to find work each year for an eases on the scale which prevailed in the last

additional two and a half million men and decade of the nineteenth century."

women. As the land is already overburd- He concludes that the twin policies of

ened with manpower, employment would economic development and reduction of

have to be found for them outside agricul- births must be simultaneously pursued. If

ture, i.e. in industry and services . . . the these two points are accorded equal priority

financial and other requirements would be and rank higher than all other development

well beyond our present means.

targets, they can be attained before the popu-

But if it were possible for the next lation increases beyond 450 million: the

twenty-five or fifty years to keep our total population will then become substanti-

population static or at least to reduce the ally stationary round about 450 million.

rate of its growth . . . the whole picture The Indian Government is, I believe, the

would change and every successive ad- first in the world to recognize, officially that

vance in our economic output would result rising standards of living and of health will

in some improvement in the living stand- only be possible if the population increase is

ards of our people.

limited. Mr. Nehru is certainly the first Prime

We are indebted to the Registrar-General Minister who -has said: " We would be a

for supplementing his I95I Census Report much more advanced nation if our popula-

with a full and authoritative discussion as to tion was about half what it is." Definite

how much the population is likely to increase steps towards this limitation are taken in the

in the next thirty years and what the Five-Year Plan; half a million pounds are

prospects are of providing enough food to provided to initiate the necessary action.

maintain the present standard of living.

The Indian Government has shown wis-

He estimates that if present conditions as dom and courage in introducing its compre-

regards food supply continue to prevail, the hensive first Five-Year Plan. Work on the

population will by I98I have increased from Plan has made a good beginning but the

360 million to 520 million, and he proceeds difficulties are immense and might well be

to consider whether India can provide the regarded as overwhelming.

ioo THE EUGENICS REVIEW

VI. CONCLUSION I am relatively new to this vast and baffling subject but certain conclusions of the first importance seem to me to emerge and I put them forward tentatively as purely personal views. 1. The World. The world population is just under 2 billion. If present increase of I3 per cent per annum continues, it will double in fifty-two years. World resources as regards land, minerals and fuels are all limited' Many of these resources are scarce ; all of them will grow scarcer as the population increases. Slower increase in population will giVe more time for technology to produce alternative supplies. There is no positive advantage in a larger world population; there are many disadvan-
tages. THE CONCLUSION IS INESCAPABLE THAT
EVERY EFFORT SHOULD BE MADE TO REDUCE
THE RATE OF INCREASE OF POPULATION, AND
IF POSSIBLE TO STABILIZE WORLD POPULATION
AS A WHOLE AT A REASONABLY EARLY DATE.
2. The West. The West is the great robber of Nature's reserves; the lower the total population of the West, the longer the reserves will last. I believe that the aim of the West should be to stabilize the population in all countries at reasonable levels; taken as a whole, perhaps the wisest policy might be that the population of the West should be stabilized at about the present level.
3. The Good Life. Hitherto I have only considered the desirable size of population in relation to the standard of living and military strength. But there are other considerations. Dr. Bertram has said: " Many feel that material wealth and power afford an incomplete and inadequate basis for human advance. What is the ultimate goal of man on earth? Many people will agree that it is a state of affairs in which every individual shall have the opportunity to develop to the full all the talents with which he is endowed, physical, mental and spiritual. This may well affect the desirable population. For instance, many persons will always demand opportunities for solitude."
4. The Under-developed countries. India, like every under-developed and overcrowded country, faces a task of the utmost difficulty

to achieve Western health and wealth. At the
best it will certainly take several generations.
India is tackling the matter with energy and imagination. There are three main lines of attack. May I consider in conclusion how
far the West can help with each of these?
(a) The first line of attack is to increase the production of agriculture and industry. The West is already helping by technical
assistance and by capital loans; I hope that it will be possible to increase this help.
(b) Death control, or the improvement of health, has made a substantial beginning.
Western science and "know-how" is fully available; much remains to be done among
the half-million villages of India. (c) If death control is increasingly success-
ful, the population will increase more and
more rapidly unless birth is correspondingly controlled. Death control without birth con-
trol, as the Registrar-General of India pointed out, would lead to catastrophestarvation and epidemics.
Birth control is without doubt the most
important and difficult of the three tasks before the Government of India. Can Western science help to achieve more effectively planned parenthood in India ? Western countries have been successful in balancing death control with birth control, but the methods suitable to the West are not suitable for the Eastern peasant woman; they are expensive and need educated skill and care.
It is widely agreed that what is needed more than anything else is the " perfect pill "; a pill which taken orally by a woman will prevent conception for a month or perhaps a longer period. To be widely used, it must be very cheap and must, of course, not be harmful in any \way. Nobody knows whether such a pill can be produced, but there is increasing confidence among authorities in the U.S.A. and Britain that, if tackled energetically by the ablest physiologists with ample means for large-scale research, there is a good chance that the problem would be solved in a few years. Nothing else we can do in the West would be of anything like equal value to the crowded and underdeveloped countries of the world compared with success in this research.
Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 2

