372 EUGENICS REVIEW.
even very lowly organisms profit by experience and by habit perfect their structure. Similarly in development, the racial habit of developing in a certain way enables the embryonic organism to pass through in a few days or months stages which took aeons to evolve, and the earlier stages, in which the habit is most firmly fixed, are those which are passed through most rapidly and regularly. Such a conception of heredity, of
course, involves the assumption of the inheritance of acquired characters, but it is pointed out that direct evidence for the inheritance of such characters would of necessity be extremely difficult to obtain, since " we should not expect any clear manifestation of such heredity till the functions that have led to structures have passed far beyond the initial stage where conscious control is essential to their performance." A considerable part of the lecture is devoted to a refutation of Weismann's arguments, and it is unfortunate that such recent work as that of Kammerer and Tower is not mentioned in this connexion. Nor is there any mention of Mendel, a serious omission in a lecture which is in essence a protest against the purely mechanical interpretation of inheritance so much in vogue in recent Mendelian speculation. If the modern student of heredity is to be convinced that organic inheritance is a process akin to habit and memory, he must be shown how Mendelian segregation and its probable relation to the pairing and separation of chromosomes fit into the mnemic scheme. That they may so fit in is quit-e possible, but a work dealing with the subject which does not even mention the problem cannot fail to leave some sense of disappointment in the reader.
LEONARD DONCASTER.
Davenport, CHARLES B. State Laws Limiting Marriage Selection,
Examined in the Light of Eugenics. Eugenics Record Office. Bulletin No. 9. Cold Spring Harbour. June, 1913; price 40 cents.; pp. 66. THE author classes the laws limiting marriage selection under three heads: (i) "Laws limiting the mental and physical condition of the
consorts; " (2) " Laws limiting consanguinity in marriage; " (3) " Mis-
cegenation." His method of examining them " in the light of eugenics " is to describe the results of a few matings of the kind prohibited in one State or another. It is, of course, impossible to arrive at a satisfactory answer to the question whether such marriages should be permitted or not by such a method, and indeed no very definite conclusions are arrived at. On the whole, Mr. Davenport does not appear to favour eugenic restrictions in marriage, but he opposes them principally on the ground that they are likely to be ineffective, even where they are biologically justifiable. Nevertheless, he outlines an elaborate and expensive scheme for State eugenic control of marriage which involves the employment of three sets of officials: (i) A State Eugenics Board, consisting of " a trained biologist, a general practising physician of experience, and a general practitioner of law of broad experience." These should be whole-time officers. (2) State official physicians, of whom in a State like New York there should' be about 500. Marriage licenses would be issued by these after an examination of the physical condition and family history of the applicants. (3) The field workers, whose duty would be to investigate family histories under the direction of the physicians. The Bulletin concludes with a useful appendix, which gives a digest of State laws limiting marriage selection up to April, I913.
PonsonbY, ARTHUR, M.P. The Decline of Aristocracy. T. Fisher
Unwin; 1913; 7s. 6d. net; pp. 320. MR. PONSONBY has selected an interesting object for his latest book. His treatment of the matter is thoughtful and suggestive; it is clearly the result of wide experience and careful observation. The early chapters

