REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

137

March, NORAH H., B.Sc., M.R. SAN. I. Towards Racial Health: A Handbook for Parents, Teachers and Social Workers on the Training of Boys and Girls. With a Foreword by J. Arthur Thomson, M.A., LL.D. George Routledge and Sons, Limited; 1914; price 3S. 6d.; PP. 326.
THIS is the kind of book for which many have been waiting. Thousands of parents, teachers, and others have recognised the imperative duty of training boys and girls for parenthood, and safeguarding the difficult years of adolescence by " moral education." Some have begun the taskhaltingly and painfully; others have shirked it; all have felt the need for more efficient guidance than they have hitherto found. Such people will be deeply grateful for Miss March's book.
Her theme is sex-education and education for parenthood. She endeavours to show that such education involves much more than merely the giving of information; it means careful intellectual, moral and spiritual training. She suggests how this may be given. While not professing to be an exhaustive treatise on pedagogy, ethics or biology, the book will be found a sufficient guide for any person of ordinary education who wishes in this respect to do the best for the young people in his, or her care.
There are two excellent chapters on Nature study and biology to illustrate the contention that the child should be shown the universality of the racial powers and should be led to "realise that each organism is, in a sense, the trustee only of the spark of life." Early teaching is advocated, and there are hints about how to answer the questions of very young children. No undue stress is laidi on biology. The chapters on Ethical Training, Education for Parenthood, and Social Safeguarding, show not only a wide range of reading, but a discriminating judgment and a sympathetic understanding of many aspects of the problem. Indeed, the special value of this book is that it recognises so fully the complexity of the subject, and gives helpful suggestions on many sides, instead of laying undue stress on any one nostrum. The writer takes the Christian standpoint, and shows where and how the religious appeal may be related to the whole teaching, but this is not allowed to dwarf other aspects, and the book will be equally valued by those who, do not use that appeal.
Where there is so much to praise it seems ungracious to blame, but it is only fair to warn readers that the workmanship is on a lower level than the plan and purpose of the work. The style has no literary merit, and is often slipshod, while the author is too fond of coining unnecessary words, such as "youth-hood," which occurs with distressing frequency. These defects take away from the reader's pleasure, but they rarely, if ever, obscure the meaning. The book can be heartily recommended to those who can appreciate solid work in spite of faults of manner.
HELEN WILSON.
Redfleld, CASPER L. Dynamic Evolution: A Study of the Causes of
Evolution and Degeneracy. New York and London. G. P. Putnams Sons; 1914; price 6s. net; pp. 2IO. THE author starts from the position that " scientists think they believe in evolution, but they really believe in special creation," that is to say, if man has been evolved from Protozoan ancestors, something new has been created, and not merely unfolded from among the latent capabilities of the Protozoan. His line of argument is that all capabilities are energy, and that what has happened in evolution has been the storing up of energy at higher and higher potential, and the object of the book is to set forth how this has been brought about. The result is very disappointing. In the first place, the writer does not seem clearly to understand what the physicist means by energy. The statement (p. 7) that "the amount of work performed by the energy is K= FVT, in which F is the force which

138 EUGENICS REVIEW.

acts to overcome resistance, V is the velocity of the force, and T is the

length of time that the force F continues to move at the velocity V," is

not completely satisfactory, nor is the matter elucidated by saying (p. 3)

that "energy is the same thing as the Philosopher's First Cause, and

includes what the theologians personify as God and Devil." But the

fundamental fallacy of the argument is that because one organism can

expend more energy in a given time than another, therefore the first has

more energy, or energy at a higher potential, than the second. The horse

which can trot a mile in two minutes is compared with radium, in that

both exhibit an unusual power of expending energy, which requires

explanation. But the analogy clearly illustrates the fallacy, for radium,

as far as we know, contains no more energy than such an inert metal as

gold; it differs, not in its stored energy, but in its power of giving it up.

So the two-minute trotter need not have any more energy than the cab-

horse; it differs in being able to use it. Most of the book is devoted to a

study of the ancestry of trotting horses, dogs, cattle, and distinguished

men, which, the author maintains, proves that offspring born at the time

when the parent has accumulated the greatest store of energy, themselves

start life with the greatest amount, though it is difficult on physical

grounds to see how a spermatozoon can contain any considerable portion of

the energy stored by the father. The treatment of statistics is far from

satisfactory, and though the tables as they stand bear out the author's con-

tention that sons of older fathers and grandfathers have greater ability

than those of younger, it is doubtful whether with other treatment a

different result might not be reached.

L. DONCASTER.

Conklin, EDWARD GRANT, Professor of Biology in Princeton University.
Heredity and Environment in the Development of Men. London. Humphry Milford and Oxford University Press; price 8s. 6d.; pp. 49'. PROFESSOR CONKLIN'S book is of the semi-popular order, and is apparently designed to acquaint the ordinary educated reader not specially versed in biology, with the results obtained by biological science which bear on heredity and on the nature of man. The style is admirably clear, the language is as far as possible non-technical, and it is plentifully adorned by Biblical extracts. Nevertheless, the contrast between this book and Dr. Doncaster's work, which we have just reviewed, is profound. Foir whereas Dr. Doncaster puts before us the arguments in favour of and against every point which he makes, so that to read his book is to obtain an education in scientific method, Professor Conklin, who is an ardent believer in Weismann and Mendel, asserts views in a most dogmatic way on matters about which scientific opinion is sharply divided. Our hair fairly stands on end when we find, in the second chapter, that he calmly settles that profoundest of all questions, viz., the relation of body and mind and dismisses mind as being related to body as function is to structure. Then when Professor Conklin asserts that Weismann " for ever disposed of theories of pangenesis and the like by showing that germcells are not built up by contributions from the body and that characters are not transmitted from generation to generation, but on the other hand that there is transmitted a germ-plasm which is relatively independent of the body," we venture just as strongly to assert that Weismann proved absolutely nothing. He strove to impose a theory on biology, and almost at every point where he descended to details and where his theory could be tested it broke down; its utter inadequacy may be seen in Weismann's attempt to explain by it the phenomena of regeneration. To assert further, as Professor Conklin does, that the germ-cells produce the body, but that the body does not give rise to the germ-cells, is either to quibble or to go beyond the evidence. The germ-cells produce the body of the succeeding generation, and part of this body consists of the succeeding

