THE PRESS AND EUGENICS: A REVIEW OF REVIEWS

By C. P. BLACKER

T HE following pages consist mainly of which (at this stage) Mr. Lidbetter draws

extracts from reviews which have from his materials, there is very little to

appeared in the Press of Heredity and provoke dissent."

the Social Problem Group and The Chances of New Statesman: The reviewer, Mr.

Morbid Inheritance, two books for the pro- Harry Roberts, an unfriendly critic of

duction of which the Society made itself eugenics, says: "The family histories that

responsible. I have not followed the usual take tlip the greater part of the volume repre-

practice of publishers of quoting only favour- sent much care and labour. The investiga-

able comment; on the contrary, I have tried tions on which they are based were carried

to give a fair impression of the reception that on in a particular area in the East End of

was given to these books by the Press. In London, where Mr. Lidbetter was, from I898

connection with reviews of The Chances of to I930, engaged in the organization and

Morbid Inheritance, which I edited myself, I administration of relief services. Further

have drawn attention to comments made volumes are promised, and Mr. Lidbetter

by reviewers on the separate contributions reserves his final summing-up and conclusions

which make up the book, in the hope that until the end of the work. Those who are

these may be of interest to contributors interested in the relation of poverty to bio-

themselves, all of whom are members of the logical inheritance should study these facts

Consultative Council of the Society.

and figures; but they should study them

critically and impartially."

Heredity and the Social Problem Group

Week-End Review: "A good deal of the

The reviewers of Mr. Lidbetter's book all prejudice against the organized eugenic

pay eloquent and appreciative tribute to movement is due to a suspicion that many of

the thoroughness of his investigation. Many its leaders are actuated by smugness rather

quote extracts from Major Darwin's intro- than by science. Rich people are apt to think

duction and several have drawn attention to that they owe their material privilege to the

the fact that in this volume Mr. Lidbetter possession of superior qualities of mind and

has confined himself to presenting the facts character; and, consequently, that poverty

and to pointing out that the interpretations is but a symptom of mental and social in-

placed upon these facts are destined to appear adequacy. Many observers who, though

in subsequent volumes.

themselves socially privileged, have had long

Birmingham Post: "The publication and intimate experience of working men and

bears the imprimatur of a Research Com- women, have come to a different conclusion.

mittee of the Eugenics Society, and is there- . . .In spite of suggestions implicit in the

fore assured in advance of the unfriendly introductory chapters, it should not be

criticism of some who, paying little heed to assumed that the collector and compiler of

the actual pleadings of eugenists, remain these interesting statistics has any class or

satisfied that by no manner of means can the economic bias. He specifically states that the

policy of sterilization free this country from present work' aims at putting into the hands

the burden of responsibility for the unfor- of those interested some facts from which in-

tunate, falsely labelled the unfit. Yet it ferencesandconclusionsmaylaterbedrawn."'

contains a mass of laboriously collected The Spectator: " Mr. Lidbetter has had

information, worthy of the closest study. exceptional opportunity for carrying out the

And in the few and general conclusions investigations he has undertaken, seeing that

207

208 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

he was for many years an official of an East latter case. In several of the pedigrees given

End Poor Law Authority and his industry in this book it is shown that parents who

equals his opportunity. But figures and have been dependent to a considerable extent

'plain facts' can be very deceptive things; upon public maintenance have produced

and in looking through these genealogical children, many or all of whom have grown up

trees and author's notes, the critical reader to be in their turn dependent upon public

finds himself again and again wondering if funds. Bad stock or bad start ? Or both?

the influence of heredity and that of environ- In this preliminary volume no attempt is

ment are quite so dissociate as would here made to assess the relative parts played by

appear to be assumed."

heredity and by environment. In later

Western Mail: The reviewer, Dr. P. K. volumes, we gather, an attempt will be made

McCowan, the Medical Superintendent of the to do so."

Cardiff Mental Hospital, and a well-known Municipal Review: " No conclusions are

psychiatrist, writes: "That heredity plays drawn in this book, but the facts collected

an important part in mental disease and from the history of generations of certain

mental deficiency is well known, but the families are given with elaborate charts, and

author's pedigrees cannot be regarded as should be of incalculable value to all who are

being a serious contribution to this subject. interested in such questions as the connection

In fact, if the pedigrees were regarded as between public assistance and mental dis-

accurate pictures, far from supporting the ability and the problems associated with

thesis of the author they would be strong fertility in these groups."

evidence against the importance of heredity The Lancet: "The pedigrees here pre-

in mental disease.... While it is essential to sented form only an instalment of the work,

study this work in a critical manner, nothing and for the discussion of the many problems,

can detract from the importance of the facts which the investigation raises, we are rightly

submitted, and it is certain that we have here bidden to wait for its completion. For the

a valuable contribution to sociology. Its present Mr. Lidbetter is content to present a

counterpart does not exist elsewhere, and the sample of his material and to direct some

evidence it provides renders it of importance attention to its high lights. This sample

to everyone concerned with the various is, however, sufficient to demonstrate the

social services and the study of population patience and industry which he has brought

in general."

to bear on a most formidable task, and to

Newcastle Journal: The reviewer, Mr. give promise of the development of a rich

Henry A. Mess, writes: " Pronounced source of information."

physical or mental defect leads very naturally Journal of Education: "These pedigrees,

to chargeability on the rates. But how far is notwithstanding that cautious exclusion of

chargeability in general due to poorness of doubtful cases obviously produces an under-

stock, and how far is it due to circumstances, statement, show unmistakably that every

especially to repetition over several genera- now existing defective in them has defectives

tions of similar bad environment?

among his or her ancestry; and the mode of

Nervous instability may be, and probably occurrence of these " blots " in the pedigree

is, part of the hereditary make-up, but its charts is sufficiently in accord with genetical

manifestations can be greatly aggravated theory to justify the belief that heredity is

in a new generation by a childhood spent in responsible, that the defects are innate and

a home where explosions of temper and other not due to environmental conditions."

forms of defective self-control are frequent The Times Literary Supplement: " If we ac-

and contagious. It is hard to disentangle cept the repeated asseverations of the author,

family heredity and family tradition. Yet it and of the editor of this book, that it is to be

is important to do so, if possible; for in the regarded as a collection of data, ' from which

former case the entail cannot be broken, no attempt to draw general conclusions ' has

whilst it may be, though not easily, in the been made, the title is a little unfortunate.

THE PRESS AND EUGENICS: A REVIEW OF REVIEWS

209

It will certainly prejudice many readers, who Medicine for Women: " A remarkably inter-

will naturally be led to assume that, in the esting symposium ... the various chapters

opinion of the writer, it is to inherited defects cover a very wide field."

of mind or body we should look for the chief University of Durham College of Medicine

explanation of that mass of poverty with Gazette: " Heredity in disease is becoming of

which the Poor Law has hitherto been con- increasing importance. This book will prove

cerned. Mr. Lidbetter's volume is neverthe- of the greatest importance to those doctors

less of very high value, presenting us as it who are asked for a prognosis as to the

does with a large body of relevant facts, chances of a disease being inherited."

evidently collected with great care, and at the The Student: Referring to the questions

price of great labour."

which the book is designed to answer, the

Church Times: " The book is not likely reviewer says: " Under a somewhat depress-

to appeal to the general reader because of its ing title, and interrupted by many almost

technical character, but it is a valuable work unintelligible charts (for so they seem until

of reference for students of sociology and the pages of explanation are consulted) this

eugenics."

book contrives to answer the above questions.

Taken all over, it is a book for the older man,

The Chances of Morbid Inheritance

who has had a good deal of experience in

The Times Literary Supplement: "There practice, and who can correlate his own notes

has been much loose and ill-informed with the findings expressed in the book rather

speculation about the whole subject [of than for the student whose mind is already

eugenics] and all sorts of drastic proposals overburdened with 'essentials.' "

for racial improvement have been advanced King's College Hospital Gazette: "As the

on this basis of comparative ignorance. The only authoritativeandcomprehensiveworkon

reputation of eugenics has thereby been the subject, this book is undoubtedly admir-

seriously injured; and many by no means able and should be in every medicallibrary for

complacent or narrow-minded people have purposes of reference. But our one criticism

come to suspect all proposals put forward by is that while the subject obviously does not

professed eugenists. This book should do lend itself to brief and dogmatic statement,

a good deal to put the science and the socio- it seems a pity that such knowledge as has

logical speculation based on it on a much been gained would not have been presented

more secure footing." Professor Hogben's in simpler and cheaper form, more suitable

appendix is speciaUy commended.

for the study of the general practitioner,

Cambridge University Medical Society Mag- whose time for reading is often limited, and

azine: " The book is absorbingly interesting upon whose co-operation depends largely the

and should prove of great value to medical advance in our knowledge of the subject."

men. The paper, printing and charts are London Hospital Gazette: " It is unfortu-

excellent, and the volume can be strongly nate that the subjects of tuberculosis and

recommended."

malignant disease are not more fully treated,

Queen's Medical Magazine: "Altogether a for they are the things about the inheritance

very complete work on a subject whose im- of which the general practitioner may most

portance has considerably increased during often be asked." The reviewer praises Prof.

the last few years." The reviewer also says: Ruggles Gates's chapter on "Genetic

" Neoplastic diseases which have always Principles."

commanded a considerable degree of investi- Manchester University Medical School

gation with regard to inheritance are dis- Gazette: " There is a very interesting chap-

cussed in a most convincing style."

ter on Tuberculosis and Heredity, wherein

Post Magazine: The book "will be of the author discusses the question of inheri-

interest to the student of life assurance who tance of susceptibility.... It [the book] con-

has passed beyond the elementary stages." tains much valuable information but above

Magazine o/ the London (R.F.H.) School of all it stimulates the doctor to take an interest

2IO THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in diseases and defects of an hereditary book is intended, will be thankful for a most

nature. . . . A book which is well worth useful addition to medical literature." Pro-

reading."

fessor Ruggles Gates's " chapter " is praised.

The Lancet: "As placing before the prac- Nursing Notes and Midwives' Chronicle:

titioner a readable and useful account of the The review is mainly devoted to a series of

subject, the book must be warmly com- favourable comments on Dr. Henry Herd's

mended." But the reviewer draws attention article on the inheritance of mental deficiency.

to differences of opinion between contribu- University of Leeds Medical Society Maga-

tors (notably in connection with the " law zine: " It was with pleasurable anticipation

of anticipation "), and to the loose usage of that we commenced this book and with

such terms as " positive family history." He appreciation and few disappointments that

also makes two small criticisms of the chap- we perused it. Among much which is excel-

ter on Genetic Principles. Critical comments lent, we would specially commend the open-

are further made of the articles on hereditary ing chapter on genetic principles and those

diseases of the thyroid, and on hereditary dealing with the nervous system, mental

gastro-intestinal diseases on the grounds disease, diseases of the blood and skeleton.

that: " although Gates and Hogben make it ... That there should be some disagreement

perfectly clear that Mendelian inheritance is between different writers upon a subject so

to be the basis of discussion, the views of complicated is not to be wondered at. For-

some of the later contributors on the nature tunately, this does not materially affect the

of heredity seem to be somewhat confused." authority of the book, which is a mine of in-

The confusion seems to reside in the fact that formation presented for the most part in an

they discuss heredity without reference to extremely readable and simple form. The

Mendelism. The review ends with the . . .authors are to be congratulated upon

words: " To those who are prepared to work this work."

warily, the volume provides a mass of inter- Nature: The review is signed with the

esting and useful information. It should do initials of Professor J. B. S. Haldane, who

much to stimulate the interest of medical selects for special commendation the article

practitioners in the problem of heredity." on hereditary cardio-vascular disease by Dr.

Dr. Witts's article on hereditary diseases of Maurice Campbell. But criticisms are made

the blood is especially singled out for warm of the articles on genetic principles, heredi-

praise.

tary diseases of the eye, skin and skeleton,

The Medical Press: "The publication of and of that on the inheritance of tuber-

this book is most opportune at the present culosis. Professor Haldane says: " When

time, when the whole question of eugenics is all criticisms are made, those chapters whose

interesting the public at large.... Genetic authors, instead of writing essays on heredity

Principles are discussed at length by Pro- and environment, devoted themselves to

fessor Ruggles Gates, and no one in this giving facts on which a prognosis can be

world could have dealt with these in a more based, are a valuable collection of data,

masterly fashion.... An excellent appendix enormously superior to that of Bauer,

and a glossary of genetic and psychiatric Fischer and Lenz. . . If a second edition is

terms are included at the end of th-e book. called for, we may hope that some of the

This is a book of which the Eugenics Society mistakes will be corrected and the deficiencies

may well be proud." The chapters by Drs. made up, in which case the value of the book

Russell Brain, G. Bray and R. D. Lawrence will be very greatly increased."

are singled out for praise.

Bulletin of Hygiene: The review is

Charing Cross Hospital Gazette: "It is signed by Professor F. A. E. Crew, who

unfortunate that disagreement is so pro- writes: " The book is undoubtedly the best

nounced between various contributors on of its kind. It may be looked upon as the

points of similarity. Nevertheless, apart first of a long series of editions, each one of

from this, the practitioner, for whom the which in turn will mark the advance of the

THE PRESS AND EUGENICS: A REVIEW OF REVIEWS

2II

science of human genetics, a science that is laborious research which have been expended

bound to grow as its importance becomes in its making. It is freely admitted that there

increasingly recognized. It would be quite still remains many gaps in our knowledge,

impossible at the present time to improve and some of the authors' conclusions and

upon it." (While deeply appreciating the deductions are perhaps not beyond cavil.

judgment contained in the last sentence, I With the increase in our knowledge of

would be a happy man indeed if I could genetic principles, it is only natural to expect

agree with it!)

in future that the practitioner will be called

The Journal of the American Medical upon more frequently to give a genetic

Association: "This compilation, by eighteen prognosis-to advise regarding marriage

English writers, is a distinctly valuable con- and procreation, and in this book he will

densed reference book which should be highly find an excellent guide. The difficulties in

useful to physicians confronted with pro- obtaining an accurate pedigree will be

blems in genetics and faced with the necessity accentuated in this country, where such a

for giving advice as to marriage and pro- large proportion of the population have

creation under circumstances that may well distant and often quite unknown relatives.

prove disastrous for adviser and advised The pedigree schedule is simple and easily

alike if the advice is not based on demon- understood. As a work of reference this book

strated scientific facts as well as on common should be in every modem medical library."

sense.... The book is well written. The Glasgow Medical Journal especially praises

judicial approach of the writers to disputed articles by Professor Ruggles Gates, Dr.

or obscure questions is notable throughout. Lewis and Dr. Herd. It ends by saying that

Excellent bibliographies follow the several " every doctor, be he General Practitioner,

chapters. It is a serviceable and constructive Public Health Worker or Consultant, will

contribution to the literature of applied read this book with profit and not a little

genetics."

interest."

The Canadian Medical Association Journal: Edinburgh Medical Journal: "The role of

"This book aims to give the physician a genetics in racial betterment is one of the

basis for understanding the laws of heredity, most important questions of the day, and to

and for dealing with the questions of his have all the information at present available

patients as to the chance of transmitting made so easily accessible is a great boon.

defects to their offspring. The section deal- The swing of the pendulum is towards a

ing with hereditary diseases of the nervous more intensive consideration of hereditary

system is excellent, as is the section on the principles from a practical rather than from

theoretical considerations of inheritance. The an academic angle; we cannot afford to

chapters on mental disease, mental defect, accept heredity in a fatalistic deterministic

and tuberculosis handle very fairly the con- spirit, but must develop a wider viewpoint

troversial matter involved in a discussion and a constructive programme. A book such

as to the relative merits of environment and as this is educative and will be of inestimable

heredity in causing these conditions."

value in stimulating interest in a subject

The reviewer criticizes the book for which for far too long has been neglected.

omitting an account of anomalies of meta- It should be read and carefully studied by

bolism and of blood-grouping. He criticizes every member of the medical profession."

the chapters upon the inheritance of skeletal Bristol Medico-Chirurgical Journal: " This

defects and of neoplasms.

appears to be the first serious attempt, by a

The New Zealand Medical Journal: "The series of specialists, to put before the general

aim of this book is to place in the hands of practitioner a synopsis of the knowledge

the practitioner a study of the inheritance of necessary to deal with the not infrequent

the more common hereditary diseases. No requests made by the public for eugenic

one can read the book without appreciating prognosis. The intelligent layman is defin-

the enormous amount of work, study and itely beginning seriously to consider the effect

212 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of sound and unsound mating, and his appeal Articles by Dr. Lewis, Dr. Herd and Dr.

is to the medical profession; the time has Boland are especially commended.

come when the latter can no longer consider The Observer: " The word 'Eugenics' is

a knowledge of eugenics as relatively unim- apt to conjure up the idea of compulsory

portant, instead of being, as it is, the key- mating of carefully selected individuals com-

stone to the ultimate success of medicine in bined with sterilization of the remainder of

its prevention and handling of disease and the population as ' unfit.' Nothing could be

hereditary defects."

further from the intentions of the scientists

Journal of the Royal Naval Medical who introduced the word, and there is a real

Service especially praises Dr. Lewis's con- need for some clear explanation of what can

tribution on " Heredity in Mental Diseases," to-day be regarded as the practical policy

which it describes as " a peculiarly thought- of those who want to see something done for

ful and attractive article. He never aban- the human race. This need has been met by

dons his sound clinical instincts-the results the publication last week of an important

of actual experience, for statistical conclu- book entitled The Chances of Morbid Inherit-

sions and calculations, no matter how ance (H. K. Lewis and Co. Ltd.)."

impressive these may be in theory. But he The Liverpool Medico-Chirurgical Journal:

knows well enough when Mendelian principles "These seventeen chapters, plentifully illus-

are applicable, and he applies them very trated with pedigrees, are well and carefully

convincingly." The reviewer also praises Dr. composed, those on abnormalities of the

Witts's article on blood-pressures and articles skeleton and on diseases of the blood being

by Dr. Gardiner-Hill and Dr. Lawrence. among the best. The chapter on mental

The Medical Officer: " Until quite recently, disorders is a piece of clear and brilliant

the practitioner had but little assistance in writing, and in a discussion on tuberculosis,

providing his answers, and he was probably which might be more condensed, the points

almost as much influenced by tradition and of importance in the 'nature and nurture'

' old wives' tales ' as were his patients. dispute are sufficiently brought out."

Vague dogmatism was nourished by partial The reviewer also praises Professor Ruggles

evidence; masses of statistics were collected Gates's introduction, but he draws attention

and most carelessly handled, without the to certain inconsistences and omissions in

employment of any criticism. There is now the book.

no excuse for this position. In this most Mental Welfare: After especially praising

valuable book the practitioner is provided the articles by Dr. Russell Brain, Dr. Lewis

with a guide which should be of enormous and Dr. Herd, the reviewer says: "The

assistance to him in his dealings with potential value of the book is tremendous,

intelligent patients. We use the word covering as it does wide fields in medicine

' intelligent ' advisedly. For the answers and biology. It is to be hoped that its

which are given to the indicated questions essentially practical nature will be appre-

depend very largely upon the available ciated and made use of by those for whom it

information as to family history. And the has mainly been compiled, and that it will

value of family histories is liable to be mark the beginning of another phase in our

vitiated by ignorance and especially in the national history when we, as citizens, have

the case of relations by marriage, by pre- become eugenically self-conscious in the

judice."

interests of humanity as a whole."

genics Review, Vol. XXV, lo. 8.

