THE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER*

By W. NORWOOD EAST, M.D., F.R.C.P.

T HE invitation to deliver the Galton above matters as they presented themselves

Lecture is an honour which I sincerely to investigators in the last quarter of the

appreciate, and I am happy to believe last century. I may add that personal

that it is a recognition of the social impor- experience leads me to believe that the

tance of the branch of medicine in which facial appearances of those inside a prison

I have been engaged for many years.

are indistinguishable from those outside,

I have selected for my subject the Non- that the connection between criminality

Sane Non-Insane Offender because I believe and insanity -is infrequent in England and

that the scientific approach to crime has Wales, and that crime, per se, is not in-

sufficiently advanced in this direction to herited.

enable a more appropriate method of treat- In the year I938, when life in Great

ment to be applied to this class of law-. Britain was more or less normal, more than

breaker. I also realize that associations three-quarters of a million persons in

like the Eugenics Society can advance England and Wales were found guilty of

medico-sociological affairs, and forward offences of all kinds. According to law

changes which are overdue, by their readi- children under the age of eight years cannot ness to discuss informally with others commit crime, and it is an established fact

problems to which many people are dis- that persons over the age of sixty-five seldom

inclined to listen in a set address, however do. The above total therefore was mainly

important the subject may be in promoting made up of persons between these age

social welfare.

limits, but. the number of our associates

It will be remembered that Sir Francis who have offended against the criminal law

Galton introduced his method of composite is usually unsuspected and largely a matter

portraiture to the Anthropological Institute of conjecture. As individuals they are so

in I878, and selected for his first trials much like ourselves that we fail to detect

portraits of criminals from English prisons anything criminal or unusual about them.

who had been convicted of murder and other This fact, together with others more forcible,

crimes of violence. He considered the con- goes to disprove the facile assumption of

nection between criminality and insanity, the uninformed who would have us believe

and studied the possibility of a criminal that crime is a disease.

class being perpetuated by heredity. At In the present context non-sane non-

the same time he recognized the difficulties insane offenders comprise subnormals,

involved in forming a correct judgment psychopathic personalities and psycho-

upon so elusive a problem. I like to think that he would have approved the subject of

neurotics. The' subnormals range from near normal to near mental deficiency, the

this lecture which deals with a group of psychopathic personalities. and psycho-

offenders who often fail to make a success neurotics from near normal to near insanity.'

of marriage or provide a happy and healthy' It will be convenient to consider them from

home, and may be considered therefore the points of view of causation, ascertain-

dysgenic apart from the possibility of trans- ment, responsibility and treatment.

mitting character traits which result in

criminality.

Causation

It is not my purpose to consider here the Criminal behaviour, like other forms of

* The Galton Lecture, delivered before the Eugensics
Society on February i7th, I947.

human activity, is the result of the interaction of various factors, individual and

6

THE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER

7

environmental. The former include the defective. There are no reliable figures in

constitutional framework, physical and this country regarding the number of

mental, inherited and acquired. The latter offenders in the non-sane non-insane group.

comprise the social, economic, material and It will probably be found somewhere

spiritual backgrounds. The earlier investi- between 5 and 20 per cent.

gators erred when they attempted to attri- I am aware that at first experienced

bute crime to a single factor or to a parti- observers overestimated the proportion of

cular personal quality. To ascertain the mentally defective prisoners. But whatever

cause of any criminal act it is necessary to the size of the non-sane non-insane group,

collect and analyze all the available infor- mere numbers are less important than the

mation regarding the circumstances of the fact that offenders in the group are likely

crime, the personality of the offender, and to repeat their offences. And generally it

the manner in which environmental circum- may be accepted that repeated offences by

stances have affected him. This is some- adults, and to a less extent adolescents,

times so complicated a task that it is only indicate a fundamental difference between

possible to assess approximately the relative the mental make-up of the habitual and the

importance of the interacting forces. Fortu- first offender.

nately in many cases a rough estimate is all One of the most important causes of per-

that is required for practical purposes. sistent criminality is habit, the stereotyped

In I9I3 Goring showed that there was no form of response to environmental circum-

such thing as a physical criminal type stances and subjective conditions acquired

among 3,000 males in English convict by repetition. Habits enable many persons

prisons. In I942 an official investigation to face difficulties and conserve energy, btit

into the physical condition of 4,000 male they may impose upon a less tough-minded

offenders between the ages of sixteen and person action which takes the line of least

twenty from the London area showed little resistance and a vicious circle may result;

evidence of physical inferiority. At the a particular situation arises, the consequen-

same time it must be conceded that some tial difficulty is repeatedly avoided and a

observers consider that there is at least some crime is repeatedly committed. It some-

physical basis for crime, and there is no times happens that the only way to break

doubt that occasionally crime is a direct up this sequence is forcibly to detain the

consequence of a physical illness. It may offender for a considerable period so that

also be noted that physical inferiority is he is guarded from the situations which

soinetimes associated with marked social give rise to it.

and professional ability.

Few will doubt that one of the most

Inherited mental qualities and those important causes of criminal behaviour is

acquired as a result of psychological experi- an imperfect development of character,

ences are of great importance in determining using this term for the inherited and

criminal behaviour. In I94I Bagot found acquired qualities which to some extent

that backwardness rather than mental depend-upon intelligence, but also are re-

defectiveness influenced the incidence of lated to temperament as well as national

offences amongst juveniles from the Liver- and social traditions, and which affect and

pool area. Among the 4,ooo adolescents in should direct the control of voluntary and

the London area, mental defectiveness was involuntary behaviour. The character of

present in nearly 4 per cent, a proportion many offenders in the non-sane non-insane

appreciably higher than in the general group appears to be incompletely developed.

population. Other mental abnormalities It fails to reach the adult level and is in-

were present in about 4 per cent also. In capable of further progress. So it comes

the general prison population in England about that whereas some offenders -in the

and Wales, i per cent are certifiable as group have their place among the non-sane,

insane and half of i per cent as mentally others are found among the non-insane.

8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Still others are found between these extremes. but different shades of grey and they tend

In passing, reference must be made to to infiltrate into the outskirts of adjacent

the fact that crime is most frequent among groups. For example, the boundary line

those with least economic security. This between normal and subnormal people or

does not mean that persons in comfortable between the psychoneurotic and insane is

circumstances are inherently more law- sometimes ill defined. Further, insanity

abiding than those on or near the poverty may be imposed upon an offender in any

line. But it does mean that the latter are group.

subjected to many temptations and stresses An approximate idea of the meanings of

which the more favoured escape. In con- the words mental defectiveness and insanity

sequence of mental and environmental is usual among educated people, who realize

stress social values are altered. Moreover, that their knowledge of these subjects is

we must not forget that a certain number necessarily imperfect. The conception of

of persons below the poverty line remain normality requires further consideration

there because their mental equipment is because it is often more inexact than many

insufficient to raise them to a higher status believe.

or appreciate the importance of socially For the most part we judge the behaviour

acceptable behaviour.

of others by our own, and estimate the

A causal factor which receives scant atten- motives and intentions which govern their

tion to-day is the lack of religious. education. behaviour by comparing them with our own

Frank selfishness is the rule. Children are instinctual urges. Herein lie certain fallacies

frequently brought up without proper care if we are ignorant of the secret projects and

or attention and home life is disappearing. temptations of others, and underrate the

Cupidity is the modem goal, short-term difficulties of understanding oneself. The

expediency supplants old-fashioned honesty. matter is more complicated when criminal

Many irresponsible persons marry for amuse- behaviour is assessed and the offender is

ment or greed, and look upon the Divorce determined to hide or disguise the reason

Court as an office where a new licence is for his activity or, as sometimes happens,

obtained to legalize a fresh adventure. is at a loss to understand it. Further, the

The search for pleasure grows apace, and ordinary person is often more potentially

hard work is no longer regarded as a Christian criminal than he is willing to believe, and

tenet or as an invigorating friend, but. as sometimes unconsciously maintains his self-

an opponent to be avoided.

regard by exaggerating the culpability of

This brief survey of some of the matters those who break the law.

which require consideration in any attempt In 'the -ordinary affairs of life behaviour

to introduce the facts associated with follows efforts directed towards satisfying

criminal behaviour among the normal group the emotions associated with the innate

of offenders is necessarily incomplete. But urges, acquisitive, aggressive, sexual, paren-

it serves as a background to the more remote tal, gregarious and the like. It is influenced

problems which arise when offenders in the by the psychological mechanisms of conflict,

non-sane non-insane group are under review. repression, dissociation, projection and

others. It is controlled as a result of educa-

Ascertainment

tion and convention, of morality and religion,

The allocation of the individual offender of a sense of social responsibility and fear

to his appropriate mental group usually of opprobrium, and by penalties.

presents little difficulty, but it may be other- Abnormal behaviour may arise if some of

wise if the characteristics of one group the innate tendencies are more and others

overlap or become superimposed upon those less imperative than in the ordinary varia-

of another. Always at the centre are typical tions of ordinary men and women; if social

examples of their kind. Outside this nucleus adjustment is impeded by any of the above

other offenders are neither black nor white psychological phenomena; and if self-

THE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER

9

control is insufficiently exercised or is mis- of the guests. Indeed, recent world events

used. We have no yard-stick to measure have not only demonstrated the great

the strength of an instinctual urge in our- heights to which men and women can rise,

selves or in others, and it sometimes appears but have also exposed the depths to which

excessive because adequate control is lack- others can descend. The poor quality of

ing. At other times the urge appears weak much of our veneer has been unmasked

because it is controlled by a strong will. beyond a peradventure, and many thoughtful

Crime results if normal or abnormal minds view with alarm the defects apparent

behaviour is prohibited by law. But note in the underlying structure.

the fact that the law does not cause the Normal behaviour may occur in the

prohibited act; it attaches to it the quality insane, and abnormal behaviour in those

of criminality.

who are mentally normal if the emotions

A too narrow view of normality leads to are too violently disturbed by chance cir-

error. In the ordinary affairs of life we con- cumstances. Moreover, a crime committed

sider normal behaviour is synonymous with by a person who is mentally abnormal is not

average behaviour. But this standard may necessarily associated with his aberration.

be misleading if we believe that our own For practical purposes we accept as normal

thoughts and activities necessarily conform a considerable degree of variation in matters

to those of others, and that any deviation concerning intelligence and wisdom, tem-

therefrom is evidence of abnormality.

perament, ethics, will-power and other

A single man, capable, intelligent, temperate and a skilled craftsman, fell in love with a

personal qualities. In other words, in some people behaviour is represented by an

married woman of his own age during the almost even horizontal line, in others the

absence of her husband overseas. From time line is wavy. The oscillations are due to

to time intimacy occurred between them until the man discovered that she had resumed relations with a former lover. He thereupon hid himself on his rival's premises, and when

transient constitutional and environmental
causes. As we look out on the. world to-day and

the latter returned stealthily attacked him consider the lessons of history, it becomes

from behind and struck into his brain with an abundantly clear that for practical purposes

axe and killed him.

a good deal of latitude must be allowed to

The homicide was not mentally defective instinctual behaviour before we regard it as

or insane, neither was he suffering from any abnormal. We have seen Nazism attain

minor mental abnormality unless the word ifs climax by the aid of an aggressiveness far

is used so freely that it has no real signifi- surpassing the ordinary.. We see men going

cance. His conduct might appear to be to the extreme of normality in their lust for

abnormal to those who are unaware of the power in different spheres, and we meet

fact that many murders are manifestations others who, although within the limits of

of the possessiveness which is a biological normality, destroy an honourable career

urge and is seen in the lower animals, parti- by nauseating behaviour. And here let me

cularly during the mating season. And here add that as a psychiatrist I claim no more

note the fact that murder is usually com- authority to decide when normal behaviour

mitted during a state of intense emotional becomes abnormal than any other well-

disturbance which is not necessarily related informed person, unless mental disorder or

to insanity or other mental abnormality. defectiveness -is present. If so it must be

Some may consider that civilization has accepted that special knowledge and experi-

advanced our behaviour far beyond the ence are required, not only to diagnose the

activities of the animal world. But the mental condition but also to determine

thinness of the veneer may be exposed, as whether it has caused the behaviour in

someone wrote many years ago, if a waiter question.

at a dinner-party upsets a plate of hot soup I believe that although our knowledge is

over the nicely starched shirt-front of one incomplete the different sub-groups of the

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

group with which we are concerned can be has some connection with the different

sufficiently differentiated to enable the periods of life. In juvenile and senile crime

psychiatrist to state his reasons for placing the constitutional factor is often more

the offender in his appropriate setting. important than the environmefital. In

Having done this he can go no further than adulthood and maturity the environmental

propose and carry out the course of treat- factor may predominate. But the differences

ment which appears to him to offer the are seldom exact enough to allow the normal

greatest chance of rehabilitating the offender. to be clearly separated on these grounds

But it is clearly a matter for others to decide alone from the abnormal. When mental

whether the advice can be accepted in the defectiveness, insanity or the non-sane non-

interests of justice and the security of insane mental conditions are related to.

society.

cnme the constitutional factor is generally

We cannot disregard the fact that when of first importance. At least this may be

mental abnormality is suggested as an said, normal behaviour usually requires the

explanation for a crime legislators as well constitutional and environmental factors to

as the public show some apprehension, be fairly balanced. It may be added that

believing that psychiatrists too often intro- physical, mental and social maturity which

duce this plea in an attempt to excuse the influence the desires, opportunities and

offender.

ability to commit crime do not necessarily

0

The fact that the behaviour and opinions develop at the same rate in the same person,

of another seem extravagant is not neces- neither do they necessarily equally deterio-

sarily evidence of mental abnormality. rate as age advances.

Neither is the fact that the reason for an In a recent article Fritz Schmidl declares

act or decision is not understood by the that although psychiatrists have adequate

person immediately concerned. Indeed the conceptions of psychosis, neurosis and organic

subconscious mind influences our activities brain disease they have not yet developed

perhaps more often than is recognized. any satisfactory classification of the per-

The second Marquess of Reading writes of sonalities who do not fall into these cate-

his father when Rufus Isaacs, Q.C., " He gories. If some of the latter show deviations

was perfectly refreshed by five hours sleep, from socially acceptable behaviour such as

and even these hours were not wasted. delinquency some of the psychiatrists call

Some subconscious faculty was at work them "' normal," holding the view that these

while he slept and he would awake to find deviations should be explained in other than

a complete set of facts, the proper arrange- psychiatric terms, whereas other psychiatrists

ment of which had given him so much label them " psychopathic personalities."

thought on the previous night, neatly sorted He also states that in most cases the latter

out and pigeon-holed in his mind the term adds nothing to our understanding of

following morning."

these subjects nor does it give much help

Turn to more humble folk. To the man for treatment. To this criticism I would

who falls in love with a woman without reply that the clinical types included in the

realizing that she first attracted him because non-sane non-insane group of offenders are

of some feature or quality which charac- more definite and precise as a result of

terized the girl of his choice in an earlier modern investigations than the legal mind

and intense emotional situation. Or to those of Schmidl seems to allow; that experience

who commit crime as the result of a forgotten affords ample proof that the ordinary

experience in their early years which was methods of treatment are usually here in-

associated with severe-emotional disturbance. adequate, and that there is reason to believe

Although constitutional and environ- that they can be improved upon if they are

mental causes of behaviour are always replaced or supplemented by more en-

present, there is some reason to believe that lightened measures. I entirely agree with

in a general way their relative importance the view that there is much loose talk upon

THE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER

II

this subject among the uninformed, and to escape from the things we fear we become

that merely to affix a label to an offender is more afraid. If we defy them they weaken

valueless, and indeed worse if it suggests and may entirely disappear.

knowledge where there is ignorance. More- Moreover, we know from personal experi-
over, I have consistently refused to accept ence, or as a rlsult of observation on others,

the view that the delinquent or criminal is how extensive the range of fear may be.

necessarily different from the law-abiding At one time a slight uneasiness of mind, at

citizen. At the same time I am ready to another an overwhelming panic. In the

believe that as our knowledge increases the latter our psychological reactions may be as

conception of the non-sane non-insane unreasoning as some of those due to the

offender will become more complete.

morbid fears which belong to the realm of

Only a brief reference is necessary to the insanity. And in our fears we have an

subnormals and psychoneurotics, as both everyday illustration of the transition from

classes are fully recognized. Subnormals the normal to the abnormal in the spheres of

are found in all classes of society, and the emotion and behaviour. It is with transitions

majority are able to float in the general of emotion and behaviour from normal to

population without breaking the law. But abnormal that we are mainly concerned in

they are handicapped in that they frequently the non-sane non-insane offender.

fail to gain promotion in their occupations Elsewhere I have recently classified

in the face of competition, and are accident- psychopathic personalities into nine cate-

prone at their work. If they commit crime gories: psychic inferior personalities,

they tend to repeat their offences because aggressive egocentric personalities, ethical

of their limitations, and because occupational aberrant personalities, alcohol and drug

placement is difficult in a competitive world. addicts, sexual perverts, schizoid, cycloid

Psychoneurotic symptoms are an indi- and paranoid personalities. A brief reference

cation of mental conflict, and the four to them is necessary, as we seem here to

generally accepted types need not be con- enter the borderland between character

sidered here. I may however mention the deviations and mental abnormalities.

anxiety type in order to emphasize the wide Many have first-hand acquaintance with

range of emotion which may occur in normal psychic inferior personalities in whom in-

persons.

herited and environmental causal factors

The term anxiety is used in this con- have varying significance. Individuals in

nection for a morbid fear of danger of some this class do not lack intelligence like the

kind and usually arises from within. It is subnormals, but their negative qualities of

necessary to stress the word morbid, as few character are so conspicuous and com-

persons are free from all fear. Normal fears promising that any positive attributes they

tend to vary with different periods of life, possess are cancelled out. They lack initia-

but the degree of fear is relative to the tive, self-confidence, resource, the capacity

danger, and need not be morbid to cause a for sustained effort, ambition and will-

crime. Thus, a young man working for a power. They avoid making decisions and

modest salary may embezzle his employer's shun responsibility, and are unable to

money because he is afraid that he will lose occupy with credit any position of authority.

the girl of his choice unless he spends more They rely upon a married partner or friend

money on her than he can afford. On the to shelter them from the difficulties which

other hand a morbid fear may be the reason the average person faces alone in the ordi-

for a crime; the offence of attempting to nary affairs of life. They are recipients

commit suicide may result from an un- rather than donors, but are frequently

reasonable fear that the ordinary aches and pleasant and equable companions. They are

pains which are common to many people often industrious, well-meaning, contented

are due to a fatal disease which cannot be and affectionate. But they take the line

faced. And note the fact that if we attempt of least resistance and cultivate the habits

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which bring them the greatest amount of
ease irrespective of the subsequent dis-
advantages. If disturbed from their ordinary routine they find it difficult to adjust
themselves to a novel situation. The ordinary- person going about his lawful occasions usually has powers in reserve
which enable him to deal effectively with
the common difficulties of life, but the
psychic inferior has not enough reserve to
deal with a crisis or, if unaided, prevent it from becoming a catastrophe. In short,
psychic inferiors fail in situations where
what we call strength of character is required, and if they commit crime are likely
to repeat their offences on many occasions. In one case, to which I have referred elsewhere, fifty offences were recorded with the probability that more would follow. The
offences are usually attributable to negative qualities of character, and are for the most part of minor social importance-petty thefts, minor sexual offences, drunkenness, prostitution and the like.
On the other hand offences committed by aggressive egocentric and ethical aberrant personalities are positive and of major importanc'e where social security is concerned.
They include some cases of murder and
other crimes of sexual or non-sexual violence, burglary, housebreaking, conspiracy, largescale fraud and some larcenies. There is
much overlapping in the two categories and future research may show that the difference is chiefly one of emphasis-persistent aggressiveness being the outstanding feature in one, and a marked' as well as persistent divergence from moral standards in the other. An important difference between the two lies in the fact that in ethical aberrant personalities the various instinctual urges, acquisitive, aggressive, assertive, sexual, parental, gregarious and others are at fault
together.
In both the condition seems to be pri-
marily due to factors which are inherent in many cases, but are influenced by previous psychological or immediate environmental factors. In both the offender is overconcerned with himself, extreme selfishness dominates his thoughts and actions. He is

unscrupulous, and those who oppose him
are destroyed or injured as mere pawns in
the adventure of life. He is assertive, impulsive, amoral, undisciplined and unreliable. He is uncritical of himself and self-confident
in spite of the fact that his record often
shows a succession of failures. He meets opposition with immediate aggression, and his response to the ordinary obstacles of
everyday life is mainly the result of excessive egoism which is unfettered by discretion or the least regard for the feelings of others. His will-power is forcible but distorted, and applied to self-indulgences which are harmful to others and often illegal. He is unable to see the world from a general point of view
and his intolerance of the rights of others
prevents him from understanding or exer-
cising the reasonableness of compromise. His intelligence is often good and may be superior, but various combinations of antisocial behaviour are carried to extremes. He is lacking in wisdom and is unable to profit by experience, partly it seems from an inherent deep-seated defect, and partly
because less remote factors cause him to disregard a long-term advantage for a shortterm gain.
I have published typical examples of their kind elsewhere. A brief description of an
aggressive egocentric personality will illustrate that type of case.
A powerful, well-built, healthy mechanic aged 23 years was convicted of larceny and shopbreaking. An employer described him as a good worker but violent tempered. The police also noted that he was violent. He was hostile, insubordinate, assertive and persistently aggressive. His emotional tension caused excessive and explosive outbursts of violence in situations which would not arouse a similar trigger-like response in ordinary persons. He assaulted other prisoners and attempted to assault the prison staff on the slightest provocation. He was callous, insincere, unscrupulous and untruthful. He was unable to appreciate the rights of others if they were opposed to his own desires. His egocentricity was overwhelmning. He had no moral sense and no appreciation of his social responsibility. He showed no remorse for his behaviour, and whilst he unjustly criticized others was uncritical of himself. His willpower was strongly directed towards the antisocial activities which were his sole purpose in life. He was unable to profit by experience,

*THE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER

and disciplinary awards for his violence in prison and sentences of imprisonment for his offences were ineffective. He was of average intelligence, and there can be no doubt that further crimes of serious violence would have been committed had he not been ldled as the result of an accident when at liberty. It will be noted that there was no evidence of any sexual abnormality and he had not been convicted of any sexual crime.
In the ordinary affairs of life we meet men and women who are within the range of normality and are particularly aggressive, many who are unscrupulous, and others who combine both these qualities. Some gain so-called success, others fail. But their aggressive and unscrupulous qualities, although extreme are part of a long-term purpose and modified according to circumstances. And although the fear of detection may not alter the manner of their lives, it enables them to profit by their mistakes and direct their activities into more carefully selected methods of behaviour. There is no hard and fast line between the more extreme varieties of such persons and the aggressive egocentric and ethical aberrant personalities. At the other end of the scale psychopathic personalities belonging to these categories sometimes project their faults on to others and develop an intense suspiciousness which oversteps the border line between sanity and insanity.
It is unnecessary to consider at length the alcohol and drug addicts. There can be few who have not personal knowledge of the former and are unaware of the different gradations which occur between the normal drinker on the one hand and on the other those who approach the outskirts of alcoholic insanity. Excessive indulgence in alcohol may be itself an indication of other mental disorder and, as I have already indicated, is sometimes due to psychic inferiority. But for practical purposes it seems desirable to limit the alcoholists in this group to those whose addiction is independent of other mental or character deviations and is itself the essential abnormality.
Addicts who indulge in narcotic drugs occasionally appear in the criminal courts. Some are insane and many traverse the high

road which leads to insane crime. But when
we sit in judgment upon them it is well to remember the great number of people who
are addicted to aperients and other nonnarcotic drugs as a matter of habit, and to
the innumerable tea and tobacco addicts.
Sexual offenders form a large and important group, in which-a wide range of positive
and negative qualities are within the limits of normality. Many sexual offenders are not psychopathic personalities, and only
some forms of unusual sexual behaviour can be regarded as sexually perverse. Crimes due to these conditions are usually repeated,
they create alarm, and often are unaffected by the usual sentences of imprisonment. A man aged 39 years received sentences of imprisonment totalling I3A years for sexual offences committed during a period of I7
years.
Among our personal acquaintances are usually a few schizoids; shy, solitary, re-
tiring persons who show little interest in the external affairs of life and live for the most
part in a little world of their own, mentally detached from their associates as far as
circumstances allow. Others are cycloids: their mood swings make them variable butoften likeable companions. At one time, and for no apparent reason, they are sociable, gay, elated and full of the joy of life. At another they are fearful and depressed. Still others are paranoids; suspicious, unfriendly, irritable and ready to take offence.
They exhibit varying degrees of quarrelsomeness, and often abruptly terminate a friendship on account of a fancied grievance.
We recognize persons belonging to these types to be different from ourselves, and if the condition is severe regard them as abnormal although in varying degree. Their lives whether schizoid, cycloid or paranoid
are often more difficult than is the case
with more evenly balanced persons, and if they commit crime it may be related to their
mental peculiarity. The administration of a closed security prison may be ill adapted to the detention of some offenders of this
type. It will be convenient to recapitulate the
most outstanding characteristics of psycho-

I4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

pathic personalities in gener4l. Their insists that responsibility means more than

offences are likely to be repeated many being answerable for wrong-doing, and at

times and usually show a degree of impul- the same time restricts the word to express

siveness and sometimes explosiveness which a state of mind which exposes the offender

may be significant in a particular setting. to legal punishment unless certain tests are

They may be below, of average or superior satisfactorily answered by the jury in his

intelligence, but they fail to profit by experi- favour. These tests are direct and simple

ence. Their purpose is short-term and often and are uncomplicated by psychiatric or

trivial, but they strive to accomplish it and psychological diversions. The jury are re-

reject a long-term and more substantial quired to consider whether *a defect of

advantage. Although the offences are some- reason due to disease of the mind prevented

times little more than a nuisance others are the accused from knowing the nature and

a menace to social security. If only slightly quality of his act, or that it was wrong.

tainted, psychopathic personalities may The Court of Criminal Appeal in I9I6*

hardly be distinguished from normal per- further simplified the tests by declaring that

sons. Those who are severely affected may " the nature and quality" of an act refers

be indistinguishable from the insane.

only to its physical character, and that

" wrong " means contrary to and punishable

Responsibility

by law. As long as these tests are applied

The many questions which arise in con- there can be no doubt that a jury is com-

nection with criminal responsibility need be petent to understand them. Moreover, few

mentioned in brief outline only. Excepting will dispute the fact that the independent

infancy, some cases of coercion, privileged character of the British citizen is satisfied

occasions and the absence of jurisdiction, with the age-old procedure of trial by jury,

an offender is presumed to be responsible and accepts the view that a democracy

for the crime he has committed unless he was should make full use of experts and refuse

at the material time insane according to law. to be governed by them.

When a defence of insanity is raised in a I repeat, in a criminal trial the psychiatrist

criminal trial it is customary to support it is required to satisfy the court and jury

by expert medical evidence, and for the that the accused is insane. The jury are

purpose of this thesis it is important to note required to decide whether the insanity has

that the psychiatrist is not called upon to made him irresponsible in law.

declare that the accused is irresponsible. There can be no doubt that modern

That is a matter for the qualified citizen as advances in psychiatry and psychology

a member of a jury to decide kinder the whilst crystallizing medical thought in some

direction of the judge.

directions have added difficulties in others.

The thoughts and behaviour of the insane And whereas the majority of psychiatrists

are to some extent related to the mental would probably regard anyone suffering

diseases from which they suffer, and at first from a major mental disorder sufficiently

sight it may appear tlhit a psychiatrist is pronounced to require certification under the

the best person to decide whether an insane Lunacy Acts to be irresponsible in the

offender is responsible or irresponsible for dictionary sense of non-accountability, there

the crime he has committed. But in many can be little doubt that the majority would

cases the psychiatric opinion is challenged also agree that the degree of irresponsibility

and the insanity of the accused disputed varies in different cases, according to the

by an opposing psychiatrist. Moreover, the character of the mental disease present,

issue is not only a question of insanity, but the motive and intention of the accused,

whether the insanity has resulted in irre- and all the circumstances connected with

sponsibility. Note also the fact that the the crime. Mark also the fact that within

law.does not use the word responsibility the experience of living prison officials

in the dictionary sense of the word. It * D.P.P. v. Codere. 12 Cr. App. R. 21, I9I6.

THE NON-SANE NON-INSANE OFFENDER

15

criminals were formerly made worse because mercy to their verdict of guilty and thereby

they were treated as bad men, and that express their belief that the offender is less

uniless care is exercised we may go to the culpable than the ordinary homicide. There

other extreme and encourage those with is nothing to suggest that the offender in

abnormal desires to gratify them on the any of these situations is irresponsible

misunderstanding that a theoretical expla- according to law.

nation is necessarily a valid excuse for a When it is considered that the non-sane

crime. For although science teaches us that non-insane offender closely resembles the

many human activities are due to inherited ordinary offender at one extreme, and may

and environmental factors over which we approach insanity at the other, there can

have little or no control, society cannot be little doubt that culpability will differ in

submit to the law of the jungle or accept an degree in individuals of the group. Judged

indeterminate view of the concept irre- in this light the more abnormal the offender

sponsibility.

the less culpable will he usually be, and

Nevertheless, in practice in certain situa- judged by medical standards the less punish-

tions degrees of culpability, that is to say ment should he receive. At the same time

blameworthiness, seem to be accepted. the more likely he is to repeat his offence,

During recent years the word delinquency the less likely is ordinary punishment to be

has come to be used for minor offences effective, and the longer should the public

committed by juveniles, and is sometimes be protected from him.

used for offences committed by adults as if

it was synonymous with the word crime. Treatment

But an ugly thing is not made attractive by In this dilemma it is important to bear

a mere change of name, and although the in mind certain other matters. Severe

Children and Young Persons Act, I933, penal measures are seldom necessary in the

refers to "Youthful delinquents" (s. 59; absence of an excess of crime likely to cause

s.-s. i) I am not aware that any adult is so public alarm, or of organized criminality.

described by law. The point is of some Although crime, is an unimportant social

importance, as the term delinquency suggests problem when compared with poverty and

something less criminal than crime. In unemployment it would soon become a

other words less culpable.

menace to social security if it escaped

Again, the Mental Deficiency Act, I9I3, control. To avoid this punishment must be

provided that mentally defective offenders certain, expeditions and adaptable.

might be sent, on conviction, to an institu- As I see it the duty of the psychiatrist

tion for defectives as an alternative to here is to inform the court of the mental

imprisonment. Where drunkenness is not abnormality present, its effect upon culpabi-

a defence it may be according to the facts lity, and, as I have already stated, to suggest

a mitigating circumstance. And the In- and if possible carry out appropriate

fanticide Act, I922, enables the crime of measures for the rehabilitation of the

murder to be reduced to manslaughter in offender. I repeat this seems as far as the

the case of a woman who kills her newly psychiatrist can go. Whether his advice is

born child if she has not recovered from accepted will depend not only upon its

the effects of giving birth to the child and possible effect upon the offender, but upon

the balance of her mind is disturbed in con- public security if medical treatment is

sequence.* Further, in some cases of adopted in lieu of, and not as an adjunct

murder the jury add a recommendation to to, a sentence of imprisonment.

* The Infanticide Act, 1938 (i & 2 Geo. 6, C. 36),
substitutes "a child under the age of 12 months"

The retributive purpose of punishment may be anachronistic, the reformative and

for a " newly-born child." It also takes into con- deterrent demophylactic. To counter crime

sideration " the effect of lactation consequent upon the birth of the child " as a disturbing factor of the mental balance of the mother.

by detaining the offender in an ordinary prison surrounds him with artificial re-

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

strictions which are often unadapted to the most sheltered and exclusive, to assist pro-

individual peculiarities of many non-sane gress in the prevention of crime and the

non-insane offenders. It is true that recent treatment of criminals.

years have seen many improvements intro- My thesis outlines a group of dysgenic,

duced into prison administration, and that and for the most part recidivistic, offenders,

prisons of minimum, medium and maximum and deals with different degrees of mental

security have been established. But this abnormality and culpability. It does not

is not enough. A special penal institution is disguise the difficulties of the subject or the

required, combining the features of a prison dilemma arising from the fact that the more

and a mental hospital, where the non-sane abnormal the offender the less culpable will

non-insane offender can receive training he generally be, and usually the more in

and specialized medical treatment if he does need of specialized and sometimes prolonged

not accept medical treatment whilst on treatment. Many observers are disturbed

probation or is too dangerous to be allowed when non-sane non-insane offenders, if

his liberty. An annex to the institution unsuited for probationary treatment, are

administered on colony lines will give committed to prison for short and ineffective

elasticity to the therapeutic and demophy- periods. Others are unwilling to impose

lactic purposes of the scheme, and enable upon them longer sentences within the

all the resources of mental treatment and legal limits for the purpose of obtaining

character building to be given an oppor- social security. There is reason to believe

tunity to assist the offenders in the group. that a solution to the problem on progressive

And since so much of the material-for in- lines may be attained in many cases if

stance the psychic inferiors-is of poor modern psychotherapeutic, psychiatric and

quality, exceptional care on discharge will educative measures are applied for a suffi-

still be necessary.

cient time in a special penal institution.

For this method of treatment the short We are here dealing with quantitative

sentences usually given-say in cases of anomalies, and need courage, clear minds

exhibitionism and sexual assaults on young and clear consciences if we are to deal with

children-are useless. Sentences approxi- them practically, effectively and humanely.

mating the legal maximum may be required

for the benefit of the offender and for public

REFERENCES

safety. I maintain that for these reasons we should not shrink from the imposition of longer sentences if necessary in order to

Bagot, J. H. (I94I), Juvenile Delinquency. London,
Jonathan Cape.
Blacker, C. P. (I945), Eugenics in Prospect and
Retrospect. London, Hamish Hamilton.

ensure special treatment. Incidentally such Criminal Statistics (I938). London, H.M. Station-

sentences will tend to restrict fertility and ary Office.

have some eugenic value.

East, W. Norwood, Stocks, P., and Young, H. T. P. (1942), The Adolescent Criminal.

London, J. and A. Churchill.

Summary

East, W. Norwood (I945), J. Ment. Sci., 91, 385.

To many people crime is an unpleasant

Galton, F. (1943), Inquiries Into Human Faculty.
London, J. M. Dent.

and remote subject. But so short-sighted Goring, C. (1913), The English Convict. London,

a view fails to appreciate the fact that anyone of us at any time may be the victim of violence, burglary, theft, fraud and the like.

H.M. Stationery Office. Reading, Marquess of (1942), Rufus Isaacs, Q.C.,
Vol. i, p. io8. London, Hutchinson.
Schmidl, F. (1946), J. Crim. Law and Criminol.,

It is therefore the concern of all, even the 37, i.

Eugenics Review, Vol. NXXI,No. 1

