THE HEREDITY OF GROWTH
Some Biological Aspects of School Medical Inspection

By ALFRED A. MUMFORD, M.D.
(Medical Officer, Manchester Grammar School).

H OWEVER clear may be our numerous opportunities it has afforded for

appreciation of the common laws of the development in children of innate powers

heredity when we consider the which their parents had in many instances

phenomena of growth in relation to animal possessed, but had not had the opportunities

biology, yet as school medical officers we for development and expression. National

soon find that considerable obscurity sur- education is a stabilizing influence in so

rounds our path when attempting to apply far as it helps the best to rise. It is, how-

these laws to the assessment of the capacity, ever, fatally easy for us to rest satisfied with

or to an analysis of the causes of high the attribution to heredity of any outstand-

attainment of the adolescent school child. ing merit in intellectual capacity, in physi-

Sometimes the influence of heredity is cal prowess, in musical ability, in skill in

clear and outstanding-high attainments handicrafts, etc., without endeavouring to

displayed by a boy in particular directions identify and understand in detail the precise

being associated with similar high attain- powers which have been inherited or the

ments in other members of the family. At precise circumstances which have favoured

other times the influence of heredity is their development.

masked, and no such association between

high attainments in the boy and similar THE NATURE OF GROWTH

attainments on the part of other members In any attempt we may make to separate

of the family can be found. Here it is the relative influences exerted by heredity

probable that any unusual capacity which and circumstance in school progress,

existed in other members of the family may whether physical or mental, we find there

have found no opportunity for display or are naturally two separate lines of inquiry:

may have been diverted into less evident (i) By the study of purely physical

channels. It is difficult, therefore, to ex- growth-i.e., the progressive changes in

press the relative influence of heredity and actual structure.

circumstances during school life in any (2) By the study of the growth of func-

mathematical form. The influence of here- tional co-operation and the development of

dity, however, is very evident to those doc- the separate parts.

tors who at any thorough entrance medical examination are in the habit of discussing

Efficient growth is a complete growth, both of structure and of function, in the

with parents the hopes entertained for the future of the boy who has recently gained

separate parts as well as in the whole. In neither structure nor function of parts does

an entrance scholarship from an elementary growth proceed at a uniform rate nor to a school. The school medical officer, as well uniform extent. We have, therefore, to

as the head and the assistant masters, in any consider a ' time increment ' in different

advanced day school will, I think, almost parts as well as a time increment of the

universally admit that, among the benefits whole-e.g., there is a separate growth in

which our national system of education has conferred upon the efficient working of the

the size of the head, of the trunk, and of the limbs, but growth in each does not pro-

body politic, not the least has been the ceed at the same rate nor to the same extent.

29

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Consequently aniy single completed indi- to structure, and still neglecting, for the time

vidual is not the exact replica of his brothers being, the question of function, we therefore

and sisters in all forms of growth, though pass from the measurements of total body

he may be in some of them.

height, etc., to the measurements of body

Besides such separate growth of struc- proportion-i.e., the relative size of different

ture of parts, there is also a separate deve- parts to each other and to the whole.

lopment of powers of the blood circulation, of the range of respiratory exchange, of food PHRENOLOGICAL BEGINNINGS

transformation and utilization, of muscular Proportion is expressed now by means of

power, and of nervous activity. During the 'indices ' or ' ratios.' Albert Diirer (died

period covered by school life-eight to I526) was the first to propound for artists

twenty years-these functioning systems, some of the laws of such body proportion,

like the structural basis upon which they and to claim that it was only by the study

rest, all develop at different rates and to a of body proportion that the artist could

different extent, not only in brothers and depict temperament-that is, the habitual

sisters of the same family, but even among tendency of human beings to behave in

those as closely related as twin children. special ways. Since Diirer's' time, both

So marked is this that the study of " un- artists and anatomists have continued to

like " twins becomes separate from that of make studies of body proportions in order

like " twins.

to understand and depict varieties of human

To make any substantial progress in our beings. Anthropometry, the science of the

inquiries as to the relation between heredity measurement of man, began when Casper

and training, we must, therefore, assess and Blumenbach attempted to express the

each child in many directions, and each relation between the skulls and faces of man-

assessment must be in terms of time incre- kind and of animals in terms of the relative

ments.

importance of the mouth-function of seizing

Confining our attention, for the time and manipulating food, compared with the

being, to growth of structure, we notice skull development as indication of general

that this may be expressed in terms of abso- intelligence displayed in the whole conduct

lute height, weight, and chest girth. If of life. Gall and Spurzheim carried similar

we had discovered some uniform and perfect inquiries still further, but they early

physical type of humanity, we might assess abandoned such ' Craniology ' as was based

each individual in terms of such perfect upon comparative anatomy, and confined

type. There is, however, no such perfect their attention to ' Cranioscopy ' or ' Phren-

type. There are as many types as there ology,' in the attempt to establish a cor-

are groups of circumstances under which respondence between the outward configura-

human life can be led. We are drawn, tion of the skull and those mental

therefore, to express the height, weight, propensities and aptitudes which distinguish

chest-girth, etc., of each growing child in particular individuals.

terms of some average or mean, and to say Comparative anatomists did not, however,

that his or her growth is in excess or in long content themselves with the study of the

defect of such mean by so much time incre- relative proportions of head and face. They

ment. When, however, we inquire into the soon turned their attention to the study of

fitness of any child to put forth some par- the proportions of other parts, especially of

ticular effort, or to sustain some par- the limbs. . Political agitation about the

ticular scholastic strain, standards of total equality of man and the justice or injustice

height, weight, and chest girth alone are of of slavery increased the interest taken in

little avail. We want something which will these scientific inquiries, which began to

represent other differences, which have a consider whether mankind was of one or of

close relation to structure yet are still several distinct species, and consequently

measurable. Still confining our attention whether men of all races possessed equal or

THE HEREDITY OF GROWTH

31

unequal social rights. Anatomical collec- Nevertheless there can be no doubt that

tions were made of human remains from all the Europeans in many of their most im-

over the world. Body measurements showed portant skeletal characters, more espe-

that the Negro had longer arms than the cially those of the skull and the pelvis, are

European and in this way approximated to more widely removed from mammals

the configuration of the higher apes. The generally than is the case with Negroes,

science of ethnology soon became merged Kaffirs, Bushmen and Australians."

into that of anthropology. In order to study how far each race possessed the peculiar body form and physical conformation which has enabled it to meet its particular climatic and other demands and to maintain existence
under its particular conditions, the Archduke Maximilian, later Governor of the
Kingdom of Lombardy and Venetia, fitted out an Austrian frigate to make a voyage round the world. The tour was made dur-
ing the years I857, 8, and 9, and the anthropological collections and measurements made
by Drs. Schertzer and Schwartz were examined and edited in great detail by Dr. A. Weisbach. (Osterreichen Fregate Novara
um die erde Anthropologische Theil, Wein, I867.) Their work formed the basis of the
modern study of anthropometry. Further anthropometric material was collected during the voyage of H.M.S. Challenger to the
Pacific Islands under Sir Wyville Thompson. The examination of the human remains
and their comparison with specimens in
various museums by Sir William Turner' added greatly to anthropometric knowledge
by the establishment of standard proportions
or ' indices ' of separate parts-e.g., radiohumeral, to distinguish between the long fore-armed and the short fore-armed type, the tibio-femoral index to distinguish be-
tween the long-legged and the short-legged types. Sir William Turner summarizes his conclusions as follows:

The fact that racial differences are asso-
ciated with aptitude to meet special conditions becomes of importance when we con-
sider the varieties to be met with in the physical framework and body build of school children. We must be prepared to recog-
nize among adolescent school children as
many types or varieties as there are types or varieties of physical and other occupa-
tions and varieties of sports. Without the
guidance of the work of such anthropologists
and anatomists as have studied body pro-
portions in terms of the concurrent condi-
tions of life, we cannot measure the results, nor even consider the wisdom or unwisdom, of the various methods of training school children.
From this point of view it is with singular satisfaction that we turn to the extensive series of 5oo anthropological measurings of 225 girls, between the ages of I5-I9, taken by Dr. Gertrude Grutzner' of Zurich. In this study, 30 different absolute measure-
ments of total or special parts are tabulated
in age periods of I5-i6, I6-I7, I7-I8, I8-I9.
Many of the girls appear in two tables, some in three. The means, maximum and minimum, and standard deviations for each are given. Other tables of 3o relative proportions of the parts are given, the whole constituting, perhaps, the most complete individual study of the structural growth of a
considerable number of adolescent girls of a

" I do not find, therefore, in the com- particular nation that has yet been made.

parative study of the skeletons of the Although the figures are confined to a par-

races of man, evidence that any one race ticular group yet they provide preliminary

predominates in all its characters over standards by which we may consider the

other races, nor that any one race in all significance of the differences in limb pro-

its characters is lower than other races. portion as regards occupational or other

aptitude.

1 Challenger Reports, i886, Part XLVII, Zoology: In order to do this we must first consider

also Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Vols. XLXI, XLVII, L; and Professor Cunningham, 2 Archives of Julius Klaus-Stiftung for the Study

Cunningham Memoirs, Dublin.

of Heredity, Social Anthropology, and Race Hygiene.

32 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

the circumstances under which growth of results which may follow from physical

limb takes place. Limb bones are laid training. Since these processes are under

down in the form of soft cartilage in which the influence of the hormones, whose

certain foci or centres of " ossification " activity, though capable of disturbance by

appear, one in the middle of the shaft disease, is largely a matter of natural en-

(diaphysis), several smaller ones at the ex- dowment, it is by a study of them that we

tremities (epiphysis). Hard bone formation may hope to get in closer touch with some

extends from these centres at a progres- problems concerning the relation between

sively diminishing rate. The diminution heredity and circumstance.

and final cessation of growth is secured by

the action of the internal secretions of the body, or hormones. These cause bony union

MENTAL AND PHYSICAL APTITUDES

of the diaphyses with the epiphyses at a fixed We have already referred to the high

period of development and cessation of selective value of our national system of

growth. As regards the influences of public education. It is very important to

exercise and activity of limb upon growth it notice that great attention is now being paid

is interesting to note that, while, in the leg, to vocational aptitude, not only by industrial

growth is taking place more extensively psychology but by anthropometry. The

and continues for a longer time at the knee Industrial Fatigue Research Board has

than at the hip or the ankle, yet, in the arm, recently published a Report (i6c) by Eric

growth takes place more extensively and Farmer on the relation between arm-propor-

continues for a longer time at the wrist and tion, span, etc., and skill among certain hand

shoulder than at the elbow (G. Kenelm workers in a chocolate factory. At the instance

Digby, Journal of Anatomy, Vol. 4I).

of the Board of Education attainments in

This greater degree of growth, and the handicrafts and drawing are accepted as

later period at which it takes place, at the contributory subjects for passing the School

shoulder, wrist, and knee joints, compared Certificate Examination. The recognition

with the elbow, hip, and ankle joints, is re- of the part played by handicraft in mental

lated to the wider range of movement and development and attainment is, to my mind,

greater variability found among indivi- at present still very incomplete, but even

duals, and probably has much to do with partial recognition shows that the undue

differences in individual aptitude, as well as stress hitherto placed upon memory and

with the possible effect of greater or less use receptive intelligence and language facility

and training during periods of rapid growth. during school life is becoming realized.

Researches in X-ray photography have Handicraft (including writing) is partly a

shown that the process of ossification and matter of suitability of the muscles of the

the union of parts of the long bones follow fore-arm for particular movements, and

very definable laws, and that, even at birth, partly a matter of the nervous control of

there is a marked difference between the two those movements, guided by a focussing of

sexes, so that the process in girls is more stereoscopic vision on that point on the

rapid than the process in boys, firstly by vertical plane on which hand movements are

days, then by weeks and months, and, by naturally conducted. Stereoscopic vision

the age of i6, by years-ossification in the at this point is obtained by the convergence

girl being then I Y-2 years ahead of that of the two eye balls and by the accommo-

in the boy. About this time, growth in dation to near vision of the two lens on a

height in the girl almost ceases, while that near vertical plane, which is quite a differ-

of the boy often goes on till i8 or ig and ent mechanical problem for stereoscopic

even later. As cessation of growth in length vision on a more distant horizontal plane.

of limb bone is associated with increased de- The part played by the relative size and

velopment of limb muscle, this fact must musculature of the fore-arm has not, so far

have important bearing upon any different as I know, yet been studied.

THE HEREDITY OF GROWTH

33

Realization of the importance of propor- hereditary) then it may also be true that

tional length of limb to other parts of the when we desire to separate the relative in-

body in relation to various forms of physical fluences exerted by heredity and by circum-

activity and manual dexterity, together stances on intellectual activity and attain-

with Mr. Eric Farmer's special inquiry ments, we should be wise to approach the

already alluded to, led me to undertake at subject by a preliminary study of certain

the Manchester Grammar School a some- structural conditions.

what similar inquiry to that undertaken by

Dr. Gertrude Grutzner at Zurich, not, however, for purely anthropological purposes,

THE BIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS

but in order to help clear up some of the The system of phrenology introduced by

obscurity which surrounds the presence or Gall failed to provide a satisfactory basis

absence of aptitude for special forms of edu- for discovering the true relations that exist

cational training. I desired to establish the between special forms of cranium and

existence of special types of body build special aptitudes and acquirements, not

along the lines of proportional limb develop- because Gall did not make very thorough

ment. dissection of the brain itself nor because he

The proportions calculated were:

did not attempt to classify mental processes

(a) Relative length of arm and leg in proportion to sitting height or trunk length.
(b) Proportional girths of upper chest and waist, shoulder, upper arm and fore-arm in relation to sitting height or trunk length.

in terms of the ends which they served. The system failed because neither the
craniological descriptions nor the psychological classification adopted were based upon biological science. Daubenton in I764, Peter Camper in 1770, and Blumenbach in

Although the inquiry is still very incom- I790 had already begun to lay down the

plete and only clinical experience without biological laws of growth whose range of

mathematical proof is at present available, variation determines the diversities to be met

vet the clinical indication is considerable with in the shape and proportions of the

that the short-armed boy differs from the human skull. Sir Charles Bell in I799

long-armed boy in his greater command had shown that different nerve impulses

over the smaller ranged muscle movements travelled along different nerve tracks and

of the fore-arm, and therefore in his greater that special groups of nerves met special

dexterity and skill in certain forms of organic needs.

handicraft and draughtsmanship; and that It was not, however, till Retzius in I842

the long-armed boy shows greater aptitude had introduced the use of a cephalic index,

for such sports and activities as require a and Huxley had introduced indices to

wide reach and range of movement.

measure the proportionate development of

The limitations of this paper prevent any the nasal passages and nasal sinuses, and

full reference to the influence of exercise Paul Broca had introduced the orbital index

and training, that is, of outward circum- for the study of the mechanism needed for

stances, upon the attainment of special skill forward stereoscopic vision, that the bio-

as compared with natural aptitude. This logical factors influencing the architectural

must be left for a later inquiry. Enough plan of the human skull, external to the

has, however, been said to suggest that if brain itself, could be considered. Our

in our attempts to separate the relative understanding of human purposes and en-

influences exerted by heredity on the one deavours reaches a further stage when we

side and by circumstances and training on succeed in unravelling the mechanism by

the other, as regards physical activities and which they are accomplished. The varia-

handicrafts, we are helped by beginning tions in the modification of the visual

with a study of structure and body propor- mechanism which, by permitting downward

tions (which are unquestionably largely stereoscopic vision, brings the finer move-

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW ments of the hand under visual control, machinery and the structural conditions
need to be determined before we can judge which accompany the achievement of purthe range of aptitude or otherwise for special pose is a natural preliminary to the study handicraft; for, in handicrafts and other of the degree to which that purpose can be special attainments, a study of the achieved.

THE BIOLOGY OF DIFFERENTIAL GROWTH

Dr. Mumford suggests that the variations tiate throughout life (Ford, I928; Ford and

in relative proportions, which he has studied Huxley, I927, and I929 in press). These

in school children, are correlated with diffe- control such characters as the rate at which

rences in skill and manual dexterity. This pigment is deposited in the eye and its time

possibility is of special interest. If the of onset. In addition a single recessive

inheritance of such differences could be factor controls the general body-growth,

proved it would become a matter of primary slowing it down but not altering the size at

importance for eugenics.

miaturity. The essential similarity of gene-

The inheritance of this kind of variation tic phenomena throughout the animal king-

is inherently probable, though there is as dom leads us to suppose that in many other

yet comparatively little direct evidence on cases growth rates are inherited in the same

the subject. We are here concerned with simple way. Huxley (I924, I927) has

the inheritance of differential growth; that pointed out that the hind limbs of adult

is to say, with genetic factors controlling grasshoppers have a fixed relative size,

rates of development. That such factors while the claws of mature male lobsters

exist is now known, but it is only in recent have no such fixed size but increase rela-

years that they have been detected and tively to the body; in both cases the rate of

studied; for much of the modern genetic change is the essential character inherited.

work has been conducted on the higher The data presented bv Davenport (I926)

insects, in which growth and differentiation show that the relatively greater sitting-

practically cease on emergence from the height of women as compared to men is due

pupa. Professor Goldschmidt was, however, to the fact that the limbs are growing in

driven to postulate factors controlling the relative length during childhood at approxi-

rate of production of sex-differentiating sub- mately the same speed, but that growth

stances in the moth Lymantria dispar ceases earlier in the female.

(Goldschmidt, I923), and of factors control- It thus appears likely the variations in

ling the rate of pigment deposition in the proportion studied by Dr. Mumford are

larva of the same species (Goldschmidt, genetically controlled, and probably in quite

I927).

a simple way. We must therefore hope

A number of such factors have been found that he will publish statistics demonstrating

in the small crustacean Gammarus chev- his important conclusions at an early date.

reuxi, which continues to grow and differen-

E. B. FORD.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXI, No. 1.

