THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
THE EUGENICS OF WAR.1
By DAVID STARR JORDAN
(Chancellor of Stanford University, U.S.A.).
THE effect of war on nations is to spoil the breed, by the very simple process of the reversion of selection. This fact was first noticed, so far as I know, by Benjamin Franklin, who was the wisest man in the early history of the United States. In our Colonial period he stood out as the sage among our people. He called attention to the fact that the system of standing armies and war in vogue in Europe in his time could not endure, because the result of it would be that the nations would breed from inferior stock, that the strong men would be destroyed, or kept from marriage, and those at home-those that war could not use-would be the parents of the next generation. And so, he says, that system cannot stand. That system still endures in Europe and in most other parts of the world, and the indictment against it is perfectly true. And I want to call your attention, for a little time, to some of the points in this connection. I can only touch a few of the main features. I may not say anything which is not known to all of you, and I must paint my picture with a very broad brush if I am to make any picture at all.
We have discovered within the past thirty years-what we knew before, but we can now prove it-that the laws which govern the breeding of men are precisely the same as those which govern the breed of the higher animals. Man is a higher animal; man's place is in Nature. And among these laws we
1 Being an address delivered at the residence of her Grace the Duchess of Marlborough, Sunderland House, on Monday, July x4th, 1913, Major Leonard Darwin (President, Eugenics Education Society) in the chair.

198 EUGENICS REVIEW.
have a few very simple ones. " Like the seed is the harvest." That is, an individual is not descended from the great herd; a man is not descended from his town or his nation; he is descended from that part of the nation, an individual from that part of the herd that formed his real ancestry. No herd of animals ever ran out through any other process excepting the selection of inferior animals for breeding purposes. No race of men, no nation, ever declined, ever decayed, ever went out for any reason except the killing out of the strong and the continuous breeding from inferior stock. " The blood of a nation determines its history "; that is, the type of man which you have in a nation determines what the history of that nation shall be. Reversing that, the history of a nation determines its blood; the events which have taken place in one way or another in a body of men determines what that body of men is to be in the future. The man who is left controls the future. We speak of blood in that sense, as the line of heredity. We know now that literal blood has hothing to do with heredity, but we may retain the old figure of speech. We know that the qualities of the individual are carried over by an elaborate process through the germ cells, not by means of actual blood. But " blood " means heredity in ordinary usage when we say " blood will tell." We say the history of a nation determines what its blood shall be. If a nation has destroyed its bravest, its most courageous, its most soldierly men, it will cease to breed that kind of man. If a nation destroys its men who are over six feet high, in time it will not have many men who reach that stature. You know the method by which fruit trees are made to bear the largest or the most delicious fruit. It is done by selecting the
best for perpetuation; that those which have the required qualities are kept as parents, but those which have other qualities are not. You know that selective breeding, as practised in the case of the higher animals, is " the magician's wand" by which the breeder can summon up any kind of animal that his fancy or needs may require. That is the main guiding principle in eugenics; with the best people as parents, you will have like people as descendants. If we breed from the weak or feebleminded and vicious, those, in a word, which are undesirable in

THE EUGENICS OF WAR.

I99

one way or another, you will have the same general type: " Like the seed is the harvest." It is not true that the harvest is exactly like the individual seed, because each individual man is a hybrid, the result of many and complex crossings of races and sub-races, an ancestry agreeing in a general way but differing in the minor traits by which we know our friends. We cannot tell with certainty from the parentage exactly what the descendant of any crosses or matings may be; but we can tell approximately. Great things will not come from small things; that great men and noble women are not descended from the feeble-minded, nor the strong from the weak and enfeebled.
As I have come to study this matter, gathering such material as the world offers in one way or another, it has seemed to me that in this fact of the effect of war in the reversal of selection lies a great overshadowing truth of history. There is not a nation that is to-day what it might have been if it had chosen its best for survival instead of for slaughter. Those who have been lost the world over have been best in the physical sense at least, and to some degree in the mental and moral sense. Men have always chosen for war the best men they could get. They have always been able to get those that were better than the average that they left at home. And if you go over the history of nations-and I must pass over that rapidly-you will find that the downfall of any nation arises through the gradual weakening of its people, and the gradual rise of the dominance of the ruling power. That has gone on in proportion to the destruction of the strong and the fit. When we knew of Rome first, its people were very efficient. They were strong and dominant, austere, severe.. They were men who looked upon no one as their superiors and on no one as their inferiors; they knew no want they could not themselves satisfy. " They were too self-willed
and independent to allow anyone to rule over them but thenmselves." All that was also said of the English colonists in America; but it was true of the people of Rome. After a while came the extension of power to other countries. They found that they could bring in as servants and slaves the people of other nations. They brought to Rome the accumulation of the

200 EUGENICS REVIEW.
conquest of the world. And Rome became like a huge spider, drawing in from all parts of the known earth whatever of wealth or power it could attain. And as the young men were sent away from the fields and the farms about Rome, from the
Campagna and the flanks of the Apennines they were scattered all over the world, and the Romans grew fewer at home. Rome filled up like an overflowing marsh, but it was not filled with Romans. It became populous with the sons of slaves and of stable-boys, settlers and camp-followers, wanderers from other lands, who had come to get rich quickly. You find even Julius Caesar speaking of " the dire scarcity of men." In the time of Titus and Marcus Aurelius we learn that " the human harvest was bad." The young men of Rome were not fitted for a young man's work in those days, when men were wanted only for war. " Vir has given place to Homo," that is, the strong man has given place to the mere human being. All through Roman history there is this complaint of the dearth of strength. You will find in Seeley's History that " Rome perished for the want of men," not for the want of population. As the Romans passed away, drawn to other lands or lost on the field of battle, others of inferior type came to fill their places. There were still men in Rome of the old Roman type-severe, austere-in the last days of the Empire such as were there in the first. But there were fewer of them. The decline of Rome is not the slipping back of the whole nation all together. Such change never took place in history. It was simply breeding from inferior stock as the good stock was thinned out. The city was a great vacuum, which the barbarians came to fill. Instead of these self-governing men, we see the rise of tyranny. As the rulers waned in power we see a corresponding weakness of the people. The consuls became emperors, the emperors became autocrats, and at last they were worshipped as gods; and the higher the ruler rose in power the lower were the people. It was said that " the little finger of Constantine was stronger than the loins of Augustus Caesar." And just as Rome fell, so fell other nations of the past. We know of no cause except the reversal of the laws of eugenics-dysgenics-the breeding from bad stock, instead of eugenics or breeding from good stock. In

THE EUGENICS OF WAR.

201

the case of Greece, in her best time, her people rose through her
thoroughness of culture and her appreciation of art and the power of using language with accuracy and beauty which no people have ever surpassed at any time. And when Greek met Greek, then came the tug of war. When the tug of war was on, it
did not take long to wipe out Greek civilization. After that, the Greeks were all gone, and their places were filled by men who came from other places, by the sons of slaves and pedlars. I might go through the history of other nations in like manner.
In the break-up of the Roman Empire, no province had a brighter future than Hispania, our Spain, and she, like others, had staked and lost her future in war and conquest.
" Against the credit for redeemed souls," said, in I620, La Puente, the Augustinian friar, " I set the cost of armadas and the sacrifice of soldiers and friars sent to the Philippines. And this I count the chief loss. For mines give silver and forests give timber, but only Spain gives Spaniards, and she may give so many that she may be left desolate and constrained to bring up strangers' children instead of he,r own."
" This is Castile," says another writer. "She makes men and wastes them." " This sublime and terrible phrase," says Captain Calkins, " sums up the whole of Spanish history."
I might take up other countries in the same way. A German writer, Dr. Otto Seeck, of the University of Miinster, who has given us the best account of the cause of the decline of Rome, has claimed that the Thirty Years' War, which destroyed about ten millions of people out of the sixteen millions alive in Germany when the war began, did not harm the breed, because massacre-more kindly than war-takes the weak and the incompetent as well as the strong. In his judgment, the breed was not injured in Germany by the killing of nearly two-thirds of the people in that Thirty Years' War. It may be that massacre, in the long run, is less harmful to eugenic development than war. It may be also that those types of war which are the most noble, that is to say, which have the most excuse, or at least which are most nearly inevitable, are the best kinds of war in a moral sense, while they are the worst in the eugenic sense. Better men go to war for principle than for plunder.

202 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Better men go to war as willing soldiers than those who are forced, as conscripts. The term "white slave" was, I understand, first used by Napoleon III. in reference to his unwilling conscripts who were brought into the army. But we would not say that massacre was to be commended on account of this fact, because in all these matters there are not only eugenic values, but also moral values; although, from the standpoint of eugenics, if you must have killing, it is best to have general massacres, taking all grades of people alike, yet as moralists we have no right to commend either the one or the other. At any rate, it is an interesting question. It is a question which is to be decided on evidence no one yet possesses, whether the Thirty Years' War actually destroyed more of the weak than of the
strong. In his charming studies of "-Feudal and Modern Japan,"
Mr. Arthur Knapp mentions again and again the great marvel of Japan's military prowess, as shown in the Chinese War, after more than two hundred years of peace. It has been even more conclusively shown in the Russo-Japanese War since Mr. Knapp's book was written. His astonishment was that after more than six generations in which military drill was not the final aim of each young man, the virile qualities of patience and
courage were found unimpaired. In the light of the reverse of this condition which we have
been considering in the case of European nations, we can readily see that the experience of Japan was just what we might expect. In times of peace there is no slaughter of the strong, no sacrifice of the brave. In the peaceful struggle for existence, there is a premium placed upon these virtues. The virile and the brave survive. They and their descendents are not wasted on the battlefield. It is the idle, the weak, and the dissipated that go to the wall. "What won the battles on the Yalu, in Korea, or Manchuria," says Professor Inazo Nitobe, " was the ghosts of our fathers guiding our hands and beating in our hearts." If we translate this from the language of Shintoism into that of science, we find it a strong testimony to the fact of race-heredity, the survival of the strong in the lives of their self-reliant and effective sons. The shades of the soldiers who fell before

THE EUGENICS OF WAR.

203

Napoleon are not guiding the hands or beating in the hearts
of the men of Europe to-day. If, after two hundred years, or even twenty years of inces-
sant battle, Japan should remain virile Ind warlike, that would
indeed be a marvel. But that marvel the world has never seen. It is doubtless true that military traditions are most persistent with nations most frequently engaged in war. But military traditions and the physical strength to gain victories are very different. Other things equal, the nations which, like Japan, have known " the old peace with velvet-sandalled feet " are most likely to develop the " strong battalions " on which victory in war is most likely to rest.
But across the Straits from Japan lies another nation which, 300 years ago, was more civilised than Japan was, a people with a fine artistic sense. They built palaces and temples, which the Japanese imitated as closely as they could but without changing either motif or device. The temples and palaces of Nagoya and Kyoto are but replicas of the palaces of Seoul. But within Korea for centuries there was continuous strife. Each victorious faction cut off the heads of prominent rivals, and this reversal of selection had much to do with the utter failure of Korea as a nation. The cause of its utter collapse under Japanese pressure lies largely in the fact of such reversal. To remove the leaders of the Opposition Bench is a process which, if continued long enough, destroys all possibility of strenuous opposition.
I am told that Samarcand and Paraguay, regions I have not visited, perhaps more than any other districts on earth, shows the effect of slaughter of the strong men in war.
The great nations of Europe have lost enormously in their different degrees, a loss marked by the angle between what they are and what they might have been. We do not know how many potential Shakespeares, Newtons, Miltons, Cromwells, Wordsworths, and Tennysons belong to the great roll of the slain unnumbered, whose potential fathers fell on the thousand battlefields of Europe. We cannot measure the great widening wedge of those who might have been and are not. The effect of war is like that of cutting off the roots of the tree; it does

204 EUGENICS REVIEW.
not affect the character of the fruit, but it affects the amount of the fruit borne on it, and in the long run it affects the vigour of the stem. For a time the fruit will be the same. Strong men will appear in a nation after war as before, but there will not
be so many of them, and the general average will be lower. Four millions of young men fell in the wars of Napoleon;
four millions of young men from all the western part of Europe. These men who were lost were between i8 and 35 years of age, for the most part, young men without blemish, as far as might be. Their bones are scattered far and wide, from Moscow to Egypt, from Waterloo to Trafalgar. These men represent a potential development in their descendants perhaps nearly as great as that which has come from the descendants of those who were survivors. It was said that " Napoleon peopled hell with the elite of Europe." It may be that in so doing he reduced the possibilities of fine life in Europe by a half.
Some twenty years ago I visited the City of Novara, in Northern Italy. South of the town was a wheat-field, where the Sardinian army was once encamped, and from which they were driven by the Austrians. From the field the Sardinians fled-you can still trace their flight by the marks left by bullet and by cannon ball on the houses-down the long street to the City of Novara. Here the King (Charles Albert) sat in his palace, and when the fleeing army came by he gave up his throne to his son, Victor Emanuel. History tells the rest, but the significance of such events lies not in the fate of kings, nor does it lie in the fate of the men, nor yet in the waste of their lives, nor even in the sorrows of those who loved them. It is found in the effect upon the race.
On the battle-field of Novara the farmers had ploughed up the skulls of the slain, had stacked them up until they formed a pyramid some fifteen feet high, with a little canopy which kept off the rain. These were the skulls of young men between i8 and 35 years of age; young men from the farms and shops and schools, some from France, some from Italy, the rest from Austria. And as these were, according to custom, the best among the yeomanry, so in their homes since then the generations have arisen from inferior stock. By the character and fate

THE EUGENICS OF WAR.

205

of the common man and the opportunity offered to him, the nations must be judged. On him the fate of the nation depends, and the waste of Novara is a waste which is enduring. It is like cutting the roots of a tree while its flowers and fruitage continue. The roots of to-day determine the fruitage of the future. Those nations who have lost their young men in war have in so far checked their own development.
Not one Novara could work ruin to any nation. But no Novara ever stood alone. Down the road in Lombardy is the little town of Magenta. You know the colour we call magenta, the hue of the blood that flowed out under the locust trees in the
park, the blood that stained the river below the hard-fought bridge. Here the French canme up from the West. In due time the Austrians fled from the bridge to the park, from the park
down the long street toward Milan, and at last out of all Lombardy. Here in a cloister of the old church of Magenta you will find the pile of skulls-skulls of brave men. You can know it by the bullet holes which the spiders for half a century have vainly tried to heal.
You will go down the plains of Lombardy, eastward to Desenzano, on the Lake of Garda. Near here is the field of Solferino, bloodiest of all, where some forty thousand killed and wounded men were left by the cowardly armies for three days on the field, untended save by flies and mosquitoes. It was here that Henri Dunant, of Geneva, a tourist in Verona, organised the work of relief which grew at last into the Red Cross Society. Dunant was almost the first to see a battlefield with modern eyes. To him it was not a field of glory, but a " European calamity." He died at Heiden on October 3Ist, I9IO, but not until he had earned the Nobel prize, not for his work for peace, but for doing his part to make war a little more human and less horrible.
If the skulls of all who fell in the great campaigns of a hundred years ago were piled up as at Novara, it would make a column twenty times as high as the tallest spire in Europe.
What now of Germany? She has had her share of the desolation and the degradation of war. It is said that in the Thirty Years' War the population of Germany was cut down from i6,000,000 to 6,ooo,ooo people. It is said that not before

206 EUGENICS REVIEW.
I870 was Germany able to regain the ground she held in i6i8. It is, moreover, claimed that while Germany is military she is not warlike. While there is no nation so dominated by the professional soldier with his mediaeval scorn of commerce, science, and all civilian things, yet there is virtually not a man in the German Army who ever saw a battle. The superiority of Germany lies in its science, its industrial art, its commerce, its exaltation of all civilian activities. The evidence of the havoc of war is not so clear in Germany as in most other lands of Europe. Perhaps massacre and desolation destroyed the weak as often as the strong. Perhaps, again, the fact of universal compulsory education and compulsory industrial training, with compulsory insurance against old-age, has greatly reduced the visible number of unemployed and of the unemployable. The factor of emigration which has filled the great cities of the new world with young Germans, ambitious and energetic, is one which we cannot estimate in comparison with the effects of war. When the best emigrate, the home lands become impoverished, but emigration gives new ideas and new experiences. The loss of one region is the gain of another, and the gain with good men overbalances the loss. The men of the new world are old-world men who have learned something in a new environment; lost something perhaps in exchange of all that is gained, but in the long run the new advantages outweigh the old. But loss which is loss comes from the sacrifice of the strong.
What shall we say of England and of her place in the history of war? In the Norse mythology, it was the Mitgard serpent which reached round the world, swallowed its own tail, and held the world together. England has made this a British world. Her young men have gone to all regions where free men can live. They have built up free institutions which rest on co-operation and compromise. She has carried the British peace to all barbarous lands, and she has made it possible for civilised men to trade and pray with savages. "What does he know of England, who only England knows?" For the activities of Englishmen have been infinitely greater than within the little island from which Englishmen set forth to inherit the
earth.

THE EUGENICS OF WAR.

207

What has all this cost? It could not be done unless it was paid for, and we must not wonder if such strenuous effort, such sacrifice of life and force, has left her with something like exhaustion.
"There's a widow in sleepy Chester Who mourns for her only son,
There's a grave by the Pabeng River, A grave which the Burmans shun."
If we would know why Chester is sleepy, we have only to turn to her great cathedral. The long north side of her red sandstone walls tells of her dead, the world over, and always the same story. Tablets to the memory of young men, gentlemen's sons from Eton and Rugby and Winchester and Harrow; scholars from Oxford and Cambridge, from Manchester and Birmingham and Liverpool, who have given up their lives in some petty war in some far-off country. Their bodies rest in India, Zululand, in Afghanistan, the Gold Coast, the Transvaal. In England only are they remembered; men who should have been the makers of Empire.
These names are recorded in almost every parish church and by the hundred in every cathedral. I have heard British officers say of the splendid young men who have died in India like flies that they might have been makers of Empire.
It is of England that Alfred Noyes says:-

"It is only my dead that I count She said, and she says to-day."

In the breeding from poorer stock in a land from which the best have been sent forth we find an efficient cause of the poverty and weakness in the London slums, and in the hopelessness of the poor throughout England. Men who would have risen and banished their own poverty have been in a large degree destroyed; whereas the weakling has been rejected from her armies. Their defects spoil them as soldiers, and they are kept as parents. The man who is left determines the future of every nation. The number of the hopeless and inefficient of our race is disproportionately large in comparison with those who are competent to take care of themselves. This is delicate
ground, and I shall touch on it lightly.

208 EUGENICS REVIEW.
The foreign service of England for a hundred years has furnished careers for the sons of the squire and the gentleman. For a century Great Britain has sent her strongest and most forceful sons. " Send forth the best ye breed," and the nation breeds from the second best.
"We have fed our sea for a thousand years, And she calls us, still unfed, Though there's never a wave of all her waves But sweeps o'er our British dead.
We have strawed our best to the waves' unrest, To the shark and the sheering gull, If blood be the price of Admiralty, Lord God we have paid it in full ! "
Why is it that three or four-some say eleven-millions of Englishmen are unable to earn a decent living, or any living at all, in England to-day? Why is it that these same unemployed are found unemployable in Canada, in Australia, or wherever they may go? Why is it that the tendency in all average physical standards is downward, while the standards of the best are growing always higher? The answer lies in the reversed selection of war. Its effects are found in England and everywhere else where strength and courage have been rewarded by glory and extinction. England has exchanged her country squires for the memorial tablet. More than for all who have fallen in battle, or were wasted in the camps, England should mourn " the fair women and brave men " that should have been descendants of her strong and manly men. If we may personify the spirit of the nation, England should most grieve, not over her unreturning brave, but over those who might have been but never were, those who so long as history lasts can never be.
"0 thou, whose wounds are never healed, Whose weary race is never run,
0 Cromwell's England, must thou yield, For every foot of ground, a son.?
Where are the brave, the strong, the fleet, The flower of England's chivalry?
Wild grasses are their winding sheet, And sobbing waves their threnody.
Peace, peace, we wrong our noble dead, To vex their solemn slumber so.
Yet childless, and with thorn-crowned head, Up the steep road must England go I "

THE EUGENICS OF WAR.

209

Dr. James A. Macdonald, of Toronto, a sturdy Scotsman of the Highlands, says: " Was it the ' weaklings ' Scotland sent through a hundred years to Britain's wars ?" When, after
Culloden, as Stevenson says:
"A peri-wigged lord from London Called on the clans to rise."
Was it the weaklings made answer? Were they weaklings from North or from the South who carried King George's ensign in Flanders, and answered the skirl of the war-pipes in Cathay? The men who stormed the heights at Alma, who faced the shock at Waterloo, who saved inany a day in India, and many another in Egypt and in the Peninsula, who climbed the precipice at Quebec, who charged with Wauchope into the hell-mouth at Magersfontain-were they the weaklings of the Scottish race ? Had they no physical fitness, no moral courage, no devotion to public duty which, had they been spared, would
have ennobled Scotland and served the world. For I50 years the wars of Britain the world over have called
to Scotland: " Send us the best ye breed." The best were sent. From moors and glens they went, from the Shires and from the Islands. Generation after generation they went, all the upstanding and fit, from the cottage and from the college, sons of the manse and sons of the glen-the best they bred.
Tell me have the fittest survived ? Go through their cities and over their moors and down their glens. More than 8oo kilted soldiers of the giant mould went out of my ancestral glen to Culloden Moor; up and down that glen have I gone without seeing a corporal's guard of the olden type. In vain I looked for them even in Inverness itself. The glens that bred the men
of the 42nd and the 78th and the 84th and the 93rd have none
left of that breed to give. In vain the recruiting sergeant goes through Strathspey and Strathglass, and Glengary and Glen Tilt, and Glenelg and Glenorchy, and Strathconon and Strathfarrar and Glencoe, and the glens of the West and the Islands. Lochiel might lift in vain the " Camerons' Gathering " that called the heroes to Waterloo. In the West Highlands few
Campbells are left of the breed that once rose up a thousand in a night at the call of Argyll. No Lord of the Isles who sleeps in

210 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Iona could ever again gather a clan worthy his tartan though he blew all night on the pibroch of Donald. And yet a Harvard professor blandly talks of war as God's method of relieving the race of the weaklings:
" The best ye breed " is war's insatiable call. Send your best, your fittest, your most courageous, your youths of patriotism and your men of loyal worth, send them all and breed your next generation from war's unfit remainder. Do that, as Scotland has done it, and what says your biology? Like father like son. Like seed like harvest. You cannot breed a Clydesdale from a cayuse, neither can the weakling remnant of a warlike nation breed a new generation of heroes for a new
generation's wars. " But we are told war ennobles the nation. Did the British
wars that drew 22,000 soldiers from the Isle of Skye ennoble the landlords who drove from their lands the very families that bred those men ? Did the heroism of the Grants from Strathspey and Glenurquhart, and the deathless devotion of the clansmen from Kildonen and a hundred other glens, who saved the honour of the race at Lucknow and Cawnpore-did that awful slaughter ennoble the dukes and earls and lords who, during that immortal sacrifice of the sons, drove the fathers from the crofts and burned the sheilings wherein they were born ? "
In America we have had but one great war. When we were Englishmen we were obstinate, and the Englishmen at home were obstinate, and nobody was very anxious to come to an agreement. We had a war which we called the War of the Revolution. The number who were killed were very small; from the eugenic point of view, perhaps it played a very small part. But we had a later war amongst ourselves, a war to determine whether a great body of people could hold together as a Republic or not. We were in dead earnest on both sides. We on the North believed that the United States was a nation, and that a nation could not endure half slave and half free. And some of us believed, as Lincoln once said, that " for every drop of blood drawn by the lash another would be drawn by the sword." And in the Southern States they believed, on equally
good ground perhaps, and certainly quite as thoroughly, that

THE EUGENICS OF WAR.

211

these States had come together as separate colonies, and that they could not be coerced by force of any central power. And so, not for the sake of slavery, but for the sake of the independence of the States, the great war was fought, and was fought until one side was starved out, and about a million of our young men, North and South, fell in the Civil War. In some of the Southern States the number who were in the army was enormously great in proportion to the population. In North Carolina, with I17,000 voters, there were 130,000 men in the army. Over half of the men who ever graduated in the University of North Carolina were in the Southern Army, and one-third of them were killed in battle. I found, in going over these
statistics again last year, that of the University men a considerably larger proportion fell in battle than of the other men engaged. For instance, from the University of Lexington, Virginia, there went out, under " Stonewall Jackson, " a company made up partly of University graduates and partly of men from the town. Of the University graduates, 40 per cent. were killed in battle, and of the men of the town 20 per cent. And the reason was given me by an officer in the Southern Army. He said, " Those who fought the most, survived the least." In other words, there is always, in war, a percentage against the man of intelligence, because he is likely to be the man of courage, and the man who will fight because he believes it to be right.
North and South alike, the men were in dead earnest, each believing that his view of state rights and of national authority was founded on a solid rock of righteousness and fair play. North and South, the nation was impoverished by the loss. The gaps left are filled to all appearance. There are relatively few of us to-day in whose hearts the scars of fifty years ago are still unhealed. But a new generation has
grown up of men and women born since the war. They have taken the nation's problems into their hands; but theirs are
hands not so strong or so clean as though the men that are, stood
shoulder to shoulder with the men that might have been. The men that died in "the weary time" had better stuff in them than the father of the average man of to-day.

2I2 EUGENICS REVIEW.
A professor of the University of Cambridge, who lately visited the United States, told me that the most vivid impression he got in all his travels from Boston to San Francisco and to
Mexico came from a chance statement of a friend in Boston, that
he belonged to the 69th Regiment of the Massachusetts Volun-
teers. It was, indeed, a wonder that this little State, with less than
half a million people, should have sent 69,ooo men into the
Civil War because they believed that the war was just. This gave an impression of the moral earnestness involved in that struggle, which he had gained in no other way. There were, in fact, I59,000 men who enlisted in the sixty-nine Massachusetts regiments. It took at times 2,500 men to fill the ranks, to keep
in each regiment its full quota of a thousand men. Many of them came from Canada, and officers came from
other States. But Massachusetts had a high reputation and, moreover, each regiment was not made up of only I,ooo men;
some had 2,500. Some were caught in "The Bloody Angle" at Spotsylvania
Court House, the snare at Gettysburg, the sands of Cold Harbour, where whole regiments might be also swept away.
I once had occasion to speak on this subject on Beacon Hill, in Boston, and Edward H. Clements, editor of " The Boston Transcript," next day published this statement: "Ever since the last quarter of the last century the lamentation has been heard: Where are the poets of yesterday? Where are the 'hundred Boston orators?' Where are the historians, the
philosophers, the political leaders, the moral reformers whom the whole country and the world itself gladly followed in the liberalizing of tlhought and of religion itself ?
" In the light of emphasis-op the degeneration of nations through their glorious wars, answer might well be sought in the roll of honour of Harvard Memorial Hall. The price was worth paying, no doubt. At all events, the ones who gave their lives in the Civil War most certainly thought so. But the price was exacted all the same. There stand the names of those who, but for this sacrifice, might have continued the glory of Boston as it was in all the higher reaches of the intellectual life, in national
politics, and in social advance."

THE EUGENICS OF WAR.

2I13

In the Memorial Hall of Harvard University are preserved
the names of the 96 Harvard graduates who fell in the Civil
War. Oliver Wendell Holmes tells us of the millions of noble
souls waiting from eternity, for parents fit to be born of. Millions of these must wait for another eternity, the " slain unnumbered," who can have no part in their nation's history. Men to-day are slaughtered by machinery, and if there was ever glory on the field of battle, there is none to-day. In earlier times men fought directly with each other. There was a certain glory in fighting. The man who was victorious was stronger
than the man who was not. Still, through all time war has told the same story. Sophocles said, two thousand years ago: " War does
not of choice destroy bad men, but good men ever." Schiller said: " Immer der Krieg verschlingt die besten."
(War devours the best.) An old French proverb says the same: " Ce sont toujours
les memes, qui se font tuer." (They are always the same who get themselves killed.)
John Esten Cooke, in Virginia, when Pelham fell at Kelley's Ford, calls out:
"0 band in the pine wood cease, Cease with your splendid call;
The living are brave and noble, The dead are the bravest of all."

In Scotland:

"Proudly they march, but each Cameron knows He may tread the heather no more."
Again, in India, Bartholomew Dowling:
"Cut off from the land that bore us, Betrayed by the land we find,
When the brightest are gone before us And the dullest are left behind."
The same motive, the same lesson, lasts through all ages, and it finds keen expression in the words of the wisest man of our early national history, Benjamin Franklin, " Wars are not paid for in war time: the bill comes later."

