ACQUIRED CHARACTERS
Recent Experimental Evidence By M. S. PEASE

T HE question of acquired characters is one of no less practical importance to
the social reformer than it is of irresistible interest to the philosopher. The certain establishment of Lamarckism would lay to rest once and for all any doubts as to the
causes of evolution and any doubts as to the wisdom in the long run of eleemosynary legislation. To the eugenist the issue is vital.
Samuel Butler, still by far the ablest dialectician in the Lamarckist camp, clearly perceived the two weak spots in the defence.
One was the adaptations of neuter insects and the other the absence of experimental proof.
Both remain with us to-day. Butler put forward an ingenious (if somewhat fantastic) suggestion for the bees and ants, while he
evaded the matter of experimental evidence
by pointing to the enormous lapse of time required for any evolutionary change to
become perceptible. Later arrivals in this field of controversy have, however, taken the converse line by evading the neuter insects and bringing forward successive champions to bear witness to the experimental evidence. As a result, it is true to say to-day that a number of experiments have been described which fit a Lamarckian interpretation, though usually it has not been difficult to find a selectionist interpretation as well. But it is equally true that every one of these instances, from the classic case of Brown-Sequard a generation ago to Professor McDougall's rats of to-day, has failed to obtain any confirmation.
A few years ago, the experiments of Harrison and Garrett on induced melanism in Selenia bilunaria seemed to be a striking case of the inheritance of an acquired character. Professor Harrison fed larvae of this moth on leaves which had absorbed lead and manganese salts in solution, and thus produced experimentally a number of melanic

moths. This induced type was inherited as a mendelian recessive. Here at any rate was a strikingly clear-cut case of induced change (though it is not quite so clear that this change
was a purposeful adaptation arising from the enforced change of habit). Be that as it may, the experiment was clearly capable of confirmation at the hands of a competent and patient entomologist. This laborious undertaking was carried through by Mr. McKenny Hughes of the John Innes Horticultural Institute; his results, on a large scale with adequate controls, have proved completely negative.* No single case of an induced
melanic turned up. It is true that Hughes's material came from the south-east of England and Harrison's from the industrial north; the two strains may have had
different potentialities in their reaction to the metallic salts-but this would introduce a special hypothesis to explain a particular discrepancy. The simple fact remains that an attempt to repeat Harrison and Garrett's
experiment resulted in failure. Professor Haldane has contributed an
analytical appendix to Hughes's paper and this has called forth an interesting rejoinder from Professor R. A. Fisher (Proc. Royal Society, B, Vol. CXII, I933) on the evaluation of negative evidence in a mendelian experiment. In Hughes's case, Professor Fisher points out, the figures by no means exclude the possibility of the metallic salts being a causative agent of a mutation rate up to 5 per cent. per generation. What, however, Professor Fisher's calculations do show is that if lead and manganese are the causative agents of Harrison and Garrett's observed mutations, then these metallic salts induce a mutation rate of an altogether greater order of magnitude than that produced by the
* Induced Melanism in Lepidoptera. Proc. Royal Soc.,
B, Vol. CX, 1932.

I7'

I72 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

most effective known agency for inducing important but oddly quite unnoticed experi-

mutations, namely, X rays. It would seem, ments by Winter (Journal of Agricultural

then, that Harrison and Garrett have proved too much; it would be simpler to suppose (as both Haldane and Fisher point out) that the mutant gene was already present in Harrison and Garrett's material.
The whole matter of acquired characters has recently been re-argued in the correspondence columns of Nature (June 4thAugust 7th, I932) by Professors McBride and J. B. S. Haldane. The new material for argument consists of the experiments by Metalnikoff, which seem to show the inheritance of induced immunity to disease in the bee's-wax caterpillar (Galleria). There is some obscurity as to exactly what precau-

Research, July-December I929) on selection in maize. Here we have a demonstration of
the unexpectedly large range of potential variability. Isolated cases of this have long
been known to -geneticists-for example, Salaman's case of segregation for resistance to wart disease in potatoes from South America,
where wart disease does not exist. But Winter's experiments have emphasized the general case for a measurable character; and in view of his results the position of selection requiresrestatement; clearlytheeffectofselection is not necessarily boundedbyJohannsen's limits. The Lamarckist has always found it

tions Metalnikoff took to rule out an explana- difficult to credit selection with any large

tion along ordinary selectionist lines; but at share in moulding the course of evolution;

best it would be a wise caution, in view of the it is possible that Winter's results may to

history of previous cases, to suspend judg- some extent remove this difficulty, for it

ment pending repetition of the experiment. offers a mendelian-selectionist explanation More recently the EUGENICS REVIEW has for the unexpected rapidity with which a
done good service in publishing an article by species responds by apparently purposeful "Student " in which attention is drawn to the adaptation to a change in external environ-

* January I933, p. 293.

ment.

Eugenics Review, Vol. , No. 8.

