REVIEWS OF BOOKS

BIOCHEMISTRY
Holt, K. S. and Raine, D. N. (Editors). Basic Concept of Inborn Errors and Defects of Steroid Biosynthesis. Proceedings of the Third Symposium of The Society for the Study of Inborn Errors of Metabolism. Edinburgh, 1966. Livingstone. Pp. vii+80. Price 15s.

NO MAN CAN hope to be familiar with the full scope of this little book. All the more important that its hard core-the inherited defects of aldosterone, cortisol and testosterone

biosynthesis-is supported by short reviews of related subjects. In a most stimulating paper

Raine traces the evolution of Archibald Garrod's idea of "inborn errors" from the vague concept of "diathesis" early in the nineteenth century. Korner then describes, concisely
but clearly, the biochemical basis of protein synthesis.

Cholesterol is the precursor of the nine or ten specialized steroid hormones. Two of these hormones, cortisol and aldosterone, are derived from cholesterol by a series of eight, enzyme-activated, reactions. The result of absent or reduced enzyme has been described for five of these. Edwards explains the laboratory methods on which the diagnosis of these "blocks" is based. In a comprehensive account Visser discusses these blocks in relation to

aldosterone biosynthesis and puts forward a possible mechanism for the "salt-losing" syndrome. The secondary association of enhanced androgen synthesis is discussed by Galal
and Rudd. Hubble links these various biochemical disturbances in a clinical perspectivecongenital adrenal hyperplasia. He estimates the frequency of this homozygous condition as about 1: 7255 in Birmingham, indicating a gene frequency of about 1: 44.
The book ends with a brief account of Kay's attempts to treat a patient with inherited lymphopenia by "grafting" foetal liver cells-a useful reminder of the common ground of immunity and clinical biochemistry.
This little volume illustrates the intense activity at the interface between clinical biochemistry and genetics. It will be essential for those working close to these fields and especially congenital adrenal hyperplasia. For the more general reader it provides help in seeing the general pattern, without hiding the gaps in knowledge.

PSYCHIATRY

G. H ATE-TP

World Health Organization. Research in Genetics and Psychiatry: Report ofa WHO Scientific
Group. Technical Report Series No. 346. Geneva, 1966. WHO. Pp. 20. Price 3s. 6d. Obtain-

able from HMSO.

THIS TWENTY-PAGE BOOKLET provides a bird's eye view of the study of psychiatric
genetics, where it has got to and where it seems to be going-the sort of view that can only be obtained from the top of the tree. The scientific group met in Geneva in November
1965; it was chaired by Professor E. Inouye; the members were Dr. N. Juel-Nielsen, Dr. D. W. Kay, Dr. S. S. Kety, Professor Jerome Lejeune, Professor N. E. Morton, and
Dr. M. E. Vartanjan; the Secretariat was Professor E. Essen-M6ller, Dr. B. A. Lebedev
and Professor P. E. Polani. Dr. Eliot Slater was unfortunately not able to attend. Where do the experts think the next advances will come? Paradoxically it is the study
of environmental factors by geneticists which now looks most promising. The outcome of MZ twins reared apart, or subjected to some different experience, reveals the influence of environment with genotype controlled; similarly with the retrospective study of MZ twins who have turned out differently. They recommend that twin studies should start from birth registers. The effect of environmental factors in the aetiology of mental illness can also be studied to good advantage by prospective studies of high-risk cases, such as the children of mentally ill parents, especially when these are brought up in foster homes.
As far as strictly genetic analysis goes, they favour the search for major genes, with
particular emphasis on the recognition of "carrier states" by various devices.

55

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
The genetic analysis of the metabolism of, and reactions to, the various drugs of relevance to psychiatry is considered a promising field, particularly if it leads to the discovery of further genetic polymorphisms. Cytogenetic prospects in relation to mental deficiency are discussed, and it is thought that minor chromosomal aberrations may still be found to excess in psychiatric populations. There is mention of fascinating work on the tissue culture of schizophrenia-prone brain cells.
The need for international standardization and co-operation is stressed: standardization in classification and methods of recording data; co-operation in studying the rare but revealing situation.
It would have been useful to have some references, and interesting to have an account of who is doing what, but no doubt this would have detracted from the general overview. As it is, it provides a short and stimulating account of what the experts think.
JOHN PRICE
Tienari, Pekka. On Intrapair Differences in Male Twins, with Special Reference to Dominance-
Submissiveness. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, Supplementum 188, Vo. 42. Copenhagen, 1966. Munksgaard. Pp. 166. Price, Dan. kr. 25.00.
CHICKS HAVE THEIR pecking order, monkeys their social hierarchy. In man, nowhere is the development of patterns of social dominance seen more clearly than in the miniature community of a pair of twins. Galton noticed the tendency for one of identical twins habitually to take the lead. Subsequent observers have been impressed by similar divisions of role. Psychiatric differences between twins are sometimes found to be related to which twin was the dominant partner. Thus, in psychopathic behaviour the dominant twin may be the one likely to be the more severely affected, in schizophrenia the more submissive. While it would be rash to attribute such disorders in the main to differences in social relationships, it clearly is of importance to learn what we can about the development and effects of dominance-submissiveness. In unrelated persons divisions of this kind may be based in part on genetically influenced traits such as intelligence and an extravertedtemperament. In the special instance of identical twins the environmental and purely social components are highlighted.
It is therefore a most useful task which Dr. Pekka Tienari has performed in reporting in considerable detail the interrelationships between various aspects of dominance-submissiveness and other differences in the early and later lives of a large, representative series of adult twins. The starting material of this investigation, as of Tienari's previous study of psychiatric illnesses, consisted of all male twins born in Finland between 1920 and 1929. The main conclusions are derived from a group of eighty identical pairs, comprising all those available in an area containing almost half the population of Finland. Findings, on the whole similar, are also reported on forty-six identical pairs from other parts of the country, selected mainly on account of suspected alcoholism or psychiatric or psychosomatic disorder, and a group of forty-five fraternal pairs. Systematic inquiries were made as to birth order, birth weight, schooling, achievement of independence, current social status, personal characteristics and many other variables. A large battery of psychological tests was also administered but the results of these are harder to evaluate. Findings are given for every pair and every variable in the form of which twin, A or B, was the heavier, the more disturbed on interview, etc. Distinction is made between which twin was dominant in the sense of being the stronger physically, which was dominant in their mutual relationship ("Who was boss?"), and which twin was the spokesman for the pair in their external relations with the outside world. Most of the information was derived from two or three different informants, with less inconsistency than might have been expected. It was also
56

