REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

325

mental ability is not evidence for or against the assertion that "feeble-

mindedness" is a discontinuous variation. But those who use this argu, ment must consider whether a contrary opinion has been based upon evidence of a better kind.

Another point is that the authors insist upon the conclusion that a judgment as to whether a child requires special treatment is not in fact based purely upon a survey of intellectual characters, but that "these children form a group in which mental defect is very common, but which probably includes also other types of social or school inefficiency, due to traits only by courtesy classed under intelligence, although they may be psychical characteristics."

But this is surely what Dr. Davenport wished to convey in the remarks

derisively commented on by Messrs. Pearson and Jaederholm at the

beginning of their paper. Dialectically, the American authors are entitled

to retort that Messrs. Pearson and Jaederholm are guilty of a petitio

principii. They may assert that what they call " feeblemindedness" is a

complex, and that it is the complex which behaves as a Mendelian unit

character. Let us try to make the point plain by a scholastic illustration.

In some examinations a candidate is examined in, let us suppose, five

subjects, if he gets less than 25 per cent. of the possible marks in any

one subject he is rejected, and if he gets less than 40 per cent. in any

two or more subjects he is also rejected. Consequently the failures will

include some candidates who are quite up to the average in four of the

subjects and very far below the average in one, and others who are some-

what below but not greatly below the average in several subjects. Statis-

tical analysis would not reveal any discontinuity in respect of any subject

between the passes and the failures, and in truth no discontinuity might

really exist. But it might be said that the two classes were really dis-

continuous, that the "unfit" organisation reveals itself equally by a relative

high but still sub-normal efficiency in several directions or by a startling

deficiency in any one direction. The basis of this " unfitness " might be

unitary although its manifestations might be various. We have supposed

that some such idea as this may have been at the back of the minds of

those Mendelians who speak of masked segregation, but we have no pre-

tensions to expound the true Mendelian faith, and very probably our

attempt to provide arguments for the American workers will be repudiated

by them. For our own part we have no sort of doubt that Messrs. Pearson

and Jaederholm's plea for further patient analysis is one which should be

heeded by practical eugenists.

M. G.

Torelle, ELLEN, M.A. Plant and Animnal Children: How they Grow.

Published by D. C. Heath and Co., 3 Portsmouth Street, Kings-

way, W.C.; price 2S. 6d. net.

THE author of this little book recognises that the question of training

children in the ethics of sex is receiving widespread attention. She

realises that such instruction has its foundation in life phenomena, and

that therefore, to be effective, it must be based upon an acquaintance with

these life phenomena, an acquaintance which may be obtained by even very young children if they are familiarised with the life processes of

plant and animal life. That much may be done, in fact, that the most

effective basis may be founded, in connection with nature study at school,

is an opinion expressed by many thinkers on this problem of sex-educa-

tion. But the great difficulty is that simple knowledge of the processes

by which life is transmitted from one generation to another is not readily

available for teachers who would enlarge their teaching in this valuable

way; it is to be found chiefly in the depths of scientific biological litera-

ture. And he who would inform himself on these scientific details finds

himself overwhelmed with technical terms and impressed with the fact

that a study of the reproductive processes of the simpler plants and the

simpler animals is usually regarded as belonging to advanced biological

work and not suitable for, not acceptable to, the young mind of the child.

326 EUGENICS REVIEW.

It is here that the author finds her inspiration for her work. She

has found in her own experience of teaching in the public elementary

schools, that children not only enjoy a study of plant and animal life

when it is dealt with progressively and is related to human life and its

problems, but that they are thoroughly able to understand the subject

matter of botany and zoology when it is couched in simple terms and

phrases.

In this book, then, she embodies an account of " plant and animal

children: how they grow," intending apparently that the book should

serve as a reading book, or perhaps a simple text-book, for use in the

elementary schools, and should supplement and fix in their minds know-

ledge which they have gained through a study of actual living specimens

in class work.

This book should be very valuable in aiding the specialist teacher

to garb his scientific facts in simple words and phrases; it should also

be very tseful to parents who would desire to help their children towards

an understanding of sex matters.

The author, an American writer, has gained her experience in

American schools; hence some of the types dealt with are not to be found

in our country (though their relatives are) and some of the popular names

given are not those in general use here. Although there are a few

inaccuracies of comparative unimportance (e.g. the rose spoken of as a

honey-bearing flower), the book, as a whole, is an exceedingly useful

departure from the usual trend of nature study literature, and though it

carefully includes the reproductive processes in its account of the various

types, it does not confine its attention wholly to these processes; in fact,

it is broad enough in scope to form an elementary introduction to horti-

cultural and agricultural work.

N. MARCH.

Galloway, T. W. v PH.D. Biology of Sex for Parents and Teachers. Published by Geo. Harrap and Co., 2 and 3, Portsmouth Street, W.C.; price 2S.
IN this small volume Dr. Galloway gives a simple, concise account of many of the facts concerning sex, dealing with them from the biological point of view, utilising the biological illumination with considerable skill to make clear the natural, stimulating and upbuilding nature of the sexfactor. The aim of this treatment of the subject is not so much to supply information to be passed on to children as to give instructors themselves -parents and teachers-a correct view of sex and of the special relation of sex problems to child-life, so that they may be fitted to meet the demands which this phase of education may make. He recognises that sex-education may fall into the hands of parents during the years of childhood, of parents and teachers during the early school period, and may be effectively extended during the high school period. He suggests that parents and teachers themselves should be prepared: lectures for future parents and for future teachers should be given by experts in the colleges and training schools.
The Appendix is an attempt to help parents to meet the particular
problems which may confront them in practical dealings with children,
and very rightly emphasises the wisdom of preparedness. Mere know-
ledge, however, does not constitute a mainstay in face of social peril,
nor will knowledge of facts alone serve to upbuild the moral framework. This the author realises to be a very important point, and he deals with the social and ethical aspects of sex-training, both in a special chapter and indirectly as the main inspiring thought running through the biologic theme.
This is a book which should be very useful to the intelligent thinker on these problems of education. It is singularly free from the diffuse wordiness, so characteristic of the literature of sex teaching, and by its very brevity and conciseness should prove to be a mental stimulant of

