REVIEWS OF BOOKS
FERTILITY
Loraine, John A. and Bell, E. Trevor. Fertility and Contraception in the Human Female. Edinburgh and London, 1968. Livingstone. Pp. viii + 384. Price 70s.
THERE ARE MANY BOOK S on infertility and on contraception, but none like this. The others have mostly been written by clinicians without extensive backgrounds of scientific research, and though they may deal, with varying degrees of adequacy, with the art, few attempt any extensive treatment of the science of the subject. This book takes precisely the opposite standpoint, the authors justifying their efforts by the rapid progress of research in the last decade which has enormously advanced our knowledge ofthe endocrinology ofthe menstrual cycle and some at least of its abnormalities, and has led to the widespread use of highly effective forms of hormonal contraception.
Anatomical, biological and biochemical aspects of the ovary constitute the first chapter, followed by morphological and biochemical aspects of ovulation. Next comes a chapter on the technology of hormone assay, a review of methods for the quantitative determination of oestrogens, progesterone, pregnanediol pregnanetriol, testosterone and pituitary gonadotrophins in body fluids. The importance of this chapter depends upon its providing the basis of most of the scientific advances described later. Many of these are dealt with in the next three chapters which cover hormone levels and effects during the normal menstrual cycle and in abnormal gynaecological conditions. In the following two chapters the subject is induction of ovulation in women with failure of that function; by Clomiphene in the first and by gonadotrophic hormones in the second. The last three chapters are concerned with contraception-oral, by intrauterine devices, and in relation to the world problem of over-population. Each chapter begins with an introduction, setting out the objectives, and concludes with a summary and an extensive and up-to-date bibliography. This is a most pleasing arrangement, especially as there are separate author and subject indices.
This is a scholarly work, objective, sound and of good judgment. It is not a textbook of the subject for clinicians; it does not, for instance, deal with the routine investigation of the infertile couple, with post-coital tests, tubal patency tests, surgical treatment and so forth. Nevertheless, it provides the scientific background, and sources of reference to it, that clinicians mostly lack, but can no longer afford to ignore.
G. I. M. SWYER
MIGRATION
Alvarez, J. H. Return Migration to Puerto Rico. Berkeley, 1967. Institute of International
Studies, University of California. Pp. xiv + 153. Price $2.00.
MANY STUDIES of migration and migrants have dealt with the great primary movements of recent times. With some such movements at least, there has been an element of reversala proportion of the emigrants have returned home again. This partial offset has often been disregarded as being of a relatively minor character, but recently a particular interest has begun to be shown in the nature of the reaction and the people who participate in it. Which types of person return-is it the less successful, or those of a particular age or sex, or those with particular family ties? How long do they spend away from home? Do they return to their former place of residence, or do they find a new location in their country of origin? How does any such change of location tie in with the pattern of internal migration in that country ?
185

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Such questions cannot be solved without a great deal of painstaking research. Census data alone could hardly provide all the answers. Migration statistics will not be enough by themselves. There must also be a good general knowledge of the economic and social aspects of the original migration; a special census-type analysis of people who have returned; and some close study of the personal motivations and aspirations involved in particular cases. All these are provided in this monograph, which succeeds not only in giving a reasoned interpretation of the principal aspects of the return movement but also in holding the reader's interest by a commendable brevity and clarity. This is a model report.
Here are just a few of the findings:
(i) Every Puerto Rican knows a good deal about the United States; one in three has lived there, and the others have either spent holidays in the USA or have relatives on the mainland.
(ii) Migration, both outward and return, is closely associated with the general movement from rural to urban areas, and return migrants who originated in the country end in the town.
(iii) There are many types of returning migrant; most of them have spent only a short time overseas and return for family reasons or for social and economic motives, e.g. they did not make a great success in the USA but nevertheless can now occupy a higher social status than before in their home country, especially as a result of skills acquired while away.
(iv) Puerto Ricans live in their own close communities in America, and so integration does not operate to diminish the prospects of their return to the island.
(v) Nevertheless, many are undecided whether or not to return, because of a balance of attraction between the wealth of the USA and the more favourable climate of the Caribbean, and between the relative poverty they experience on the mainland and the feeling of home that they have when back in Puerto Rico.
P. R. C.
PATHOLOGY
Ounsted, C., Lindsay, J. and Norman, R. Foreword by Gilbert Glaser. Biological Factors in Temporal Lobe Epilepsy. London, 1966. The Spastics Society Medical Education and Information Unit in association with Heinemann Medical Books. Pp. 135. Price 21s.
THIS PLEASANTLY PRODUCED monograph analyses the clinical case-records of 100 children with temporal lobe epilepsy and includes lengthy follow-ups. The study has been prospective and the findings reported to emphasize those features of the natural history of the disorder which might lead to its prevention. Many of the children were seen and recruited at the time of their first bout of status epilepticus or febrile convulsions, and the largely prospective nature of the work gives it importance.
Temporal lobe epilepsy is common and probably accounts for more than a third of all chronic seizure disorders, as well as being one of the more intractable forms of epilepsy. The seizures are complex and involve behavioural automatisms, personality and thought disorders, and visceral disturbances, and in this book attention is particularly paid to other little understood disturbances of behaviour, such as the hyperkinetic syndrome and the frequently occurring catastrophic rage. Disorders of psychological function and their relationship to home factors, schooling and society are considered, as is the problem of the destructive potentiality of grand mal occurring in infancy and early childhood. The indication that uncontrolled grand mal may lead to more severe temporal lobe epilepsy has important implications with regard to the treatment of grand mal and its prevention. The
186

