NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.

By NORMAN E. HIMES, Ph.D.

T HE most important events of the past fact that there have recently been intro-

quarter are of eugenic interest in the duced in Washington two Bills, H. R. 5370

broad rather than the narrow sense. and S. I45I, designed to tighten up Section

They relate mainly to population policy and 2II of the United States Criminal Code relat-

control.

ing alike to obscenity and to birth-control

The most extraordinary news is that appliances, advertising and knowledge. The

relating to the extraction, by an official of former was introduced by Congressman

the Massachusetts Birth Control League, Higgins of Boston, one of the urban strong-

from the United States' postal authorities holds of Roman Catholicism, the latter by

of a most significant ruling to the effect that Senator Hyde of Arizona-both at the

it is not illegal for physicians or qualified suggestion of Postmaster-General Farley.

health agencies to send or receive, through The present law provides for the prosecution

the mail, contraceptive materials or instruc- of the sender of non-mailable matter. The

tions. This master-stroke, if such it turns new Bill would make the knowing receiver of

out to be, has been engineered by Mrs. such matter criminally punishable. At hear-

Andrew Marshall, who very shrewdly some ings before the Post Office Sub-Committee,

years ago induced two Boston lawyers of Congressman C. Pierce urged an amendment

high standing to make a study of the exempting the medical profession.

Massachusetts law on contraception. They The only opponents to the Pierce amend-

came to a liberal opinion, the essence of ment were three representatives of the

which was that the dissemination of advice Catholic Church. Mgr. John A. Ryan,

orally was not prohibited. Thus the way was representing the National Catholic Welfare

opened up for clinics and private physicians, Conference, stated that in his opinion birth-

providing they gave no written prescriptions. control was not justified even to save the life

The publication of this legal opinion in the of a mother. Miss Agnes Regan, of the

columns of the influential New England National Council of Catholic Women, and

Journal of Medicine* must have done much Edward J. Heffern, executive secretary of

to allay the fears and stir the intitiative of the National Council of Catholic Men,

Massachusetts physicians.

opposed the amendment. S. I54I was re-

Now we have a second attempt. If it ported out of committee, but Senator Robert

proves successful it will be revolutionary, for LaFollette objected, declaring that the Bill

it knocks essential props from under Com- had not been given due consideration and

stockery, and will render all but unnecessary that he had not even been informed that a

efforts to repeal Section 2II of the United vote was to be taken. The Bill has accord-

States Criminal Code and the corresponding ingly been re-committed.

section of the Tariff Act of I930. I suppose Probably these Bills have slight chance of

the danger is that it is more easily reversed becoming law. They may not even be re-

than legislation-especially if and when ported out of committee. But the mere fact

Catholic pressure groups start operating on that such legislation has been drawn up in

Postmaster-General Farley, a Catholic. this day is significant of the level to which the

NEW REACTIONARY BILL ON BIRTHCONTROL
Difficult to reconcile with the above is the

democratic process can descend. There can be little doubt that Congressman Higgins is vote-catching. These Bills, if they became law, would be even more unenforceable than

* The oldest medical weekly in the U.S.A., formerly the present ones, which are in a state of al-

the Boston Medical and Surgical Journal.

most complete nullification. Their successful

I33

I34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

passage would increase disrespect for law, MEDICAL SOCIETY OF THE STATE OF

inasmuch as from 6o to 8o per cent. of the NEW YORK

married population of the United States On May i8th the House of Delegates of the resort to some form of contraception. Medical Society of the State of New York, Furthermore, such a law would be open to representing approximately I4,000 physigrave abuse. It would be very difficult to cians, adopted a resolution urging the prove knowledge of the content of a package American Medical Association to make a prior to its receipt; and surely mere passive thorough study of birth-control and its receipt without knowledge of content could related problems. The following resolution hardly be considered a criminal offence. was introduced by Dr. George W. Kosmak, Otherwise grave injustice might be inflicted an eminent New York obstetrician and editor upon innocent parties: an individual could of the American Journal of Obstetrics and send contraceptive literature to an enemy, Gynecology:

inform post office inspectors, and secure his prosecution, even though the recipient had

" Whereas State and Federal legislation governing the control of reproduction is conflicting and

no intent whatever to commit a punishable renders certain phases of medical practice illegal,

offence. If these Bills are not cheap votegetting they represent the efforts of a religious minority to enforce its moral values by law
upon the majority. We, in the United States,

it is important that the medical profession as a whole should undertake to clarify and lead in the solution of these questions which involve medical practice and procedures. The importance of such control in medical practice, where such control

have always prided ourselves upon religious constitutes a therapeutic measure, is obvious to all.

toleration, but if one tolerates intolerance,
toleration tends to perish. It is safe to say that the American people have no conception

" Resolved, that the House of Delegates of the Medical Society of the State of New York recommends to the House of Delegates of the American Medical Association that it officially sanctions the

whatever of the extent to which Catholic appointment by the board of trustees of a com-

clerical and lay leaders have been, in recent decades, breaking down a fundamental American ideal and standard.
There has been much criticism in birth-
control circles of Postmaster-General Farley, who has permitted the dissemination through the mails of books describing the safe period technique, at the same time that books describing other methods have been prohibited.* If the ruling extracted from the post office authorities by the Massachusetts
League proves upon later investigation to be authentic, the concession will be a noteworthy one. I must confess that I am at present very sceptical of the Massachusetts report, inasmuch as it runs directly contrary to Section 2II of the United States Criminal

mittee to study carefully all these related problems and formulate at least a preliminary report to be presented to the I936 session of the House of Delegates of the American Medical Association."
The Women's Medical Society of New York State, meeting at the same time, also moved a " unanimous and hearty endorsement " of the stand taken. The New York delegates and those of two other State medical associations will attempt to press for action at the annual meeting of the American Medical Association to be held in June, but I hardly expect that favourable action will be taken this year. The American Medical Association seems to have two outstanding phobias: birth-control and socialized medi-
cine.

Code. It is extremely doubtful if it is within WOMEN'S INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE

the authority of the Treasury or Post Office At the closing session of its annual meeting

Departments to amend this legislation by an held in Washington on May 7th, the Women's

administrative ruling. This matter will be Intemnational League for Peace and Freedom,

investigated further, and there will be a more unanimously adopted the following resolution

adequate report in my next letter.

in support of the Birth Control Bill now

pending in Congress:

* See EUGENICS REVIEW, 1935, XXVI, 256.

Whereas it is generally recognized that population in relation to natural resources and world

NEWS FROM THE U.S.A.

135

markets is one of the causes of war; and whereas the intelligent control of population is a present need; and whereas to achieve this intelligent control, scientific birth-control information must be available for all classes; therefore be it resolved that we, the Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, support the bills now before Congress, S. 6oo and H.R. 56oo.

nursing organizations and officials, social,
educational and labour groups, business and professional women's clubs, parent-teacher associations, Junior Leagues, American
Legion Auxiliaries, rotary groups and political societies.

Though there are national sections of the
League in twenty-seven countries and corresponding groups or individual members in twenty-one other countries, the membership in the U.S.A. is only about Ioooo. The Catholic organizations, on the other hand, represent much larger memberships. Unfortunately, when it comes to counting heads in legislative halls, numbers impress legislators much more than the quality of intelligence they represent.

EUGENICS IN COLLEGE TEXTBOOKS
It is gratifying to learn that many recent college textbooks on the family are giving more space than formerly to contemporary aspects of familial relations, including quality of population and eugenics. Among these are Hornell Hart's Personality and the Family (Boston, Heath), the new edition of Goodsell's Problems o/the Family (New York, Appleton-Century) and J. K. Folsom's The Family: Its Sociology and Social Psy-

chiatry (New York, Wiley). It seems true to MARGARET SANGER'S AMENDMENT say that eugenics has received more symThe National Committee for Federal Legisla- pathetic treatment from American sociolotion on Birth Control has just published a gists in recent decades than heretofore. list of organizations endorsing Mrs. Sanger's Sociologists, perhaps because they deal amendment to the restrictive birth-control essentially with social forces, are apt to be legislation. Probably a thousand organiza- strong environmentalists. Yet recent social tions are listed, among them national, state trends gave guarded approval of eugenics, an and county medical societies and clubs, event which could not have occurred in deans of medical schools, public health and American sociology two decades ago.

Applications are invited for the post of part-time Secretary to the Editor of the Review. A knowledge of shorthand and typing is essential. Write, in the first
instance, to Mrs. Collyer, Eugenics Society, 69 Eccleston Square, London, S.W.1.

