THE ANALYSIS OF PHYSIQUE

By J. I. COHEN, M.A., Ph.D.
(From the Psychological Laboratory, University College, London)

T HE problems of variation in human 5, 6, 7). Persons of dysplastic physique

physique or constitution arise in many suffer from poor health and less sound con-

fields of science. It is the object of the stitution more frequently than those with

present necessarily brief paper to assemble more symmetrical proportions (3).

some of the more important pieces of infor-

mation on this topic. The conventional Fertility

anthropometric methods used by psychiatrists to distinguish psychotic groups and to
measure the association between physical constitution and psychotic type* vary from simple inspection of physique to the taking of detailed measurements. Physical anthropologists follow along the same lines. Numer-
ous indices of body-build have been devised

Persons of asthenic physique are said to have a lower fertility than persons of pyknic build (5, 8). This claim must be treated with caution, for it is a well-attested fact that the average age of unselected pyknics is much higher than that of unselected asthenics
(3, 9).

for this purpose. Many of these indices are

not valid mathematically because the num-

ber of anthropometric measurements multi-

plied together in the numerator of the index

is different from the number in the denomi-

nator. So the size of the individual, as distinct

from his shape or proportions, influences the

magnitude of the index. Two of the best in-

dices of build are

Weight* and Chest Circumference

Stature

Stature

Longevity
There is a clear relationship between physical build and longevity. At the younger ages those who are underweight or markedly overweight suffer from a high mortality. At the older ages some degree of overweight is an asset. In general, mortality seems to increase with increase in weight beyond the optimum. It also increases with an increase in the excess of abdominal over chest girth (6).

Genetic Influences

Disease

Regression towards mediocrity is said to

Fairly convincing evidence indicates that
the individual of asthenic build is predisposed
to tuberculosis, pneumonia, dyspepsia, nervous instability, presbyacusia, schizophrenia, hyperthyroidism and brain disorders. The
person of pyknic build, on the other hand, is prone to diabetes, nephritis, apoplexy,

be more striking in the offspring of fleshy than of slender parents. There seems to be a
tendency for persons of similar build to intermarry (5).* Divergences of view exist
as to the relative influences of general -and
specific factors in determining body size. Castle (io) and Shull (ii) support the view

dropsy, circulatory and alimentary disorders, arterio-sclerosis, cerebral haemorrhage, car-
diac diseases and gall-bladder diseases (3, 4,
* It is not necessary to give a full review of the literature on alleged temperamental differences associated with differences in physical type as this may be obtained elsewhere. See the writer's A Statistical Study of Physical and Mental Types, 1939; M. Schmidt's
K6rperbau und Geisteshrankheit, I929; E. Miller's Types of Mind and Body, 1926; and D. G. Paterson's Physique and Intellect. Io3o.

that general factors play the major part, whilst specific factors (if any) are subordi-
nate. Sumner (I2) and Davenport (5) stress
specific factors at the expense of general ones. Work by the writer suggests that general factors are more than twice as important as specific ones (I4).
* See the data on somatic homogamy given by
Pearl, R., and Pearl De Witt, R. (I934) Human
Biolo,v T. a8-222_

8x

82 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Growth and Shape

come of exceptional stature. In the sphere

Perhaps the most important new approach to the study of physique is that relating

of mental development the rule of growth seems to hold both ways, namely that the

the ultimate size and proportions of the highly intelligent adult must have been a

human body to the processes of differential growth throughout the developmental period.

precocious child and, conversely, the precocious child must, in normal conditions,

The growth impetus of an organism is grow into an adult with more than average

largely determined genetically but environ- ability. According to Burt, however, short

mental agencies also play an important part. children owe their shortness to the fact that Variability in height and weight is a function they stop growing earlier. This is exempliof growth rate which is itself a function of fied in the extreme case of the cretin; whereas age.* The study of relative growth helps tall children mature later (i8).

to bring to light the precise relationships It would be interesting to know whether

holding between the growth rate of the different parts and of the body as a whole.

there is such a thing as a general maturity factor. Brooks (i9) and Gates (20) both

An investigation carried out by McCloy (i) came to the conclusion that maturity is more

to discover the measurements best adapted to or less specific, and that no single mental or

identify body types resulted in the emergence physical trait is symptomatic of general

of three common growth factors which maturity.

McCloy calls factors for linear growth, cross-

sectional growth, and growth of fat respec- Some Recent Results

tively. A study (by the writer) of anthropometric measurements of about 350 adult subjects leads to the conclusion that the growth rates of the bodily parts may be
regarded, from the standpoint of factorial analysis, as determined by two major
reactions, one governig magnitude in all bodily parts, the other governing dispropor-
tionate growth in traits of length on the one hand, or in traits of circumference on the other (I4). More details are given below. The first factor determining general magnitude seems to be the same as the one called "linear " by McCloy.
The question whether the dates of cessation of growth bear any relation to ultimate
physical proportions merits attention. According to the White House Reports, since, as a rule, tall individuals attain their
final stature at least as early as, if not earlier than, short individuals, the genetically tall

The factorial investigation by the writer, referred to above, suggests the following conclusions.
(i) All physical measurements, whether in the vertical, horizontal, or sagittal dimensions, are interrelated. Actually, a general factor determining magnitude in all the traits, or growth of the body as a whole, was found
to enter into all the measurements. The three traits most highly saturated with this factor or, in other words, most informative of
individual differences in bulk, were pelvic and waist circumference and pelvic breadth. It would be worth while finding the relation between this factor and general fitness. So far, no acceptable standard of measurement
of fitness seems to have been devised (23). (ii) The discriminative value of traits, as
regards their capacity to impart information of physical growth or magnitude, varies more in males than in females.

must grow on the average faster than the genetically short (I5, i6). Others have arrived at similar conclusions. Nevertheless, although a person with exceptional stature was prob-
ably a precociously big child, this does not

(iii) By removing the first (general) factor, all the subjects may be reduced to the same general scale of size.* The effect is the same as that obtained by selecting at the outset,

imply that a precociously big child will be- * Size" here, of course, does not mean height. It
means a magnitude partaking of all the traits studied. * The relation between retardation of growth rate, This statement may be criticized on the grounds that

life span, diet and ultimate size are discussed by C. M. it is not permissible to compare the variability of non-

McCay in Problems of Ageing, ed. E. V. Cowdry, I939. homogeneous traits.

THE ANALYSIS OF PHYSIQUE

83

a sample homogeneous for size. When this length, waist circumference, pelvic circum-

is carried out a bipolar factor remains indi- ference on the one hand, and manic-depres-

cating a tendency towards disproportionate sion and schizophrenia on the other. The

development in length traits, on one hand, schizophrenes had relatively longer arms and

or in circumferential traits, on the other. legs and smaller circumferential measure-

Circumferential magnitude in chest, waist ments whilst the reverse was the case with

and pelvis may be considered to be a conse- the manic-depressives.

quence of lack of " growth energy " for (x) In the case of a group of fifty-one

length traits. Measurements in this factor Jewish female mental patients, a significant

determine a person's shape or proportions correlation of o 557 was obtained between a

independently of his general bulk.

combined weighted measure of chest depth

(iv) When the specific circumferential and pelvic breadth and manic-depression

traits are omitted from the analysis, the and schizophrenia. The manic-depressives

bipolar (or type) contrast appears between had relatively deeper chests and broader

disproportionate length (of leg, arm, etc.), pelves.

and disproportionate breadth (of pelvis, (xi) Observable sex differences in physique

chest, head, etc.). In other words, when the are such that it seems reasonable to assume

subjects are reduced statistically, to the two fundamental human types, namely the

same quantity of " growth energy," in some male and the female. If one could establish

it is expended in excessive length and in norms for the physical proportions of males

others in excessive breadth.

and females, one might then be able to

(v) The most reliable traits for distinguish- measure tendencies to masculinity or femi-

ing physical type differences, i.e. the traits ninity in terms of approximations to these

having the highest values in the bipolar norms. One might find, however, as Terman

factor, are leg length, and waist and pelvic and Miles found in their psychological

circumference.

measures of masculinity and femininity (2I),

(vi) The factor determining general growth that there is a considerable amount of over-

and development accounts for about two lap between the sexes, such overlap varying

and a half times as much of the variance of according to age, temperament, and other

the traits as does the factor determining influences.

relatively specific linear or circumferential A comparison was made between the

growth.

results of analyzing certain physical measure-

(vii) If traits are studied singly, true type ments of a group of English males with the

differences will be obscured by the presence results of analyzing the same measurements

of a general factor common to a number of of a group of English females. The results

traits. The common factor must first be suggest that physical differences in females

eliminated before factors governing type as compared with males are to a somewhat

differences will become evident.

greater extent differences in size than differ-

(viii) The order of magnitude of variability ences in proportion or type. Chest breadth

of the traits, as judged by their coefficients also appears to be a better index of size in

of variation, was found to be as follows: males than it is in females. Moreover, the

(a) circumferential and sagittal measurements.
(b) breadth measurements. (c) length measurements. (d) head measurements.

results indicate that the female trunk is more " rectangular " than that of the male. In other words, there is a greater difference between shoulder and pelvic breadth in males than in females.
As compared with males, females have

(ix) With a sample of forty-seven English longer legs relative to trunk volume. They

male mental patients, a significant correla- also have shorter arms and shorter and

tion of 0-4I3 was obtained between a com- narrower trunks relative to stature and are

bined weighted measure of arm length, leg more brachycephalic.

84 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(xii) By the use of Fisher's Discriminant References

Functions (22), a compound measure of four (i) McCloy, C. H. (1936). Univ. of Iowa

variates, chest depth, pelvic breadth, shoul- Studies in Child Welfare, 12, 2.

der breadth, was found to discriminate significantly between eighty-six adult male schizophrenes and eighteen male manic-depressives

(2) - (1938). Univ. of Iowa Studies in Child Welfare, 15, 2.
(3) Pearl, R. (I933). Constitution and Health,
London.

(Jewish patients). The patients were first (4) - and Ciocco, A. (I934). Human Biol., 6,4.

classified into schizophrenes and manicdepressives by psychiatric diagnosis independently of their physique. It was then

(5) Davenport, C. B. (1925). Eugenics Record
Office, Bull. No. 24, Washington.
(6) Dublin, L. I., and Lotka, A. J. (1936). Length of Life, New York.

shown that they could be significantly differ- (7) Draper, G. (I924). Human Constitution,

entiated on the basis of a compound physical Philadelphia.

measure. The compound measure is a linear function of the separate measurements and maximizes the ratio of the variance between

(8) Boldrini, M. (I93 I). La Fertilita dei Biotipi, Milan.
(9) Wertheimer,.F. I., and Hesketh, F. E. (I926). Medicine, 5, 375-463.

the groups to the variance within the group. (io) Castle, W. E. (1924). Proc. Nat. Acad.

It thus enables us to predict, with the maxi- Sciences, 10, 19-22; I8I-2.

mum amount of accuracy, to which psychotic
group any particular patient belongs. The
multiple correlation of mental type with the

(iI) Shull, E. F. (1931). Heredity, London. (12) Sumner, F. B. (I924). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sciences, 10, 178-80.
(I3) Huxley, J. S. (1932). Problems of Relative

four measurements is 0.3I9 (N = I04). Growth, London.

(xiii) The best single index differentiating

manic-depressives from schizophrenes was

found

to

be

Shoulder Breadth Pelvic Breadth

In four pairs of groups studied separately, a

higher value of this index was obtained for

(I4) Cohen, J. I. (1938). J. Ment. Sci., 84,495-512. (I5) White House Conference on Child Health and
Protection (I932). Pt. I, 80-I20.
(I6) Baldwin, B. T. (igii). J. educ. Psychol.,
2, 150-2.
(I7) Thompson, D'Arcy (I9I7). Growth and Form, London.
(i8) Burt, C. (I937). The Backward Child,

the schizophrenes than for the manic-
depressives in every case. In this respect the trunk of the schizophrene approximates more to that of the female. However, when the effect of age was taken into account, the

London. (I9) Brooks, F. D. (I928). J. Appl. Psychol.,
12, 228-41. (20) Gates, I. A. (1924). J. educ. Psychol., 15,
329-58.
(21) Terman, L. M., and Miles, C. (1936). Se*

significance of the difference disappeared. The relative discriminative values of the
various physical traits was found to vary according to age, sex and race.

and Personality, London. (22) Fisher, R. A. (I936). Ann. Eugen., 7,
I79-88.
(23) Cathcart, E. P., et al. (I935). I.H.R.B. Rep. No. 7I, London.

Egic Review, Vol. XXXIl No.8.

