EVOLUTION BY SELECTION

The Implications of Winter's Selection Experiment*

By " STUDENT"

FOR some time after the publication of material, found pure lines, not a pure

the Origin of Species it was generally line. Obviously, therefore, mutations had

held by those who accepted Darwin's occurred with sufficient frequency to pro-

reasoning that species originated by the duce them; and, given time, it may

accumulation of small variations in the be supposed that even in self-fertilized

same direction under the influence of organisms progress could be made merely by natural selection; and the occurrence of selecting the extreme pure line, waiting

large ' mutations,' such as the Ancon for a mutation, selecting again, and so on.

sheep, was perhaps rather overlooked. The Tedious work-but for the Origin of

rediscovery of Mendelism, however, has Species there is now plenty of time. tended to emphasize the latter portion of From a practical point of view, however,

Darwin's work, rather to the exclusion of the plant breeder cannot afford to wait for

the former, until it is actually held in favourable mutations; he cross fertilizes-

certain quarters that the selection of small
differences can only lead to small, or at all events stricfy limited, changes of type.
Yet it cannot be denied that, apart from
colours and other ' fancy ' points, the actual improvement of domestic animals has usually proceeded by just this accumulation of small differences.
If I am not mistaken, the view that selec-

and so in most cases does nature. Now
until experience has been accumulated, the results of cross-fertilization are unpredictable; but very soon certain facts begin to emerge-" Tall is dominant to dwarf,"
Two rowed is dominant to six rowed," and so forth, and such things attract atten-
tion and rather obscure other equally important facts. Cross a " dense " and a

tion is limited can be traced back to " lax " variety, and among the ultimate Johannsen's work, where he showed that progeny may be found plants " denser " from an ordinary stock of beans there could than the " dense " parent and " laxer " be isolated a number of ' pure lines,' which than the "lax" and almost anything differed from each other in the mean weight between. Cross high and low protein, and of their seed, but within each of which no the same overlapping will be found when

appreciable genetic variation in seed weight the first mix-up has sorted itself out.

could be detected.

Try to explain this on Mendelian lines

His work has led to a considerable and it will soon become obvious that even

advance in the selection of cereal seed, in self-fertilized plants there must be a

since it is quite certain that for practical tremendous variety of genetical make-up; purposes ' pure line ' seed will behave in one or two relevant genes will be quite

much the same way as if the plants were inadequate to explain the facts, ten or propagated vegetatively; they will start twenty will complicate the calculation, but

growing together and will ripen together, and their seed will be uniform and behave uniformly in its turn. Yet Johannsen, working of course with self-fertilizing
* Winter, Floyd L.: " Continuous Selection for Composition in Corn," Journal of Agricultural Research, July-December I929. Pp. 451-75.

will be none too many. Perhaps it would
be better to postulate 200-300 and reduce the problem to mathematics.
Since characters which do not affect the survival of the organism are not encountering selection, an ordinary cross-fertilizing population must be expected to accumu-

293

2Q4

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

late among all its members very large place, the stock is apt to die out-which

numbers of genes corresponding to such makes pure line selection very difficult.

unessential characters. In ordinary times Nevertheless much may be done by mass

these would roughly neutralize one another, selection, and it is with mass selection that

each individual carrying a mixture of Winter was concerned.

genes which would produce variation in Premising that he selected continuously

opposite directions, so that only a limited for twenty-eight years, from I896-I924, it

genetic variation would result; but with a is perhaps best to quote his description of

change of environment this reservoir of the procedure verbatim:

genes would serve a very useful purpose One hundred and sixty-three ears of a as raw material for selection: some charac- variety known as " Burr's White " were

ters, formerly neutral, would then affect used as foundation stock from which selec-

survival and all those genes which produce favourable somatic variation would tend to
be preserved while their opposite numbers would be eliminated. Thus the accumula-
tion of small variations in the same direction
could proceed far beyond the original range.*_
That such a state of things does indeed exist seems to be indicated by Winter's paper, to which I am now drawing attention. This describes a very determined

tions were made in four different directions, namely for high oil, low oil, high protein and low protein.
These four strains were carried on in the
same way. In the high protein, for example, twenty-four ears highest in protein were selected for seed and planted
in an isolated plot, each ear in a separate row. These ears were harvested separately and the seed for the next crop selected from the ears which were found to be

experiment carried out on " corn "-i.e. highest in protein. Nine years later the

maize. Now maize is commonly cross- system was modified somewhat in an fertilized; unless cross-fertilization takes attempt to prevent loss of vigour by in-
breeding. Alternate rows were detasselled

* Perhaps this argument may be clarified by an illustration. Suppose during a period when height is of no particular importance to an organism two hundred small mutations have succeeded in establishing themselves in equilibrium, each of which affects height to an equal extent, say, I mm. We may represent the
first gene as either a,, present, or bl, absent, the second as as or b,, and so on. Then any individual will contain either a1 a,, a1 bL, or b1 b, and the proportions in which
these possibilities occur will be assumed for the sake of illustration to be I * 2 * I; similarly with the other subscripts, so that the distribution of individuals according to the numbers of "a" genes which they

and seed was selected only from the
highest yielding detasselled rows. In 1921
this system was again modified to reduce the amount of inbreeding. Two seed ears were taken from each of the detasselled
rows regardless of yield. The high oil, low oil and low protein
tests were similarly conducted, selection being made each year of ears highest in oil, lowest in oil and lowest in protein, respectively.

contain will be in proportion to the coefficients of the
binomial (a2 + 2ab + b2) M or of (a + b)'0.
The standard deviation of this binomial distribution is io, so that although it would be possible for an individual to contain the " a" genes in any number from o to 400, yet in practice even a population of

For a proper appreciation of the work the original paper should be consulted, but only a few figures will be necessary to display the interest of the results:

Ioo,ooo,ooo would be very unlikely to outrange 140-260 corresponding to I20 mm. of height between the highest and the lowest individual, less than one

I will deal with the figures giving the percentage of oil, which are the more strik-

third the possible range.

ing, but the facts are similar in the case

If now we imagine only the highest half of the population to mate (at random) we should get a rise in " a " content of 8 in the mean value, to 208, while the standard deviation and range would hardly be altered, so that the process could be repeated, a further rise of 8 mm. obtained and so on until the mean would rise well beyond the value of the original extreme indi-

of the protein. (i) Two strains have been selected, one
which has a mean percentage of oil about twelve times the standard deviation of the original population above the original

vidual: and all this without fresh mutations. Of mean, and the other about seven times

course this illustration has been simplified to the point of absurdity, but it may serve to exhibit the possibility of such potential variation.

below. As illustrating this, the minimum value in the High race during the last five

EVOLUTION BY SELECTION
PROTEIN

295

Year. MPe Cent.

Staviatond

Lowest Variate. Highest Variate.

I896 IO93
High /\ Low

I897 IO*99 IO'63

I898 io098 IO49

I899 II'62

9 59

1920 I4.0I
I92I i6'66
1922 I7.34
1923 I6.53 I924 i6'6o

7.54
9.I4
7'42
6'48 8'38

I-04
High /\ Low i'i6 '90
I'22 I-32
I'28 I'OI

8.3
High /\ Low 8.3 8*2
7 7 7.5
8.4 6.7

I.79 *89 9.5
I.84 I.35 9.4
I.24 '70 I2*6
I.4I '73 I3-I .II9 117 |I46

6'o
6*6
6*i
5'0 6*i

I3 9
High /\ Low I3.6 I4.0
I4.9 I3-4
I4.8 I3.I

I7.4 IO-5
i8*8 I3.4

20o6

9'6

I9'7 9.4

I9'2 ii'8

OIL

.~ ~ Ma Vau.Sadr

Year. MPer ent. of Oil.

SvatiaOnrd

I896 4.68 High /\ Low
I897 4.79 4-IO
I898 5'IO 359 I899 5-65 3'85

1920 9.28
I92I 9.94 I922 9'86

I923 Io'o8

I924

9-86

i'8o
I7I
i*68
I'58
I5I

'4I
High //\Low '38 '29
'48 '32
.42 *32
'52 '2I
*66 I*I5 *54 'I9
.65 '24
*6Ii 22

Lowest Variate.
39 High /\ Low
3'6 3.4
4.I 3.2 4'3 2-8
7.8 i'o
8.4 I'O 8-7 '9
8.3 III
8-4 '9

Highest Variate.

6*o High /\ Low
5.7 4.7
6'7 4.8
6-5 4.6

Io'6 2*4

II.7

2.3

II.3 2'2

ii-8 2'I

II.7 2'2

years is considerably higher than the maximum value found during the first four years and, on the other hand, the maximum value in the Low race is even more markedly below the lowest in the first four years.
(2) Although the standard deviation of the high race has risen and that of the low has fallen during the experiment, it would be hard to say whether on the whole there has been a decrease or an increase in variability owing to the selection.*
* Dr. Rasmussen of Svalof, has pointed out to me that this might perhaps be explained by an exaggeration in the environmental effect when acting on plants enfeebled by inbreeding. But the steady rise in oil percentage right up to the end of experiment seems to require an almost undiminished genetic variability.

We may assume the variance to be composed of two parts, one inherent and therefore subject to selection, and the other environmental, or " fluctuating," and therefore a hindrance to selection. Just what proportion we should allot to each of these we have no sure means of judging, but in both cases the latter is, I believe, likely to be very large. Incidentally it may perhaps account in both cases for the obvious correlation* between the mean and the standard deviation.
In any case the inherent part of the variation had of course a smaller standard
* It is reasonable to suppose that a given variation in environment would produce greater variation in a high genetic stock than in a low one.

296 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

deviation than that observed for the whole, ment succeeded, by continuous mass selec-

perhaps much smaller, so that the move- tion, in producing two races of maize, one

ments of the means were, respectively, of which has more than twice, and the other

more than twelve and seven times this less than one-third, the normal oil content.

" inherent" standard deviation. Hence In a character so influenced by environ-

either the possibilities of variation latent ment the progress has, of course, not been

in the original material were enormous or uniform in its manifestation; but it appears

a steady stream of favourable mutations to have been comparatively so genetically,

was maintained to carry the means along. and shows little or no indication that it has

In any case, these results cannot be reached its limit in either direction.

explained on the basis of a few easily It does not appear that such steady pro-

detected genes. But by reducing the prob- gress could be obtained with less than

lem to the simplest possible basis-starting hundreds of genes affecting oil content and

from the intensity of selection, the rate of it seems not unlikely that there are

movement of the means at first, and the thousands. In any case it is clear that the

difference between the initial and final possibilities of continuous selection of

values of the mean-it is possible to make small variations for the formation of new

some sort of calculation of the minimum species are likely to be very much greater

number of genes which might allow of so than would appear merely from a considera-

large a change by repeated selection. And tion of Johannsen's work on pure lines,

I find that the order of these numbers is which was carried out on a self-fertilizing

100-300. There is little indication, how- organism.

ever, that selection had yet reached its And so we reach the conception of species

limit after twenty-eight years, and we patiently accumulating a store of genes, of

should probably be within the mark if we no value under existing conditions and for

assumed that the number of genes affecting the most part neutralized by other genes of

oil (or protein) content in Burr's White opposite sign. When, however, conditions

Maize may run up to thousands.

change, unless too suddenly or drastically,

But if we have thousands of genes, con- the species finds in this store genes which

tinuous selection in one direction may, in give rise to just the variation which will en-

fact must, result in progress almost with- able it to adapt itself to the change.

out limit (at all events until the progress It follows that the change appears to

itself induces counter-selection as perhaps have produced the variation which it has

it does in the case of low oil content) for merely selected from among those poten-

although the selection will reduce the tially present. Thus we can reconcile the

number of genes there will be time for fresh view held, amongst other people, by the late

mutations to occur to keep up the possi- Walter Heape, that the environment pro-

bility of further selection.

duces the required variation, with the older

Darwinian selection of random variations, to

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

which it appears at first sight to be dia-

To sum up: Winter has in this experi- metrically opposed.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIV, No. 4.

