Genesis and Reclamation of the poor White in South Africa.*
By PROFESSOR J. E. DUERDEN, M.SC., Ph.D.
Rhodes University College, Grahamstowtin.
The interest at present rnanifested in the problem of the poor white of South Africa, and the seeming inadequacy of any solution would appear to call for its relegation to the fundamental principles of genetics. Indeed, had the question been one concerned with the improvement of domestic stock it would have been submitted to the geneticist forthwith; but as a problem in human welfare, it has been relegated to politicians and philanthropists. Yet the teachings of
genetics apply with equal force to human beings and domestic animals,
and success in either calls for the application of like principles. In his experimental breeding work with animals the geneticist
is impressed with the permanency of the fundamental characteristics of a race,and at the same time with their modifiability in the individual as a result of environmental influences. He is well versed in Galton 's p'hrase: "Nature and Nurture, " and is accustomed to contrasting hereditary and acquired characteristics. As a working basis he proceeds
on the assumption that acquired modifications are non-transmissable,
and that each generation starts where its predecessors began, not where they left off; the germ plasm is deemed to rernain continuous and unalterable, and individual attainments are for the generation only. Racial variation he finds in plenty, and selection of the desirable and rejection of the undesirable enable him to advance the average of the good qualities he desires. Failing the sporadic changes in the germ plasm which give mutations, progress can, however, be achieved only by means of environmental influences, and the effects are but individual, not racial.
Original Stock from which Poor Whites are Derived. In approaching the poor white problemn the geneticist first enquires as to the nature of the original material from which the class has come. From this he can gather to what degree the degenerate condition of today is evidence of an originally retrogressive nature, or to what extent it has been impressed by force of circumstances. If primarily degenerate in nature his science can offer no encouragement; the individual is constitutionally incapable of fitting into the comaplexities of modern
*An Address delivered before the Grahamstown Social Welfare League.

GENESIS AND RECLAMATION OF THE POOR WHITE.

271

life, and can exist only on support from others or under some simpler state of society not yet evolved. If, however, the degeneracy be
the result of circumstancestowhich he has been subject there is the
highest hope for his recovery; the blood is good, but the chances have been against it and call for amelioration.
Historically, there is no uncertaintv in estimating the sociological value of the original stock from which the class of indigent white has evolved. It is derivative of the two most virile nations of Europe, the industrious, adventurous, sea-faring Dutch and British, with a slight admixture of French. The Dutch followed in the wake of van Riebeck, mostly fromn 1652 to 1806, and were largely soldiers, sailors, artizans, farmers and servants with a leavening of the administrative, commercial, and professional classes. In any numbers, the British arrived from 1795, when they first took over Cape Town, and were mnuch of the same types, the purely settler class predominating in the last centurv, notably the three to four thousand 1820 settlers in the Eastern Province. The French refugees arrived mostly in 1688, but their national identity became largely merged in the Dutch element. On the whole the immigrants may be held to have been no better and no worse eugenically than the corresponding classes of their time in Holland and Britain, the descendants of whomnmake up the two nations to-day, while the sturdy qualities of independence and adventure were probably in the ascendancy. Writing in dispatches of the men who took part in the Great Trek of 1836-37 the Governor, Sir Benjamin D 'Urban, describes thern as "brave, patient, industrious, orderly and religious people; the cultivators, defenders, and tax contributors of the country."

Production of the Poor White Class.
If, then, it be accepted that the ancestors ofthe poor white class were neither better nor worse than the corresponding classes in Europe, we have to account for their present state of degeneracy, in which they have become for the most part incapable of providing for themselves more than a bare subsistence. Opinions may differ as to the relative value of the various influences, but a close study of all the circumstances is highly convincing that they can be sumrned up as inherent in the peculiar conditions of South Africa to which the trekkers subjected themselves. The general trend was towards isolation, of removal from centres of activity and progress to distant parts where each could lead an untrammeled existence, free from every form of social, political, and economic restraint, where land could be had for a mere nothing. The free, simple, hunting, pastoral life and the lure of the land made a strong appeal; the country was thinly peopled, and ample room was available for increase of family and stock, or for further migration if necessary. The presence of the native was a disturbing factor, and at the same time inhibited any healthy stimulus for manual work; while the hard natural conditions prevailing in undeveloped South Africa, with the accompaniment of drought and flood, discouraged agriculture and all forms of enterprise, and led to partial exhaustion of the land by stock. The conditions to which the settlers were subject are well expressed by the South African poet, Mr. F. C. Slater:-

272 EUGENICS REVIEW.
"Many evils come to try
Their fortitude: their cattle die,
Sometimes all their streams run dry When, 'neath the sun's unflinching sting, Earth is as a tortured thing, That quivers in its parched pain And begs with blistered lips for rain! Sometimes, when their fields are green, Russet clouds on high are seenHissing clouds that fall like rain Over valley, field and plainHissing clouds that pass in haste And leave behind a desert waste."
With the gradual filling-up of the country and the absence of new areas to which to migrate, the farmner had to restrain his wanderings, his family growing larger and the resources of his land less. Except in
the rmost favoured spots he gradually found himself becoming poorer, and less capable of providing a decent existence. Absence of education
and of stimulating contact with his fellow man and with the outer world engendered narrowness of outlook, and lack of sympathy and plasticity for progressive measures. It was manifest that the trekker had struck out on wrong lines, and could not retrace; he stagnated, an.d his virile nature succumbed.
As regards the proportion of the population now involved, rural and urban, we cannot do better than quote the estimate of Prof. W. M. Macmillan in his Lectures on the Agrarian Problem: "We might state the case thus, that nearly one-twentieth of the white population of the Union are in permanent absolute poverty, mnany of them perhaps demoralised beyond redemption; in addition, we have to reconstruct society so as to prevent perhaps considerably more than another twentieth from being dragged by adverse, but remnediable conditions, down to the level of those submerged. "
The results are such as would be expected, and have but little relationship to national characteristics; they would in all likelihood have been the same with the people of any nation, subjected to the same environment. The descendants of the Dutch comprise by far the majority since they were the first settlers, and have the longest been subject to the deteriorating influence of the remote country, the back veld. It is their adventurous and freedom-loving nature which has been their undoing. "Our poor rustics to-day are the depositories of the traditions of the Great Trek, and the children of the pioneers of civilization in this wide land;" but South Africa owes much to them for their pioneering efforts in the opening-up of the country.
The production of an indigent class of land-owing farmers, descended from virile stock, is probably unique in social evolution, and has an intense interest for the eugenist and sociologist. It is to be ascribed to the depressing influences of isolation, consequent upon the sparsely populated character of South Africa, the harsh pastoral and agricultural condition of the country occupied, and the presence of the inferior Bantu race. Elsewhere the indigent population is constituted

GENESIS AND RECLAMATION OF THE POOR WHITE.

273

'largely of the inefficients and ineapables by nature; the present class is specific to South Africa in its origin. It is for the most part a result of 'historical and geographical factors, acting on an otherwise desirable strain.
New Agricultural and Inzdustrial Era.

In the meantime, and more especiallv during the past twenty 'years, a new agricultural and industrial era has dawned upon South
Africa. The extension of railways, the manifold activities in research,
teaching and propaganda of a vigorous and well-directed Department -of Agriculture, the development of schemes of water storage and
irrigation, successes against animal diseases innumerable, the intro*duction of high-grade stock of all kinds, the advent of the ostrich and lucerne and fencing, the encouragement of fruit and grain production -and better methods of disposal and export of products, all these have placed pastoral and agricultural effort on an assured basis, more pro-
;gressive and intensive. Mining, metallurgical and manufacturing
industries havc made their advances, and wielded an influence in the
-country is rise.
But the stimulating influences from these have failed to reach the isolated trekker on his distant farm or, reaching him, have found him
cold and unresponsive. The incubus of years of depressing isolation, ,subversive to nature, cannot lightly be thrown aside. Meanwhile the
land has made its appeal to a newer and intenselv vigorous type, with -capital and intellect meet for development, infused with the new ideals in agricultuire and awake to its possibilities; the townsman of all classes, merchant, official and professional, has responded to the call of
the countrv and its life of freedom, while the farmer already prosperous has expanded more and more. The glamour of the land prevails in South Africa. The inevitable has happened. The trek farmer has relinquished his feeble hold on his land, and has either become a
dependant upon the newcomer or drifted helplessly into the towns, scarcely more capable of makinig a Ilivelihood there than in the country. Within recent vears one has witnessed whole districts in which the
pioneering farmners, pathetic in their hopelessness, have been replaced
by the modern progressive; the country has advanced in material prosperity, but the individual has succumnbed. The original trek farmer was before his time, elected a wrong course, and cannot now retrace his steps; he failed to fore-see the result of isolation in a new undeveloped country, great with possibilities, but special in their nature, only to be won by strenuous, intelligent effort directed by science. The new occupier takes up where the old leaves off, but has
knowledge of the requirements meet for success.

Recovery.

Recoverv of the poor white class is not without its hopefulness, though having a two-fold bearing. For adults the geneticist has nothing to offer. They are the inheritors of the two or three hundred years of
environmnental influences, unfitting for modern South Africa. The
effects have been cumulative from generation to generation, and have
maoulded the individual from the day of his birth. Transferred to

274 E4UGENICS REVIEW.
ameliorating surroundings, his efforts to shake off the incubus of habit are for the most part futile. In.general, he is incapable of making a decent livelihood either under or away from his old surroundings, incapable of adaptation to the nmore strenuous and comnplex conditions now normal to South Africa. He but accentuates the ordinary poverty
and distress of town life. His day of opportunity has gone by; he remains a genuine subject for philanthropic effort, designed to help to.
ameliorate the condition of the incapable and the unfortunate in life 's. struggle; his position calls for the exercise of all the virtues of altruism., but he is Ino longer a helpful factor in his country's welfare.
On the other side, the possibilities of the new generation inspire one with the highest hope. The imrnigrant stock has been shown to be virile, the (quality of the blood has not changed, the deteriorating influences affect only the individual., the new life starts with all the original potentialities of its class, and can be nmoulded to the possibili-
ties of its anicestral forbears. But from the beginning the comning generation must be freed fromn the depressing environnment which enfolds its irnmediate forbears, ere it is moulded in the sanmc depressing
mnannier; it must be placed under influences such as will fashion it in harmonv with the social needs of to-day. There is no escape for these genetic re(luirements. Allowi, the new generation to grow up under the old parental surrouindings, and it repeats the parental incapacityv subject it to favourable conditionis and it responds, fitted for the com.plex needs of its class. No creatuire does its best which does not start we] I from the beginninig.
The principlc of the early segregation of the new generation under improved conditions is Inot here advocate(d for the first time. but its
enlforcemncit from the realnm of genetics accords it the support of scientific authority. The application of the principle, however,,
prese1its great (liIliculties which cannot inow be entered upon; some
little has already been done. Manifestly, in the present state of the
public conscience, much propagand(a will be necessary ere intelligent
sentimnent in support of the need is awakened on a national scale.
Nationial lproblems receive their enforcement at particular periods in a
counitryr's historv, and in these davs of awakened national aspiration,. re-arrangement of social ideals, and political stabilitv the timne may be deemned opportune. An effort to arouse public sentiment on behalf of the submnerged part of the nation shouLld appeal with peculiar force tothe Universitv youtlh of South Africa, appreciativ-e of the blessings he himself received from the State in fitting him for a position of enlarged social worth. Infused with the spirit of true South African. nationalisma, he should in turn be prepared to strive for a chance in life for hlis humble brother. It is fundamentally a problemt of education,. but with unusual features. It is suggested that University Associations. be formed to investigate the problem in all its bearings, and to constitute nuclei from whicll should radiate influences destined to arouse an intelligent and symipa.thetic public opinion, that fore-runner of legislative accomplishment. No nobler or more inspiring call could come to the educated vouth of South Africa, infused with true nationalism as part of a humnanitarian universalismn, than to devote himself tothe social reclanmation of those in economic bon(lage, irnpressed by a,

GENESIS AND RECLAMATION OF THE POOR WHITE.

275

formative period in his country's history. In reflecting on the good work done by Mr. Geo. H. Hofmeyr, Secretary for Higher Education, in the encouragement and co-ordination of the efforts in Child Welfare and Industrial Education it is permissible to hope that the Universities themselves mnay follow the lead in the regeneration of submerged South Africa; no other part of the -community is able to bring to bear
upon the problem such independent and enlarged sympathetic minds, trained in the conditions necessary for the right development of others. Studies such as those emanating fromrr the investigations of Prof. W. M. Macmnillan may well be taken as inspiring models.
In the assurance of tangible results, a movement of the nature here outlined is wholly different from that of philanthropy as generally
exercised, and makes a different appeal. The one is wholly rernedial whereas the other is mainly palliative. Philanthropic effort usually
concerns itself with the naturally deficient, the incapable, and its measures aim at making his lot more bearable; but it is without permnanent eugenic value. Indeed, unless wisely administered, it may
encourage degeneracy, bv affording the means for bringing into being others of like character, and thus continue the bad stock. Social sentiment has not yet reached the stage where it will permit of measures
for the gradual elimination of the undesirables. The reclamation here
advocated is concerned with the birth-right of individuals having a real
potential value to South Africa.
The new agricultural and industrial development of South Africa
carries with it the call for this regenerated class. Everywhere is the growing demand for efficient whites. Immigration is good, and is immediate in its returns, but the recovery of one's own carries high obligations, even though slow in realisation. Farmers demand
efficient whites for their intensive agriculture and high pastoral attainments; industrialism calls for a higher level of production, only possible from efficients.

