EUGENICS IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA

By DR. B. SEKLA
(Secretary of the Czechoslovak Eugenics Society)

Population Trends
T HE eugenics problem in Czechoslovakia is complicated by the somewhat exceptional position of this
country in respect to its population development. For a long period of history the two branches of the Czechoslovak people were under the influence of rather different cultural environments; Czechs in the socalled historical parts of the State-namely, Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia, which formed the ancient kingdom of Bohemia and for the last 300 years belonged to the " Austrian" part of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy; and Slovaks (and Carpatho-Ruthenians), who were included in the Hungarian part of the Habsburg Empire. There were always
cultural relations between both national branches (the differentiation of the written Slovak language was effected only in the middle of the last century, and the noncatholic confessions in Slovakia still use the Czech language in church); and a number of leaders in the movement for the revival of Czech national feeling in the beginning of the nineteenth century, as well as several personalities prominent to-day in the political and cultural life of the Czechoslovak Republic, were born in Slovakia.
In spite of these cultural relations and the essential spiritual and national unity of Czechs and Slovaks, the whole complex of the economical, cultural and mental environ-
ment was different for both parts; and the inhabitants of Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia were earlier in following the downward trend in population numbers, which was manifested in all countries of the West-European cultural sphere. The inhabitants of Slovakia and Carpatho-Ruthenia on the contrary, retained their more eastern population type, which corresponded also to their geographical
position and above all to their political

inclusion into the eastern part of the old monarchy.
The present effect of this difference in
development is that while in Bohemia the birth-rate curve is on almost the same level as in the great West-European countries (e.g. England and Germany), we find in the extreme East of Czechoslovakia birth-rates which are among the highest in Europe. Some data on the population trend from I923 to I934 are as follows:

Total Birth- Birthnumber of rates for rates for inhabitants 1923 1934 Bohemia ... 7,196,ooo 22 5 151I Moravia and Silesia ... 3,69g,ooo 25- 2 I7.2 Slovakia ... 3,454,000 36-o 24.I CarpathoRuthenia ... 774,000 434 34-I Czechoslovakia 15,043,000 27-3 I8*6

Net surplus in in
1923 2934
58-18 x6-4o
40-71 19*14
56-89 32-26
14.53 13.10
I70-32 8I-54

From these figures it is evident that there is a marked differential fertility between different parts of the State, though of course it is far from having any qualitative meaning
in the unfavourable sense of the term. On the contrary, -all ethnological and anthropo-
logical evidence we possess favours the view that the population of Slovakia represents a relatively unselected group of normal and sound constitution; and the growing intimate interpenetration of both branches, which is to be expected as a result of new
conditions in the common State, can have only a favourable effect on the constitution of the future population of the whole country.
A few words may be said about the population problem of the minorities in the Czecho-
slovak Republic. There are about 22 - 3
per cent. Germans,t for the most part in the western part of the State, and especially in the industrial districts in the North of

* Estimate for 1934.

t 1930 Census.

II5

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Bohemia. This is undoubtedly one of the comprised the following members: Dr. VI.

reasons why the Germans, considered separ- Ruzicka (professor of biology; died in I934),

ately, have a lower mean birth-rate than Dr. Brozek (later professor of genetics;

the Czechs (e.g. i8 *2 for the Germans, died in I935), Dr. Herfort (professor of

against i9 8 for the Czechs in I930). The paedo-psychopathology), Dr. Kriienecky

other great minority, the Magyars in Slovakia (now professor of animal breeding, Agricul-

(about 4.8 per cent.), follows on the whole tural College in Brno), Dr. Cada (professor of

the birth-rates of the respective groups of philosophy; died in I9I8), Dr. Drachovsk;

the Slovak population in which its members (professor of national economy and financial

are living.

law), and Dr. E. Benes (then a lecturer in

The figures quoted above not only indicate sociology). Dr. Benes, now President of the

the existing differences in the birth-rates of Republic, was, of course, soon diverted from

different constituents of the State, but from this special field in pursuit of a much wider

them we see also that the development con- end-the creation and stabilization of the

tinues in the same direction in all parts; the new State.

birth-rates are falling in direct proportion to The activity of the Society was primarily

the penetration of modem ways of life and directed to the propagation of eugenic ideas

to the mental influences accompanying this among the public. Soon after the war, the first

process. The downward slope of the natality attempts were also made to penetrate the

curve is even a little steeper in Slovakia than legislature with eugenic principles. In i9i9,

in the west of the State. This is perhaps on the initiative of Professor Hagkovec, a

explicable by the influence of two independ- proposal was put forward for compulsory

ent factors: first, in Slovakia there is a medical examinations before marriage.

decline from a relatively high absolute birth- Though not accepted then, this remains one

rate; and secondly, the penetration of of the first aims of eugenics in our country.

modern ways of life with the accompanying Such examinations, it is recognized, can also

psychical atmosphere above referred to are serve as a valuable means of promoting

taking place at an increasing rate.

general health and preventing contagious

This statement about the falling birth- diseases, etc., and have, therefore, a general

rates deals of course only with the quantita- medical and hygienic, as well as eugenic,

tive aspect of Czechoslovakian population interest. So it is. probable that in due time

development. But as we know, it is behind this proposal will be accepted. The Ministry

this that the qualitative eugenic problem is of Public Health has lately become interested,

hidden. We must assume that here, as in any and the matter has also been discussed in

country with a similar decline in population the Social-Hygiene Committee of parliament.

numbers, there is a differential fertility; In I926, a discussion was opened about the

whence it follows that this period of transi- reform of a paragraph in the penal law, deal-

tion from the naive to the rational type of ing with criminal abortion. On this occasion,

population development brings with it, as the late President of the Society, Professor

studies from different countries suggest, Ruziicka, put forward the claim that, if in

increased dysgenic risks for future genera- some cases the artificial interruption of

tions. In this period the process is continuing pregnancy should be permitted, this should

on such a large scale that an impoverishment be in the first place on eugenic grounds, i.e.

in the hereditary endowment of the popula- where there was a probability of defective

tion must result.

offspring. The proposal was not accepted

Organization

then, but the discussion continues. A Eugenic Research Institute was founded

The Czechoslovak Eugenics Society was by the Society in I924 by the aid of the

founded in I9I5; the constituent Com- Ministry of Public Health. This Institute is

mittee was convened by Dr. Haskovec, now the centre of both eugenic research and

professor of neurology and psychiatry, and propaganda. In spite of its limited means,

EUGENICS IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA

it has produced a considerable series of the German sterilization law, several dis-

papers on different aspects of eugenics, cussions on this subject have taken place in

including the genetics of physical and mental the meetings of medical as well as juridical

defect in man, vital statistics, and differ- societies. It is satisfactory to note that these

ential fertility. It has also issued several accept eugenic ideals with understanding;

propaganda pamphlets. Larger works on and in the German law, it is only the com-

eugenic subjects have been produced by pulsory clause that is opposed to the general

Professors RuicZka, Brozek, Hagkovec, feeling. Eugenic problems are discussed also

Kfiienecki. A translation of Major Leonard in the Press, and members of the Society

Darwin's excellent book, What is Eugenics? frequently speak at meetings of different

has been issued by the Medical Publishing organizations, which are called for the propa-

Association.

gation of eugenic ideas.

The Society also created a pre-marital Some distrust of negative eugenics and

eugenic bureau in Prague (now attached to sterilization was aroused in the general pub-

the university polyclinic); and similar insti- lic by the close connection of German

tutions have been established in two other eugenics with the unpopular race theonres

large towns of the country. In Prague, the and the idea of the inequality of European

register offices draw the attention of candi- races. These misunderstandings are being

dates for marriage to the importance of a dissipated by systematic instruction of the

health examination and the possibility of public.

obtaining it in the eugenic bureau.

At present, Dr. J. Drachovski, professor

In the whole, we can claim a growing of the Law Faculty, is President of the

public interest in eugenic matters. Different Czechoslovak Eugenics Society and its repre-

corporations of public importance have sentative in the International Federation of

formed eugenic sections or commnittees, as Eugenic Organizations; and among the

for example, the Masaryk Academy of Work, members of the Committee of the Society

and the Conmmittee of Mental Hygiene, there are several professors of the medical

constituted under the auspices of the Ministry faculty. The present address of the Society

of Health. Recently, under the influence of is: Prague-iI Albertov 4.

SCIENTIFIC BOOKS

Current and Standard ENGLISH, FRENCH and GERMAN Literature in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL and PHYSICAL SCIENCE
sUpplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.

A visit to this Department is respectfully suUested.
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentionina interests.

H.
[l.

1Kx..v1LLEEWVWI1ISC&(Coo..

LLJttdd..,,

TJ36 GOWER STREET
LONDON W.C.1 WeviVeowll.tCNo.2
Duhgonici Review, Vol. IIVUI No. 2.

