PREVENTION OF HEREDITARY BLINDNESS

A Survey of Professor Franceschetti's Proposals

By J. MYLES BICKERTON, F.R.C.S.Eng.

AT the request of the International I. " Education in the facts of heredity."

Association for the Prevention of

Here he stresses " the importance of

Blindness, Professor Franceschetti

ophthalmologists having a training in

read an illuminating paper at their Annual

genetics, and also that the public should

Congress in London this year.

receive some instruction."

It is impossible to do justice to his work 2. The improvement of statistics by the

in a short summary. He considers that

following means: (a) adopting an

the following six measures would reduce the

international standard of classification;

incidence of hereditary blindness, and ex-

(b) having the patients examined by

presses the opinion that a committee should

oculists competent in genetics, and so

be set up to study the means of realizing

improving the literature that readers

them. of a future generation may be quite

i. Collection of precise and complete
statistics. 2. Training of physicians (especially of
ophthalmologists) in genetics, and education of authorities and the public. 3. Extension of facilities for pre-marital

sure of the diagnosis; (c) organization of a central register.
3. Prevention of hereditary eye disease: (a) by the diminution of consanguineous marriages; and (b) prevention of pro-
creation in certain diseases.

consultation, and the general introduction of the pre-marital certificate. 4. Increased use of social workers.
5. Decrease in consanguineous marriages. 6. Decrease of the transmission of heredi-
tary eye diseases by making sterilization available to the patients.

Procreation would be forbidden absolutely in the following conditions:
(a) Patients with serious dominant disease, e.g. congenital cataract, aniridia, microphthalmia (dominant type), retinitis pigmentosa, glaucoma (eventually congenital optic atrophy).

His paper is divided into four sections. (b) Patients with concomitant hereditary

The first describes the hereditary eye diseases

diseases of other organs. Transmission

and their modes of transmission; the second

of eye diseases is particularly to be

deals with the relative incidence of hereditary

apprehended when there are con-

and acquired blindness; the third refers to

comitant hereditary diseases of other

the social consequences of blindness; and

organs, particularly oligophrenia, deaf-

the fourth deals with prevention and de-

mutism, or nervous or mental diseases.

scribes certain medical, hygienic, and medico-

In Franceschetti's opinion procreation

social measures that are necessary to prevent

must be prevented even in sporadic

blindness as often as possible in hereditary

cases of this type.

eye diseases. I propose to deal with this (c) Patients with sporadic dominant dis-

section here.

eases, or who have affected children.

The theoretical measures which would (d) Normal patients who have more than

reduce the numbers of the hereditary blind

one child with hereditary eye disease.

are " the prevention of carriers of patho-

The case arises principally for the

logical genes from having children." Under

recessive diseases of which the most

practical measures he suggests:

frequent are: buphthalmia, retinitis

IOI

102 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

pigmentosa (recessive type), and total ing the transmission of hereditary diseases

colour blindness.

by preventing the increase in the number of

(e) The sisters of patients with sex-linked children in poor families, particularly where

diseases-Leber's disease principally. there is danger of deficiency in the children.

Abstention from parenthood is recommended in the following conditions: " (a) Cases of serious recessive diseases. As the
children of these patients are ordinarily

It is hoped thereby to lighten the financial
burden of these families, and permit the parents to take better care of a smaller num-
ber of children.

unaffected, it is difficult to demand absten- 2. Segregation

tion from parenthood, at least for the present. It is only for the blind with mental diseases

The difficulties are particularly great for the relatively frequent diseases like myopia.

that segregation is necessary.

Despite the fact that myopia is the most fre- 3. Sterilization

quent cause of hereditary blindness, the The great advantage of voluntary steriliza-

attempt to prevent its transmission would tion is that, in leaving the decision to the

lead us too far afield. The only thing we can patient, there is no implication of moral

do at present is to advise a patient with high inferiority. It is obvious that an educational

myopia not to marry a person similarly campaign among the blind must be organi-

affected, for then ioo per cent. of the children ized to explain the necessity of sterilization.

will be myopic. (b) Carriers of serious Special committees exist in England to study

recessive diseases. Wegner (1934) proposed eugenic problems. According to Usher,

the prevention of parenthood in the children sterilization has been practised in several

and even in the sisters of patients with seri- cases of hereditary blindness, and in indi-

ous recessive diseases. I do not think it viduals with one or more children with

possible to go so far. I do not concur in the hereditary eye diseases. In the United States

opinion of Fleischer (I934) who believes that it seems that a patient may have himself

in families practising in trades calling for per- sterilized if he so desires. It must not be

fect sight (sailors, painters, dyers, hunters), forgotten that in certain countries steriliza-

the transmission of anomalies of colour vision tion for eugenic reasons is not authorized. It

may be prevented by eugenic measures." is principally in these countries that a cam-

paign in favour of voluntary sterilization

APPLICATION OF MEASURES TO PREVENT THE TRANSMISSION OF BLINDNESS
I. Celibacy

must be organized, for it is our most effective weapon against hereditary blindness. Needless to add, sterilization should be available
free to poor patients."

" The need for celibacy in hereditary blind- GENETICS OF EYE DISEASES

ness must be explained early in the schools In section i of his paper, Franceschetti

for the blind. It must be recalled that the describes the mode of transmission of the

blind often show a lack of understanding, various eye diseases.

and marry other blind individuals. It is apparent that the offspring of such marriages run a greater risk of being blind (sometimes
even IOO per cent.).

(a) " In man, as in animals, the normal
characters depend upon a considerable number of genes (polygenetic). The human race, however, is not prolific, and it is almost

In England the blind may earn their living impossible to determine the genotype of the

in private institutions only so long as they individual. It is established that hereditary

remain celibate. Even if the blind do not pathological conditions are generally due to

marry, there is always the possibility of the modification of a single gene. Waarden-

natural children, and the transmission of the burg has very rightly insisted, however, that

disease. Birth-control also aims at prevent- these hereditary diseases are not caused by

PREVENTION OF HEREDITARY BLINDNESS

103

the alteration of a single gene, but that, as individual. According to the Mendelian

for normal characters, the other genes play a formulae, 50 per cent. of the children should

part. It is nevertheless undoubtedly true be affected. The prognosis can, therefore,

that, in general, it is sufficient that a single be made quite easily."

gene be modified for the pathological condi-

tion to appear.

2. Irregular Dominance

The hereditary diseases of the eye are " The prognosis is more difficult to make

also, in general, caused by the modification since the heterozygote may be apparently

of but one gene. There are, however, certain healthy. The genotypic affection, therefore,

ocular affections whose mode of transmission does not manifest itself, although theoretic-

is not in accord with the laws determined for ally dominant. These variations of the

the inheritance of monogenetic defects. If phenotype are particularly frequent for the

two or three genes are modified, the determin- colobomata. The frequency with which a

ation of the genotype becomes very difficult. normal or pathological character manifests

It has been possible to make a digenetic itself in a heterozygous individual is denoted

classification of certain ocular defects. by the term ' penetration.' Unfortunately,

(b) The determination of the genotypes there are no statistics in ophthalmology

becomes extremely difficult for those anoma- which shed any light on this problem. In

lies in which the normal condition is subject psychiatry, where they are more advanced,

to wide physiological variations (size of the the following figures have been obtained:

cornea, refraction, etc.). It is probable that the refraction is determined by the interplay of a great number of genes. Thus, in the cases of high myopia, for example, these genetic factors play such a part that it is almost impossible to determine the influence

Mental Debility, ioo per cent. penetration;
Dementia praecox (Schizophrenia), 66 per cent. penetration (quoted from Luxenburger).

of the pathological gene or genes.

The importance of irregular dominance is

Even for the defects which are very easy that the descendants of apparently healthy

to diagnose (coloboma, cataract, etc.) there parents may be affected, which does not

are often abortive forms which would pass occur in regular dominance. The probability

unnoticed were they not discovered by the that a descendant of an individual subject to

study of the genealogical tree.

a disease transmitted by irregular dominance

We do know a considerable number of will be also affected is equal to half the

hereditary eye diseases whose mode of trans- penetration percentage.

mission has been established. To make a prognosis in children whose parents or 3. Recessive

relatives are affected with hereditary anoma- A recessive defect generally manifests

lies, it is indispensible to know the mode of itself in one-fourth of the children if the two

transmission of the various ocular defects parents are heterozygous. The children of the

which may lead to more or less complete diseased individual are generally (although

blindness."

all heterozygous) apparently healthy. This

EUGENIC PROGNOSIS

is only true of the relatively rare defects. For the more or less frequent anomalies, like

Franceschetti then shows how the modes high myopia, the number of heterozygous

of transmission affect the prognosis for the individuals in the population is considerable.

descendants.

(One per cent. of heterozygous individuals

i. Regular Dominance

corresponds to i8 per cent. of heterozygotes in the population.) Thus, in practice, the

"We are generally concerned with a heterozygous offspring of a diseased indi-

mariage between a heterozygous, and vidual are very likely to marry another

therefore diseased, individual and a normal heterozygote. In this manner the defect

104 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

reappears in the second generation. More- modification of two or more genes (poly-

over, if the diseased individual marries a geneticism). Two dominant genes are in play

heterozygote, 50 per cent. of the children if a family disease generally appears in a

will be diseased.

single generation without consanguinity.

Even for the rare recessive hereditary I am convinced that it will be possible

defects, the prognosis must be guarded. I sooner or later to show for a number of

have personally observed a case of a man defects whose mode of transmission now

affected with congenital buphthalmia from seems- obscure-cranial anomalies, etc.-

both sides, whose first child, a girl, also that polygeneticism is involved.

presented a bilateral buphthalmia, despite

the fact that there was no consanguinity of 6. Sex-linked Dominance

the parents. It is obvious that in an absolutely healthy
family, consanguineous marriages may even
protect against degeneracy introduced into
the family by non-consanguineous marriages. The genes recessive for general or ocular
defects are, however, so widespread in the population to-day, that consanguinity must be considered dangerous, as is proven by the already mentioned figures. Moreover, it must be remembered that the danger is not
only that eye diseases, but that a number of general, and particularly cerebral, anomalies may be manifested, given the number of
pathological genes in the population. It is obvious that two heterozygotes may fortuitously marry. The chance of finding two altered genes in the same individual is, however, much greater in the offspring of con-
sanguineous parents.

Nystagmus is often transmitted as a sexlinked recessive defect, but it is also transmitted, and occasionallyin the same family, by irregular dominance. It is for this reason that Lenz has suggested that it is transmitted
not by simple dominance, but rather by sex-
linked dominance.
According to the formula, were this true, we should find twice as many women as men affected, which is not the case. For Lenz, this is explained by the fact that the dominant sex-linked gene manifests itself only in 30 to 50 per cent. of the heterozygous women, or in other words that the penetration of the sex-linked gene is from 30 to 50 per cent. in the female. In my opinion, there is in practice no difference between sexlinked dominance with 50 per cent. of penetration, and the sex-linked recessive mode with change in dominance in 50 per cent.

4. Sex-linked recessive
(a) From the patient by his daughters to his grandsons.
(b) By the sisters of the patients to their sons, or by their daughters to their

There is, however, a distinct difference between simple and sex-linked dominance. In the latter, as opposed to the former, the disease can never be transmitted from father
to son.

grandsons."

7. Homochronous and homologous manifesta-

Franceschetti refers to exceptions in sex- tions of hereditary diseases

linked anomalies:

The tendency to confuse congenital and

"(a) The manifestly diseased heterozygotes. hereditary diseases is all too frequent even

(b) Exceptions to Lossen's law, e.g. trans- to-day. There are nevertheless a number of

mission by men in haemophilia.

defects which only become manifest after

(c) Among the sisters of the diseased there birth. In the members of one family, and

are too many carriers, and among the especially of the same generation, these

brothers too many diseased.

diseases appear at nearly the same age

5. Digeneticism

(homochronous manifestation). The ocular defects which appear late are,

It has long been supposed that certain especially, late ptosis, keratoconus, cataract,

hereditary diseases in man were due to the tapeto-retinal degeneration (macular defects,

PREVENTION OF HEREDITARY BLINDNESS

105

etc.), juvenile amaurotic family idiocy,

i. The infrequency of isolated cases

glaucoma, and a number of senile diseases.

in proportion to family cases;

Some diseases, though congenital, only

2. The proportion between presumably

appear long after birth, either because the

hereditary isolated cases and family

symptoms pass unobserved (night blindness),

cases ; and

or because they are progressive (retinitis

3. The occurrence of hereditary dis-

pigmentosa, myopia). The malformations

eases in the population."

are ordinarily manifest at birth, the abio-

trophies generally appear after birth.

CRITICISM OF STATISTICAL DATA

We speak of homologous manifestation According to Franceschetti the statistics

when a hereditary disease appears in the same with regard to hereditary blindness are vague

generation in the different branches of the and unreliable for the following reasons:

family. Homologous manifestation is especially observed in diseases of nervous origin. In ophthalmology, this is principally the case for cataract in dystrophia myotonica, and
certain tapeto-retinal degenerations (family
diseases of the macula)."

" i. They are concerned with selected material based upon the number of patients institutionalized in homes for the blind, or seen by a physician in his
practice.
2. The official statistics on blindness ordi-

8. Anticipation
Professor Franceschetti concludes this section by saying that the principal difficulties and exceptions arising in the application of the Mendelian formule to man are the following:

narily make no distinction between
hereditary and acquired blindness, or they are based solely upon the assertions of the patients. 3. The evaluation of the number of hereditary affections is often based upon the frequency of congenital anomalies.

(a) Irregular dominance.

There is much evidence that not all

(b) Different modes of transmission for

hereditary diseases are congenital. The

defects with the same clinical picture.

result is that the figures given for the

(c) Late manifestation.

hereditary diseases are generally too

In section 2 he refers to single cases of hereditary diseases.
" For the majority of hereditary diseases of the eye, the mode of transmission has been determined by the study of the family trees. The single cases of diseases ordinarily hereditary have been neglected by the investigators. The appearance of single cases may result from several causes:
i. Recessivity, defective expected i in 4. 2. Single cases in dominant disease,

low. 4. The statistics based upon the observa-
tions of an oculist in his practice are more valuable without, however, being more exact. This is due to the fact that the differential diagnosis of hereditary from acquired disease is very often difficult to make without a general
examination of the patient (Wassermann reaction, etc.) and of the other
members of the family. This difficulty is of the greatest importance for tapeto-

(a) by mutation;

retinal diseases, atrophy of the optic

(b) by manifestation of latent geno-

nerve, and diseases of intra-uterine,

typic defects;

and therefore exogenous, origin. Never-

(c) owing to exogenous factors, idio-

theless, despite these difficulties, it

kinetic influences.

should be possible to establish much

3. Polyphenia, syndromes resulting from a single gene or group of genes.

more accurate statistics than we now possess. "

4. Mistaken diagnosis.

Discussing the definitions of blindness,

Statistics are wanted to show,

which vary considerably in various countries,

io6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

he says: " It is obvious that the statistics of the answer is no, we have no such figures,"

hereditary diseases should include not only and he proceeds to show that the calculation

complete blindness, but incomplete blindness could be made if we had such figures as are

and amblyopia. This is all the more import- available to psychiatrists.

ant, because a large proportion of the Wilson's figures show that two myopic

patients suffering from hereditary diseases parents have ioo per cent. myopic children,

are only partly blind. This is principally and that one high myope parent will trans-

true of the myopics, who are often classed mit the myopia to 44 per cent. of the chil-

among the amblyopics."

dren.

With regard to the incidence of hereditary " According to suppositions made, a

blindness, he gives figures of I5 per cent. patient suffering from hereditary blindness

for congenital blindness, and of these he has sixty times as many chances of having a

suggests that 43 per cent. are hereditary blind child as a normal individual has."

(Waardenburg suggests 43 per cent. also), But he adds the following:

and that the number of hereditary cases is
certainly even greater for incomplete or partial blindness. For the partially blind at
Zurich some 88-5 per cent. of the cases are
probably hereditary. He considers that 33 per cent. of the blind are so from hereditary causes. He concludes that roughly:

" All these calculations are obviously only of relative value. My purpose was rather to show how the necessary calculations should be made had we complete statistics, and not approximate estimates, in order to advise
persons contemplating marriage, than to arrive at necessarily arbitrary conclusions.

" I. 15 per cent. of the blind are so at birth. Let us hope that it will be possible, in the

2. 50 per cent. of blind children are so near future, to base our counsels upon

congenitally. The percentage is even statistics of this type."

higher for amblyopia.

3. 50-60 per cent. of congenital blindness PRACTICAL PROPOSALS

is hereditary.

In section 3 of his paper Professor France-

4. 40 per cent. of juvenile blindness is schetti discusses the social consequences of

hereditary. Here, too, the percentage blindness. He considers them from (a) the

is higher for amblyopia.

point of view of the blind individual, and

5. 33 per cent. of blindness is hereditary. (b) a more general point of view. He agrees with Waardenburg that most of the blind

It is obvious that these estimates are only are of normal intelligence, and of high moral

valid for those countries in which trachoma, principles. " It is not their affection that

smallpox, and ophthalmia neonatorum rarely oppresses them so much as the social diffi-

cause blindness. For the other countries, culties created by the difficulties of earning a

allowance must be made for the infectious livelihood."

diseases."

He stresses the special difficulties with

He then reviews the most common here- regard to education and training of the blind.

ditary blinding diseases, and his figures He considers compulsory education necessary

demonstrate that myopia is the principal for blind children, mentioning the value of

factor in the etiology of complete and, above partially sighted classes (Bishop Harman),

all, of incomplete post-natal hereditary and considers that the partially blind and

blindness.

blind require entirely different training.

At this point he asks " if we have any From the general point of view he men-

figures to show the frequencies of hereditary tions the serious financial problem and the

diseases in the descendants of patients suffer- eugenic problem. Here he points out that

ing from hereditary blindness, and can make the weak-minded in Munich have 64 per cent.

a prognosis for the children of patients whose more children than the normal, and in Berlin

pedigree is unknown to us. Unfortunately ioo per cent. more than the normal. He says

PREVENTION OF HEREDITARY BLINDNESS there is a high infant mortality among those What is the significance of these facts ? subject to certain of the heteditary eye They show that the present position is diseases. He entirely agrees with Waarden- terrible, but that, if certain reforms are burg that the eugenic measures must be carried out, immense improvement and relief considered not only from the social but also of suffering is possible. They also show that from a purely humanitarian point of view. large numbers of the blind are made blind
He then gives in section 4 the measures by a callous indifference to suffering, enwhich would reduce the numbers of the blind gendered by social and religious prejudice with hereditary eye diseases. His suggestions and by ignorance. They show that much are very similar to my own, and his figures money spent on relief and care of the blind correspond fairly closely with many of those would be better spent on prevention. Prothat I stressed in my paper published in fessor Franceschetti has shown us what to 1932. do; let us see that we do it.
PUBLICATIONS OF THE ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE
52 UPPER BEDFORD PLACE, W.C.1
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute
IN HALF-YEARLY PARTS F:IFTEN SHILT NGS EACH
Vol. LXIV. ii contains among other matter the following:
NOTES ON A HERO CULT FROM THE GULF OF CARPENTARIA, NORTH QUEENSLAND
(Plates XXVI-XXVIII). DONALD F. THOMSON, D.Sc.
INDONESIAN INFLUENCE ON EAST AFRICA CULTURE (XXXVIII-XLII). JAMES HORNELL. EYEBROWS AND EYELASHES IN MAN :,their different forms, pigmentation and heredity
(with Preface by PROFESSOR Suic). F. ROZPRYM.
Man
A MONTHLY JOURNAL OF ANTHROPOLOGICAL SCIENCE. Annual Subeciiption, LI; monthly numbers, 2S. net. Eugen Review, Vol. NVINLo. 2.

