INTERNATIONAL FAMILY CONFERENCE AT BRUSSELS

Mr. A. J. Brayshaw, the General Secretary of the National Marriage Guidance Council, was one
of the eight British delegates who attended the Brussels Conference of the International Union of Family Organizations at the end of July. In this article, which is here published through the courtesy of the National Marriage Guidance Council and of the editor of its monthly bulletin,
Mr. Brayshaw gives a personal impression of the conference.

O NE of the reasons for attending over- nombreuses, of Catholic families, Protestant

seas conferences, or indeed for any families, workers' families, or families in par-

travel abroad, is to sense the different ticular regions. They have grown and

atmosphere and learn the different back- flourished, perhaps more especially because

ground. Read as you may, you have to go to of the recognition that they have received

a country to learn the things that are taken from the State in view of the serious anxiety

for granted there, the assumptions that are felt about a declining population. Thus the

common to their thinking, the things that family organizations have set to work to

seem in their setting too obvious to need obtain price concessions for their members

telling. The Brussels Conference was a fas- from the manufacturers of prams or furni-

cinating opportunity to discern the common ture, for instance, and to get family allow-

factors and the divergences between the ten ances, reductions in railway fares and other

nations represented by the I25 conference family concessions from the State.

members, and I learned much that was new They also provide all sorts of services for

and striking to me.

their members, like convalescent and holiday

The conference itself was of particular homes, insurance services, education for

importance as the first meeting of the parents and teachers, legal advice, and some-

I.U.F.O. General Assembly since the organi- times consultants to help in resolving mar-

zation was founded in Geneva in I948. The riage difficulties. They have grown in wealth

General Council and the larger Assembly had and influence, and in many cases they are

a number of sessions, therefore, with much represented on official bodies and serve in a

to consider about the Union's constitution, sense as consumers' representatives on behalf

finances, functions and future work. In of the family. They are to a large extent

addition, the first part of the week was occu- pressure groups, championing the economic,

pied by a family conference, attended mainly social and political claims of the family

by representatives of voluntary bodies, while somewhat in the way that trade unions

at the same time experts from different uphold the claims of their members here.

governments met to discuss housing and its One of the most arresting things about

finance and technicalities. Their meetings these organizations is the great stress that

were a particular success and it is to be they place upon economic factors. It was

regretted that the British Government was significant that in one of the discussions, for

not represented. It seemed, incidentally, a instance, on " The Proclamation of the

different world, in which one could talk with Rights of the Family"' a draft was adopted

Swiss or Belgian experts about their coun- stressing the demands of the family for tries, where there is no real housing shortage; recognition and concessions, with very little and as you go about Brussels you can see reference to the duties and responsibilities of

many notices in windows advertising flats or families, which were taken for granted.

shops to let or for sale.

At first sight it was a strange contradiction

Mainly between the two world wars that these organizations, in which Roman

organizations have sprung up, especially in Catholic influence is great, should be so much

France and Belgium, consisting of familles OCcUpDied with material considerations. I

t38

INTERNATIONAL FAMILY CONFERENCE AT BRUSSELS

came to the conclusion, however, that
although these organizations are called
leagues and associations of families they tend
in practice to reflect the preoccupations of
the Chef de familles, which on the Continent
quite definitely means " papa." He is
anxious about the income tax, the children's
education, the discount on the purchases,
while his wife rules absolute in the home. I
do not think, therefore, that this heavy emphasis on economic factors really means
that Continental family organizations are
materialist in outlook, but simply that they tend to represent the viewpoint of the
husband, who is primarily concerned to provide for his wife and children.
Certainly it was significant that throughout the whole conference it was the external relations of the family unit that received
most attention. Conference members were
not only unwilling to discuss the hated subject of le birth-controle, but they hardly mentioned the inter-personal relationships within the family. Papers read by Mrs. Eleanor French (British Social Biology Council), Dr. C. P. Blacker (Eugenics Society) and myself stood alone in referring to personal relation-
ships and psychological factors, apart from the valued contributions of Dr. Abraham
Stone of the American Association of Marriage Counsellors.
In Anglo-Saxon countries we tend to think
of marriage in psychological, emotional and
physical terms. We note marriage break-
down among all classes of society, with little regard for economic or educational levels. Therefore, we think, money has little to do with it. The economic emphasis of the Continental organizations was thus a stimulating challenge. Is it not true that in Britain many middle-class husbands help their wives with the washing-up who would never help if the family could get domestic labour as readily as in some Continental countries ? And is not this an economic factor shaping family relationships ? More than once speakers virtually reproached Britain and the U.S.A. for their " backwardness " in having no leagues of families to press their claims. Why was it, we were asked; that when the British Government recently increased old-age pen-

sions there had been no furore from the
family organizations pressing for increased
family allowances ? For my part I felt uneasy about some of
the assumptions, and some of the statements
that drew applause, like the declaration that
the State should see that with each new child the standard of life of the parents was main-
tained through some form of subsidy. The idea recurred that parents ought to be as
well off as single or childless people. Well, I wonder. I have five mouths to feed, and compared with my unmarried friends I see
very well that they have more to spend on themselves, their clothes and entertainments
and holidays. Is this really wrong ? It seems to me that we who have children have such precious riches that we should not begrudge
our single friends such compensations as
money can buy. What astonished and, I confess, distressed
me, was this apparent lack of an adequate sense of the infinite value of children for their
own sake. It is all very well to pay farmers a subsidy to cultivate acres that they would not otherwise plough; but is it really right to induce people to have babies they would not otherwise have ? The right reason for having children is because a couple really want them and will really love them.. It is true that parenthood should not involve economic disabilities that will handicap the children or dishearten the parents; but there is a real danger to the nobility of parenthood if children are regarded primarily as economic assets. This is not merely hypothetical. In French North Africa, for instance, the family allowances seem to the natives like fabulous wealth, and it is commonly said that many of the men regard it not only as patriotic that they should keep their wives in the family way, but also less trouble than
working for a living. As to the conference itself, the Belgian
National Committee of the I.U.F.O. and the Ligue des Familles Nombreuses made admirable arrangements, and were delightful hosts. But while it is true that at one dinner we each received more meat than a week's ration at home, and that we enjoyed an unforgettable excursion to Bruges, yet there

140 0E

EUGENICS REVIEW

was hard work, too, with constitutional discussions starting at 8.30 in the morning. The International Union is still a young organization with vigour and enthusiasm and with sufficiently varied outlooks among its mem-
bers to provoke lively discussions for years to come. Although there were deep dif-

ferences of view there was always courtesy and tolerance, and while this is assured the Union has a most important function. Without it we should grow parochial, so that we welcome the challenge and stimulus and cameraderie as well as the exchange of
knowledge that it brings to our work.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation In different countries, more particularly In the several
parts of His Majesty's Dominlons, and In the United States.'
President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACM-LLAN, G.C.V.O. Chairmn of the Executiwe Cosmitte: The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice DENNING HI rry Editors: Professor F. H. LAWSON, D.C.L Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., .C.,
asisted by Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, B.C., and Professor H. C. GLTITERUDGE, K.C.
Ho.rer Secretary: E. H. WALL, Esq. Annual Subscription - - - ONE GUINCA
Address: 18, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2
Eugmiw Revit,w VOL NINo. 8

