A STUDY OF HEREDITY IN AN ISOLATED VILLAGE COMMUNITY
By J. W. McFEETERS, M.D., B.Ch.

T HE village which was my home for definitely segregated. Tradesmen's and

several years was an ideal one from labourers' families, too, do not intermarry.

the point of view of studying heredity, since its isolation had apparently been almost
complete for centuries until comparatively recent years; while the hostility of its inhabitants towards strangers was so marked up to the end of last century that marriages

Finally, as is generally the case, the members of the " problem group," as it has been called -those of subnormal mentality, the lawless, the alcoholics, the Ishmaels of the community-tend to mate with others like
themselves.

into families outside the village were very The people are of short, stocky build,

rare, as also was the entry of new families slow in speech, movement and thought. The

into the community. This naturally limited standard of intelligence among the labouning

the range of selection in mating, and so class is poor. The village schoolmaster,

increased the likelihood of occurrence of rare indeed, who has struggled for many years

recessive characters. It was, indeed, the to find the few encouraging grains of wheat

frequent occurrence of rare diseases among among a most depressing amount of chaff, is

the people of the village that first made me of the opinion that there is a much higher

take an interest in heredity.

percentage of dull and subnormal children

The village is one of about I,500 inhabit- in this community than in any of the sur-

ants, and until recently, owing to the rounding villages, in which opportunities for

nature of the surrounding country, access to random mating have always been greater.

it has been from one direction only. It The more intelligent members of the com-

is obvious, therefore, that, though first- munity belong for the most part to families

cousin marriages have been rare, the same which have come to the district within the

stocks were bound to mate in generation past three or four generations. I show here

after generation;. while, apart from the (Fig. i) the pedigree of one of the few

isolation of the community itself, other families of marked intelligence, with some

factors have diminished stills further the notes on individual members, in order that

range of choice in mating. For example, I may contrast with it a family in which

church and chapel families remain fairly mental development is below the average.

THE " A" FAMILY
I lM

I 1 2&z3
* 1t
~~~5~~~~4

6

,f *
5

4t
10 11
t

3

13 '°4g 1as 72A

3 14

1.

I

Members of intelligence above village average

**

Members about whom information is not available a O

FIG. I

73

19 5,
V1 11 573w 9

ff*

*

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The grandfather of the man, A.A., shown as
1.I in the pedigree, came on foot from Scotland at the beginning of the nineteenth
century, driving his cattle with him, and
settling eventually in this village where his descendants remained. He acquired a small-
holding and passed it on to his son, who in his turn handed it down to A.A. This man, who was himself well-read, gave his family as good
an education at the village school as was in his power in days when most children left
school-if, indeed, they went at all-to go to
work at the age of nine or ten.
His eldest son (II.i) ran away from home,
and all trace of him was lost.
S.A. (I1.2) joined the Army and became a sergeant-major in the R.A.M.C. His son,
A.A. (III.i), was a lieutenant in the regular
army at the time of my investigations. Both his daughters (IV. i and 2) are apparently
girls of marked ability, having passed their
Higher Certificate examinations with several credits. One had gone to London University and the other was taking up music as a career.
H.B. (III.4) remained at home to look after her father in his later years. Her elder girl was illegitimate and is of no special ability. The younger girl gained a scholarship to a secondary school and appears a bright, intelligent girl.
H.A. (III.6) is in business in London and doing well.
To return to the second filial generation, F.A. (II.4) was the least successful of his family, being a horseman all his life on one farm. He was, however, a man of definite
intelligence. The only one of his family to show ability above the village average is D.C. (I1.12), the elder of whose daughters, J.C. (IV.6), gained a scholarship to High School, while the younger, B.C. (IV.7), has shown marked artistic ability from a very early age.
The youngest member of the second filial generation, A.A. (II.6), was the most able and successful. He was apprenticed to a butcher, and, after some years of hard work and careful savng in various parts of England and Wales, returned to his native village, where he set up as a butcher himself, doing extremely well.
His eldest son, B.A. (III.4), is of rather visionary type and has not succeeded financially, but is a very well-read man, a fluent speaker in the Labour interest and a local preacher. He has written some quite passable poetry which has been published locally. His

daughters, M.A. (IV.8) and D.A. (IV.9), both
gained scholarships to High School, while the elder went on to a training college and is now a teacher.
A.A. (III.i8) followed his father as butcher. He has done well and extended his clientele for miles around the village, having two motor vans on the road. His second son, R.A. (IV.I6), has remarkable musical ability, having acted as organist in two churches, reorganized and trained the village band to prize-winning status and run a dance band with success.
R.A. (III.20) has a good business as a carpenter. His son, L.A. (IV.i9), is of outstanding ability. Having obtained a scholarship to the local Grammar School, he gained another to Cambridge University, where, after a series of scholarships and prizes, he obtained a double first, went on to get his D.Sc. at the age of 24 and became a university lecturer in Biology in the same year.
M.H. (III.22) practically runs the large haulage business of which her husband is nominal head. She is noted for her organizing ability in other directions also, and gets up each year an elaborate carnival for the local hospital.
Even the less noteworthy sibs in this family are for the most part of considerably higher intelligence than their neighbours in the village.
Most of the members of this pedigree are above average height. They are generally of rather slight build, with good features and a definitely intelligent look. (So many of the villagers whom I class as descendants of the aboriginal inhabitants have faces utterly devoid of expression or vitality.)
It is interesting, in view of the difference in height of this family, to note the finding of the Anthropological Committee of the British Association, I878-83, quoted by
Moore (I934). The report showed that
classes of the community manifesting greatly increased intellectual abilitywere customarily of greater height, while criminals, lunatics and mental defectives were definitely of low stature.
A "Problem Group" Pedigree
If, as Gates (i929) suggests, feeblemindedness is inherited as a simple Mendelian

A STUDY OF HEREDITY IN AN ISOLATED VILLAGE COMMUNITY 75

recessive, this would account for the wide-
spread mental deficiency in the village, since a very large proportion of the members of
every generation in the " aboriginal" families must be heterozygous carriers of the
factor for feeble-mindedness. A mating of two such apparently normal carriers will produce feeble-mindedness in one quarter of
the offspring, two-thirds of the remainder being again carriers of the defect.
On the other hand, Goddard (1914) has traced feeble-mindedness in unbroken succession for five generations, which would seem to imply a dominant heredity. He considers that heredity is the important determining factor in feeble-mindedness, alcoholism and syphilis playing a much smaller part. Baur, Fischer and Lenz (193I) suggest that in slighter degrees of feeble-mindedness
the heredity is usually dominant, while in the graver degrees it is generally re&essive.
It is difficult to estimate in any section of
the population the proportion of feebleminded or mentally deficient individuals, since so much depends on the standards of normality decided upon by the investigator.
As Lewis (1934) points out, the actual de-
limitation of disease is much more difficult in psychiatry than elsewhere in medicine,
since the main psychoses are akin to and often indistinguishable from variations of types of personality which fall within the limits of the
normal.
In the country in particular, the custom by which boys and girls were formerly set to work on the land or in service at a very early age accounts for a very high percentage of illiterates among the older members of the

community; and this in its turn handicapped the mental development of their children.
A family tree is here shown (Fig. 2) with
a high proportion of feeble-minded members,
some of them bordering on the insane. I shall confine myself to giving a few notes
concerning the more interesting cases, merely marking the less extreme cases as "simple" without further elaboration.
H.V. (I.7) was recognized by his contemporaries as being " not all there." He never went to school, and got only occasional employment.
M.S. (II.I5), his only daughter, was also definitely subnormal in mentality. She married a simple, stolid labourer, by whom she had one daughter, K.S. (III.ii), whom I have classified, perhaps euphemistically, as " simple." Some years later, while her husband was still alive, M.S. fell in with a man of equally low mentality with herself-H.G. (II.i6)who had been in the Army for some years, but had been discharged and had spent most of his later life either in the workhouse or in prison.
The result of this liaison was a daughter, A.T. (III1.4), who borders on insanity. She is dirty and slovenly, and quite incapable of being trained. Her house, her person and her children are consistently filthy.
Her husband, W.T. (III.I5), is quite feebleminded. He is good-natured and obliging, but is unable to read, or to write more than his own name. He served in the Army during the Great War, I9I4-I8, and is fond of recounting his experiences in France, which are utterly improbable and are certainly unconfinned by others who were in the same company.
When A.T. became piegnant for the third
time, I referred her, on account of the filthy

THE " V " AND " T " FAMILIES

t~~1.~~~~

Mentally deficient

* Stillbirths
FIG. 2

76 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

condition of her house, to the Public Assistance cases of mental deficiency (Penrose, I938).

Institution, where she was told to report a few Penrose's assertion that, as the mental grade

days before term. She put off going, however, and finally started in labour at home. Though there was a former " handy-woman "
living only a few yards away, A.T. notified nobody; and the baby (IV.io) was born in
the chamber on which A.T. was sitting under the impression that she wished to defecate. Her husband coming upstairs some time later,

of the patient diminishes below the point which he describes as " the borderline of mental defect," fertility also diminishes, is
borne out in the family just described. It will be noted that the only low-grade defectives who have been moderately fertile are A.T. and W.T. (III.I4 and I5).

A.T. showed him the child, which, with

placenta attached, was in the chamber, and High Blood Pressure, Cardiac Disease

he buried it-without wrapping or covering of and Obesity

any kind-in his allotment. The very next
day A.T. went herself to a neighbour's house, and told the family there, as an interesting
piece of gossip, what had occurred. A post mortem on the infant not showing definitely

Inheritance of build was studied by me purely in its relation to high blood pressure and cardiac disease; so obesity is the only
hereditary abnormality of build for which I

whether it had had a separate existence from prepared pedigrees, since it was almost solely

the legal point of view, no police action was among the families with a high percentage of

taken, the only charge possible under the obese members that cardiac diseases and

circumstances being " concealment of birth." high blood pressure occurred.

M.T. (II.i8), mother of W.T., was of quite defective mentality. She never went to school,
being always a helpless, stupid individual. Her brother, C.T. (11.20), is of a very low standard of intelligence. He lives aloneexcept for innumerable rats-in a house
which is incredibly filthy, speaking little to anyone. He cannot read or write, though he

While the hereditary nature of hypertension was noted as early as the sixteenth
century, the tendency in recent years has been to inculpate various environmental factors; alcohol, tobacco, worry, mental or physical strain and heavy manual work being blamed, severally or together, for the onset

is quite a good worker.

of high blood pressure. Indeed, the tendency

Brief mention must be made of some mem- to-day-in this cOuntry, at any rate-is to

bers of the other branches of the family: minimize the hereditary factor and to mag-

R.V. (II.5) is of very dull mentality, his nify the part played by the various stresses

only reply to most remarks or questions being of modern life.

a grunt. M.B. (III.6), his daughter, is absolutely un-
intelligent. She can neither read nor write, nor can her husband, H.B. (III.7). So far, their only offspring has been a macerated foetus, born prematurely.
C.V. (II.7) is dull and stupid. He went to

Weitz (1923) traced the blood pressures of monovular twins over a number of years, and found that the blood pressures of each
pair remained practically equal throughout the whole period. In one case, that of two
women who were in later life at the time of

school for four or five years, but " could not his report, one had all her life worked hard

learn his letters."

in factories and on the land, while the other

M.C. (II.ii), his sister, borders on the had lived a quiet life as a town housewife.

insane. She never ventures out of the house Yet the blood pressures of these two sisters

without her husband. She was rescued from remained almost identical over the whole

the well in her garden some years ago, but it was impossible to discover whether her presence in it was accidental or suicidal.

period of his investigations. Addressing the Deutsche Gesellschaft filr
Kreislaufforschung at Bad Nauheim, the

The family described here has been chosen same investigator (Weitz, I936) described his

because the sibships are small and it can, researches into the causation of hypertension

therefore, be reproduced and described more over a period of fifteen years, mainly among

conveniently. In many other families sib- the phlegmatic peasant population in and

ships are large, as is so frequently found in around Tiubingen. With regard to alcohol,

A STUDY OF HEREDITY IN AN ISOLATED VILLAGE COMMUNITY 77

he carried out experiments on ninety-three areas, and the correlation of their findings

persons, reported by the police of Tiibingen by geneticists and statisticians.

as heavy drinkers, but found that the With regard to environmental factors and

incidence of hypertension among them was their possible effect, practically all the

no greater than in any average sample of the inhabitants of the village live under almost

population. Tobacco also, he decided, had identical conditions. They lead, on the whole,

no appreciable effect on the blood pressure, placid lives; while their work, if laborious

nor had excessive work or worry.

at times, is not as a rule of a type to cause

In fact, the only external factor to which sudden or excessive strain. In fact, an

he assigns any weight is faulty diet. He indulgent employer, for whom most of the

points out that Africans, Indians and men in the locality worked until his death

Chinese suffer from hyperpiesia to a much less in I935, coupled with a succession of idle

extent than do Europeans and Americans; foremen, made the laziness of the workers

but that these peoples, when they adopt a from the village a byword for miles around.

" European " diet, soon begin to show hyper- Beer is the only form of alcoholic beverage

pietic signs. His view, therefore, is that it is consumed by most of the men, and, with a

a tendency to high blood pressure which is few exceptions, their use even of this is

inherited, and that the actual hyperpiesia temperate. The hyperpietic famnilies, so far

often becomes manifest through faulty as I can ascertain, do not indulge in a diet

diet. different from that of their neighbours. In

With regard to cardiac disease, Campbell fact, the village presents a comparatively

(I934) points out that in thirty cases of homogeneous whole as regards habits of life,

inherited heart disease, associated with work and diet.

arterio-sclerosis, obesity and high blood It is interesting, therefore, to note that

pressure, investigated by Ryle and himself, blood pressures considerably above the

twenty-four gave a history of the father or average are found almost exclusively among

mother being also affected, while in only six the members of a few families. I reproduce

cases were both parents free, sibs only being one pedigree here (Fig. 3), showing not only

affected. This would seem to indicate that members with cardiac disease and high blood

the condition, while usually dominant, may pressure, but also those of marked obesity.

also be inherited as a recessive trait.

The results of my investigations into family M.F. (I.2) died of heart failure at the age of

histories of heart disease and high blood pressure, and my examinations of living members of such families, have convinced me that there is a dominant hereditary element in these conditions, at all events in the community where my studies were carried out. I did not find a single case of

36.
E.W. (I.3) became stout about the age of 45. He had a stroke at the age of 6o, dying a week later.
E.H. (I.5) died of heart failure at the age of 54.
A.W. (1.4) had, so far as can be discovered,
no cardiac or vascular disease, and indeed no

high blood pressure in which at least one of illnesses of any kind up to the age of 70, when

the parents did not show the same morbid she developed pneumonia and died.

condition, and in most cases one or more of Her brother, R.W. (I.7), was in regular

the sibs in addition. I would point out that employment as a road scavenger up to the age

I am simply a general practitioner, untrained in the study of genetics apart from my own reading of the subject over the past few years; but I feel that this whole question of the inheritance of circulatory diseases is of such immense importance that it merits detailed study and investigation by as many

of 8o. The blood pressures and cardiac
condition of all his descendants are normal. S.P. (II.i) became very stout in the early
forties. She led a comfortable and placid life as cook-housekeeper to an easy-going bachelor, who employed a general maid as well. When first seen by me at the age of 58, S.P. was very stout and had a blood pressure of 240/I65.

observers as possible, particularly in rural She was given advice as to diet. Shortly after

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
THE "V" FAMILY
I ,2
m t 6 y,

Obese hyperpietic members

Non-obese hyperpietic member

Members suffering from cardiac disease

Details unknown

aa -

FIG. 3

a0

this she was pensioned off by her employer, and with this pension and her savings she was enabled to live an easy life with a married sister. In spite of this easy life (or possibly
because of over-indulgence in foods tending to increase hypertension) a cerebral hemorrhage occurred at the age of 6i, followed by two more within a few weeks, the last of these proving fatal. She did not indulge in alcohol, except for an occasional glass of stout.
E.W. (II.3) lived in London most of his life, dying there of pneumonia at the age of 6o. He had become corpulent in the middle forties and had not worked for some months before his death by reason of high blood pressure.
A.W. (II.5) died at the age of 44 from heart failure. His daughter, W.S. (111.i), at the age of 35, weighed I2 stone, though of short build. Her blood pressure was considerably
above normal (I65/I20).
B.W. (II.7) started as a farm labourer, but was never a hard worker. He became very
stout about the age of 40, and at the age of 45 had a cerebral hemorrhage, which left him with marked loss of power in the left arm and leg. On his return to duty he was employed
as farm foreman, going from one part of the farm to another in a trap. Thus his work was very light. At the age of 57 he had two cerebral haemorrhages within a few months of each other, death supervening on the second of these. His blood pressure at this time averaged I95/II5. He was a heavy smoker and drinker.
His daughter, F.A. (III.8), at the age of 25, was already very stout. Becoming pregnant, she did not engage either nurse or doctor until the baby's birth was almost due. Before the nurse had had an opportunity of doing a

urine examination, the patient developed eclamptic fits, and was sent at once by me to hospital, where she recovered under treatment. I may add that on her marriage I warned her, in view of the family history, to be careful in her diet and to seek advice at once on becoming pregnant.
H.W. (II.9) died at the age of 20 of "syncope."
W.W. (II.io) at the age of 54 had put on 2 stone in weight within two years, and had then a blood pressure of I75/I25. He had been successively labourer, gardener, fann foreman and roadman. He is a light smoker and a very moderate drinker.
E.P. (11.i2) leads a busy life, helping her husband with poultry and rabbits and working on the land. Her blood pressure at the age of 45 was I75/I20. She is the only member of her sibship who did not show any signs of obesity.
None of the members of the third filial generation, with the exception of W.S. (III.i) and F.A. (III.8), have up to now shown any hypertensive tendency, though it is possible that some of them would be found by the
"cold test " of Hines and Brown (I935) to be "hyper-reacting normals."
In another family, for whose pedigree and family history space is not available, only one of seven sibs is of normal build and blood pressure, the others being all excessively stout and showing marked hyperpiesia, though none of them-an interesting pointsuffers from cardio-vascular disease to any appreciable extent. In this family, unlike that shown in Fig. 3, the onset of obesity occurred early in life, one of the children at

A STUDY OF HEREDITY IN AN ISOLATED VILLAGE COMMUNITY 79

the age of 9 weighing 8 stone i pound. It

appears, therefore, as if cardio-vascular

disease and hyperpiesia are separately in-

herited and as if the changes of body build

in a family tend to follow a definite pattern

as regards age of onset, as is suggested by

Davenport (I923).

Of such importance is the frequent asso-

ciation of obesity with cardiac disease,

nephritis, diabetes and other hypertonic

conditions that MacLaren (I929) stresses its

value as a prognostic factor, the mortality

from these conditions being much higher in

persons of stout build.

The importance has also been emphasized

by Cole (1938), who suggests that dietetic

treatment should always be tried in cases

where obesity is associated with chronic

bronchitis, myocardial weakness, high

blood pressure, visceroptosis and fascial

rheumatism. He finds that occasionally

patients fail to respond to dieting, and that

in most of these cases the obesity is familial

or hereditary. I find, however, that even in

obese families members will sometimes

respond well to dieting if carefully supervised.

For example, the mother of the fat boy

mentioned above was under Cole, and was

put by him on a diet, as she had had a slight

cerebral haemorrhage at the age of 35. In

fifteen months on the diet given her weight

fell from 7 pounds,

13 stone
and her

6 pounds to blood pressure

IO stone dropped

from 235/I75 to I55/II0.

From the point of view of eugenics, the

dominant nature of the heredity usually

found in hyperpiesia is of the utmost

importance. A person belonging to a hyper-

pietic family should not, it is suggested,

marry a person with a similar heredity, as

the outlook for their children in respect of

hyperpiesia would naturally be a poor one.

It will be seen, further, that obesity is a factor

of immense importance when associated with

diseases of the hypertonic type. A study of

a family pedigree will enable a practitioner

to keep a close watch on the sibs and children

of patients, and to institute a suitable dietetic

regime at the first sign of increasing weight,

no possibly preventing the onset of severe

cardiac or vascular complications.

Rare Hereditary and Familial Conditions
The necessity for exact knowledge of the hereditary nature of many diseases and morbid processes is steadily increasing with the passage of time; for, by improved methods of treatment and by the more careful and efficient supervision of ailing children in school clinics and in private practice, numerous persons suffering from conditions formerly considered fatal now reach adult life, and are enabled to marry and to transmit to their children the hereditary defect which would, under less favourable conditions, have disappeared. There is thus a duty devolving on the medical practitioner to study more closely the inherited abnormalities of the various systems of the body, so as to be able to give satisfactory eugenic advice to his patients, and also, so far as possible, to prevent the onset of disease, where both hereditary and environmental factors are concerned.
Inbreeding is found nowhere to so marked an extent as in remote rural districts or in small island communities, for the chance of random mating is there very small. Inbreeding, it is true, is never practised among human beings to the close extent which is experimentally produced in animals and plants; and the fact of inbreeding does not of itself produce disease. The only danger of inbreeding or marriage of cousins is the increased likelihood of a mating of two carriers of one or more undesirable recessive characters.
The increasing urbanization of our population has tended to conceal or obscure the hereditary influence of morbid processes, since so many people in cities have lost touch with other members of their families, and since rare recessive elements are not so liable to manifest themselves there as in isolated rural districts, where there is a more restricted choice in mating. Indeed, in an isolated village, it is in many cases possible to predict the type of disease from which a certain proportion of members of certain families will suffer, and which will probably
be at least a contributory cause of death.
I have given elsewhere outlines of several hereditary and familial diseases occurring

80 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in my locality (McFeeters, 1939), and have References

shown there pedigrees of rodent ulcer and Baur, E., Fischer, E., and Lenz, F. (I931)

hydramnios (conditions not previously, so Human Heredity, London.

far as I am aware, reported as familial), and
also a sex-linked pedigree of muscular dystrophy.
It would be of immense value if large-scale investigations could be made into the heredit-
ary or familial elements in various morbid

Campbell, M. (I934) Chances of Morbid Inheri-
tance, London.
Cole, L. (1938) Brit. Med. J., 1, 157. Davenport, C. B. (I923) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 9,
226.
Gates, R. Ruggles (1929) Heredity in Man, London.

processes. The system of clinics for the study Goddard, H. H. (1914) Feeblemindedness, New

of disease in varying aspects, common in the York.

United States of America and in Germany, Hines, E. A., jr. and Brown, G. E. (I935) Proc.

might well be imitated in this country, while Mayo Clin., 10, 37I.

a closer co-operation between practising Lewis, A. (I934) Chances of Morbid Inheritance,

physicians, hospitals and geneticists might London.

lead to notable discoveries in the realm of McFeeters, J. W. (I939) Brit. Med. J., 1, 2I8.

heredity. The realization that any given disease is
inherited as a dominant or recessive charac-
ter is of immense importance and puts a valuable weapon in the practitioner's hand. It assists him, not only in diagnosis and prognosis, but also in the realm of eugenics,

MacLaren, J. P. (I929) Medical Insurance Examination, London.
Moore, E. (I934) Heredity, Mainly Human, London.
Penrose, L. S. (1938) Spec. Rep. Ser. Med. Res. Coun., No. 229.
Rolleston, H. (I934) Chances of Morbid Inheritance, London.

which Rolleston (I934) has termed " the Weitz, W. (1923) Z. klin. med., 96.

most effective, economical and humane of Weitz, W. (I936) Verh. dtsch. Ges. Kreislauf-

the departments of preventive medicine." forsch., 9, II.

PHYSIOLOGICAL ZOOLOGY

Articles appearing in forthcoming issues:

REACTIVITIES OF COLPODA DUODENARIA TO ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS. II. FACTORS
INFLUENCING THE FORMATION OF RESTING CYSTS. By C. V. TAYLOR and A. G. R. STmcKLAND,

Stanford University. RETARDATION OF EARLY CLEAVAGE OF URECHIS BY ULTRA-VIOLET LIGHT.

By ARTHUR

C. GESE, Stanford University. ON THE KILLING ACTION OF OPTICALLY ISOMERIC NICOTINES IN RELATION
PROBLEMS OF EVOLUTION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM IN ANIMALS. By G. F. GAUsE

TO and

THENI.NPPRE. OUSDPMAULRCAATNGDAIOROVIAN,AOIFTnsItDiGtURuPtIeLNoIAfC.ZIoToBlAyoSgRyCO, BRUEnURiCvTeIrHAs.iTtSyAILoABfENMRoDasncMdoUwV.LITKTIOPRLHEAMHBEURAGDESR, BWYasRhiEnGgtEoNnEURniAveTrIsiOtyN.

Edited by W. C. ALLE, Professor of Zoology, The University of Chicago. Published

Quarterly by the University of Chicago Press. Subscription: 35s. 2d. per year.
Exgfish dgext.r: CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX No0. 8

