324 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Pearson, KARL and Jaederholm, GUSTAV A. Mendelism and Met Problem of Mental Defect. II. On the Continuity of Mental Defect. (Questions of the Day and of the Fray. No. VIII. London. Dulau and Co.; I914; pp. 47; price is. net.)
THIS pamphlet, which continues the discussion initiated by Dr. David Heron's " Criticism of Recent American Work," affords an agreeable contrast to its predecessor; not only is it more valuable as a positive contribution to knowledge, but the style, although not entirely free from acrimony, does not sin against the ordinary rules of good taste and good feeling.
The argument is based upon an examination of 26I " normal " children in the elementary schools of Stockholm and 301 " mentally defective" children in the "help classes" of the same city. The examination was conducted by means of a modified Binet-Simon series of tests.
The data are analysed with the help of modern statistical methods, and careful attention is devoted to the various sources of fallacy, some dependent upon the selection due to removal of abler children to higher schools, others upon the fact that, whereas by hypothesis the difference between the physical age and the mental age, as defined by the BinetSimon tests, in normal children should on the average be zero for each age group, such a result is seldom attained in practice. The latter defect is allowed for by means of a correction based upon a regression equation connecting mental and physical age. Even in the uncorrected data it is seen that 64 per cent. of the " feeble-minded " children have grades of mental defect presented by cases of normal children. It is true that no single mentally defective child has a mental age equal to its physical age, but 54 per cent. of the normal children have mental ages inferior to their physical ages. In the case of the corrected data, it is found that 705 per cent. of normal children fall into the range of intelligence of
the so-called mentally defective, while 60o5 per cent. of the latter have
an intelligence comparable with that of some normal children. The authors accordingly think that there is no justification for regarding " feeble-mindedness " as a condition discontinuous with the varying intelligences of a normal population. In the concluding section the problem whether the mentally defective children could be regarded as the "tail " of a population within which intelligence conformed to the Gauss-Laplace type of distribution is examined, and the conclusion suggested by the statistical results is that the mentally defective population may be heterogeneous. In view of their findings, the authors hold that the suggestion made by, or on the authority of, American observers that " feeble-mindedness " is a unit character in the Mendelian sense should be dismissed.
Messrs. Pearson and Jaederholm, in the course of their lucid discussion, themselves either definitely enunciate or implicitly suggest the criticisms to which their conclusions are subject.
To begin with a relatively unimportant one, they refer on p. io to the doubt some might feel as to the sufficiency of linear regression equations for the purpose in view. This doubt is somewhat strengthened by the diagrams on pp. 24-25, and we had the curiosity to test the linearity of the regression in the case of the second diagram on p. 25. Computation of the correlation ratio from the data in Table IV., p. 27, and application of the usual test, seem to indicate that the regression is not in fact linear; but this single result is certainly not sufficient to disprove the suggestion that the use of a linear relation may suffice for practical purposes.
A much more substantial objection might be based upon the trenchant criticism of the methods of selecting the members of the "help classes " which is given in Note II, pp. 43, etc. It appears that a host of circumstances other than "mental defect " have weight in determining whether a child shall be transferred to a "help class." For instance, in crowded schools it may be much more difficult to organise such classes than in those with plenty of room. In view of these facts, a hostile critic might urge that the overlapping of the two sections of children in respect of

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

325

mental ability is not evidence for or against the assertion that "feeble-

mindedness" is a discontinuous variation. But those who use this argu, ment must consider whether a contrary opinion has been based upon evidence of a better kind.

Another point is that the authors insist upon the conclusion that a judgment as to whether a child requires special treatment is not in fact based purely upon a survey of intellectual characters, but that "these children form a group in which mental defect is very common, but which probably includes also other types of social or school inefficiency, due to traits only by courtesy classed under intelligence, although they may be psychical characteristics."

But this is surely what Dr. Davenport wished to convey in the remarks

derisively commented on by Messrs. Pearson and Jaederholm at the

beginning of their paper. Dialectically, the American authors are entitled

to retort that Messrs. Pearson and Jaederholm are guilty of a petitio

principii. They may assert that what they call " feeblemindedness" is a

complex, and that it is the complex which behaves as a Mendelian unit

character. Let us try to make the point plain by a scholastic illustration.

In some examinations a candidate is examined in, let us suppose, five

subjects, if he gets less than 25 per cent. of the possible marks in any

one subject he is rejected, and if he gets less than 40 per cent. in any

two or more subjects he is also rejected. Consequently the failures will

include some candidates who are quite up to the average in four of the

subjects and very far below the average in one, and others who are some-

what below but not greatly below the average in several subjects. Statis-

tical analysis would not reveal any discontinuity in respect of any subject

between the passes and the failures, and in truth no discontinuity might

really exist. But it might be said that the two classes were really dis-

continuous, that the "unfit" organisation reveals itself equally by a relative

high but still sub-normal efficiency in several directions or by a startling

deficiency in any one direction. The basis of this " unfitness " might be

unitary although its manifestations might be various. We have supposed

that some such idea as this may have been at the back of the minds of

those Mendelians who speak of masked segregation, but we have no pre-

tensions to expound the true Mendelian faith, and very probably our

attempt to provide arguments for the American workers will be repudiated

by them. For our own part we have no sort of doubt that Messrs. Pearson

and Jaederholm's plea for further patient analysis is one which should be

heeded by practical eugenists.

M. G.

Torelle, ELLEN, M.A. Plant and Animnal Children: How they Grow.

Published by D. C. Heath and Co., 3 Portsmouth Street, Kings-

way, W.C.; price 2S. 6d. net.

THE author of this little book recognises that the question of training

children in the ethics of sex is receiving widespread attention. She

realises that such instruction has its foundation in life phenomena, and

that therefore, to be effective, it must be based upon an acquaintance with

these life phenomena, an acquaintance which may be obtained by even very young children if they are familiarised with the life processes of

plant and animal life. That much may be done, in fact, that the most

effective basis may be founded, in connection with nature study at school,

is an opinion expressed by many thinkers on this problem of sex-educa-

tion. But the great difficulty is that simple knowledge of the processes

by which life is transmitted from one generation to another is not readily

available for teachers who would enlarge their teaching in this valuable

way; it is to be found chiefly in the depths of scientific biological litera-

ture. And he who would inform himself on these scientific details finds

himself overwhelmed with technical terms and impressed with the fact

that a study of the reproductive processes of the simpler plants and the

simpler animals is usually regarded as belonging to advanced biological

work and not suitable for, not acceptable to, the young mind of the child.

