THE EUGENICS REVIIEW.
NATURE AND NURTURE IN
SHAKESPEARE'S PLAYS AND
ELSEWHERE.
MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN, Sc.D.*
We who are interested in Eugenics often find ourselves employing that convenient jingle of words-to use Sir Francis Galton's epithet-nature and nurture, and to most of us, but I suspect not to all, it is well known that Shakespeare was the first to use this antithesis in order to draw a sharp contrast between the two fundamental, bases of human conduct. To quote the actual text, Caliban is. described in the Tempest as being "a devil, a born devil, on whose nature nurture can never stick"(1); and no doubt when first reading this passage one cannot but feel uncertain whether Shakespeare really did intend to bring to the minds of his hearers exactly the same ideas. as those which we Eugenists now attach to his words. Did he intend to indicate by the word "nature" the way in which the peculiarities of the germ from which Caliban sprang affected his character all through his life? Did he mean by "nurture" the way in which that. creature's character was affected by the peculiarities of his surroundings ? In fact had Shakespeare a sound general idea of the contrast. between heredity and environment ? Shakespeare had no scruples. whatever in using the same word when he intended to convey very different meanings; the word "inherit," for example, besides beingused by him much in the same way that Eugenists use it now, sometimes meant no more than the mere becoming possessed of the object. in question by any means whatever. An impartial examination. of the many passages in which "inherit" and "nature" are used byShakespeare must, however, in my opinion, lead to the conclusion. that he thoroughly realised the contrast between nature and nurture as understood by us.
Considering in the first instance this same quotation concerning
* .- 'Address, 1927.

182 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Caliban, it is to be noted that however strange the word "stick" may seem in this connection, yet it is really extraordinarily well suited to help to convey the meanings which we now attach to nature and nurture. Shakespeare evidently thought that any nurture that might be bestowed on Caliban was unlikely to stick, and that if it did stick for a time, it would soon be rubbed off; just as we might now allude to the uncertain and unenduring effects of the surroundings at Borstal on the worst of the young offenders sent there for reform. And as to Caliban's nature, it seems to have been regarded as the fixed basis on which nuture might possibly have stuck; just as we look upon the hereditary element in our own composition as in itself a thing past recall, though never preventing environment from producing some beneficial effects. It is true that no one would now ever speak of environment as sticking on to heredity, and I must leave it to experts to decide whether the word "stick" had a somewhat different range of meaning in Shakespeare's days, or whether it was his genius that made it possible to use it in a way no other author would dare to do.
Shakespeare seems to have been even more impressed by the inheritance of mental than of physical qualities; which is, I confess, to me a surprising fact. As to physical qualities, in"Love's Labour Lost" the Princess is told by a forester in the course of a wordy skirmish that "nothing but fair is that which you inherit"(2). The context certainly indicates that it was her beauty which was in question; though the remark may imply no more than a compliment implying that the lady was very good looking. The inheritance of physical features is,however,clearly alluded to in"All's Well that Ends Well," when the King greets young Count Bertram with the following words:
"Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face; Frank nature, rather curious than in haste, Hath well composed thee. Thy father's moral parts Mayst thou inherit too! Welcome to Paris" (3)
the word "curious" here evidently being used in the sense of careful. If by "moral parts" Shakespeare meant such mental attributes
as tend to promote moral conduct, we have in this last quotation a distinct allusion to the inheritance of mental qualities. The same idea probably underlies the words of Sebastian in the Tempest when he declared that "to ebb hereditary sloth instructs me"(4); the meaning apparently being that his sluggish inborn qualities made it easier for him to move backwards-to ebb like the tide-than to flow or to advance. Again there is probably the same underlying thought in the following words of Timon of Athens concerning certain senators which were addressed to his steward, after that official had been frozen into silence in an interview with them:-
"These old fellows Have their ingratitude in them hereditary: Their blood is caked, 'tis cold, it seldom flows; 'Tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind; And nature, as it grows again toward earth, Is fashioned for the journey, dull and heavy." (5)

NATURE AND NURTURE IN SHAKESPEARE'S PLAYS. 183
In this passage it is true that the way in which the words "heredity" and "nature" are used gives rise to doubt as to whether Shakespeare here really had natural inheritance in view. This doubt does not, however, arise in regard to another passage from the same play, in which the same disagreeable character informs Apemantus, in words not quite convenient to quote in full, that his father was mated "to some she-beggar, and compounded thee poor rogue hereditary,. " (6)
Even minor mental attributes, such as stupidity, seem to have been regarded by Shakespeare as being hereditary, if we may judge by the following dialogue in "As You Like It":-
Touchstone. Hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd? Corin. No more but that I know .... that he
that hath received no wit by nature nor art may complain of (want of) good breeding (bringing up) or comes of a very dull kindred. (7)
One of the main characteristics of hereditary failings, in so far as they can be separated from those due to environment, is their fatalistic character, a point well illustrated by a passage from Anthony and Cleopatra. Before quoting it may I point out that the word "purchase" is derived from the old French "pourchasser," and did not originally necessarily in any way imply a money transaction, and consequently that '.'purchased" is here best translated by "acquired." As to Anthony, we are told that-
"His faults, in him, seem as the spots of heaven, More fiery by night's blackness; hereditary
Rather than purchased; what he cannot change,
Than what he chooses. "(8)
No doubt it is true that we should never admit to ourselves that we are incapable of resisting a failing; and on this point the best analogy which I have been able to devise is to compare our heredity to an immovable anchor to which we are tied by an elastic cord. This cord can never be stretched by us to its utmost limit, and although we cannot actually drag our anchor, we may be certain that any further exertions beyond those already made would always have beneficial effects. The following somewhat obscure passage from "Measure for Measure" is intended to indicate,as far as I can judge,that by a mental struggle a man is able to counteract the pull of his natural impulses, that is to stretch the tie binding him to his original hereditary endowments. Angelo in the play is described as-
"A man whose blood Is very snow broth; one who never feels The wanton stings and motions of the sense, But doth rebate and blunt its natural edge With profits of the mind, study and fast."(9)
The meaning seems to be that Angelo was cold blooded and that when his passions did tempt him, he was able to blunt their edge by studv and by diet.
In order to further emphasize the fact that Shakespeare well understood the contrast between nature and nurture, a passage from

184 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Henry IV. can be quoted. But before doing so, may I observe that when I re-read it lately it brought back to my mind the remark which a learned German professor made during the course of a lecture on the English drama. He said that a German audience as a rule both understood and appreciated Shakespeare's plays better than did an English audience. This observation I resented until he gave reasons why this was likely to be the case. These were that the German audience of Shakespeare is listening to a language which they use every day, to modern and easily-intelligible German; whilst the English audience hears not only an archaic phraseology, but also often corrupt text. Possibly after I have read the following speech by Falstaff you may feel less inclined than you now are to quarrel with the German professor.
"Hereof comes it, that Prince Harry is valiant; for the cold blood he did naturally inherit of his father, he hath, like lean sterile and bare land, manured, husbanded and tilled, with excellent endeavour of drinking good and good store of fertile sherris, that he is become very hot and valiant. " (10)
After pointing out that this is the only occasion on which Shakespeare uses the phrase "naturally inherit," and calling attention to the analogy between "endeavour" and the French word "devoir," may I venture to translate this passage into modern English? "Hence it comes about that Prince Henry is valiant. His cool nerves were a natural inheritance from his father. Just as sterile land can be manured and tilled, so he has made himself valiant by performing the excellent duty of drinking much good wine." Falstaff wished t& point out that the Prince's hereditary endowment of great calmness could be suitably overcome by an environment of alcohol if taken in sufficient quantities.
Lest it should be thought that I am attributing to Falstaff evil thoughts which were not his, I must be permitted to quote his next succeeding words:- If I had a thousand sons, the first human principle I would teach them should be, to forswear thin potations, and to addict themselves to sack." These are Falstaff's words, and to condemn Shakespeare on account of this advice would be as logical as to declare that that great genius believed that "to be a well-favoured
man is the gift of fortune; but to write and read comes by nature'" (11I because he put these words into the mouth of the worthy Dogberry.
There is another obscure passage which I should like to quote, both because it shows how much importance Shakespeare attached to natural inheritance and for other reasons unconnected with Eugenics. In"All's Well that Ends Well"the Countess praises the heroine inthe following terms:- I have hopes of her good that her education promises; her disposition she inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer; for where an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities, there commenda-tions go with pity-they are virtues and traitors too; in her they are the better for their simpleness; she derives her honestv, and achieves her goodness."(12) I do not feel sure as to the meaning intended to be conveyed, but the following is the best translation I can give: "Her natural tendencies she inherits, and these make her acquirements

NATURE AND NURTURE IN SHAKESPEARE'S PLAYS. 185
more perfect; for where an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities with it, there our praises are mingled with regrets. In these circumstances virtues are both virtues and traitors too. Her virtues are better for her pure nature. She has inherited honesty of nature and has acquired goodness of character."
This assertion that acquired virtues, when springing from unclean inborn tendencies, may be treacherous can be well illustrated by reference to Falstaff's speech just quoted. Here I shall fall foul of many Shakespearean critics, for I intend to affirm that Shakespeare has represented in him an immoral, untrustworthy, selfish and greedy old reprobate. He was not a coward, for when he ran away it was not from fear, but merely from a calculated desire to save his own life, undeterred by any high motives. When it suited him he was goodnatured and affectionate, and he was always full of wit. These are his good qualities which may still have traitorous influences; for they will continue to make many people listen to his advocacy of intemperance in a very different frame of mind to what they would have experienced if these words had fallen from an equally disreputable person without any wit or kindness of heart. If Shakespeare's genius was never more clearly shown than in the portrayal of this character, yet I fear that it also may have had a slightly treacherous influence in causing such torrents of admiration to be showered on this fat old humbug. - May I in passing venture to express the wish that for the purposes of acting only, Shakespeare's plays should be somewhat more freely translated into modern English, so as to be more easily 'understanded of the people.' We have much yet to learn from him, and much is now lost because of the difficulty of following the actual text when spoken. It is true that only those who have attempted this task of translation can realise how difficult it is to convey the meaning without losing all that is Shakespearean in the words. It is a task for a literary expert of the highest standing to perform in a spirit of humility.
Some of those who have been convinced by the foregoing quotations that Shakespeare did thoroughly understand the contrast between heredity and environment may feel somewhat surprised at this discovery. But is that surprise justifiable ? In bygone days, when men were often nearer to nature than are the town dwellers of to-day, it was easier to learn by experience the lessons of the stockyard; that is the broad lesson that like tends to reproduce like, and that any carelessness in the selection of the progenitors of the coming generations soon begins to show its harmful consequences. Two thousand years before Shakespeare's days, Plato had learnt this lesson; a lesson which he unfortunately tried to teach in such a manner that we cannot now tell which of his words are to be regarded as humorous and which as real practical advice. After Shakespeare's days the increasing artificiality of modern life and other causes led to a steadily increasing ignorance of the knowledge to be derived directly from nature, at all events amongst the leaders of public opinion; a state of things which seems to have reached a climax in the latter half of the XVIIIth century. At that time all the best minds were imbued with "a passionate faith in the illimitable possibilities of human progress"

186 EUGENICS REVIEW.
(17, p. 119); a faith which is inconsistent with a belief in the widespread existence of failings like those attributed by Shakespeare to Anthony, that is of faults which cannot be overcome by any effort at command. Rousseau was the writer of that period who had the widest immediate influence, though luckily not that which was most enduring. He likewise held that the inborn capacity of man for reaching true happiness knows no stint though he differed from his more philosophic contemporaries in believing that no progress was then being made, and that the only method of securing progress was by a return to a state of nature. (17, p. 198) The effect of his teaching was to divorce the springs of social reform from "disciplined intelligence and scientific reason" with disastrous effects, and it was not till the XIXth century, after Rousseau's influence had greatly waned and after science had begun to produce wider effects, that a return to the more natural views entertained in Shakespeare's days took place, and a logical study of racial questions began to be possible.
Of Rousseau's works that which did most harm by its distorted estimate of environmental influences was probably his discourse on Inequality; though it should perhaps be added that what this brilliant writer intended this essay "to mean, and what his first disciples understood it as meaning, is not that all men are born equal. He never says this, and his recognition of natural inequality implies the contrary proposition" (18, p. 181). Lord Morley, from whom I have been quoting, is no doubt amongst the highest authorities on such an his. torical point; though it is possible he had not quite escaped from Rousseau's harmful influence; for he himself seems not to have had perfectly clear ideas in regard to the line of demarcation of the spheres of influence of heredity and environment. Rousseau appears in certain passages to have adopted the curiously erroneous notion that the onlv effect of the differences in the inborn qualities of men has been to create differences in the amount of property owned by them; and as in that mythical state of nature which existed previous to civilization, no acquired property was owned by any individuals, a return to that blessed condition would necessarily result in the removal of all differences between men. This was the aim of the reforms advocated by him, and in his advocacy of them he seems to have ignored all the effects of the differences in moral, mental and physical natural endowments such as might be experienced by men not owning any property. We must admit that Rousseau's views have often been seriously misrepresented, and we may well agree that part of the enormous influence of his writings was highly beneficial. But in considering the after effects of this strange personality,which clearly had certain "most equivocal and repulsive sides," we are again reminded of Shakespeare' s saying that where an unclean, or shall we say an unsound, mind carries virtuous qualities with it, these are "virtues and traitors too." As regards the progress of rational views concerning racial questions, Rousseau's teachings certainly had most deplorable con-
sequences. In order to illustrate the effects of Rousseau's teachings on the
beliefs and conduct of men of even the noblest qualities, I should like to refer to certain episodes in the career of one of his contemporary

NATURE AND NURTURE IN SHAKESPEARE'S PLAYS. 187
English disciples, Thomas Day, author of "Sandford & Merton." In doing so I shall as far as possible use the actual words written by a lady who knew him well, Miss Seward, known as the Swan of Lichfield; not because she was noted for her veracity but because her style is pleasantly reminiscent of her date.
Day even as a young man "was tall and stooped in the shoulders, full made but not corpulent; and in his meditative and melancholy air a degree of awkwardness and dignity were blended." His features were "interesting and agreeable amidst the traces of a severe small-
pox', (19, p. 18). In spite of these disadvantages, or perhaps rather because of them, his love affairs were numerous. First we hear of some verses to a lady who ultimately seems to have found that she had
no heart to give him. Then followed certain episodes with a sister of his Oxford friend, Mr. Edgeworth, the father of the famous Maria Edgeworth; but here again no climax was reached. The result of these failures was a careful reconsideration by him of the whole situation. Ever despicable in Mr. Day's "estimation were the distinctions of birth, and the advantages of wealth; and he learnt to look back with resentment to the allurements of the Graces. He resolved, if possible, that his wife should have a taste for literature and science, for moral and patriotic philosophy. So might she be his companion in that retirement to which he had destined himself, and assist him in forming the minds of his children to stubborn virtue and high exertion. He resolved also that she should be simple as a mountain girl, in her dress, her diet and her manners; fearless and intrepid as the Spartan wives and Roman heroines. There was no finding such a creature ready made, philosophical romance could not hope it. He must mould some infant into the being his fancy had imaged" (19, p. 35).
With these high thoughts in his mind, Rousseau's disciple set forth to explore the Foundling Hospitals in Shrewsbury and London; and with the aid of a friend he selected from the girls whom he inspected "two of twelve years each; both beautiful; one fair, with flaxen locks, and light eyes; her he called Lucretia. The other, a clear, auburn brunette, with darker eyes, more glowing bloom, and chestnut tresses, he named Sabrina" (19, p. 46). Let it at once be said that his subsequent behaviour to these two girls was in every respect exemplary, in spite of the disappointing results of his exertions. His first step was to take them both to France with no other companions, so that they might receive no ideas except those which he himself might implant. Unfortunately the two girls "teazed and perplexed him; they quarrelled and fought incessantly; they sickened of the smallpox," and being alone he had "to perform for them the lowest offices of assistance" (19, p. 37).
Our hero then returned to England "heartily glad to separate the little squabblers." Sabrina, having become the favourite, he placed Lucretia with a milliner. Later on he settled in Lichfield, and thither he led the beauteous Sabrina, then thirteen years old, where he "resumed his preparations for implanting in her young mind the characteristic virtues of Arria, Portia, and Cornelia. His experiments had not the success he wished and expected. Her spirit could not be armed against the dread of pain, and the appearance of

^188 EUGENICS REVIE:W.
danger. When he dropped melted sealing-wax upon her arms she did not endure it heroically, nor when he fired pistols at her petticoats, which she believed to be charged with balls, could she help starting aside, or suppress her screams" (19, p. 39). In other respects she failed also, being averse to study, and giving little promise of the ability necessary for the education of youths destined to emulate the Gracchi. After a series of fruitless trials, all hope of moulding Sabrina by well-applied nurture into the being of his imagination were abandoned and she also was suitably disposed of.
Not long after these events Mr. Day began to pay his attention to Miss Honora Sneyd, a lady with whom the famous but unfortunate Major Andre had been in love before his departure for America, where destined to meet a tragic death. Mr. Day soon offered Honora his "philosophic hand"; and though she tried to school her heart to softer sentiments in his favour, "she did not succeed in that attempt, and ingenuously told him so." But there was a very pretty, very sprightly, very artless and very engaging younger sister, Elizabeth, to whom "the yet love-luckless sage transferred the heart which Honora had with sighs resigned. " This young lady told him that she could have loved him if he had not acquired his "austere singularities of air, habit and address"; and here was, he felt, another chance of proving the perfectability of man by a suitable environment. He went to Paris and committed himself to dancing and fencing masters. He "stood daily an hour or two in frames, to screw back his shoulders, and point his feet; he practised the military gait, the fashionable bow, minuets and cotillons; but it was too late!" On his return to England poor Elizabeth had to confess that "Thomas Day, blackguard, as he used jestingly to style himself, less displeased her eye than Thomas Day,fine gentleman" (19, p. 44).
Though I must cut short any further account of our love-luckless hero, yet I cannot bear to leave him thus stranded. After this last disappointment he resumed his accustomary neglect of person; to learn later on that the two Miss Sneyds, one after the other, had married his friend Edgeworth; whilst Sabrina had married the very friend who helped him in his search for a prospective bride at the Foundling Hospitals. Before all these events had occurred, however, he had himself at last succeeded in obtaining a wife; and although Mrs. Day may have had a good deal to put up with, yet there was great affection on both sides until his death. This event occurred some eight or ten years later on, when he fell a victim to one of his uncommon systems. He thought highly of the gratitude, generosity, and sensibility of horses. He reared, fed and tamed a favourite foal. When first taken out, "the animal disliking his new situation heeded not -the soothing voice to which he had been accustomed. He plunged, threw his master, and then, with his heels, struck him on the head an instantly fatal blow" (19, p. 50). Thus poor Mr. Day did not survive to learn this last lesson as to the uncertainty of environmental influences
My main object in these remarks concerning Rousseau's English disciple has not been to poke fun at him, for that is too easy a task to be worth the effort. His moral character was indeed unimpeachable, and very very few of us would dare to place ourselves on an equality

NATURE AND NURTURE IN SHAKESPEARE'S PLAYS. 189
with him in regard to his persistence in obeying the dictates of his conscience. Where he failed was in his judgments on human affairs, and for this failure his master, Rousseau, must bear much of the blame. The question which I wish to raise is really whether Shakespeare would not have seen the folly of going to a Foundling Hospital in search of a wife, especially if no enquiries were to be made as to the stock from which the foundling sprang. Shakespeare knew that "crimes, like lands, are not inherited" (13); that is to say, that children must not be blamed for the sins of their ancestors; yet surely he would have felt that this way of selecting a bride greatly increases the chances of being tied for life to some "rogue hereditary," or, at all events, to someone without that disposition which makes fair gifts fairer. It is true that all we know about Sabrina and Lucretia, except their infantile squabbles, is much in their favour; but to make this fact serve as the basis of an argument to prove that there is no folly in adopting such a method of choice is on a par with declaring that a man who has not had his house burnt to the ground is thus proved to be a fool for having insured against that contingency. We must in such matters never judge by single instances; though if we could ascertain the complete life history of a thousand Sabrinas and Lucretias, the information would be not only extremely instructive, but what we have been hoping in vain to obtain. Then again can any readers of Shakespeare's plays doubt for a moment that he would have advocated love as being far safer than any system of education, however well devised, as a foundation on which to build hopes of a happy married life.
Lastly, if it is not too fanciful, I should like to enquire which would have been more easily persuaded to give his support to eugenic reforms, Shakespeare or Rousseau? Rousseau lived for years unmarried with a high grade imbecile, sending the five children resulting from this union to a foundling hospital in such a manner as to make subsequent efforts to trace their indentity quite futile; and for this conduct he made the excuse that the rich were robbing him of the bread he might have given his offspring. Such a man as this we should far prefer not to have had in our ranks; ranks which, moreover, he certainly would never have joined. That this is so we may be sure, because Rousseau never founded his theories on fact; whereas we believe that to advance on any other basis is to advance blindfold. On the other hand Shakespeare fully realized the importance of inborn qualities; he knew that like tended to produce like; and judging from the following lamentful quotation, we are even tempted to declare that he had grasped the idea of reversed selection:- "The strain (race) of man's bred out into baboon and monkey"(14). At all events with Shakespeare's sound ideas in regard to inheritance, we are safe in believing that if he could have known that to-day those instructed by hereditary sloth, together with those on whose nature nurture sticks so loosely as to make it impossible for them to retain the skill necessary for the winning of good wages, were multiplying more rapidly than that "happy breed of men" who till now have formed the bulk of the inhabitants of this little world of ours, "this precious stone set in the silver sea" -if he could have foreseen all this, he would have fully realized the danger of our situation. He would have seen that the

190 EUGENICS REVIEW.
words which he put in the mouth of Cassius-"Rome thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods" (15)-will assuredly come true of this country if the existing differential birth rate is allowed to continue for long. And if thus convinced, he must have become an advocate of eugenic reform; because for such a conversion, all that is necessary, besides a just appreciation of existing conditions, is a true patriotism. That Shakespeare was expressing his own deep love of England when he wrote the dying speech of John of Gaunt in Richard II. can hardly be doubted. Perhaps some of the ideas brought to our minds by this speech do not altogether fit in with modern aspirations, and no doubt the dangers which were in Shakespeare' s mind were very different from those we are now considering; for no one then suspected the possibility of an insidious falling off in the inborn qualities of the mass of the people, a process all the more dangerous from being invisibly slow. But looking to the spirit rather than to the letter of the words, I cannot bring my address to a close more fitly than by quoting a few words from "time-honoured" Lancaster's great speech:
"This blessed plot, this earth, this realm, this England,
This nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings,
Feared by their breed, and famous by their birth,
This land of such dear souls, this dear dear land, Dear for her reputation through the world,
That England, that was wont to conquer others, Hath made a shameful conquest of itself. Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life,
How happy then were my ensuing deathl!' ' (16)

NOTES.

(1) Tempest, IV., 1. (2) Love's Labour Lost, IV., 1. (3) All's Well that Ends Well ,I. ,2. (4) Tempest, II., 1. (5) Timon of Athens, II., 2.
(6) ,, ,, ,, IV., 3. (7) As You Like It, III., 2. (8) Anthony and Cleopatra, I., 4. (9) Measure for Measure, I., 4. (10) Henry IV., Part 2, IV., 3.

(11) Much Ado about Nothing, III., 3.
(12) All's Well that Ends Well, I., 1. (13) Timon of Athens, V., 4. (14) ,, ,, ,, I., 1 . (15) Julius Caesar, I., 2. (16) Richard II., II., 2. (17) Rousseau, by J. Morley, Vol. 11
(18) , Ir . (19) Life of Dr. Darwin, Seward.

The word 'stock' is also used by Shakespeare in a manner indicating his belief in the power of heredity. For example:-
Hamlet 111., 1. for virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it;

Henry VlllI.,IV., 2.
This Cardinal Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly Was fashion'd to much honour from his cradle.

NATURE AND NURTURE IN SHAKESPEARE'S PLAXYS.
Richard Third 111., 7. This noble isle doth want her proper limbs; Her face defaced with scars of infamy, Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants, And almost shoulder'd in the swallowing gulf Of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion.
Winters Tale, IV., 8. You see, sweet maid, we marry
A gentler scion to the wildest stock, And make conceive a bark of baser kind By bud of nobler race; this is an art Which does mend Nature-change it rather; but The art itself is Nature.

191

