26 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

comparison between castrates and normal individuals has taught us thus much. Their influence upon the energy-production of the
body, upon the mental activities, and upon many other functions of the organism, can-
not yet be wholly visualized; but they seem

to be of very great importance. Therefore the knowledge of the action of these hormones means much to the physiologist and physician; and we may say that control over the reproductive hormones means much more than control over reproduction.

MR. PUNCH ON EUGENIC FAMILY ENDOWMENT
(Reprinted by special permission of the Proprietors of " Punch.")
T- HIS strange case, in which the accused are the principal members of the late Conservative Government, was concluded at the Old Bailey to-day.
Mr. Justice Trout, addressing the jury, said: " This painful but important case has revealed a singular story. The prisoners in the dock are indicted at the instance of a Naval officer, Commander Paravane, upon two counts-first, that they did obtain a considerable sum of money by false pretences, and, second, that they did, severally and collectively, libel the Commander.
" Now a number of the officers in His Majesty's Navy are married and have children; and, as you have heard, it is the principle or habit of the State to look with especial favour upon those who take upon themselves the responsibilities of matrimony and parenthood, since, for reasons not wholly clear to all of us, it is still considered desirable that the population of these already over-crowded islands should continually increase. Therefore the taxes exacted from a bachelor are greater than those required of a married man; and the income-tax of a father is reduced, though not extensively, in exact proportion to his fertility. Pensions are granted to widows, but not to spinsters equally needing support. In addition, the officers and men of His Majesty's fighting forces receive higher pay (or allowances) from the dav that they lead some happy girl to the altar-that is to say, the officers and men of the Army, the officers and men of the Royal Air Force, and the men (but not the officers) of the Royal Navy. The exception is a startling one. ...
" It does credit, no doubt, to the heart of the nation that we deny to the officer what we are willing to grant to the simple seaman, but it will not, I think, enhance our reputation for common-sense. Is it to be understood that it is correct and desirable for an ordinary or able-seaman to take a, wife, but not for the Captain of his ship? Are the children of a stoker satisfactory additions to the race but not the offspring of an Admiral? Surely we are agreed that the blood and spirit of Nelson and Drake are not confined to the forecastle? ' Hearts,' if I may be permitted to imitate a celebrated poem:
'Hearts just as hard to check Beat on the quarter-deck,'
and the arguments which support the endowment of marriage in the one place cannot miraculously lose their substance in the other.
" One of the Naval witnesses, a bachelor, ventured to attack the principle itself; but it is too late, or perhaps too early, to do that. If it were accepted
Eugenics Review, Vol. XXII, No. 1.

MR. PUNCH ON EUGENICS
as a matter of policy that a reduction of our population is the first essential for a reduction of our difficulties then we should be right not merely to refuse assistance to those who contract matrimony but to impose a tax or fine upon the. producers of every child, increasing in severity with the size of the family. There is much in theory to be said for this, but what is material is that we do not say it. On the contrary, we publicly bewail the smallest decline in our national birth-rate, which is already lower than that of France, so long derided by us as a decadent nation antagonistic to the birth of babies. We cling to the strange belief that it is possible and proper to squeeze into a suit-case of limited dimensions an unlimited number of objects; and hence, in our limited territory, we applaud and support the multiplication of infants. So long as that is our general line of thought any particular departure from it will be difficult to justify, and none perhaps could be more dubious than the one under discussion. Quality as well as quantity must be our aim; and if that be admitted it is clear that the breed of the Naval officer is one of the first which an eugenical expert would be careful to include in any scientific plan for the improvement of the race. ...
" On the last occasion on which this topic was discussed in the House of Commons it excited the interest of less than forty of the six hundred and fifty Members, so that the House was ' counted out ' and the debate ignominiously concluded. This suggests that in the opinion of the Legislature it matters little whether a Naval officer is able to marry and beget children or not; and it may be that the speeches of the prisoners, when coupled with their conduct, have encouraged that opinion. . . ."-Mtsleading Cases: xxix.-The Sailor's Wife. Rex v. Baldwin, Bridgeman, Churchill and others. By " A.P.H." PuNNCE, February 26th, 1930.

27

