EUGENICS: GALTON AND AFTER

By SIR CHARLES GALTON DARWIN, K.B.E., Sc.D., F.R.S.

W~TTE warmly welcome this volume,*
from the pen of Dr. Blacker, whichis
appearing very appropriately at the
conclusion of his long period as secretary of
the Society. It is thus a culminating service rendered by the man who has, perhaps more than any other of our time, devoted himself to the cause of eugenics. As the title explains, and as the author himself confesses, the book has really two rather different purposes. Nearly half of it is an account of Galton's life and work, covering the enormous variety of his activities, though, of course, with a special emphasis on eugenics; while the rest of the book describes the developments since those days of the various subjects which have bearings on eugenics.
One of the troubles that most of us suffer from is the impossibility of reading all the books that we ought to and that we should like to. Thus Galton's memory is perpetuated in the four volumes of Pearson, but there
must be few, unless they are actively concerned in the history of any of the subjects at which Galton worked, who will have found the time really to study those volumes in detail. The first part of this book, then, admirably fulfils a need by gving at just the right length an account of Galton and his work. To anyone who has the wish-and there should be many-to know about the extraordinary versatility of his genius it may be commended as giving just what is needed, though perhaps such a reader might also be urged to read Galton's own Memories of My Life.
In studying the scientific thought of the past, one of the most difficult things to assess is the mental climate of the period in which new ideas are put forward. They, may appear to arise full-fledged out of nothing from the
mind of one individual, whereas actually they were really sometimes in the minds simultaneously of many people, and it is
* Blacker, C. P. Eugenics: Galton and After. London,
1952. Duckworth. Pp. 349. Price 25S.

chance which of them happens to get the
credit. Thus attributions of priority are always difficult, and justice is not always
done. But when all credit is given to rivals,
still Galton has strong claims to have been the real initiator of a great many different
branches of science. It is perhaps his versatility that is the most rematkable
quality, but unlike some other versatile geniuses it was associated with a persistence
through which, after proposing a subject,
he did a great deal of the spade-work in getting it established. This characteristic
comes out in all his activities. Thus when he was a traveller he spent a full two years
on his travel, and when he saw the need for measuring human qualities he set up an anthropometric laboratory, where no less than nine thousand people were tested. One of his pioneer ekperiments was on the way
the human mind works. It was roughly on
the line that later has become the current practice of word-association, but it was invented by him and done entirely on himself, and though he records the fact that he found it quite repellently disagreeable still he had the persistence to see it through. Nearly all his other activities have come into extended use; mention may be made of his discovery of the anticyclone, of his use of blood transfusion as a test of the pangenesis theory, of the Galton ultra-sonic whistle, and of finger-prints. To be just, mention should also be made of one subject in which he made extensive studies, which
seems to have come to nothing; this is the subject of " number forms." In more important fields there is his work on the co-relation (sic) coefficient, which practically created the modem science of statistics, and there is the study of twins, which provides the best means yet devised for distinguishing the effects of nature and nurture. And then there is his work on eugenics, embodied in Hereditary Genius and the Inquiries into Human Faculty, and in many of his other

152

EUGENICS: GALTON AND AFTER

I53

writings. All these things are described in literature on all this, and Dr. Blacker -has

the present book, and no one could help done a great service in summarizg it for

being impressed by the wide range of the those who could not, or would not, study the

fields he covered. Here and there, there is, originals. There are accounts of the well-

of course, a breath of what seems now the established tests of intelligence, and of the

rather naive simplicity of the nineteenth much less well-established tests of character.

century with its easy explanations of every- Much of this work has been done in America

thing to do with evolution, but although -for much of-it the author draws on Osborn's

throughout his life his views remained Preface to Eugenics-and no one could

remarkably constant, yet apart from a few withhold admiration from the work done in

of these minor things they were quite this difficult field. It perhaps leaves the

outstandingly modem.

impression that it may not even yet be

The rest of the book-rather more than running on the right lines, but we can be

half-describes what has happened to grateful for the laborious work so patiently

eugenics since Galton's days. There are undertaken by so many workers, for even if

chapters which describe the developments new approaches should be discovered which

in each relevant subject. The first intro- prove more profitable, still this kind of

ductory chapter describes the great changes exploration is the only possible way in which

in mental climate that have occurred, largely a new science can be established.

on account of the two wars. There is a The chapter following deals with genetics,

description of the prejudices induced describing the general principles of the

against eugenics through the subject getting subject on the usual Mendelian lines. It

confused in some people's minds with the then branches out into questions of imme-

various schools of militant nationalism. Then diate interest to eugenists, by discussing such

there is an account of how the rather easy things as identical twins. There is a short

optimism of the nineteenth century has been account of the " wolf children," whose actual

replaced by a clearer appreciation of the behaviour was so very different from any-

difficulties that eugenics has to face. There thing described by Kipling; this case seems

is also in this chapter an account of the to swing the balance between nature and

change in climate which has removed the nurture very much in the direction of

absolute prohibition of the nineteenth nurture. The chapter ends with an account

century on the discussion of sexual matters of the present genetic doctrines enforced in

and birth control.

Russia. This seems a rather unnecessary

There is then a chapter on demography, excursus, but perhaps the excuse for it is

describing the conditions of different parts that these doctrines may at present be

of the world in the matter of population and dictating policy about eugenics in a great

population increase. It brings out the very portion of the world.

important fact that during the past century Using these foundations Dr. Blacker then

in nearly all parts of the world the population describes the condition of existing opinion

has doubled itself. There is a classification and policy on eugenics in various countries.

of the countries into five demographic He refers to the report of the French Com-

classes, and the fact emerges that a great mittee on Population, which raises in an

many parts of the world are still fast acute form what is really the cardinal point

increasing in population, and thus surely in eugenics. It bears on the question of the

laying up future troubles for themselves. " planned family." In this country there is

An interesting map shows at a glance the a tendency to insist that children ought only

condition of the world in all these respects. to be born if they are wanted by the parents.

Then there is a chapter on the entirely It sounds an admirable principle, but the

different subject of testing procedures, a French Committee comes down squarely

subject entirely transformed since Galton with the opinion that a population recruited

started it. There is a large mass of technical in this way will not maintain its numbers-

154 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

in fact, that in human nature there is an practice of eugenics is examined the more

inadequate wish for children. The matter is difficult it is all seen to be.

disputed by some authorities, but it is As a general view of the book, it provides

obviously of quite principal importance for an admirable conspectus of a whole range of

the future of the race. Connected with this there is then a discussion on marriage guidance and other familial questions.
Finally, there is the subject which should certainly be the main interest of eugenists, the question of positive eugenic policy, that is the encouragement of the increase of good

knowledge which the ordinary reader could
not, or anyhow would not, gather from its original sources. This in itself would be enough justification, but the book does much more. Opinions have changed and are changing, so that no finality in them is attained. Eugenics cannot be a pure science like any of the -ologies, because it deals

types as contrasted with the elimination of with man himself, and so in a changing world

bad types. There are a number of interesting it will always be changing too. It is inevitable

suggestions of what might be done in this that there will be changes of policy, but there

way, including one which should be explored need be much less uncertainty than there

further; this might be described as the now is about the knowledge on which these

award of scholarships to parents instead of policies must be based, and it is only through

to children. But in this part of the subject the existence of books like this that the

it is hard to avoid the conclusion that, knowledge will develop on which sound

frankly speaking, the more closely the practical policies may be chosen.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION INTERNATIONAL LAW
Fonded in 1894
President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.CV.O. Chair. of the Executiwe Comitee: The Rt. Hon. Lord Jusce DINNING Editors: Profenor F. H. IAWSON, D.CL. J. E. S. FAWCETT, D.S.C.
Howaryr Sweearyv: IL H. WALL.

AND

Annual Subscription: THIRTY SHILLINGS for U.K. subscribers

INTERNATIONAL AND COMPARATIVE LAW QUARTERLY. Article, Notes, Notices of Books, etc.
Addres: S NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2

Eugenis Review, Vol XLIV, No. a

