HUMAN TEMPERAMENT*

The Development of Methods for Assessing It

By P. E. VERNON, M.A.

A SCIENCE of eugenics must depend beyond us. Why is it that we find it so

very largely on the accumulation of difficult to approach these social, emotional,

accurate, objective knowledge about and conative traits with scientific methods?

human beings. For our discussions of They are probably more important than

heredity and of the differences between abilities in determining human inter-actions

individuals or the various social classes can and adjustments, as Professor Bartlett has

hardly progress without a broad basis of pointed out in an earlier number of this

anthropometric and psychometric facts. journal.'+

During the past fifty odd years systematic measurements have been made of certain physical characteristics of men and women, and for about half that time we have also been able to gauge with considerable exactitude the mental qualities that we call ' intelligence.' Indeed, the individual tests first devised by Binet, and the group tests for which America is mainly responsible, constitute one of the most important instruments or methods that we possess in our large-scale studies of mankind. The present writer is by no means wholly satisfied with the techniques and some of the interpretations which have been put upon such test results; but he does not intend to devote this paper to their criticism. In spite of their drawbacks, we need only turn to the Wood Report of I929 on mental deficiency to realize how valuable they have been in the advancement of our relevant scientific knowledge.
But it is obvious that intelligence tests are only the first step; we are already

Actually the main source of our difficulties would seem to lie in the ambiguity of the temperamental qualities or personality traits which we so glibly attribute to one another. If no two people agree exactly in their views of a third person's temperament, and if they do not know what they mean by the descriptive epithets which they apply, we can hardly expect to reach the stage of measuring these qualities. Anthropometric dimensions of the body or the head are perfectly definite; any two investigators obtain practically the same measurements of height, weight, etc., from the same individuals. Even ' general intelligence ' comprises certain types of behaviour which can be rather readily recognized or agreed upon by different investigators. But what do we mean when we say, for example, that Napoleon was ambitious, forceful, a born leader? The average Englishman and the average Frenchman, at the beginning of last century, had entirely different views about

capable of measuring almost any of the more

specialized aptitudes, mechanical, musical, mathematical, or medical, and so on. And

latter in America, to express much the same concept. American readers are, indeed, advised to substitute " personality " for " temperament "

yet the affective factors of temperament and personality,t and of interest still seem to be

throughout this paper. Rather than enter into this controversial field, the writer would refer to a summary by G. W. Allport and himself, in the

Psychol. Bulletin, 1930, Vol. 27, 68i-688. Of the

* The writer expects to publish shortly a fuller account of the psychological topics summarized in this paper, under the title: The Experimental Approach to Personality.
t The definitions of these terms, temperament and personality, are still very uncertain. The former is more commonly used in England, the

definitions quoted there, Schoen's is fairly satisfactory, namely, " . . . the organized svstem, the functional whole or unity, of habits, dispositions and sentiments that mark off any one member of a group as being different from any other member. . . ...
$ Bartlett, F. C., Temperament and Social Class. EUGENIcs REviEw, April IQ28. Vol. 20. No. i.

C 325

326 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

him. To his mother and his brothers not take into account all the multiplicity of

Napoleon's characteristic traits must have conditions that affect any particular piece

seemed very different again. It is a poor of behaviour.

explanation to say that people at that time But to return to Napoleon; why is it that

were prejudiced, and that now we know we agree rather closely nowadays in our

better what was his real temperament. Why judgments of his temperamental qualities?

should we be any more right than the people The answer would seem to be that we know

who actually came in contact with him? the facts of his life history, that he won such

Furthermore, there is any amount of and such battles, that he said such and

evidence which proves that our traits vary such words, that his contemporaries said such

enormously in the estimation of different and such things about him. It follows, then,

observers; the child has quite distinct tem- that if we can obtain a sufficiently compre-

peraments in the eyes of his friends at hensive view of how a person behaves during

school, his teachers, and his relations at every phase of his existence, we achieve

home. Every person who observes him can some objective justification for our views of

only obtain a partial idea of what the child his temperament. Napoleon's ambition is

is like; the observer's opinion is based on an unmistakable quality, because the events

a limited acquaintanceship, and he is very of his life conform throughout to this

apt to jump to conclusions, or to obtain a descriptive epithet. It is not necessary to

generally favourable or unfavourable im- ask whether the ambition was some bio-

pression and to be influenced thereby in all physical thing or entity which he himself

his judgments. The schoolmaster who says possessed. The facts are that his behaviour

that a certain boy is pugnacious may be towards society, and the behaviour of other

basing his judgment on a few fights with people towards him, more often than not

schoolfellows; but the chances are that the fitted this particular trait-name. We are

boy does not work hard for the master, so entirely ignorant of the neuro-physiological

that the master's dislike of the boy has been structures of his brain which actually deter-

projected into his judgments of other mine this consistent type of behaviour; the

qualities. The master has no idea how the trait itself is a purely hypothetical and

boy behaves outside school. He may be very somewhat tautological assumption. We can,

submissive and retiring at home. Perhaps if we like, say that Napoleon possessed the

the master teaches classics, and the boy is trait of ambition, but this explains nothing

thoroughly bored by classics, though very more than does the statement that an

much interested in mathematics. He works animal defends itself because it possesses an

hard at the latter subject, and creates a instinct of self-preservation. What we are

much more favourable all-round impression interested in, as scientific students of human

in the mind of the mathematics master. or animal nature, are the facts of behaviour

Here we have a commonplace illustration to which we give the instinct-names or the

of those permutations of human inter- trait-names.

relationships which are constantly occurring What are the bearings of this point of

in our everyday lives. It serves to show view on the measurement of temperament?

that temperamental qualities are exceed- The main conclusion is that traits are not

ingly indefinite when contrasted with quantitative, unified variables, like the

physical characteristics and mental abilities. cranial dimensions. It is certainly unsound

A person may be pugnacious at one time, timid at another; pugnacious according to one observer, merely energetic to another. This is not because the person himself is
inconsistent or unintegrated, but simply because our judgments of his temperament are over-simplified abstractions which can-

to say that one person possesses a certain amount of pugnacity, or timidity, and that another person possesses half, or double that amount. Traits cannot be measured in the same sense as lengths and weights are measured. For heuristic purposes we may have to express these qualities in the form

HUMAN TEMPERAMENT

327

of quantitative scores, but we should never half as intelligent as the average individual

forget that such scores are artifacts, not with an I.Q. of Ioo. These figures merely

scientific measurements. The most effec- express, in arbitrary and unequal units, the

tive substitute that we can offer for strict relative difference between the level of

measurement is what is called sampling. intelligence of the first individual, and the

For example; if we desire to obtain a average level or norm of the total popula-

measure of an individual's timidity, we first tion. Similarly, in order to deal with the

devise a number of test situations to which results of our samplings of timidity, we

some people will respond with timid, others have to express them in terms of their

with fearless behaviour. The individual's distribution in a group of individuals. We

reactions in these situations give us a must therefore apply all the methods men-

number of samples of his temperament. tioned in the previous paragraph, and any

Secondlv we may present him with a others that occur to us, to a large group of

questionnaire or ' paper and pencil test.' persons whose background and age are

This questionnaire contains, say, fifty approximately similar. We can then give

questions about his past behaviour under scores to each individual on each sample, in

conditions which were likely to stimulate terms of his standing relative to the average

him to fear or bravery. After each question of the group.

three or more possible answers are pro- Suppose, then, that we now possess these

vided; one of these indicates very timid scores on, say, ten different samples of

reactions, another very bold reactions, the behaviour or of opinion, for each member of

others are intermediate. If the individual our group. We proceed to find by correla-

is sincere, he will check the answer to each tional methods to what extent the samples

question which best describes himself. By ' hang together or are associated con-

means of simple statistical methods, an sistently. We take, for example, the

appropriate score can be found for each opinions of the schoolfellows of our group of

answer. And by summing all the indi- subjects, and compare them with each

vidual's scores, we obtain a sample of his individual's own opinions, as expressed in

opinions about his own timidity.

his answers to the paper and pencil ques-

Thirdly, we ask other people who are well tionnaire test. We shall find some, but by

acquainted with the individual to estimate no means complete agreement. If the

his timidity on some standardized scale. correlation coefficient of i.0 is taken to repre-

Here again we shall obtain better results if sent perfect a'reement, and a coefficient of

we get them to score him on the basis of o.o is taken to represent no agreement at

objective behaviour, which they have all, then we are likely to find an interme-

actually observed in the past, rather than on diate figure, of about 0.3 to o.6. This

the basis of their personal subjective im- indicates a general tendency for those

pressions. And we should try to get hold of individuals who think that they behave

acquaintances who will have diverse slants timidly to be regarded as timid by their

or viewpoints about him. His schoolfellows' friends, although there are many excep-

judgments will afford us one quite useful tions. Similarly, we intercorrelate all our

sample of opinion, but different samples samples, and we shall find (according to the

ought to be collected, say, from his sisters, present writer's experience) that the

his employers, and others who have observed average degree of overlap or association

him in different phases of his existence. between any two samples will be a correla-

Now, owing to the peculiarly complex tion coefficient of 0.2 to 0.4.

nature of temperament, we are not only That the average intercorrelation is so

unable to apply strict measurements, but small need not surprise us. Some psycholo-

also we possess no absolute units, like gists who have worked with tests and ratings

inches, pounds, or seconds. An individual of traits have concluded that the tests are

with an intelligence quotient of 50 is not useless, because two measures of (nomin-

328 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ally) the same trait fail to agree closely with angle. One might say that the investigator

one another. Still more frequently investi- who applies the samples is viewing the

gators have asserted that generalized, con- individual through a number of narrow

sistent types of behaviour, i.e. traits, do slits. The separate scores (from tests and

not exist. They find that a boy may be ratings) only cover a small part of the

timid at school (according to one sample) meaningful whole of his temperament.

and bold at home (according to a second Hence no two samples can be expected to

sample). They therefore think that the boy overlap at all closely, unless the two slits

possesses a number of discrete timid and are also close together, that is, unless the

bold habits of response, and that he reacts two test situations are very similar in mean-

in a specific way to the specific situation ing. Again, the individual's reputation in

quite independently of his reactions to other the eyes of two school friends will be very

similar situations.

similar; but his parents see him from a very

But the fault really lies not in the incon- different angle. So that while the father

sistency of the boy, but rather in our con- and mother may agree with one another,

ventional, over-simplified verbalisms. In they could not be expected to agree to any

ordinary conversation we speak of traits great extent with the opinions of his friends.

or temperamental qualities as distinct In terms of correlations we usually find that

entities, assuming thereby that a person two friends or two parents may correlate

whom we call timid would be timid with one another as highly as 0.7 to o.8, but

under any and all conditions. Profes- that friends' ratings often correlate with

sor Spearman, meeting with the same parents' ratings to 0.3 or less.

belief in the field of intelligence, has demon- The next step is now quite obvious,

strated the incorrectness of this 'oligarchic' namely to combine as many diverse samples

theory.* Our samples do not intercorrelate as possible. The present writer calls this

highly because we have, of necessity, sum of a number of tests and ratings a trait-

abstracted each sample of behaviour or composite. He has found in his own work

opinion and isolated it from the total con- that it undoubtedly corresponds much more

text which gave it its full meaning. A closely to the trait-name than do the results

hypothetical example was given above of a of any single sample. Some of the samples,

boy who was called pugnacious and trouble- we generally find, correlate, on the

some by his classics teacher, who disliked average, much more highly with the rest

him, but was given high marks for good than do others. It may be that the test

conduct by his mathematics teacher. The situations in the ' poor ' samples entirely

reason for this was that the boy happened failed to evoke the timid-brave type of

to be more interested in numerical than in behaviour, or else that the non-correlating

verbal work. But if we merely abstracted opinions or ratings were obtained from

the opinions of the two teachers without people who lacked sufficient acquaintance

making any inquiry into the reason for his with the individuals in our group. Thus it

apparent differences of behaviour, we should is often necessary to eliminate some of the

naturally obtain contradictory samples. In ' worst ' sets of scores, and to retain only

other words, the expression of each sample the half-dozen or so which give the highest

as a numerical score severs from the sample average intercorrelation. But one has to be

the various conditions and factors that, very cautious at this stage, since the

originally determined it.

elimination of the more diverse samples

It is difficult to explain this argument necessarily narrows the scope of one's trait-

except by the use of metaphors. Each composite.

sample, as it were, approaches the indi- Take an example which is familiar to us

vidual's temperament from a rather narrow all, that of intelligence tests, which apply

* Spearman, C. E., The Abilities of Man.
don: Macmillan. I927.

Lon-

essentially the same methods as those outlined in this paper. It is well known that

HUMAN TEMPERAMENT

329

group written tests (Analogies, Completion, and so collected over a hundred samples of

Vocabulary, Arithmetic, etc.) intercorrelate behaviour or opinion for each subject. As

very closely. And it is usual to select for a many different methods of approach were

battery of group intelligence tests only those employed as possible. During the experi-

tests which do depend, as we say, on the ments he came to know the subjects rather

higher mental processes. But by concen- well, and the series concluded with a clinical

trating in this way on almost purely verbal interview with each subject. At this inter-

tests and excluding tests of a more practical view the writer showed to a subject all his

type, we narrow the final score to a measure outstanding high or low test scores, and by

of what is mainly a verbal type of intelli- means of personal conversation tried to find

gence. These scores do indeed predict with out the meaning or psychological signifi-

considerable accuracy the individual's cance of these scores. The test results are

future scholastic achievements, because but ciphers; it is necessary to consider what

scholastic work is also largely verbal. But they actually show in each single concrete

they have much less application to future individual. In this way logical relations

intelligent behaviour in the more practical, between the overlapping tests were built up,

or social, or other fields. The same diffi- and the interpretative synthesis of results

culty is found, in an intensified form, in went hand in hand with the statistical

tests of temperament. If, for example, we synthesis. It was then found that about 8o

find that our samples of opinion tend to sets of scores fell naturally into a number of

intercorrelate much more highly than our groups or types of reaction, i.e. into trait-

samples of objective test behaviour, it is composites. Each composite contained from

probable that all our raters who gave us 5 to 8 different samples, including some

these samples of opinion were somewhat objective test reactions, some opinions of

similarly biased. And a trait-composite external observers, and some opinions of the

which includes only the opinion samples is subjects themselves. In addition to general

almost certain to be ' off-centre.'

or abstra-ct intelligence, the following

The writer is therefore very doubtful trait-composites were thus established as

whether the purely statistical criterion of psychologically meaningful, and statistically

high average intercorrelation is capable of consistent.

giving us satisfactory composites. Numeri-

cal results by themselves are generally Practical or mechanical intelligence equivocal and ambiguous. For we should Quickness-slowness not forget that a score on one sample of Impulsiveness-caution

behaviour is an abstracted symbol for part Sociality-asociality

of a complicated reaction of the individual. Leadership or ascendance-submissiveness From this total meaningful reaction to our Dependability and persistence or

test situation we have selected only the efficiency

partial aspects or elements that can be Emotionality of the deep or repressed

objectively measured. The fundamental type

limitation of the strictly scientific or the Emotionality of the broad, overt, or un-

statistical approach in this field is that it repressed type

cannot record all the variety of factors which Radicalism-conservatism

enter into any particular test response. A3sthetic interests Thus it would seem justifiable to apply Scientific interests

interpretative, subjective criteria in build- General integration or maturity of

ing up these partial samples into a meaning- character.

ful trait-composite.

In one series of experiments, the present Most of these seemed to represent rather

writer gave some fifteen hours of tempera- closely the trait-names by which they are

mental tests to 25 undergraduate subjects, called, though the impulsiveness and

330 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

emotionality composites were less satisfac- been more fortunate, since they can take as

tory, statistically and logically.

their criterion either age differences (Binet),

We must return again to the statistical or scholastic performance. Many psycholo-

treatment. A simple concrete example may gists tried to correlate their temperament

help to explain it. Suppose that you saw test results with ratings, using these ratings

an individual, X, at a party, sitting alone as the best available criterion. This is

and not talking, you might assume that he obviously unsound, since the ratings are

was an unsocial, introverted person. You just as likely to be biased (off-centre) as

might or might not be right; for instance, the tests. The sampling method, as advo-

if he happened to be feeling very unwell at cated in this paper, avoids this difficulty

the time, your judgment might not be by what is called internal validation. The

justified. But suppose that you saw X in a sum of all the available samples is taken

large number of other situations, always as the best possible criterion, since it

exhibiting the same general 'type of a-social approaches most closely to the desired

behaviour, your conclusion would be very infinite number of samples. Hence it is

much strengthened. In fact, the more that the validity of our tests or opinion

samples of his behaviour in society that you samples is shown by the extent to which

observed, under the more diverse conditions, they ' hang together ' or are positively

the sounder would be your generalization. correlated with one another.

But only if you had an infinite number of We can apply to our results a further

such samples could you be certain that he check of a qualitative and quantitative

was always what you call unsocial.

nature. If several trait-composites are

The statistical methods used in the established, then we are sure to find that

writer's research try to follow out this any two separate composites will overlap to

illustration by defining the trait in question a greater or lesser extent. Just as in

as the average of an infinite number of ordinary life we would naturally expect the

samples. Any one sample or observation impulsive person to be also rather quick in

has a certain predictive value with respect movement, or the a-social person to be

to this infinite number, but two tests of the rather submissive and lacking in leadership

same predictive value, when they are com- qualities, so we should expect to find a posi-

bined, are clearly better than one. It can tive correlation between the total scores on

be shown that when six samples intercorre- all the quickness and impulsiveness samples,

late to + .24, then the theoretical validity or the totals on the sociability and leader-

of the trait-composite (i.e. of the sum of the ship samples. Sometimes, then, we can

six sets of scores) is + .8I. Theoretical decide on the satisfactoriness of a composite

validity means the probable correlation of by the degree to which it correlates mean-

the composite with the infinite number of ingfully with any other composites that are

similar samples. In the present writer's available. As far as possible it is desirable

investigation, this was a typical result. to make up composites which are relatively

Most of the trait-composites which were independent. But just as all temperamental

established, even in this preliminary work, trait-names tend to overlap in meaning, so

were thus found to measure with quite fair we should look for a certain statistical

consistency the behaviour of the subjects in overlap of composites.

situations of the general types covered by It is impossible in a short paper like this

the trait-names.

to go into the various technical complica-

Now, the great obstacle that has been tions, and the theories of temperament

encountered by most investigators of tests which led to this method. Nor is it possible

of temperament has been the difficulty of to discuss here the connection between this

finding a criterion or a means of showing approach and the ' eclectic ' principles

that the test measures validly what it sets upon which Spearman works in his measure-

out to measure. Intelligence testers have ment of general and specific factors of intel-

HUMAN TEMPERAMENT

33I

ligence. The sampling technique, though adopted mainly from the work of Professor M. A. May, of Yale University, closely resembles Spearman's pooling of tests.* But since we encounter far greater complexity and indefiniteness in the sphere of temperamental traits than when dealing with intellectual factors, it seemed inadvisable to apply Spearman's more elaborate statistical methods.
The main object of this paper is to recount the difficulties rather than the achievements of measuring temperamental traits for practical purposes. At the moment it is only possible to outline what is perhaps the most promising approach to a scientific study of the affective and conative tendencies in human beings. And yet some points of direct relevance to eugenics have already
* May, M. A., Statistical Methods in Personality
Study. J. AMER. STAT. Ass., I93I, I68-I74. An explanation of the differences between the sampling technique and the methods of Spearman and Kelley will be given by the writer in a later publication.
Cf. footnote (*) p. 325.

been established. May and Hartshorne, using essentially the same methods on a more elaborate scale, have shown that the character trait of honesty-deceit probably
has a considerable innate basis.t In other words, by sampling the honest-deceptive
behaviour of a large number of brothers and sisters, they have demonstrated that' there is as much resemblance between the composite scores of pairs of siblings as there is between their intelligence scores.
But we must be content to progress slowly. There are no simple and easy short cuts, no methods of direct and certain measurement in the field of temperament. A great deal of laborious analytic testing and rating with large numbers of individuals is necessary before we can decide on the most satisfactory trait-composites; and this quantitative, psychometric research must be synthesized by clinical observation and common sense.
t May, M. A. and Hartshorne, H., Sibling
Resemblance in Deception. XXVII. Yearbook Nat. Soc. Stud. Educ., 1928, 2, I6I-I78.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 4.

