SCAPULAR TYPES AND HUMAN FITNESS*

A Study of an Outward Sign of Biological Efficiency

By WILLIAM WASHINGTON GRAVES, M.D., F.A.C.P.
(Director, Department of Neuro-Psychiatry, Saint Louis University School of Medicine.)

To be a good animal is the first requisite to success in life, and to be a nation of good animals is the first condition to national prosperity.-HIERBERT SPENCER.

H UMAN beings differ innately in these. Each character shows a range in

their physical, mental, and total variation, but none a wider range than the

make-up. They differ innately in vertebral border from its mergence with the

capacity for health, disease, duration of life, scapular spine to the inferior angle. The

and adaptation in general. Fitness is a con- variation range of this part of the bone is

venient term to express the biological fact from extremely convex to straight, and

of relative capacity for adaptation and sur- from straight to extremely concave. Con-

vival. No one is wholly fit, no one is wholly sideration of this fact enabled me to classify

unfit. Fitness is the very foundation of scapule of human stocks and some other

family and community health, disease, and mammals into convex, straight, and con-

of national survival. The problem of cave types.

human fitness is vital and enduring. It has The classification of scapulae in skeletal,

many phases, but none is more worthy of foetal, and living human material is

intensive investigation by this and future based primarily on the character (convex,

generations than its relation to the health straight, concave) of the greater portion of

and disease of a people.

the vertebral-border contour below the

Among the differences and similarities scapular spine in its relation to a straight

having fitness values and common to human line. If the " greater portion " of this part

stocks, are those discernible in shoulder of the border, beginning at its point of mer-

blades. Having found some of these in a gence with the scapular spine, is convex,

family study in I906, I was led to investi- straight, or concave, it is so classified. The

gate them in living, skeletal, and foetal contour of this part of the bone may be

material, and to classify scapule into regularly, irregularly, slightly, moderately,

readily recognizable types. I was further or markedly convex or concave, or it may

led to investigate the origin and distribu- be straight or nearly so, tending rather to

tion of scapular types in human and other concavity than to convexity. (Fig. i.)

mammalian stocks, and these investigations The classification is based secondarily on

have revealed rather definite relations of an assemblage of variations peculiar to, or

scapular types to the vital and enduring more frequently found, in each type. Thus

problems of human fitness.

one type of scapula is brought into more or

BASES FOR SCAPULAR CLASSIFICATION
An intimate study of the human scapula reveals at least forty morphological and architectural characters. It may be safely said that no other bone discloses so many of

less sharp contrast with other types, not only by the character of the vertebral-border contour (convex, straight, concave), but also by a number of correlated characters.
While each scapular type embodies a variable constellation of correlated characters,

it is nevertheless the relation of the contour

* Prepared in 1930 for the Committee on Growth and Development, White House Conference on Child Health and Protection.

of the great portion of the vertebral border below the scapular spine to a straight line

215

2I6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

that establishes a firm foundation for scapular classification in skeletal, feetal, and living material.
In a recent comparative study (i) of
approximately I,2oo mature scapule, it
has been clearly shown that the concave and
straight types have twelve or more features in common; therefore they constitute
variant types, contrasting vividly with convex types. These comparative studies have
justified me in combining the straight and concave forms and in designating them the scaphoid types. Further justification is found in the fact that persons in whom the vertebral border is classified straight often disclose characteristics in total make-up similar to, although as a rule less marked than, those in whom it is found to be concave. Figure i illustrates the primary basis of scapular classification and suggests useful
symbols for recording the types and the varying degrees of convexity and concavity.

OTHER BIOLOGICAL PROBLEMS
Classification brought the scapula, for the first time, into definite relations with a number of biological problems, and among these may be mentioned: phylogenesis; ontogenesis and morphogenesis in general; bone growth; bone form and variation in man and other mammals; the modification of bone form by muscle attachments, muscle pull, and various environmental influences in pre- and post-natal periods; age changes in bones and other tissues; the origin and distribution of scapular types; human heredity, longevity, morbidity, and adaptability in general. The relations of scapular classification to the foregoing problems and some of the results of investigations thus far may be summarized as follows:
(i) Similar scapular types are present in varying degrees and percentages in the skeletal remains of all accessible human

Figure i.-Scapular classification-convex, straight, concave-based primarily on character of greater portion of vertebral-border contour below scapular spine in its
relation to a straight line.

(A)
The Convex type: may be regularly or irregularly, slightly : Cvi, moderately: Cv2, or markedly: Cv3 convex.

(B)
The Straight type: straight or nearly so, neither convex nor concave, tending rather to concavity than to convexity.

(C)
The Concave type: may be regularly or ir-
regularly, slightly : Ccl,
moderately: Cc2, or markedly: Cc3 concave.

Pigure x illustrates the primary basis of scapular classification and gives useful symbols in recording the types. A, convex type, (Cv2); B, straight scaphoid type (ST), and C, concave scaphoid type (Cc3). The scaphoid type (straight or concave) combines twelve or more anatomical and architectural features common to straight and concave which contrast vividly with similar features in the convex.

SCAPULAR TYPES AND HUMAN FITNESS

2I7

stocks, both ancient and modern, and of found. The influence of muscles or their

some other mammals (gorilla, orang, attachments, or of muscle variation, or of

chimpanzee, lemur, armadillo, bat, etc.). muscle pull either on scapular-type forma-

(2) Scapular types are inherited mor- tion, alteration, or modification through-

phological features, and, with the excep- out the life cycle must be considered neg-

tion of definite racial marks of inherit- ligible when we remember that as early

ance, in no accessible morphological as the twelfth faetal week each scapular

feature common to ' normal ' human in- type (convex, straight, concave) is found.

heritance thus far known do the mem- (6) Regardless of race, stock, sex,

bers of a given generation more closely social level, occupation, or environment,

and more frequently resemble each other each scapular type (convex, straight, con-

and at the same time one or both parents cave) is found in varying degrees and per-

than they do in scapular types.

centages in the tall, the short, the fat,

(3) By the twelfth feetal week the and the lean; the ' broad backs ' and the

human scapula has attained the general ' narrow backs,' the strong, the weak, the

form it apparently ever after retains, and healthy, and the sick; the near to, and

in this early period of development the remote from, an ideal in development; the

same scapular types are found, as in all mentally brilliant, average, and defective;

subsequent periods of pre- and post-natal the well and poorly muscled; the well and

existence.

poorly nourished; the ' excellent,' the

(4) In pre- and post-natal periods, one ' good,' and the ' poor ' types, and in all

finds both symmetry and asymmetry in heretofore-described human types.

scapular types. More or less symmetry (7) It is among persons disclosing

in type is found in approximately 8o to go innate defectiveness in adaptation, charac-

per cent., but definite asymmetry in type terized mainly by definite asymmetries,

is found in IO to 20 per cent. of humans. disproportions and disharmonies in total

The more or less symmetrical types are make-up that straight, concave, and

called " pure," and the asymmetrical " mixed " (scaphoid) types are most fre-

types are called " mixed " scaphoids, be- quently found.

cause such types have scaphoid compo-

nents. The same person may have convex THE AGE INCIDENCE OF SCAPULAR TYPES on the one side and on the other concave, -ITS BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE

or convex on the one side and straight on In I907 while investigating the possible

the other, or straight on the one side and inheritance of scapular types, the observa-

convex on the other (fig. 2). Asymmetries tion was made that scaphoid types seemed

in type, as well as asymmetries in degree to predominate in the young; whereas, con-

of type, are independent of handedness, vex types seemed to predominate in the

occupation, disease, or other environ- old. This observation led me to make statis-

mental influences. Moreover, both asym- tical investigations in comparable numbers

metries in type and in degree of type are of the living and the dead in successive age

found in some other mammals (anthro- periods. These investigations and those of

poids, bats, armadillos, etc.).

many others have confirmed my observations

(5) Particular variations of scapular of I907, and thereby disclosed a finding of

muscles or of their attachments are not unusual biological significance-the age

found to be associated exclusively with incidence of scapular types-a finding as yet

any particular scapular type in any period unparalleled by any other inherited,

of life. Inherited variations of bones, morphological, or functional feature, trait,

muscles, and other morphological fea- or character. From personal statistical in-

tures generally have heretofore been con- vestigations and from those of many others,

sidered expressions of the Anlage pecu- one could at this time tabulate the scapular

liar to the individual in which they are classification of approximately 6o,ooo per-

2I8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

sons, representing supposedly-healthy and known-to-be-sick groups of white stocks in
various age periods from the fifth year to
old age. The results of these investigations

more frequently found than the convex types in the unduly disease susceptible, the plus-potentially sick, the shorter-lived of the race.

clearly demonstrate the great biological significance of the age incidence of scapular It is not possible at this time to state the

types and are summarized in part as exact percentages of convex and scaphoid

follows:

types in the young and in the old repre-

(a) The scaphoid types (straight, concave, and mixed) predominate in frequency of occurrence in the young and relatively young, and the convex types predominate in frequency of occurrence in the old and relatively old, regardless of the nature of the material (excellently, well, or poorly adapted).
(b) The relative percentages of convex and of scaphoid (straight, concave, and

sented in any population, even in so-called ' normal ' groups. Scapular classification by me in earlier years and by others since then doubtless contained considerable error, because of failure to adopt uniform methods in recognizing scapular types in the living and because of the inherent difficulties in this phase of the physical examination-a
phase, which, prior to scapular classifica-
tion, had never been attempted. I have elsewhere stated (2, 3, 5) that, choosing at

mixed) types in all age periods are depen-
dent primarily upon the age and secondarily on the nature of the material.

random in our population, the percentages of scaphoid types from the twelfth foetal week to the tenth year of life are approxi-

(c) The percentages of the convex types mately 8o: the convex types 2o; whereas,

increase while the percentages of the sca- in the old (seventy and over) the percentages

phoid types (straight, concave, and mixed) are approximately, scaphoid 2o and convex

decrease in successive age periods from 8o. Personal investigations during the past

childhood to old age, regardless of the two years of approximately io,ooo persons-

nature of the material (excellently, well, Grammar School pupils, Boy Scouts,

or poorly adapted).

orphan-asylum inmates-ranging in age

(d) The percentages of the concave and from six to fifteen years, and comparable

mixed (scaphoid) types decrease more numbers of persons over sixty years of age

rapidly than the straight (scaphoid) types disclose the following approximate perfrom childhood to old age, regardless of centages:

the nature of the material (excellently, Six to fifteen years: scaphoid types 65

well, or poorly adapted).

per cent., convex types 35 per cent. Sixty

(e) In poorly adapted groups, in simi- years and over: scaphoid types 35 per cent.; lar age periods, there are more scaphoid convex types 65 per cent.

types and fewer convex types than in well-

adapted groups.

THE ORIGIN AND SIGNIFICANCE

(f) Investigations in explanation of the The variations of the greater portion of
age incidence of scapular types in the the vertebral border below the scapular various directions herein outlined, includ- spine, on which scapular classification is ing follow-up observations on a relatively primarily based, are inherited variations. large number of individuals during Since they are common to all accessible periods of growth, maturity, and senes- human stocks and some lower forms, the cence, have disclosed no process or cir- inference is tenable that they are primeval cumstance capable of changing one type with man and other mammals disclosing of scapula into another; hence there them. Many other features common to remains but one explanation of the age shoulder blades and other parts of man and incidence of scapular types: the scaphoid of other mammals are doubtless of similar types (straight, concave, and mixed) are nature and origin.

C.V.

-

.;.:: .*: ;: II::c. i. ...;:

E6 :M W s4 ST .

CC!.

:2 ..
+:::+ +r +0

.+.:+* :Iii;'..

I:
..::.

::..
FIGURE 2.
Photographs of six pairs of scapule from white males in the age period 50-59, derived from dissecting-room nmaterial, Laboratory of Anatomy, \Vestern Reserve University MIedical School, Cleveland, Ohio. The three pairs on the left (convex, straight and concave types) in the ordler naimie(d from top to bottom are typical " pure " types, i.e. each bone of each pair is of the same tvpe. 'lhe three pairs on the right are mixed (scaphoid) types (concave+convex, straight+convex, concave + straight) in the order named from top to bottom.
To face Page 218

SCAPULAR TYPES AND HUMAN FITNESS

2I9

Inherited variations are everywhere appa- of the convex types. Just who they are and

rent in the world of life, and nowhere more how many there are in each direction is a

so than in the differences, resemblances, problem for continued research.

similarities, and inequalities abounding in We have long known that all human

structure, function, and total make-up of beings are, in the broadest sense, disease

human beings. They are the foundations of susceptible, some more, some less, but as

our ability to distinguish one individual, yet we have not studied the apparently

one stock, one race from another, the funda- healthy as intensively as the definitely sick.

mentals of individual constitution and the Therefore, the questions are pertinent:

raw materials for observation, classification, Who among us are the excellently, well or

correlation, and evaluation in the problem poorly adapted; who are the plus-potentially

of individual adaptability.

healthy or sick; who are the more, who are

Present-day knowledge of heredity and the less, susceptible to disease in the broadest

the relations of heredity to environment sense ? The general recognition of scapular

clearly shows that the evaluation of indivi- types and co-existent inherited variations in

dual adaptability is to-day, and must for routine physical examinations will be

ever remain, a fundamental and universal helpful in answering these questions. Just

problem. Individual adaptability is not so long as we fail to recognize and evaluate

only a problem for the biological scientist, the innate differences and similarities in

the teacher, and the jurist, but also for all human beings, just so long shall we fail to

laymen capable of manifesting interest in recognize and evaluate the innate capacities

science, popular education, and social im- underlying individual health, disease, and

provement. If we would determine who are adaptability in general and fall short of the

the excellently well, or poorly adapted possibilities in health promotion, disease

physically, mentally, or morally; who are recognition, prevention, and cure.

the relatively fit or the relatively unfit; who The only tenable explanation of the age

are the plus-potentially healthy or plus- incidence of scapular types is in full accord

potentially sick; who are the longer and with previously existing conceptions of

who are the shorter lived of the race-if we hereditary predisposition to health and

would do this, we must not only evaluate disease in the broadest sense, and in full

the factors of individual inheritance and in- accord with previously existing conceptions

dividual environment, but we must recog- of the relations of human heredity to en-

nize, classify, correlate, and evaluate man's vironment and these, in turn, to morbidity,

inherited variations, and apply the results longevity, and adaptability in general. The

to the study of the whole individual.

first morphological proof of these concep-

COMMENT

tions is found in the application of scapular classification to the study of human beings.

From the foregoing brief summary of The age incidence of scapular types is, as

some of the results of investigations based yet, unparalleled by a similar finding in

on scapular classification, it becomes appa- connection with the types of other inherited

rent that new and dependable approaches to variations common to human beings, be-

the vital and enduring problems of human cause the principle of investigation which

fitness have been found.

led to this finding had not been recognized

The striking differences in scapular-type prior to scapular classification and its appli-

percentages in the young and the old not cation to the study of human beings.

only justify the inference of greater mor- Application of this principle, now under

bidity and mortality among the possessors way, to the study of well and poorly adapted

of the scaphoid than among the possessors groups representing successive age periods

of the convex, but they also justify the in- in various human stocks gives promise of

ference of good adaptations and decreased finding other types of inherited variations

morbidity and mortality in many possessors with age incidences of similar import to

220 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

those of scapular types. However, until with scapular classification, is that the

these shall have been found, we have in physician of the future will be able to make

scapular classification and the age-incidence a rather accurate assessment of the constitu-

principle of investigation dependable means tion peculiar to the individual, obviously not

for assessing the biological worth (excellent, on a particular scapular type alone, but on

good, or poor) of a given population and of the constellation of coexistent inherited

segregated population groups.

variations having fitness values similar to

I would here emphasize the fact that a scapular types. Until that time arrives we

particular scapular type is not the measure have in scapular classification, when accu-

of the individual. Some of the best adapt- rately made, dependable indications of the

able are possessors of scaphoid, and some of biological worth of any community or popu-

the least adaptable are possessors of convex lation. I say this because the age incidence

types. The part is never greater than the of scapular types points unerringly to two

whole, nor the whole greater than the sum groups in any community or population:

of all its parts. Therefore the presence of a (i) the bearers of the convex types, among

particular scapular type in any person indi- whom will be found the larger number of

cates but one thing, one sign of his inherit- the better adaptable-the plus-potentially

ance. To determine the individual's capa- healthy, the longer lived; (2) the bearers

cities for health or disease requires an of the scaphoid types, among whom will be

evaluation of all other structural and func- found the larger number of the poorer adap-

tional variations-nothing less than a study table-the plus-potentially sick, the shorter

of the whole individual in relation to his lived of the race; and (3) because investiga-

heredity and environment. When, through tions of supposedly healthy groups (high-

further investigations, we shall have recog- school and university students and gradu-

nized and evaluated other inherited varia- ates and A.E.F. men) and of segregated sick

tions co-existent with scapular types, we groups (tuberculous, insane, feeble-minded,

shall then be able to form better judgments and prison) in comparable numbers in

of an individual's capacities for health, similar age periods show approximately

disease, and adaptation in general than we from i S to 2 /4 times as many convex

are to-day.

scapular types in the supposedly healthy as

While it cannot be too strongly empha- in the known-to-be-sick groups.

sized that a particular scapular type or any

other inherited variation is not the measure PROMISE OF CONTINUOUS RESEARCH

of an individual's fitness; scapular types are Through continuous research, based upon

nevertheless firm bases for correlating all scapular types and the age-incidence prin-

other inherited variations, anthropometric ciple of investigation, may we not reason-

measurements, and indices co-existent with ably expect more general appreciation of

them, and for correlating these in turn with that basic pathology, which is inherent in

various aptitudes and morbidities. More- every human being to a greater or lesser

over, scapular classification and the age- degree? Just as we are now able to prevent

incidence principle of investigation are use- epidemics of communicable diseases by

ful means for assessing the relative fitness accurate knowledge of the conditions under-

of populations and of segregated population lying them, may we not reasonably expect

groups. The application of the age-incidence prin-

that, with better knowledge of individuals, we may often prevent disease in them?

ciple of investigation, first found and used With fuller appreciation of the nature of the

by me, will enable future workers to deter- soil, particularly in childhood and adoles-

mine the fitness value of any inherited varia- cence, may we not better strengthen the

tion, anthropometric measurement, or index weak; through well-directed effort render

after its fixation or maturity. The rich the inherent soil more resistant and thus

promise of the investigations, which began advance a bit nearer the highest ideals of

SCAPULAR TYPES AND HUMAN FITNESS

22I

the medical profession-health promotion and disease prevention?
Continuous application of scapular classification to the study of individuals, families, populations, and segregated population groups gives promise of clearer recognition and evaluation of heredity and environment, the ever-present factors underlying individual health and disease, physical, and mental adaptability, family, stock, and racial betterment: family, stock, and racial deterioration.
REFERENCES
I. The Types of Scapula: A Comparative Study of Some Correlated Characters in Human Scapulac (AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY, Vol. iv, No. 2, I92I).

2. The Age Incidence of Scapular Types: Its Possible Relation to Longevity (TRANSACTION, American Association of Life Insurance Medical Directors, 1924).
3. The Relations of Scapular Types to Problems of Human Heredity, Longevity, Morbidity, and Adaptability in General (ARCHIVES OF INTERNAL MEDICINE, July, 1924, Vol. xxxiv, pp.
I-25).
4. Methods of Recognizing Scapular Types in the Living (ARCHIVES OF INTERNAL MEDICINE,
JUlY, I925, Vol. xxxvi, pp. 5I-6I).
5. The Plus-potentially Sick of the Race (GLASGOW MEDICAL JOURNAL, December, I925).
6. The Relations of Shoulder Blade Types to Problems of Mental and Physical Adaptability (The Henderson Trust Lecture, No. IV, delivered at the University of Edinburgh, October i6th, I925, Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh).

International Congress of Eugenics
New York, Aug. 20-23, 1932.
International Gienetics Congress
Ithaca, N.Y., Aug. 24-31, 1932.
*
TLJNOWoHf EaREtracnasnattlhaentgilcamvoouyraagendbreommaonrcee
fully realised than in one of the giant Cunard express liners. You will save time,
and enjoy real ocean luxury, by taking
advantage of this world-famous service.

SOUTHAMPTON-NEW YORK (Via CHERBOURG)
MAURETANIA ... August 6th
BERENOARIA . . . August I3th
HOMEwARD FROM NEW YoRK
Mauretania, Sept. 7; Berengaria, Sept. 14

Apply CUNARD LINE, 26/27

Street,

CockspurLondon, S.W.I, or local offices and agencies.

GGENEETIC'PPRRIINNCIPLES
IN MEDICINE AND SOCIAL SCIENCE

By LANCELOT T. HOGBEN, M,A., D.Sc.

Prl#or of SoeWl BMioUy UnlEwiNt of London 159.

Professor which are

Hboeignbgeninitnrdoidcuacteeds

the methods
to make the

ssctiuednyce.of

human inheritance
He discusses the

apnlaceexacotf

genetics in preventive medicine, the bearing of modem biological concepts
on racial and other social questions to-
gether with an analysis of the problem of population growth. The book con-
tains a great deal of material published for the first time and is invaluable alike to medical men, to students of sociology and to all who are interested in the
eugenic standpoint.

WILLIAMS & NORGATE LTD.
38 Gt. Ormond St., W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 3.

