INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY

The Scottish 1947 Survey *

By Professor Sir GODFREY THOMSON, D.C.L., Ph.D.
Chairman, The Scottish Mental Survey Committee

W HEN this lecture was written for full details in the Survey Committee's first

delivery to a Members' Meeting report, The Trend of Scottish" Intelligence.*

of the Eugenics Society I was un- Both in I932 and in I947 we tested a

aware that it was the custom to publish complete age-group of Scottish eleven-

such lectures in the REVIEW. Before con- year-olds. In I947 the Registrar-General's

senting to its publication I have obtained estimate of their number was 80,300. Of

the consent of the Scottish Mental Survey these, the Survey schedules were completed

Committee, and of the principal co-workers for about 95 per cent, and the group test

whose results are mentioned. But I have score was recorded for 70,200, those missing

asked that the diagrams shown at the being mainly the absentees on the days of

meeting should not be reproduced, for they the test. This was about the same propor-

should be accompanied by much more tion as in the early Survey, or a trifle

detail than I could give in a talk. Their better. The group test was exactly the

general nature is easily grasped from the same in both Surveys.

context.

Two random samples of the children

I had some hesitation in accepting the were chosen to give further details: the

invitation to address you on the Scottish 36-day sample and the 6-day sample-

Survey to-night, and that for two reasons: the latter being part of the former. The

One meeting of Section J of the British 36-day sample was composed of all the

Association at Newcastle dealt with this children born on the first, second, or third

matter, and I feared that another meeting day of any month in I936, who were visited

might be superfluous. And secondly, I in their homes; the 6-day sample was

am only the chairman and leader of a band those born on the first day of the even

of people whose work enables me to give months. Most of the extra information

this lecture whatever interest it may possess, I have to give you now, over and above what

and I do not wish to usurp their claims in has already appeared in print, will concern

any way, or to anticipate the publication of the 36-day sample of over 7,000 children.

their full papers. However, I felt that

courtesy and gratitude to the Eugenics Group and Individual Testing

Society demanded my personal report, and The steep descent of average score in the

so here I am.

group test with larger and larger families

I would like to speak for a comparatively was fully confirmed, both in the group

brief period and thereafter answer questions testing of the 70,200 children and in the

and hear, I hope, criticism and advice. individual testing, by the Terman-Merrill

The Scottish Mental Surveys

test, of the 6-day sample of about I,200 carried out by Mr. Kennedy Fraser and

May I first remind you briefly of the numerous helpers. The graph showing the

main results of the repetition in I947 of the group test scores for different sizes of family Scottish Mental Survey of I932, results is shown on several of the diagrams which

already published in my article in The have been distributed.t May I, in passing,
Times of November I7th, I948, and with
* University of London Press, published on August

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on i9th, I949.

October 25th, 1949.

t It is shown on p. io8 of the published Report.

i63

i64 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

ask for all these diagrams to be returned at the end of this meeting, partly because I want to use them again, and partly because I do not want any premature publication of the details shown on them.
In spite of this apparent multiplication of the less intelligent, there was no evidence, in the average scores of all children in I947 compared with I932, of any general decline of intelligence. Indeed, the group test score in I947 was actually higher than in I932, 36*7 points against 34.5, out of a possible 76. The individual test scores were somewhat inconclusive because of the different forms used, the Stanford in I932
and the Terman-Merrill in I947; but a very careful statistical comparison which Dr.
Fraser Roberts has carried out gives no reason for assuming any change in I.Q. either way.
Intelligence and Family Size
We are left, therefore, with the apparent paradox that although the less intelligent seem to be multiplying more rapidly than the intelligent, yet the average intelligence does not seem to be sinking. Various hypotheses have been advanced to account for this, and one is already answered in the Report. It was the surmise that later born children in a family are progressively less intelligent, or tend to be. With our large numbers we could investigate this separately for each size of family, and found it unconfirmed. We are still enquiring into the reason for a very slight superiority of the first-born and last-born in each size of family, but this small difference is quite insufficient to account for the general drop in I.Q. as families of larger and larger size are considered.
Influence of Environment
One obvious hypothesis is, of course, that the whole phenomenon is environmental in origin and that no selection is, in fact, going on. The suggestion in this hypothesis is that the large families are not unintelligent because they are in so many cases the families of unintelligent and thoughtless parents, but because their very size con-

stitutes a handicap. Other things being equal-for instance wages being equal in the
two cases-the father of one or two children can give them better schooling, buy them more books, give them more room for
private study, and supply better food,
clothing and holidays than can the father of six. It seems indeed very probable, on general grounds, that these influences may explain at least part of the phenomenon,
and a general improvement in welfare
between I932 and I947 could explain the
improvement in the group test score.
Test Sophistication
There remains in the mind, however, an uneasy fear that environmental improvement may be only masking a hidden selection going on behind, a steady selection which might in the long run defeat any temporary environmental improvement. Especially is this fear increased by the possibility that the children of 1947, though perhaps less intelligent in reality than those of I932, were more accustomed to tests and were thus able to make a better score. In short, were the I932 children handicapped by unfamiliarity with test-procedure, and the I947 children helped by being used to such questions ? Tests have been widely used in the intervening years; and, moreover, newspapers, children's journals, school reading books, and the B.B.C.
have all used freely,the type of item which
appears in a group test such as we used. Some further as yet unpublished results
lend some support to the view that test sophistication may explain the rise. Nine of the Scottish Education Authorities had used tests very little, while fourteen of them had used them a great deal, previous to I947. Among the former, the 1932 and I947 scores were 35.0 and 35-4, a very small difference. Among those where tests
had been much used the rise was from 35.9 to 39. I, a significant improvement.
Mr. Maxwell has also examined the performance in the I947 test of those boys and girls who had been subjected to a somewhat similar test earlier in the year, or in the previous year, by their Education Authority,

INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY

I65

and finds that they get better scores than Let me now return to the Scottish in-

the others. But there is a serious snag here. vestigation.

For these pupils had been tested a year

earlier than routine demands for reasons Intelligence and Social Class

connected with their intelligence, either Another line of enquiry is to ask whether

because they were put forward as precocious the negative association between family

by their teachers, or because they were, on size and I.Q. is found within each social

the contrary, backward and needed diag- class, or whether it is only due to differences

nosing. They were a selected group, and in test performance between social classes.

not a random sample of the whole.

There have been in the past enquiries which

We find such difficulties on every hand suggested even a positive connection among

when we try to probe further into environ- graduates of Harvard and Yale. But that

mental influences. So often there is also was before intelligence testing was avail-

conscious or unconscious selection.

able. Where tests have been given to

socially homogeneous groups, the negative

The English Survey

association has usually, and as far as I

At this point I would like to interpolate know always, been found to persist. This some remarks about the English Survey, is now fully confirmed by our Scottish data.

somewhat similar to the Scottish one, which Mr. James Maxwell, one of the chief has been carried out from Moray House by workers engaged on the analysis of the Mr. W. G. Emmett. The results of this Survey data, who has already at the British

Survey have not yet been published, but a Association quoted the figures I gave for the

paper by Mr. Emmett will appear soon. more and less sophisticated areas of Scotland

The English Survey differed from the Scottish in several respects. It concerned only ten districts, and not the whole of England, and, furthermore, the time between the two tests was only about ten years and not fifteen as in Scotland. Also different
tests were used in the different districts. 3I,728 children were tested on the first occasion, and 28,505 on the second. The numbers were therefore about forty per cent of the Scottish numbers.
In one respect, which concerns what I was saying about test sophistication, the English Survey had the advantage over the Scottish one, for in England there is little or no reason to think that the children of I947 were any more familiar with tests that their predecessors of a decade earlier had been. All the ten English areas had already used tests before the first of our Survey tests, in some cases for many years.
The general result from England is that
the boys show a fall and the girls a rise,

-sophisticated I mean in the sense of familiarity with tests-has supplied me with preliminary figures for each occupational level of the 36-day sample, from some of which I have made the graphs on
the sheets which have been passed round.
It will be seen at a glance that in every case-with the possible exception of farmers, where the curve is irregular at its two ends-
in every other case, I say, the graph descends
at much the same slope as it does for all the 70,200 children. The numbers of cases are of course much smaller, for they refer only to the 36-day sample, and to separate occupations within that sample, so that zigzagging of some of the graphs is only to
be expected.
The occupations of the fathers were
ascertained by visitors to each home, some of them in very remote parts of Scotland.
Very careful instructions were given to the visitors, and very few of the families declined to co-operate. These instructions were based on previous experience in other

while both together show no change. As Surveys, and the questions aimed at ascer-

far as this evidence goes, therefore, it does taining not only the generic name of the

not appear that a change in test sophistica- occupation, but the father's status in it.

tion explains the absence of a decline.

For example, an answer " engineer " is

i66 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

insufficient, and the visitor asked further what kind of engineer, whether professionally qualified, and (if an employee) whether paid weekly or at longer intervals? The visitors were warned to make no enquiry about the actual salary or wage. The
coding of the answers was done by Professor D. V. Glass, who has wide experience of such.
There is, of course, a general decline in average score from professional and salaried classes, through skilled manual workers, down to unskilled. The curves are at different levels on the diagrams in your hands, but the slope is everywhere similar. The general decline in the 70,200 children, while partly due to differences between occupational classes, is also clearly due in part to a decline in I.Q. with size of family within each class. The bearing of this on the environment versus heredity problem is not clear, but it seems at least to be consistent with the assumption of a genetic cause, the assumption that at least some selection is going on.
Age of Mother
Among the facts ascertained about the 36-day sample was also the date of birth of the mother, and it was hoped that this might throw light on some aspects of the enquiry. There were 766 mothers born before I900,
659 born after I9I4, and over 5,000 born
in between. Comparison of the two extreme groups showed that the children of the older mothers did better than those of the younger,
35.9 to 341i. This superiority was found
in each separate size of family, as one of the diagrams before you shows-and it also shows the usual decline in I.Q. with family size in both groups.
But it is unsafe to draw the naive conclusion that the children of older mothers do better in tests, and wrong to take the inferiority of the younger mothers' children as evidence of a decline in the successive generations. For in the first place, the families of the younger mothers are quite likely to be incomplete, whereas those of the older mothers are almost certainly finished. The former families are possibly, therefore,

really large families not yet finished, potentially large families, one might say. The younger mother curve perhaps ought to be moved a place or two to the right, which would abolish the difference between the two curves. If this is the explanation, heredity -rather than environment is sup-
porteq1. For the younger mother families
are less intelligent, although not yet large.
Occupational Status of Father
But other snags come to light when we examine the occupational status of the husbands. The higher occupational and social grades are much more represented among the husbands of the older group, in part, perhaps, because the young husbands had not yet had time to rise into salaried positions or to become employers rather than employees. But in part because the professional classes, who marry later, are simply not represented among these young parents. These young mothers had borne the child whom we tested at the age of twenty-two or earlier, and that is unusual in the higher occupational groups. The one cause suggests environmental, the other hereditary explanations. The whole comparison warns us how careful we must be not to jump to conclusions.*
Twins
We have not been able, or have not yet been able, to do anything towards separating fraternal from identical twins, except by considering the two groups of like-sexed and unlike-sexed twins, the latter being of course only fraternal, not identical. My present remarks, however, apply to the whole group of twins, of whatever sex.
In each size of family it will be seen that twins are inferior to the whole group of 70,200. This/ may be a fundamental fact due either to the setback of twinning, the greater nutritional handicap in the prenatal period, or some other cause. But it is
* And later calculations, since I wrote the above,
show that the mean score is higher in the groups between these extremes, the highest average being achieved by the children of mothers borm in the years 1905-9, who were therefore from 27 to 3I when the tested child was born.

INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY

167

possibly fictitious, for there is definite statistical evidence in our data that the birth of twins tends to stop the growth of a family. Twins are often the last-born, no further pregnancies being adventured upon. Being the last-born ought not in itself to be a handicap, for I explained earlier that the last-born seems to share with the first-born a slight advantage, only very slight, but undoubted.
But if the twin birth puts an end to the
family, which is, as it were, a " might-havebeen-larger" family than it actually is, then possibly our family size in our diagrams is, for the twins, less than it was going to be; just as, in the case of the younger mothers, the size of family is in many cases no doubt less than it is going to be. So perhaps our twin curve needs also shifting to the right. I only labour this rather subtle and, you may say, very unreal point, in order to show what difficulties stand in the way of sharp and clearcut conclusions.
I have given the scores of the twins separately for each size of family, because the fact that their inferiority persists in each size disposes of another surmise, namely, that their inferiority in general average was due to the greater frequency of twins in large families. Clearly the chances of a twin birth are proportionately large in large families. But evidently, as the curves show, this is not the cause of the twins' lower scores.
Mr. Barclay, another member of our group, has analysed further this apparent defect of twins in the test score. He finds that it persists in every grade of occupation, at every age of mother, and whatever the density of the home may be (the ratio, that is, of persons to rooms).
He has, however, called attention to
an apparent deficiency in ascertainment of
twins in our enquiry. Assisted by officials
of the Registrar-General's department, and
beginning with the recorded number of
twin births in I936, he finds, on making
allowance for mortality, etc., that we
should expect many more twin pairs than

the 525 we have records for. This is being looked into.

Physique and Family Size
Leaving now the twins, I turn to the connection, if any, between physique and size of family. Here Mr. Maxwell's sorting and calculating has barely begun. We have the weight of each child in the 36-day sample and have sorted out weight against size of family for the girls. There is a drop over the sizes of family I, 2, 3 and 4, the mean weights being 72 o, 70 o, 69 o, and 68 2 lb. Thereafter, there is no steady change and for families of ten the weight is still 68*2 lb. There is a hint of nutritional influence in the first four numbers.
Again, we have information about the number of rooms and the number of residents in each home, and the differences in weight are in the direction we would expect. The average weights are, for the girls of the 36-day sample:

Number

Less than i person per room 293

I but less than 2 ,, ,, 1,434

2 ., . 3 It ", I,Io6

3 ormore

" " 654

3,487

Mean Weight
73-13 lb. 7o-I6 ,
67.37 ,,
65*93

It is sad to think that 654 of these 3,487 girls live in such overcrowded homes, and are, possibly in consequence, half a stone lighter in weight, on the average, than the
293 who have abundant space, and probably other advantages.

Differential Birth-rate and Intelligence
One of the theories put forward to explain the absence of a decline of intelligence despite a differential birth-rate is not environmental, but purely genetic. Professor Penrose has illustrated this possibility by constructing a highly simplified model of a population in which these phenomena could coexist. Fundamentally, such theories depend on postulating a very low birth-rate for parents of the very lowest intelligence,
* I must emphasize that these are preliminary figures and that checking and counter-checking, still going on, may lead to some changes, but not probably to large changes.

i68 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and they arrange the proportions of each every size of family except size eight, where

level of intelligence so that equilibrium the first-born is not so good. For the first four

continues from generation to generation. families the advantage of the first-born and

It is a fact that human beings of the very the last-born is definitely highly significant

lowest levels of intelligence leave few or no in the statistical sense. For larger families,

offspring. In many cases they are physically where it is still found, there comes in a

incapable, in many cases they are confined difficulty of selection of the sort I have

in institutions, in most cases they are already said queers so many of our calcu-

extremely unattractive in appearance; and lations. It will be remembered that all our

in other instances they do not come to children are aged eleven. The early positions

maturity, are possibly even still-born. in very large families are therefore im-

Whether their numbers are sufficient to possible, and even in the families of size

balance the differential shown by our seven you will see that the first and second

curves I do not know. It would be an positions are insufficiently represented. The

interesting and useful task for someone I54 in the first position, being eleven years

to estimate their numbers, and to con- of age and having six younger brothers and

sider whether this reversal of the differential sisters, are members of families where the

birth-rate at the low end of the scale of children have come very close on each other's

intelligence can in fact cause the average heels. Yet these 154 get a better average

to remain constant.

score than the average member of a family

of seven. It is all very puzzling. Further-

Position in Family

more, there is a certain selection in the

Perhaps, since time permits, I may at mothers of these children as we go from

this point return to the question of the first-born to last-born. A mother whose

association, if any, of intelligence with son aged eleven is the last-born of a family

position in family. In our Report there of seven cannot be very young, whereas

are given the mean intelligence scores for if he is the first-born she may be. The

each position in each size of family, and to age of the mothers, in the family of seven

illustrate what I am going to say I have in our table, probably increases steadily

had these figures passed round for families on the average as we pass from the first to

of four and of seven:

the seventh position in the family.

Position Number Mean

All this makes the drawing of definite

I

2,612

36.15

2 2,855 34'63

3 2,908 34'40 4 2,567 36.31

conclusions difficult, and I do not draw any at this stage. We are, however, very interested in the phenomenon and are

10,942

35 32

keeping it in mind as we go on with our analyses. It is my experience in scientific

Position Number
I 154
2 293

Mean 3I'48
30'40

work that when one comes across phenomena
which puzzle, one is often on the verge of a discovery, and I hope it may be so in this

3 517 27'79
4 570 29'8i

case.

5 6

6617
584

22781'86ii

Further Experiment

7 607 32'04

I would like, finally, to say something

3,342

29-45

of our plans for further experiment. We hope in the first place that our Survey will

You will see in these figures the pheno- be repeated, with improvements, in another

menon I mentioned earlier in passing, namely, fifteen or twenty years. And secondly, in

that in each size of family the first-born and addition to going on with the analysis of our

also the last-born scores rather more than existing data, we want to follow up the 1,215

the children in between. This is found in children of the 6-day sample throughout

INTELLIGENCE AND FERTILITY

their whole lives, to see what a cross-section was quite probable that this " test sophisti-

of the children of Scotland make of their cation" would have been itself sufficient

careers. Terman* of California has followed to account for most of the difference be-

up about a thousand Californians from tween the scores in the two surveys. Further,

school to middle age, and a very interesting the relationship between test score and the

book his report makes. But his were all socio-economic status of the home was very

gifted children of high I.Q. Ours, on the marked. Again, it was probable that the

contrary, are a fair sample of the whole improvement in social conditions over the last

range of intelligence from the lowest (except few decades had had the effect of raising

for the very mentally defective) to the the national I.Q., as measured by tests.

highest. Their Terman-Merrill I.Q.s range It did not follow, of course, that this

from 173 down to 58. They are dotted was necessarily counteracted by a corre-

over the whole of Scotland, in cities and on sponding decline due to the negative cor-

remote crofts and distant islands, and their relation between intelligence and size of

parents are of all classes and many occu- family. There was evidence in the Report

pations. 'It will be a hard task to keep of the Royal Commission on Population

touch with them after the compulsory that this differential fertility had existed

school age, but we intend to try to lose as since the middle of the last century, and

few as possible. The Nuffield Trust' has probably earlier. Also, this tendency per-

already given us a grant which will enable sisted in a remarkable manner through

us to do the absolute minimum necessary such environmental influences as parent's

to keep hold of them during the next five occupation, degree of overcrowding, and

years. We could, however, make good use so on. It appeared likely that this might

of more financial help, and if any of my be a natural phenomenon not necessarily

hearers are in possession of great wealth, associated with declining intelligence. In

it would give me much pleasure to relieve the U.S.A., Tryon had divided white rats

them of some of it for this purpose.

into two groups on the basis of their ability

to learn a maze. Over some generations it

DISCUSSION
Mr. JAMES MAXWELL said that he would like to comment on points that had occurred to him whilst handling the Scottish Mental Survey data. Sir Godfrey Thomson had referred to the paradox of a rise in the intelligence test score having been accompanied by a decline in average test score with increasing size of family. He appeared to favour the interpretation of this as a decline in the average intellectual level of the population which was being masked by an improvement in environmental conditions.
One thing that had impressed him, Mr. Maxwell continued, was the strong influence of environmental effects upon test scores. The children in I947, for instance, had had more experience of mental tests than those in 1932; and it

had been observed that the " intelligent " group of rats had fewer offspring than the
" dull " group. Unless we were willing to conclude that the intelligence of the white rat population was declining, we could not easily argue that the intelligence of a human population was declining.
PROFESSOR P. E. VERNON said that, to his regret, he had been associated only with some of the earliest stages of the Scottish Research Council's investigation. He could therefore, as an outsider, sincerely congratulate Professor Thomson and his collaborators on the brilliant work that had been described. In particular, it was a privilege for those present at to-day's meeting to hear of some of the results which might not reach publication for many months. As others would be better qualified to comment on the social and eugenic implications of Professor Thomson's paper,

* Getnetic Studies of Genius: IV. The Gifted Child he would prefer to draw attention to some

Grows Up. Stanford University Press, I947.

of the important advances in research

170 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

techniques made by the Mental Survey investigators, advances which would be of the greatest value for further studies in this field. For example, proof had been provided of the effects of familiarity on group test scores. Professor Vernon pleaded guilty to having invented the term " test sophisti-
cation" in I938. Members of the Society should certainly study the chapter by Dr. Fraser Roberts. in The Trend of Scottish
Intelligence. The way in which he bridged

the gap between the I932 and I947 group tests, via Stanford-Binet and TermanMerrill individual tests, was a beautiful technical achievement. He had also estab
lished the important point that when the intelligence of two populations was to be compared, any group tests which correlated fairly highly with an individual test could
be used, provided that the same individual
test was given to samples of both populations.

OCCASIONAL PAPERS ON EUGENICS
EUGENICS nI PROSPC & TROSPEC
C. P. BLACKER Price is. 6d.

CYRIL BURT PriCe 28.

T TRND OF NATIONAL INlEIG6ENCE

The Galton Lecture, 1946, by GODFREY

THOMSON, with a Symposium in I947

by ALEXANDER CARR-SAUNDERS, CYRIL

BURT, LIONEL PENROSE and GODFREY

THOMSON.

Price 25.

PSYCHOLOICAL APPROACHE TO THE BIOGRAPHY OPFEIUS LEWIS M. TERMAN Price is. 6d.
Fellows and Members may obtain these pa s at a reduction of 6d. on the above ,t prices direct frorm SIh Eugnics Soety.

THE EUGENICS SOCIETY
and
CASSELL & COMPANY, LTD.

ugenic Review, VoL NIoNo,. 4

