REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

369

in recent years. In his present volume he discusses the ideas which have

given birth to the movement, and which still correct and inspire it. His

fundamental position is that of the pragmatist. As such, he has a horror

of logical systems and general principles, whatever their nature. The

" State Socialism " of Mr. Ramsay Macdonald is a mere substitution of the

bureaucrat for the capitalist. Under its regime individuality must be

subordinated to the State. The tyranny of the general will is not less

abhorrent than the tyranny of the strong man. Socialism for Mr. Walling

is only justified in so far as it provides freedom for individual develop-

ment. He is impatient of the sociologist who views the State as an

organism the cells in which are individual men and women, as he is

intolerant of the historian and the evolutionist who demands aeons of time

for effective social progress. History itself has few lessons to teach us-

ancient history none, but the " class system " imposes it upon our educa-

tional system because it tends to perpetuate an old and effete social

organisation. Eugenics is based on a pitiful fallacy, and the biologist is

no guide to the social reformer.

Mr. Walling finds his choicest spirits in the persons of Nietzsche,

Max Stirner, and Ellen Key. In their writings the individual comes to

his own, and the state in which their ideas are most nearly realised is

the most ideal democracy. Education as conceived by Dewey and (for

small children) Montessori is the type which the Socialism of Mr. Walling

demands.

Such is the current of thought upon which Mr. Walling bases his

hopes for the future. The State Socialism as advocated by the Chairman

of the English Labour Party in the House of Commons may come first,

but it can only be a preliminary to the freedom in which alone the

individua,l ran flnurish.

T. A. GrErE (the TTnivprsitv of Sheffield).

Elderton, E. MI.; Barrlngton, AMY; Jones, H. GERTRUDE; Lamotte,

EDITH M.M. de G.; Laski, H. J.; Pearson, KARL. On the

Correlation of Fertility with Social Value. A Co-operative

Study. Eugenics Laboratory Memoirs, XVIII. London.

Dulau and Co.; I913; price 6s. net; PP. 72.

FOR "fertility" read " size of family," and for "social value" read

" amount of weekly wages," and the title of this memoir will give a

fairly accurate description of its contents. Even when simplified in

this way the problem remains a complicated one, since both the size

of the family and the amount of the wages are directly influenced by

the age of the father-facts which must be allowed for if an attempt

is made to determine whether a man earning high wages is likely to

have a larger or a smaller family than one earning less. The principal

method adopted by the authors is to calculate three pairs of correlation

co-efficients (i) between age of parents and size of family; (2) between

age of parents and wages; (3) between wages and size of family. Then

by the use of the method of partial correlations an attempt is made to

find the degree of interdependance between wages and size of family

undisturbed by the influence of parental age. The results show that

when this procedure is adopted there remains a slight negative correla-

tion between wages and size of family. That is to say, workmen earning

high wages appear to have slightly smaller families than those earning low.

In emphasizing the importance of the question studied, the authors

enunciate the following statements of what they consider to be the " sole

conditions under which national progress can be assured ": (i.) wages

ought to be directly proportional to social value as measured by physique

and ability; (ii.) the size of the family ought to be proportional on the

average to wages. If the conditions laid down in the former statement

were fulfilled the results arrived at in the paper under review would be

of a very disquieting kind. That they are to some extent fulfilled can

well be argued, but to what extent remains to be determined-a work of

much urgency and importance.

EDGAR SCHUSTER.

