THE GRAZ STERILIZATION TRIAL

Judgment of the Supreme Court By FELIX TIETZE, LL.D., M.D. (Vienna)

IN the EUGENICS REVIEW of January in the sense of " doing a physical damage."

I934 (p. 259), I discussed the verdict of The hostile intention is not identical with the

acquittal pronounced by the Graz Pro- intention to damage, and the dolus in the

vincial Court (Landesgericht fur Strafsachen), crime of severe bodily damage need not be

on July 4th, I933, in what has become known restricted to a bodily injury, but may also

as the " Graz Sterilization Trial." I men- aim at a bodily evil of any other kind. It is

tioned that the decision of the court was not clear that in this sense an " assault " is every

final, an appeal having been lodged in the influence on the other individual's body

Supreme Court; but I expressed the view which, while doing no external or internal

that a change seemed very unlikely. On May damage, produces physical inconvenience

8th, I934, however, the Supreme Court or pain.

reversed the judgment of the Provincial Neither, according to the revised judg-

Court, and condemned most of the defendants ment, is the first court's opinion founded in

to varying periods of imprisonment, one of in the words of the Criminal Law, which it

the heaviest sentences (fourteen months) quoted. The words of section I52, " who has

falling on the author, who had advocated acted against a person," do not signify hos-

sterilization in his lectures and writings. tility in the sense of hostile feeling, as be-

The main arguments of the Supreme Court comes clear by a comparison of this section

were as follows:

with section I34, where the same words

The Provincial Court was wrong in holding " against a person " are used, but only in

that the " hostile intention," mentioned in connection with the action done. In section

section I52 of the Austrian Criminal Law, is I34, which deals with murder, no dolus,

an intention coloured by hostility against the coloured by a hostile feeling of the perpe-.

injured person. As shown in the historical trator against the attacked individual, is

analysis of the changes in the law concerning needed. The intention to kill is in itself the

bodily damage, hostile intention is every strongest indication of hostile intention. In

intention directed against the physical in- the opinions of the courts, as well as in the

tegrity, every intention to commit physical literature, there is no doubt as to the irrele-

harm on the attacked individual, even an vance of the victim's consent to the crime.

assault. Hostile intention, therefore, is the This leads inevitably to the conclusion that

intention of injuring or assault.

such consent is without decisive consequence,

It is wrong to think that the intention to if the criminal has acted with " other hostile

assault is absent if the injury happens to aim intention" (§ I52).

at an effect desired by the injured individual The first court had considered as proved

himself, and is done with his consent. The that the defendants had acted with the in-

first court interpreted " assault " as an in- tention of inflicting severe injuries, but held

fluence on the body of the attacked indivi- the opinion that they were to be acquitted in

dual, which he did not desire, and in fact view of the fact that a hostile intention, even

regarded as an evil. According to this inter- intent of assault, was lacking. For the crime

pretation, an assault would be possible only of infficting severe bodily damage, it would

in connection with a hostile feeling against therefore want evidence of a dolus coloured

the attacked individual. The Supreme Court, by a hostile feeling of the perpetrator against

however, used the word " assault " precisely the injured individual, even if the dolus

213

214

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

directus of committing the action was in- damage of the body. Cosmetic operations,

dubitably present. In such a case, however, therefore, may only be considered lawful if

the " hostile intention " of section I52 iS of the disadvantage caused by the operation is

no account, being only a symptom of the not greater, in the general opinion, than the

dolus indirectus.

advantage it may be expected to confer.

Further, the first court's conception of the The weighing of the advantage for the

dolus necessary for the crime of severe bodily recipient and the disadvantage for the donor

damage was incompatible with its recognition in a transfusion or transplantation operation,

of the fact that, in attacks against life or also determines the decision whether the

physical safety, the attacked person's con- operation is legal or not. In scientific ex-

sent did not exclude the criminality of the periments the legal interest in the progress of

act. This view, in fact the correct one, did medicine, and especially in new therapeutic

not accord with the decision that the methods, must be balanced against minor

damaging act, to become punishable, must disadvantages to an individual, who, with

be the effect of a hostile feeling against the his consent, of course, is operated on for

attacked individual. For, from the viewpoint scientific purposes. But operations done for

of this latter opinion the consent of the purposes not acknowledged as advantageous

attacked individual must exclude the dolus by the law are unlawful. Such are operations

and the criminality.

destined for the sterilization of men for any

The Supreme Court concurred with the other except therapeutic reasons.

opinion of the first court that, with crimes The draft for a new Austrian Criminal Law

against life and physical safety, the consent of I927 states (§ 263): " Operations and

of the attacked individual did not exclude therapeutic measures are not ' bodily

criminality, as legal values were concerned damage' in the legal sense, if they are in

which an individual might abandon, but accordance with the practice of conscientious

which from the legal standpoint were in- physicians." The reason is that operations

alienable, their alienation being opposed to for therapeutic ends are lawful under the

their ethical purpose.

existing law, and the draft follows the

Against the legal conception that " severe opinion that they are not included in the idea

bodily damage" does not need a dolus of " bodily damage."

coloured by hostile feeling of the perpetrator For these reasons the judgment of the first

against the injured person and that this per- court was to be reversed.

son's consent does not exclude the crimin-

ality, it has been suggested that in that case every medical operation would be a crime.

SUMMARY

But this is untrue. For the law acknowledges Let me summarize briefly the differences

the principle that interests of higher value between the two courts.

might be asserted at the expense of those of Both the judgments agree in propounding

less value. The consequence is that medical the question whether the sterilizing operation

operations on certain conditions are abso- as such brings with it a severe injury.

lutely lawful. Operations are lawful if they Further, neither of them doubts that,

are intended to save or sustain life or if generally speaking, the consent of an attacked

they are diagnostic or prophylactic. For individual does not exclude the criminality

the legal interest in the preservation of of a deed.

human life is greater than that in preventing Yet they differ in their conception of the

the pain, wounds, expenditure, and other "hostile intention " (feindseliger Absicht)

inconveniences, connected with surgical which, according to the Austrian Criminal

operations.

Law (§ 152), is needed to make an injury a

The same considerations hold if the crime of severe bodily damage. While the first

damage inflicted by the operation itself court ruled that such " hostile intention "

eliminates or prevents a more serious must not be considered as present in a case

THE GRAZ STERILIZATION TRIAL

215

in which the effect of the injury was desired by the attacked person who had consented to it, the Supreme Court came to the con-
clusion that this " hostile intention " was nothing other than the intention of damaging
the bodily integrity of the attacked indivi-

dual. Therefore, the consent of the persons operated on did not, in its view, change the criminal character of the sterilizing operations-by contrast with other medical operations the purposes of which were
acknowledged by law as advantageous.

THE WISTAR INSTITUTE BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE

AUTHORS' ABSTRACTS insure accuracy, advance information, and a saving of time and costs. Since the beginning of The Wistar Institute Bibliographic

Service in I9I7, each contributor to the journals included in this service has supplied an abstract of his own manuscript. This brief summary is printed and mailed without the delay necessary to the publishing of the complete article. Subsecribers to the service thus

receive advance information from those best qualified to give it.

ADVANCE ABSTRACT SHEETS bearing ten or more abstracts without bibliographic references, are sent for the present to members of the American Association of Anatomists, to members of the American Society of Zoologists and to Members of the American Institute of Nutrition, without cost, and sold to others at $3.0o per annum for all abstract sheets issued. This is a convenient means of selecting such articles as may be

desired in reprint form. Prices of reprints are given on each Advance Abstract Sheet.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC SERVICE CARDS bearing authors' abstracts with complete bibliographic reference for all articles appearing in The Wistar Institute journals and those

co-operating, s$.oo per year.

Abstract cards may be obtained from the beginning of the series, June x, 19I7. Each abstract card is issued to subscribers before the complete paper appears in

a

journal.

ABSTRACTS IN BOOK FORM Abstracts with authors' and analytical subject indices are brought together periodically in book form. Volumes I to 7 covering the abstracts issued from June I, 19I7, to December 31, 1933, $5.00 each. Liberal discount to subscribers to the Bibliographic Service

Cards.

The Wistar Institute Bibliographic Service covers the publications listed below:

Journal of Morphology The Journal of Comparative Neurology The American Journal of Anatomy

FoLo Anatomioa Japonica (Tokyo, Japan) Biologcal Buletin The Austalian Journal of Expimental Biology

The Anatomial Rord

The Jounal of Ex

l Zoology

Ameri Joual of Phy Anthropology

and Medical cee (Adaid, South A Journal of Parasitology (Urbana, Illinois) E al Monographs (Durham, North Caroina)

Journal of Cellular and Comparatv Physiology American Anatomical Memoiu

P gIcal ZoOlog (Chicago, Illiois) Stain Technologye(Genea, Nw York)

Biological urvey of the Mount Desert Region

EARLY SERIES In addition to the above, bibliographic reference cards, without abstracts, may be secured for articles which have appeared in the Journal of Morphology, from vol. I (I887) to June I, I927 ....................... ...................... 380 titles

The Journal of Comparative Neurology, from vol. I (I89i) to June I, I917 .......... .............. 450
The American Journal of Anatomy, vol. I (I9oI) to June I, 1917 .............. ...................... 344 ,, ThAenatomical Record, vol. I (x9o6) to June I, I917 ................................................... 464 ,,
The Journal of Experimental Zoology, vol. I (I904) to June I, 19I7 ............. .................... 423

The American Anatomical Memoirs .....................

.....................................

9

These cards, containig full bibliographic references, enable a subscriber to have a complete record of authors and titles with their

subject headings for all articles which have appeared in the above journals from their beginning to current issues.

The price for these Bibliographic Reference Cards is two cents for the first card of each title. Additional cards for each title may be had at one-half cent per card when ordered at the same time.
THE WISTAR INSTITUTE OF ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY, Philadelphia, Pa., U.S.A.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXVI, No. 8.

