REVIEWS OF BOOKS
feated in debate-that his critical faculty is overdeveloped at the expense of creative originality. Inspection of his own original contributions to clinical and social psychiatry, of the now classic clinical survey of melancholia for example, which is reproduced here in full apart from the detailed case histories, will at once dispel this illusion and indicate that it is no more than the juice of sour grapes.
Nevertheless, it has to be said that it is as a critic, in the best and widest sense of this description, that Sir Aubrey is revered by his colleagues. Psychiatry, as a discipline sine discipline and with an inclination to tumble all too readily head over heels, has need of a watchdog. Read for example in Between Guesswork and Certainty in Psychiatry what is really meant by verifying a hypothesis and what is not meant: "Interpretations which explain the phenomena only too readily, lead to a feeling of certainty which closes the mind to further inquiry and makes the believer hostile to any breath of scepticism".
Professor Lewis also has a sure eye for the psychiatric cliche which masks the woolly concept. To him the loose use of words is an anathema: "semantic carelessness over the meaning of terms in psychiatry leads easily, as we all know, to faulty diagnosis and sometimes in consequence to faulty treatment". In contrast his own use of words is for the most part impeccable and achieves a degree of lucidity which all might envy. Among many elegant turns of phrase there are many quotable quotations, some of them jewels. Thus he describes an obsession as a mental foreign body-"homemade but disowned, a sort of mental sequestrum, a calculus that keeps on causing trouble". Again: "The unconscious", he states, "is unhappily named: so positive a concept should not have so negative a verbal symbol".
Lucidity apart he can be remarkably incisive. In discussing the place of child psychiatry and psychoanalysis in post-graduate psychiatric education, many a lesser man might have been content to remark lamely that this is a controversial issue. Not so Lewis. He begins a new paragraph with a short verbless punch-line, a sentence having almost a fanfare-like quality. "Child psychiatry and psychoanalysis-igneous topics these". One can sense the coals of conffict glowing.
Finally in The Study of Defect he points out how in the beginning investigations into mental defectiveness were at first largely anthropological. We read: "Interest in the size and shape of skull became intense. Medical writings on defect in the first half of the nineteenth century are cluttered with cranial measurements . . . But little was gleaned from all this craniometry. Thomas Fuller put the matter in a nutshell . . ."(!). Intentional or not the pun is worthy of Charles Lamb. What the splendid matter Fuller put in a nutshell was the reader must find out for himself, for Lewis in addition to supplying us with fresh stock has a sure eye for the quotable quotations of others. How numerous and always apt these are is a further tribute to his erudition.
W. H. TRETHOWAN

POPULATION

Dupaquier, J. (Editor). Annales de Demographie Historique 1966. Paris, 1967; Societe de
Demographie Historique; Editions Sirey. Pp. 440. Price 32F.

IN THE WORLD of historical demography, the French are pre-eminent. Their commitment to the subject is immense. The volume of their output is unmatched as its importance, both at the substantive and methodological levels, is unequalled. They dominate the international conferences. Not surprisingly, therefore, one looks forward eagerly to this annual publication of the Societe de Demographie Historique, of which the current number is the third.
The Annales of 1966 opens with a number of articles, most of which were presented as papers to meetings of the Societe de Demographie Historique and to which are appended
comments by discussants. We have P. Guillaume on nineteenth-century Bordeaux; P.

ER-T

267

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
Riche on demographic problems of the High Middle Ages; J. N. Biraben on the population of French Canada from the seventeenth century to the present day; E. Vielrose on migration within the United States during the second half of the eighteenth century; K. Obermann on some statistics of the states of the German Confederation during the first half of the nineteenth century; and P. Galliano on infant mortality in the southern suburbs of Paris, both of the children born there and amongst those in charge of a wet-nurse, in the years 1774-1794. There is also a very interesting article by M. Couturier on the use of the computer in historical demography.
Readers of THE EUGENICS REVIEW will no doubt be especially interested in A. Armengaud's article on the working-class movement and neo-Malthusianism in early twentieth-century France. This deals with Paul Robin and his Ligue de la Regeneration humaine and its impact on various left-wing groups. It appears that neo-Malthusianism had some support among the Syndicalists but that the Socialists were strongly opposed to it, although, curiously enough, it was never discussed at their party congress. The socialist opposition to neo-Malthusianism was put as succinctly as it ever has been by a certain Dr. Vargas, cited by Armengaud. "Le neo-malthusianisme", he wrote, "ne tend qu'a ameliorer un etat de choses dont l'existence n'est pas mise en question et qu'au contraire, nous, revolutionnaires, cherchons a detruire".
In addition to these articles, the Annales includes a number of book reviews and comments on recent events and developments in the study of historical demography. M. Reinhard, for instance, reports on the demographic history section of the Twelfth International Conference of Historical Sciences held at Vienna in 1965. P. Goubert does likewise for the colloquium on problems in the study of mortality held at the University of Liege in 1963. Amongst other items is a note by E. A. Wrigley on the work of the Cambridge Group for the History of Population and Social Structure.
This brief summary is sufficient to indicate that the Annales is by no means confined to French historical demography. This is also true of the splendid bibliography, of some 150 pages, of which about half covers either countries other than France or methodological works of universal concern. My only criticism here is one that can be directed at many bibliographies. One cannot be sure that the coverage is equally comprehensive in all areas, whilst on occasion it is difficult to see why some titles appear and others do not. The bibliography is divided between recent publications and important publications of earlier years.
The final feature of the Annales is a section devoted to documents. The current number contains some eighteenth and nineteenth century Czechoslovakian statistics: annual population totals from the Kingdom of Naples, Sicily and the towns of Naples and Palermo from 1790-1824 and a collection of baptism, marriage and burial statistics from Languedoc in the period of the French Revolution, designed to illustrate the extent of contraceptive practice at that time.
The Annales de Deimographie Historique 1966 is one of the most important publications of the year. It, and one hopes its many successors, should occupy a prominent place on the shelves of all who are interested in population history.
MICHAEL DRAKE
GENETICS
Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology. Volume xxxi. The Genetic Code.
Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y., 1966. Laboratory of Quantitative Biology. Pp. xxii + 748. Price $15.00.
DURING THE FIRST WEEK of June 1966, molecular biolo"gists from many countries met
at Cold Spring Harbor for the Annual Symposium. They were gathered for what was, in
268

