THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
IT iS with deep regret that we have formally to record the death of our venerable Honorary President,
which took place at Haslemere, Surrey, on the U7th of
January, I91I. Sir Francis Galton has been rightly called the "Founder of Eugenics"; he took a great interest in the inauguration and growth of our Society, and personally contributed to the success of this REVIEW. The following Memoir is from the pen of one who, knowing him well, feels that he has lost an inspiring teacher, and a genial, sympathetic friend.
MEMOIR.
"The broadening and cleansing of man's outlook on the Universe, the realisation of his place in the scheme of things and of the help which is expected from his conscious co-operation towards progress and enlighten. ment, are perhaps the greatest of all results of the last fifty years."
SIR OLIVER LODGE.
FRANCIS GALTON, born in i822, came of a Quaker family, long connected with Birmingham by both residential and commercial ties. He was the seventh and youngest child of Samuel Tertius Galton, who is said to have combined an enormous appetite for mensuration with a keen sense of humour. His son

2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
testifies that his father's constant pocket companion was a sliding rule, for which he found all sorts of uses. He gave to the world one book.-on the dry, but to him fascinating, subject of Currency. Galton's paternal grandfather, Samuel John Galton, had, like his grandson, a decided taste for order, method and statistics. He loved to arrange all kinds of data in parallel lines of measured length, which he would colour for greater distinctness.
Galton's mother was a Darwin, daughter (by a second marriage) of Erasmus Darwini, a physician and philosopher very eminent in his day, and author of the didactic poem " Loves of the Plants," which Canning and Hookham Frere cleverly parodied in the Anti-Jacobin under the title " Loves of the Triangles." Dr. Erasmus Darwin was twice married. One of his children by his first wife was Dr. Robert Darwin, the father of the famous Charles Darwin. Francis Galton and Charles Darwin were, therefore, half first cousins; they had a common grandfather but not a common grandmother. Galton's mother has been described by her son as being of a joyous and unconventional temperament, with nothing of the Quaker about her. In spite of her frolicsomeness, she was " very methodical with her papers and accounts" and possessed remarkable powers of observation. She could mentally picture, and afterwards reproduce in rough architectural outline, the interior of any house she had stayed at. She would fold a strip of paper by doubling it, quartering it, and so on into similar portions of equal length and use this strip as a scale by which to correct her mimic, amateur plans. Francis Galton may thus be said to have inherited a double dose of mensuration, one from his father, another from his mother. A parentage so composed recalls the well-known lines of Goethe when speaking of himself:
Vom Vater hab' ich die Statur, Des Leben's ernstes Fuhren;
Vom Mutterchen die Frohnatur, Und Lust zu fabulieren.
A charming trait of Francis Galton's character may be fitly noticed here. His passion for science did not (as it sometimes does) dry up the springs of his affections. He was very fond of

SIR FRANCIS GALTON-MEMOIR

31

his four elder sisters and his two elder brothers. He was more especially attached to a sister who suffered from spinal curvature, and for the greater part of her life had to lie on her back. When the baby Francis was born she at once took to him as a fairy gift sent from heaven to cheer her loneliness. She proceeded to " mother" him (as elder sisters will) and undertook his early education. She taught him to regard the Bible as a verbally inspired book, grounded him in the Latin tongue, and made him learn by heart a quantity of English verse. The result of her pains was that her pupil was reckoned by his family as a sort of prodigy-a role which with ordinary persons is apt to make them prigs. But the youthful Francis was no ordinary person and was not easily spoilt.
Another of Galton's charming traits was his modest estimate of his own achievements. Honours he never sought. They were showered on him in the shape of Medals and Degrees by the governing bodies of learned Societies for which he had written scientific memoirs, and towards the very end of his life his unofficial, unpaid, public services were requited (?) by a Knighthood. The Medals and Degrees he highly valued. By the Knighthood he set less store.
When he was in his eighty-seventh year he undertook an arduous task. He began to write his autobiography, spanning with the bridge of his excellent memory (aided by old diaries) a space of fourscore years. His ulterior purpose was " to show how the growth of a mind is affected by circumstances," or, in the phraseology he was the first to employ in this connection, to illustrate the effect of " Nurture upon Nature." Memories of my Life (as he styled the book) is very pleasant reading. It enables. us to appreciate both the man and his work and I shall continue to draw upon it for my facts and dates.
Galton's father intended him for the Medical Profession, and entered him at the age of i6 as an indoor pupil of the Birmingham General Hospital. At first he worked in the dispensary, where he was taught (he tells us) to distinguish between an 'infusion' and a 'decoction,' between a 'tincture' and an 'extract '-as if this was all he learnt from it. He found it "amusing" to make pills by hand, and did not at that time

4 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
view them statistically. When some sixty years later he visited a great chemical manufactory, where they were turned out by machine at the rate of a million in twenty-four hours, he reckoned (with a suppressed chuckle) that if forty-five of these machines were kept at work day and night, "a grandmotherly Socialist Government might supply to every man, woman and child of the forty-five millions of the British Isles one free pill daily." In order to test the effect of the drugs to which he had access he resolved to try them on himself, following the serial order of the pharmacopeeia. He began with the letter A, and went straight on till he got near the end of C, when he took two drops of Croton oil. These acted as so violent a purgative that he did not pursue the alphabet further.
Besides working in the dispensary of the Hospital he was frequently employed in the Accident Ward. He delighted in neat bandaging and plaistering-he learnt to bleed, to cup, and even to draw teeth. At one time he had no less than sixteen fractures, dislocations and other injuries under his care, his proceedings being watched, rather than directed, by the House
Surgeon. From Birmingham he was transferred to King's College,
London, where he lived for a year in the house of Professor Partridge in New Street, Spring Gardens, not long ago demolished to make room for the extension of the Admiralty and the construction of the new way from the Mall to Charing Cross. At Dr. Partridge's hospitable dinner-table he met many men of science and learning-Sir Charles Wheatstone, Sir William Bowman, Sir George Dasent and others. His days were spent in the medical department of the College, where he attended lectures on physiology by Robert Bentley Todd (I809-I86I), and on chemistry by John Fraser Daniell, the inventor of the Daniell Cell. On his medical experience he makes the reflection that in medicine much has failed to attract notice for want of even the rudest statistics. He characteristically doubts " whether the unaided apprehension of man suffices to distinguish between the frequency of what occurs on an average four times in ten events
from one that occurs five times." In the dietary prescriptions of the doctors he finds no system at all. He was told by the

SIR FRANCIS GALTON-MEMOIR

5

managing partner in a large wine merchant's business that the books of his firm showed there was no class of wine that had not at one time or other been ordered for patients by the faculty.
Between the ages of i8 and 2I Galton was an undergraduate of Trinity College, Cambridge. He was never what is called a " great reader," but he digested all he read by much thinking about it. Although his mathematical powers were considerable, he did not compete in the tripos, his health having broken down in his third year. His father dying about this time, he came into a moderate fortune, which rendered the active pursuit of a profession unnecessary. Had he become a practising physician or surgeon, he would no doubt have risen to eminence in that line, would probably have amassed a considerable sum of money, and might (with luck) have attained to a baronetcy. But in that case he would have had no hand in the improvement of the human race, would probably have had no leisure to think about the race at all. His financial independence gave him opportunities for cultivating his tastes and developing his intellectual powers. His " nature " was thus greatly aided by his " nurture" -his " heredity " by his " environment."
Galton had before going to Cambridge made a short tour in the East in company with Dr. Allen Miller, a chemist of distinction, who was for many years Treasurer of the Royal Society. He now decided to go to the East again, but his second journey was a much more serious affair than his first. His objective was Egypt and Khartum, to reach which town was in those days regarded as a traveller's feat. From Egypt he journeyed to Syria, and having reached the Lake of Tiberias (Sea of Galilee) he descended the Jordan on a raft constructed of inflated water skins, his escort travelling by the side of the river to render him assistance if needed. The further he travelled South towards the Dead Sea, the more and more he became "impressed with the weirdness of the great fissure in the earth's crust " through which the Jordan flows.
Five years later, when he was 28, he organised another expedition-this time to tropical South Africa. The Royal Geographical Society gave him hints for his equipment and introductions to such persons as were likely to be useful to him.

6 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
The journey was very adventurous, and, in I853, he published a full account of it. At its close, this same Society awarded him its gold medal; the President (Sir Roderick Murchison) remarking, when presenting it, that " so long as private gentlemen like Mr. Galton would devote themselves to accomplish what he had achieved, this country might boast that it produced the best geographers in the world."
A second literary outcome of his South African expedition was The Art of Travel, or Shifts and Contrivances in Wild Countries, published in I855. This handy volume of some 300 pages is packed with recipes for all sorts of emergencies. In it he explains how to pitch a tent in the loose sand of the desert-how to brew an effective emetic with a charge of gunpowder-how to flash a distant signal from the lens of a a pocket heliostat, together with a thousand other "dodges," most of them invented by himself. The book is now out of print, and for the most part out of date owing to the general improvement in travelling facilities since the last edition was published.
For about forty years of his life Galton was connected with Kew Observatory, first as a member of its Managing Committee, afterwards, in I867, when the Meteorological Council was established, as a member of that Council, and from I889 to i90o as its Chairman. The work at Kew was thoroughly to his liking. He had already been a close observer of the wild mood of Nature and the customs of savage tribes. He now directed his attention to the sun and the stars, and to the changes of wind and weather. He began by busying himself with improving the means for standardising sextants and other angular instruments. He contrived an apparatus by which thermometers could be accurately tested at Kew and suggested that watches should be tested there as regards their rates. The Kew Observatory during his connection with it extended in several other directions. It tested the telescopes supplied to our Army and Navy and the complicated Mariner's compass. It set up an apparatus devised by Sir William Abdy and Major Leonard Darwin for testing photographic lenses and awarded certificates to the makers of them.
A Kew certificated watch, compass, or lens has a recognised
value of its own.

SIR FRANCIS GALTON-MEMOIR

7

During this same period Galton took part in the construction of the weather charts of the Times newspaper. He first described the " anti-cyclone " and introduced the term to signify that downward movement of air with a high barometer and a clear sky, which is, in its action, the direct opposite of the
disastrous " cyclone," being formed under contrary conditions of the atmosphere. He busied himself with the photographic tracings which show automatically at each moment of time how the barometer stands. He designed a compound drill pantagraph which reduced these tracings in height independently of reduction in length. From fine grooves cut into squares of soft metal were printed quarto copper plates each containing the whole of the instrumental data furnished at several points of observation extending over several consecutive days. Improvements like these are national gains of enormous importance to all those who
" go down in ships " to traverse the trackless ocean. If this greatly condensed narrative of Galton's work were to
end at this point, enough would have been said to prove that he vwas a conspicuous figure among his fellow-scientists. But as yet only half the tale has been told. It is not for his exploration of Damaraland and the Ovampo, nor for his ingenious mechanical contrivances, nor for the services he rendered to the British Association as its General Secretary, nor for his work at the Meteorological Office, nor for his anthropometric laboratory at South Kensington, nor for the assistance he rendered to Scotland Yard by discovering the value of Finger Prints as a means of identification-it is not for any or all of these that he will be best remembered by posterity. He rendered other and more valuable services to the community, as all the world knows.
When Charles Darwin's Origin of Species appeared in I859 Galton simply 'devoured' its contents. It showed him how Nature proceeds, in the case of plants and animals, by the accretion of small differences, and he set himself to consider the effect of such accretions upon the human race. As early as i865 he wrote
in Macmillan's Magazine as follows: "The power of man over animal life in producing whatever variations of form we please is
enortnously great. It would seem as though the physical structure of future generations was almost as plastic as clay,

8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW
under the control of the breeder's will. It is my desire to show more pointedly than, so far as I am aware, has been attempted before, that mental qualities are equally under control." He
developed this theory four years later in Hereditary Genius (i869),
and later still in his Inquiries into Human Faculty (I883)-a book in which the word ' Eugenics' (coined by its author) first appeared in print. Other books from his pen bearing on the same subject were his English Men of Science (I874), Life History Album (1884), Record of Family Faculties (I884), Natural Inheritance (1889). Of those I have mentioned the first and last are perhaps the most original. It is a misfortune that Natural Inheritance is not only out of print but is not easily procurable anywhere. In it he lays down (in effect) that the laws of heredity are mainly concerned with deviations from the Median, (the vertical line which divides in half the space enclosed between the normal or other curve of frequency and the base on which that curve stands)-and that these deviations may be translated from whatever they were measured by into what he calls " Statistical Units." This scheme of measurement it is that forms the foundation of Biometrics and gives rise to what is (somewhat cumbrously) termed the " Coefficient of Correlation "-that fraction of unity by which one set of observations is comparable with another set. Whenever the existence of observed differences is due to the combination of small independent causes their relative frequency may (as Quetelet showed) be computed a posteriori by a method similar to that by which the probability of " sequences " of successive throws of
dice may be computed a Priori. With a view to stimulate this
new line of enquiry, Galton, in I904, endowed a Research Fellowship and a Research Scholarship for the promotion of " that study of agencies that may improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations either mentally or physically "the official definition of 'Eugenics' formulated by the University of London.
To the propagandism of this science of Eugenics Galton devoted the last ten years of his life and wrote several essays upon it, amongst them, the Huxley Memorial lecture delivered at the Anthropological Institute in I9OI, and the Herbert Spencer Memorial lecture delivered at Oxford in 1907. Mendelism may

SIR FRANCIS GALTON-MEMOIR

9

possibly play some havoc with his " law of Ancestral Inheritance"; his second great law of "Regression to mediocrity" may have to be restated hereafter; but the fire he kindled in the breasts of his followers will not be extinguished. On the contrary, their enthusiasm is growing, and will grow, day by day.
And there is something else that will survive him. Those who had the privilege of his friendship will long remember the sweet reasonableness with which he bore his deafness and other ailments incidental to his advanced age. They will also remember his singular power of engaging the love of all who came into contact with him. Of him we may say what he himself said of his favourite invalid sister-that her "life was passed under an abiding sense of duty without which few persons have done great things." The actual experiences of these two close friends were, however, very different. Her sense of duty shone through a delicate frame shattered for many years by bodily weakness. On the other hand, a strong constitution and a sunny nature made his sense of duty-and, in the suggestive words of Sir 0. Lodge, his "conscious co-operation towards progress and enlightenment "-springs of continual joy.

M. C.

