ROBERT C. COOK
Population Reference Bureau Inc.
Eugenics

T HE WORD "EUGENICS" was coined by posure of weak or defective infants to the

Sir Francis Galton in 1890 as "the study elements was practised by the Greeks and by

of forces under social control which en- many other peoples throughout history. In The

hance or impair the inborn qualities of future Republic, Plato set forth a comprehensive code

generations".

of eugenics that has become almost a horrible

That inborn qualities could be greatly modi- example of what an abstract philosophical

fied by artificial selection was appreciated by approach can lead to.

ancient civilizations, which developed breeds of Although different mating systems-endo-

livestock by the application of rule-of-thumb gamic or exogamic-have affected the genetic

methods of selective mating.

constitutions of human populations throughout

history, their eugenic effects have been mainly

History

accidental or incidental. The exact knowledge

The idea that human beings differ in their of the genetic process on which a rational

hereditary endowment is also very old. With- eugenic policy might be based has existed for less

out attempting a review that would be mainly than half a century. Until the key had been

of antiquarian interest, a few references to found to the riddle of heredity, man's penchant

Greek writings may not be out of place. In the for theorizing had little practical value, and

sixth century B.C., Theognis took a pessimistic these ancient writings have now only an his-

view of then current human mating practices: torical interest. Not until the latter half of the

With kine and horses, Kurnus, we proceed By reasonable rules, and choose a breed For profit and increase, at any price,

nineteenth century did factual bases for manipulating the "inborn qualities of future genera-
tions" begin to be developed. The publication

Of a sound stock without defect or vice. But in the daily matches that we make The price is everything; for money's sake, Men marry; women are in marriage given. The churl or ruffian, that in wealth has thriven,

of Darwin's Origin of Species in 1859 marked a turning point in biological science and provided the intellectual environment for experimental
work on the phenomenon of evolution.

May match his offspring with the proudest race.

Darwin envisioned evolution as an interaction

Thus everything is mixed, noble and base. If, then, in outward manner, form and mind, You find us a degraded, motley kind, Wonder no more, my friend; the cause is plain, And to lament the consequence is vain.

among the variable factors inherent in all organisms exposed to the rigours of survival. Those organisms better adapted to a particular environment tended to survive and to perpetu-

Among the Spartans, mate selection was practised, and the age at which marriage took place was regulated to assure procreation at the time of life when it was believed the production of fine progeny was most likely. Ex-

ate their kind. The less well adapted variants
failed to survive or to reproduce. This selective "sieve by veto" of the environment, operating over hundreds or thousands of generations, resulted in the emergence of strains of organisms showing remarkable adaptation to most varied

* Reprinted, by kind permission ofthe author and ofthe environments. Darwin was puzzled by the

publishers, from The Encyclopedia of Sexual Behavior (1961), editedby Albert Ellis, Ph.D. and Albert Abarbanel, Ph.D. Published by Hawthorn Books Inc., New York: London, William Heinemann (Medical Books) Ltd.

nature of the variability of organisms that he saw as an essential factor in the evolution process. His speculations as to how and why variability

'45 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1963, 55, 3.
ER-C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

occurred have proved in the light of much experimental hindsight to have been mainly
erroneous. The key that unlocked the mystery of vari-

good of the whole with scant regard to that of the individual.
Man is gifted with pity and other kindly feelings; he has also the power of preventing many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall well within his pro-

ability and heredity was provided by Abbot vince to replace Natural Selection by other

Gregor Mendel in 1865. His experiments with processes that are more merciful and not less peas, conducted in a monastery garden in what effective.

is now Czechoslovakia, formed the basis for the modern science of genetics. Mendel's pioneering was so revolutionary that thirty-five
years elapsed before biological concepts had reached a point in development where his discoveries could be understood and evaluated. The science of genetics actually began with the rediscovery of Mendel's paper in 1900, rather

Galton devoted the later years of his life to promoting an acceptance of his view on eugenics and, through his influence, the Eugenics Education Society was founded in London in 1908. He bequeathed his fortune at his death to the University of London for the establishment of the Galton Laboratory.

than in 1865.

Recent Advances

During this interval a cousin of Charles The past half-century has seen a very rapid

Darwin, Sir Francis Galton, had become con- advance in the science of genetics, adding to

vinced that heredity was a prime factor in the effectiveness of animal-breeding techniques.

determining the quality of human beings. Basing The problem of nurture vs. nature has been

his studies on Darwin's evolution concept, experimentally studied, and in its original form

Galton attacked the problem of heredity and it has been found to be meaningless in the sense

environment-of nature vs. nurture-statistic- that no blanket answer can be given. It is an

ally. Between 1869 and 1883, he published three approach useful only in terms of specific heredity

books supporting his view that nature-the and specific environment. For example, blood

inborn qualities of a human being-was a major groups and eye colour are very little affected

component in the development of the gifted by environment, whereas body weight and

individual. In Hereditary Genius, English Men of intelligence are considerably more labile.

Science: Their Nature and Nurture, and Inquiries That many important physical characteristics

into Human Faculty Galton reported his statisti- of human beings are largely determined by

cal analyses of the background of gifted indi- genetic differences can no longer be questioned.

viduals. He also pioneered in pointing out the Pedigree studies of many characteristics, both

value of studying identical twins as a means of normal and pathological, are to be found in

learning more about the nature-nurture problem. the literature. These heredity-determined diff-

Galton's work broke new ground in analysing ferences range from trivial characteristics such

factors that contribute to the development as a blaze of white hair or a minor variation in

of human intelligence and personality. His ear form to profound physical or mental

studies convinced him that heredity played an defects: sickle-cell anaemia, sex-linked muscular

essential part in the development of individuals dystrophy, colour blindness, specific forms of

of unusual competence, and this became the mental defect, and the like.

motivation of his later years, leading to his The question of the extent to which mental,

founding of the eugenics movement. Towards emotional, and personality differences are due

the end of his life he wrote (1908):

to heredity is still under exploration.

I take eugenics very seriously, feeling that its principles ought to become one of the dominant

Frederick Osborn (1951) surveyed the psychological and genetic studies on the interaction

motives in a civilized nation, much as if they were of heredity and environment made over the

one of its religious tenets.... Individuals appear previous twenty-five years, and concluded:

to me as partial detachments from the infinite

ocean of Being, and this world as a stage on which

1. Variations in capacity for developing intelli-

evolution takes place, principally hitherto by gence tend to follow family lines. Similarity of

means of natural selection, which achieves the hereditary factors accounts for a substantial part

146

EUGENICS

of the known similarity in intelligence between parents and children.
2. Individual differences in intelligence are in part due to individual differences in inherited capacity. When the environment of two unrelated individuals is similar, differences in heredity probably play a major part in making the individuals different. When their environments differ and their heredity is somewhat similar, the environment is probably the major cause of their differences.
3. There is no evidence on hereditary factors as a cause of differences in the average intelligence of racial or regional groups in this country. Known differences in their environment are probably sufficient to account for present differences in the average intelligence of racial and regional groups.
4. Hereditary factors appear to account for a part of the average differences in intelligence between the skilled groups and the unskilled occupational groups....
In order to obtain a proportionate increase in the number of persons at the upper levels of intelligence, it would be necessary to raise the level of hereditary capacity for intelligence.
That evaluation holds to-day. Although our picture of the genetic mechanism has changed, Galton's appraisal of the importance of inborn qualities in the emergence of high intellectual endowment has ample support. Granting that the expression of inborn endowment of man can be considerably modified, the evidence indicates that the inborn component remains paramount: it sets the limits.
Now, whether these limits are achieved depends on the nature and effectiveness of environmental stimuli. "Wooden legs are not inherited, but wooden heads are", Dr. E. G. Conklin remarked many years ago. The observation still holds.
Even before Osborn, a group of distinguished geneticists subscribed to a statement that explicitly spelled out the tremendous improvement in the human breed that might be made in a very few generations if the enhancement of the inborn qualities of future generations of mankind were purely a genetic exercise:
... The intrinsic genetic characteristics of any generation can be better than those of the preceding generation only as a result of some kind of selection, i.e. by those persons of the preceding generation who had a better genetic equipment having produced more offspring, on the whole, than the rest, either through conscious choice, or as an automatic result of the way in which they lived. Under modem civilized conditions such

selection is far lesslikelyto beautomaticthan under primitive conditions, hence some kind of conscious guidance of selection is called for. To make this possible, however, the population must first appreciate the force of the above principles, and the social value which a wisely guided selection would have.
... conscious selection requires, in addition, an agreed direction or directions for selection to take, and these directions cannot be social ones, that is, for the good of mankind at large, unless social motives predominate in society. This in turn implies its socialized organization. The most important objectives, from a social point of view, are the improvement of those genetic characteristics which make (a) for health, (b) for the complex called intelligence and (c) for those temperamental qualities which favour fellow-feeling and social behaviour rather than those (to-day most esteemed by many) which make for personal "success" as success is usually understood at present.
A more widespread understanding of biological principles will bring with it the realization that much more than the prevention of genetic deterioration is to be sought for and that the raising of the level of the average of the population nearly to that of the highest now existing in isolated individuals, in regard to physical well-being, intelligence and temperamental qualities, is an achievement that would-so far as purely genetic considerations are concerned-be physically possible within a comparatively small number of generations. Thus everyone might look upon "genius", combined of course with stability, as his birthright. And, as the course of evolution shows, this would represent no final stage at all, but only an earnest of still further progress in the future.
Mutations and the Human Gene Pool The years that have elapsed since the "Geneticists' Manifesto" was written have seen remarkable developments in genetic theory. Some of these give a heightened urgency to the need for developing means to conserve the adaptive efficiency of the gene pool of the human species. In his presidential address before the Society for the Study of Human Genetics in 1950, Dr. H. J. Muller explored the proposition that the lack of selection against nonadaptive genes means an inevitable deterioration of the human species. The principle is illustrated by the loss of organs and even organ systems in parasitic species. It is now clear that this deterioration is not due to a Lamarckian response to the nonuse of the organs, but rather to the buildup of nonadaptive mutations in organs no longer having survival

'47

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

value for the species, and thus no longer exposed The rate at which this deterioration in the

to effective selection.

human gene pool is occurring is not definitely

The reason for this is to be found in the nature established, for adequate statistics do not exist

of the mutation process, which has been inten- in any country to permit a direct estimate of

sively studied in many organisms during the the existing load of morbid mutations. Over a

past thirty years. It is now established that short period of time it is a matter of no great

mutations occur spontaneously at all loci, the consequence, for the buildup will unquestionably

rate of occurrence varying with the locus. be slow. In the long run, however, the effects

These mutations are conceived of as being bio- may be profound.

chemical changes in a highly complex system, Muller foresees that the elimination of adap-

which is integrated and timed to trigger develop- tive selection will eventually result in the bio-

mental and/or metabolic sequences. Defects logical disintegration of the human species:

such as albinism or diabetes are due to the

absence of gene-controlled enzymes essential to pignent synthesis orto carbohydrate metabolism.
The development of organic adaptation is

Our descendants' natural biological organization would in fact have disintegrated and have been replaced by comDlete disorder. Their only connections with mankind would then be the historical

thus seen to consist of a process of scanning and one that we ourselves after all had been their

screening the mutative changes that are constantly appearing in any species, the vast majority of which are deleterious.
The scanning process consists of sexual

ancestors and sponsors, and the fact that their once human material was still used for the purpose of converting it aitificially into some semblance of man. However, it would in the end be far easier and more sensible to manufacture a complete man

reproduction, which includes meiosis (crossing- de novo, out of appropriately chosen raw materials,

over) and the formation of gametes, showing all possible combinations of parental genes, and

than to try to refashion into human form those pitiful relics which remain.

the random recombination of these gametes at
fertilization. A wide array of genotypic com-
binations from heterozygous parents is displayed in the progeny, to be screened by the test of survival. Under natural conditions this consists mainly of the ability of the organism to live and to reproduce.

As matters stand to-day, it appears that the current patterns of survival and fertility are not calculated to enhance the inborn qualities of the human species, either physically or psychologically, but rather are increasing the proportion of morbid genes in the gene pool of the
modern industrial nations. The almost universal

existence of birth rates that favour the repro-

The Problem of the Future

duction of the less intelligent offers no prospect

Until very recently, it would appear that the for upgrading the inborn intelligence factors

scanning-screening process has applied to the of future generations, and the need to substi-

human species in much the same manner as it tute some form of humane and voluntary

has applied to all other organisms. But Dr. selection for the stern selective forces of the past

Muller estimates that in order to maintain the is the crucial eugenic dilemma. To hope that

present level of morbid mutations in the human entire gene systems can be made over through

gene pool, some 20 per cent of the population some form of microgenetic magic is about as

would have to suffer selective elimination realistic at the present time as proposing to

through death or nonreproduction. Since in solve the population problem by resorting to

the advanced industrial countries to-day less space travel.

than 5 per cent of the population fails to reach

the age of 25-the mid-period of reproductivity Accomplishments and Hypothesis

-it is apparent that a buildup in mutations is How this eugenic miracle is to be brought about

occurring. Muller concludes that to-day "no- remains an enigma, and the eugenics movement

thing like the equilibrium quota is eliminated by has not made much progress in coming to

death before the age of reproduction". Nor, it grips with this problem. In the early years of the

might be added, by nonreproduction.

eugenics movement in England, it was naively

148

EUGENICS

assumed that the "divinely ordained" social divergence between the qualities desirable in a

classes into which the English population had traditionally been divided provided a ready-
made criterion of eugenic excellence. To enhance

good social inheritance and the inherent capacities of a good genetic inheritance. The home conditions which are best suited to child development depend among other things on affection, intelligence,

the inborn quality of future generations nothing patience, honesty, loyalty and respect for the

more would be needed than to encourage the breeding of the aristocrats and to check the
breeding of the plebeians. In the United States, in a society lacking hereditary classes, the early

individual.... It seems almost certain that a distribution of births which would improve the social inheritance along these lines could be developed in such a way that at the same time it would tend to improve the genetic inheritance.

eugenists could turn to no such convenient

criterion of inborn excellence. This difficulty This has evolved into a "Eugenic Hypothesis"

was met by the equally questionable assumption that the criterion for eugenic excellence is the that race provided the necessary criterion. The "healthy family". "Health now includes almost

eugenic salvation of mankind was given into the all aspects of human well-being" and these hands of the Great Blond Nordic. This theme aspects are held to bc related. "Health, like

developed an interesting variation in the de- liberty, is indivisible." This "healthy-family" limitation of "problem families" (the Jukes, the complex is assumed to be transmitted in fam-

Kallikaks, and the Nams). It was hoped that ilies more or less as a unit. The postulate there-

their elimination through compulsory sterilization would pretty much solve the eugenic

fore is that, once reproduction has beccme a matter of voluntary choice, the healthier families

problem.

will desire to have the larger number of children

The adoption by Adolf Hitler of a programme and the unhealthy families will automatically

of "race purification" based on superficial and desire to have the smaller number of children.

perverted derivatives from the naive concepts All that is necessary, according to this view,

of the early eugenic enthusiasts understandably to start on the road to a eugenic millennium is

engendered opposition to any programme of a social situation in which parenthood is

eugenic reform. Yet the problem remains.

voluntary. The enhancement of the inborn

The Scandinavian countries, with relatively qualities of the human breed will follow almost

homogeneous and stable populations, have automatically.

made considerable progress in locating in their populations some strains that have a high fre-

That eugenic progress can be assured without the need for the individual to make choices

quency of human hereditary disease. Pro- except those that are assumed to be virtually

grammes of voluntary sterilization with adequate automatic by reason of being a member of a

legal safeguards have made some impact in "healthy family" or an "unhealthy family"

reducing hereditary defect. But these are trivial appears to err on the side of naivete. Furtherin terms of the over-all problem of enhancing more, the assumption that all members of the inborn qualities of the human population. "healthy families" carry an equally favourable

Since its establishment in 1921, the American genetic endowment is untenable in view of the Eugenics Society has undergone some changes extreme heterozygosity of the human species.

of outlook and policy. Over the past ten years Finally, and the most serious objection to the

it has evolved the policy that it is possible to "Eugenic Hypothesis", the existence of a genetic

build into the culture a pattern of living which, without conscious volition on the part of the

complex that can be defined as a "healthy family" runs counter to all genetic experience.

individual, will automatically assure a eugenic A basic tenet of genetics is that the units that distribution of births. In a "Programme of transmit heredity are discrete and independently

Positive Eugenics" published by the Society in inherited. Nor can the phenomenon of linkage,

1953, it was stated:

which tends to transmit genes located on the

... there are strong grounds for believing that the same means could be used to improve both

same chromosome as a unit, be adduced to support this concept. And crossing-over means

the social and genetic inheritance. There is no that in populations-as distinct from pedigrees

'49

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

-the unfavourable alleles are as likely to be factors influence fertility cannot be questioned.

linked as are the favourable alleles of the For example, in the United States over two-

"healthy family" genes.

thirds of the female population between the

Only when relatively pure genetic strains of ages of twenty and twenty-four is married, as

human beings exist can the "healthy family" compared to less than a fifth in Ireland. If the

act as an adequate selective criterion. Such one Irish woman in five who marries during the

strains are not to be found to-day; and human years of maximum fertility had a better-than-

mating patterns do not provide much basis average inborn endowment, the genetic quality

for expecting them to appear. The effective of the Irish people would be rapidly enhanced.

selection envisaged by Dr. Muller and the If thereverse were true, eugenic deterioration

signers of the "Geneticists' Manifesto" cannot could be very rapid. No evidence exists that

be achieved by the application of the "Eugenic provides an answer to which-if either-of these

Hypothesis".

situations exists in Ireland.

It is unfortunate that the publication of the In the United States, on the other hand,

"Eugenic Hypothesis" produced so little com- where a situation approaching pangamy exists,

ment or discussion. The writer proposed an any possibility of rapid enhancement of inborn

alternative hypothesis, hoping it might stimulate qualities seems much less likely. Pangamy may

further exploration of what appears to be the be democratic, but it can hardly be selective.

central problem of eugenic motivation. This When virtually every woman produces approx-

took the view that an effective eugenic pro- imately her quota of children, effective birth

gramme must necessarily be based on the indi- selection does not exist.

vidual rather than the family as the unit of Neither in England nor in the United States

selection. Its effectiveness would therefore -or in any other country, for that matter-does

depend upon highly motivated individual deci- there exist a climate of opinion extensive enough

sions: the motivation would have to be strong and strongly enough motivated to form the

enough to result in individual decisions not to basis for an effective programme. The steps

have progeny where the genetic prognosis was which are being taken to develop such a climate

unfavourable.

of opinion are pathetically inadequate to

It was postulated that a basis exists for de- produce any measurable effect.

veloping such a compelling motivation: the In a population enjoying a very high degree

overwhelming desire felt by virtually all women of genetic enlightenment, the urge towards

to bear perfect children, without physical or perfection could be a compelling and effective

mental defect. Obstetricians testify that this eugenic motivation. This is not the case to-day,

desire is so deep-seated and overwhelming that anywhere on earth. Were it possible to identify

the first question a woman asks about her new- in the heterozygote a majority of the existing

born child is not "Is it a boy or girl ?" but "Is the lethal and morbid genes, a major revolution

baby perfect?".

in attitudes towards reproduction might be

During the years since Galton, very little brought about. Much progress in identifying

progress has been made in developing, identi- heterozygotes has been made in recent years;

fying, and utilizing those forces under social and such a possibility may be realized before

control that might be called on to produce a very long.

eugenic society. Until the effective "motivational However, until more is learned, the mandate

pressure points" that will promote sound to perfection-which appears to be deeply built

eugenic decisions are identified and applied to into our species-could be strong enough, if

bring about a selective pattern of births, eugenics properly directed, to motivate a voluntary with-

will remain a paper discipline.

holding from reproduction on the part of those

The crux of the eugenic dilemma lies in how to so unfortunate as to carry an unfavourable

manipulate these "forces under social control" genetic heritage. Great numbers of women have

in order to assure a selectively favourable foregone reproduction for far less compelling

pattern of births. That social and economic reasons.

ISo

EUGENICS

Since eugenics deals with human conception, with birth and death, it is the centre of one of the most highly charged areas of emotional stress in human experience and action. Eugenic progress will continue to be an extraordinarily complex and difficult field of human endeavour, but it remains a challenge that cannot indefinitely be evaded.
REFERENCES
Blacker, C. P., 1952. Eugenics: Galton and After. London: Duckworth.
Blacker, C. P., 1957. "Family Planning and Eugenics Movements in the Mid-twentieth Century." Eugen. Rev. 47, 4.
Cook, Robert C., 1955. "Eugenic Hypothesis B." Eugen. Quart. 2, Nos. 3 and 4.
Darlington, C. D., 1953. "The Major Policies of the American Eugenics Society." Eugen. News, 38, No. 2.

Darlington, C. D., 1958. "The Control of Evolution in man." Eugen. Rev. 50, 3.
Differentiation of Current Mating and Fertility Trends (Symposium). 1959. Eugen. Quart. 6, No. 2.
Galton, Francis, 1908. Memories ofMy Life. New York: E. P. Dutton & Co. Inc.
Holmes, S. J., 1936. Human Genetics and Its Social Import. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Lorimer, Frank, and Osborn, Frederick, 1934. Dynamics of Population; Social and Biological Significance of Changing Birth Rates in the United States. New York: The Macmillan Co.
Muller, H. J., 1950. Our Load of Mutations. Amer. J. hum. Genet. 2, 111.
Osborn, Frederick, 1951. Preface to Eugenics (rev. ed.). New York: Harper & Brothers.
Roberts, J. A. Fraser, 1959. An Introduction to Medical Genetics. London: Oxford University Press.
Stem, Curt, 1950. Principles of Human Genetics. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman & Co.
Woodworth, R. S., 1941. "Heredity and Environment: A Critical Survey of Recently Published Material on Twins and Foster Children." Social Science Research Council Bull. No. 47.

I si

