INTO THE MADDING CROWD: CEYLON AND ITS POPULATION PROBLEMS

By RICHARD RUMBOLD

O NE of the first things that strikes the
visitor to Ceylon is the extraordinary fertility of the people matched only by
the wonderful luxuriance and abundance of
the vegetation. But let me try to conjure up
a picture. I live on the south coast of the island, and
between my bungalow and Colombo, a
distance of about a hundred miles, the road traverses an almost uninterrupted succession of coconut plantations, forest upon forest of coconut palms, whose branches overarch the
road, so that one has the impression of
driving along the aisles of a lofty green cathedral. And, every two or three miles,
there are villages, with numerous bungalows, or more likely, little houses roofed with
cadjan-cadjan is the dried frond of the palm; and everywhere there are peoplepeople ambling on the road, or sitting on their haunches by the side of it, along with the pariah-dogs; or tearing down the road (the Ceylonese are the worst drivers in the world) in cars packed to suffocation with children. Children! Tney spring up from nowhere and everywhere. In order to maintain good relations one asks the village headman or schoolmaster to tea, and he turns up with all his children, perhaps half a dozen of them, perhaps even more, rows and rows of tiny chocolate-coloured figures whose voracious thirsts have to be quenched with lemon squash or ginger pop. Oriental multiplicity and gregariousness are indeed a trial and an ordeal to the eclectic Westerner from abroad accustomed to entertaining one or two carefully chosen friends.
Part of the truth, of course, is that the population of this island is increasing at one of the highest rates in the world. Every year some 200,000 people or more go to swell its numbers. According to the Census

of I946, there were then about 6-6 million in Ceylon; today there are close on eight and a half million; and by I960 it is calculated that
there will be nearly ten million. These figures may be compared with those for the Republic of Ireland, which is roughly the
same size as Ceylon, where there are about three million or slightly under. There are, of
course, a number of factors to account for this steep rise, of which I shall mention now only one: namely, the control of malaria by D.D.T. at the end of the second world war.
Owing to the relative smallness of the country it has been possible to spray pretty thoroughly the breeding-places of the mosquito, and the result has been a phenomenal decline in deaths due to malaria. In I954 the malaria mortality rate was only fifty-three per million
of the population, which is the lowest on record, but until I948 it was very high indeed; and in I935, the wofst year of all, it was no less than 8,452 per million of the population. And, in addition to the 50,000 or so people who lost their lives in that year as a direct result of malaria, there were thousands of others-some say hundreds of thousandswho died from other diseases.complicated by malarial infection. Doctors in Ceylon now look back upon that year of epidemic as the
worst within their memories. Before asking ourselves whether this
enormous expansion of population in the island is a good or bad thing let us explore the ground a little. For we shall see that the population question in Ceylon impinges directly or indirectly on some of the major problems which the island has had to face since she was granted her independence in I948. I shall consider the question under four heads: family planning, economic resources, unemployment, and
racial dissensions.

87

THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July, I956. 48, 2.

88 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Family Planning

doctors recommended special diet for under-

Interest in family planning in Ceylon
dates back to 1932 when the Women's Political Union under the guidance of
Dr. Mary Rutman sent a resolution- to the' Ceylon Medical Council recommending that birth control and eugenics should form a recognized part of the curriculum of the Ceylon Medical College. The resolution, which was published in the Press, aroused a storm of criticism, especially from Catholics, and the matter was more or less dropped. In 1935 and again in I937 Sir Julian Cahn visited the island, and his lectures at the Medical

nourished children, the parents could not afford to buy it, because they were already burdened with large families. Of this I can bear witness myself, since not long ago I went round the largest of the children's hospitals in Colombo, where I was shocked by the enormous numbers of emaciated children, suffering from rickets and other diseases due to undernourishment, lying in their cots. The admirable devoted physician in charge told me he could do little for them owing to the poverty in their homes.
Amongst other questions I asked Mrs.

College revived interest in the subject. He Fernando whether she met any opposition in

also made a donation of &ioo towards the
establishment of a clinic which was opened

her work from the Buddhists, who form by far the largest religious group in the island.

in I937-the first in Ceylon. But during the She replied that the Buddhist objects only to

second world war it had to be closed down killing or the taking of life, and once it is

owing to the difficulty of obtaining supplies explained to him that contraception does not

of contraceptives.

involve the taking of life, but only its

In I953, due largely to the encouragement prevention, there is no opposition. The

of Dr. Abraham Stone and Mrs. Sanger, a opposition comes chiefly from the Catholics,

family planning association was founded whose influence in the island has been strong

whose object was " to help in increasing since its ruthless occupation by the fanatically

happiness in marital and family relationships religious Portuguese in the sixteenth century,

and in ensuring an improvement in the who incidentally destroyed and plundered

domestic life of the people of this island." A some of the loveliest temples in the island

clinic was opened in that year and another in and tried forcibly to convert the inhabitants,

the following year, aid the Government, many of whom still bear the Portuguese

though at the risk of alienating Catholic names with which the missionaries baptised

opinion, has made small grants and alloca- them. De Silva is as common a name in

tions to the association, one of whose major Ceylon as Smith or Jones in England.

difficulties has been to supply contraceptives On the other hand, I have been reliably

at a price which the mothers can afford. informed that, amongst backward Sinhalese

It is not possible in this article to deal at peasants, social custom tends to favour

length with the energetic, but uphill, work childbearing. A woman with many children

of the Family Planning Association, whose is highly respected in her village, whereas one

secretary, Mrs. Sylvia Fernando, is an without children is regarded with pity, if not

extremely able, intelligent and-what is with contempt. There is even a saying in

rarer in Ceylon-civic-minded woman. She Ceylon that it brings bad luck to look first

told me that her interest in family planning thing in the morning upon a bhikkhu

was personal and human, rather than (Buddhist monk) or a barren woman.

concerned with wider national issues. While Another curious reason given for the excessive

visiting the homes of the poor, she was fertility of the peasant is boredom. At

appalled by the number of women who, in 6 o'clock in the evening or thereabouts the

spite of themselves, where condemned to iron curtain of darkness falls in the tropics

more or less perpetual childbearing, since with clockwork regularity, and since towns

they seemed to regard it as a phenomenon and other sources of amusement are few and

of Nature which could not be prevented in far between, there is nothing for the peasant

any way. She also observed that when to do after his day's work in the paddy-fields

INTO THE MADDING CROWD

89

except enjoy himself manufacturing more and more human beings.
A third reason, of course, is the much lower marrying age of the Oriental, which makes the childbearing period longer than in the countries of the West. In I953 there were I87 children born of mothers under the age of I5; 23,154 of mothers between I5 and 20; 96,544 of those between 20 and 25; and 99,643 of those between 25 and 30. Thereafter the figure drops.
Economic Resources
The relation between the economic resources of the island and its population is such a large, complex and, up to a point, imponderable issue that it is difficult to sum it up adequately here. One of the reasons in favour of population control is that the economy of the island is a fluctuating and uncertain one, depending, as it chiefly does, on its exports of tea, rubber and coconut products and the ability to command adequate sales as well as fair prices for these goods in world markets. Much has been done under the Colombo Plan and other schemes to accelerate capital investment, create new industries and above all, since Ceylon is a rural country, to develop agriculture. In this connection the Government has leased out large tracts of hitherto uncultivated jungle land to colonisers, though these jungle-settlements are by no means always successful; and one constantly hears alarming stories of gross immorality because the settlers, removed from the sanctions of the village, have swept decency to the winds. Large irrigation schemes have also been set afoot, particularly in the dry zones of the north and north-east, the most famous being the great Gal Oya scheme, where American engineers laboured for years to dam and harness the waters of the Gal Oya river, which now irrigates thousands of acres of what was once barren jungle land. But according to a recently published report of the U.N. Population Division all these efforts constitute only a holding action in the battle between population and the extension of cultivable land.
It would probably be tnre to say that,

unlike in India, there is little, if any, actual starvation in Ceylon, but there is very extensive undernourishment, even judged by
Oriental standards; there is also, extensive malnutrition, owing to the excessive con-
sumption of starches. A European bank manager in Colombo told me the other day
that, when he had a rush of work on, he found it impossible to obtain an extra effort
from his Ceylonese clerks, which he attributed mainly to their poor and inadequate
diet, which consists mainly of rice and curry. (Only the educated and Europeanized minority of Ceylonese eat Western dishes
and then, as a rule, only in the evenings or when entertaining European visitors.) It is
difficult to see how it can be otherwise with
the ridiculously low standard of wages. Even a dish of rice and vegetable curry in an ordinary shop or boutique costs the equivalent of about a shilling,' and 4s. to 5s. a day is a fair average wage. In the case of miners, agricultural workers and household servants, who usually obtain their food free, it is even less (I pay my gardener 3s. a day, the houseboy slightly more and the Tamil cook about 5s.). One wonders how all these people can possibly contrive not only to feed themselves and their families, but also buy clothes, pay rent, and so forth.
The other day I gained some insight into the living conditions of the colonists in the jungle areas. I was out shooting with a party of friends, and at dawn we came upon a jungle-clearing-known here as a chenawhere some men were growing kurrakan-a small bush which yields a flower and a seed which is ground down into a powder rather like flour. Worn out with plodding through the jungle, we were glad to accept the hospitality of these simple people, who had been keeping a watch throughout the night to prevent elephants from trampling down their crop.
But, heavens! How poor, how destitute of everything they were, except for their cadjan huts, their few cooking utensils and one or two angry-looking dQgs. They looked exceedingly emaciated, but they told me they succeeded in keeping body and soul together by selling the kurrakan grain in the

go THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nearby town, in exchange for which they situation is created by the devastatingly

bought rice and vegetables. There must be high unemployment. Never have I travelled

hundreds of thousands of Ceylonese living in in a country where so many people are

more or less similar conditions out in the doing-or appear to be doing-so little. In

jungle, though if they have guns or spears such a blissful climate as this the dolce far

they probably manage now and again to kill niente life does not create anything like the

a wild boar.

same spiritual frustrations or humiliations

Until recent times the Sinhalese peasant, which resulted, say, from the unemployment

if he owned a few acres of paddy or coconut, of England and Germany in the thirties,

could consider himself well off, while his particularly as the Ceylonese tend to be

numerous children, who helped in the fields, rather lazy and unenterprising. Which in

were an economic asset rather than a turn is probably due to the enervation of

liability. But owing to inheritance customs the climate and the abundance of the

in the island, whereby each holding is vegetation so that they have never had to

divided up in equal proportions between the meet the " challenge" (to use Professor

children, fragmentation of land has reached Toynbee's term) of a hostile natural

ludicrous limits; and it is not uncommon to environment.

find a man owning, along with brothers and Nevertheless, there is grave anxiety and

sisters, half an acre of paddy. A situation discontent, particularly amongst the middle

which leads, incidentally, to incessant litiga- classes. Statistical data on unemployment

tion, as well as to disputes and then frequently in Ceylon are not particularly reliable, but a

to murders, there being an average of one to recent survey undertaken by the Central

two murders a day in the island. The Bank showed that i6-6 per cent of the total

Sinhalese peasant is therefore becoming work force of the island (estimated at about

virtually landless.

three and a quarter million) was unemployed;

One of the communities where family and apart from the Tamil coolies on the tea

planning is becoming absolutely vital is the and rubber estates, the most badly hit

large Tamil estate population. Their rapidly group are the middle class group, i.e. men

expanding numbers are creating a serious who have been educated up to Senior School

redundancy of labour, particularly as it is Certificate standard. In this small but

not possible to extend to any appreciable dynamic group, numbering about 6o,ooo,

extent the acreage of tea and rubber at nearly a half are unemployed.

present under cultivation. Unless there is
some control of their birth rate all the good work which has been recently done to improVe working conditions on these estates will be of no avail, and lowered standards will inevitably produce progressive malnutrition, greater incidence of diseases, and so forth. In their report on this community the Family Planning Association stress as one of their main difficulties that of obtaining access to the houses of these Tamil coolies (one calls them houses but, except for the newer ones, pigsties would be a more appropriate term), which are scattered far and wide over the
estates, often with no roads leading up to them, and in the hilliest part of the island.

There are a number of interesting factors to be considered in this connection. In the first place, education is virtually free in this island-a popular move on the part of the
Government, but one which must represent an enormous economic burden on the State in the building of schools, payment of teachers, etc., as well as being, incidentally, an indirect inducement to childbearing. As a result, it is no unusual thing for a boy to remain at school till he is nineteen or twenty, and after this intensive education he is very reluctant indeed to work on the land, not to mention cultivating derelict jungle land, in which he would probably be of most use to his country.

Unemployment

Far from wanting to do so, he joins in the mad rush and scramble for the all-too-few

A more serious, and indeed more explosive, Government posts, or failing that, for

INTO THE MADDING CROWD

91

commercial and clerical posts, which confer on him, for some reason or other, an extraordinary prestige. 'Moreover, most Ceylonese youths are bent, when they marry, on finding a wife whose parents are prepared to offer large, dowries; and the highest dowries are paid to daughters marrying professional men, such as lawyers and doctors, Government civil servants, and so forth. In fact, one can almost say (and this is especially true of the Tamils) that there is a regular scale of charges, and not long ago I met a Tamil gentleman who was beset with anxiety as to how he would earn enough to provide his three daughters with dowries large enough to enable them to make suitable marriages-that is to say, marriages to young men with promising and socially esteemed careers.
Communism, both of the Stalinist and Trotskyist variety, is a force to be reckoned with in Ceylon, and doubtless it adds to the restlessness of these middle-class youths, unable to find jobs in Colombo appropriate to their educational standards.
Another factor contributing to this restlessness is the influence of Great Britain, which still pervades and indeed haunts the island. I do not wish to open up yet another theme, which though fascinating would take us altogether too far and deep, but it may be briefly said that when a small country like Ceylon has been occupied by foreign powers generation after generation (starting with the Portuguese in the sixteenth century) its indigenous culture and ways of life are bound to suffer a terrible disruption: and, consequently, as soon as the tide of occupation recedes, it is apt to be left high and dry, its people being without roots either in their native culture or in that of the occupying power. Almost all the better-class Ceylonese speak perfect English, have accustomed themselves to Western ways and standards, and send their sons, if they can afford it, to Oxford or Cambridge. It has now been decided to abolish English as the official language of the country, which innovation, it is hoped, will diminish appreciably the spell exercised by the \Vest, particularly upon young men who have tended to regard their

proficiency in English as the passport to a non-existent job.' In the meantime the rapidly expanding population worsens the unemployment situation, which, according to the recent survey by the U.N. Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, is likely to become particularly acute in urban areas unless there is far more rapid development of large and small industries.
Racial Dissensions
All of us are familiar with the fact that rising birth rates in the predominantly agrarian economies of the East are creating the threat of ever graver world food shortages, even as we know that many of these Asiatic countries are suffering from chronic unemployment with consequent dangers of Communism. But do we, I wonder, sufficiently realize the danger of racial and communal dissensions arising from this growing congestion and conglomeration of peoples? To my mind this is the most interesting feature of Ceylon's rapidly expanding numbers, though population pressure is probably only one of many causes of the racial dissensions existing at present in the island.
It may be well at this stage to remind the reader that Ceylon is a multi-racial island. The islanders, who to-day number close on eight and a half million,.refer to themselves as a whole as Ceylonese. But these Ceylonese are made up of various races and racial strains. Among them are:
(a) The Sinhalese. They are by far the largest group, amounting to about 67 per cent of the total population. They are of Aryan origin, speak Sinhalese, and are mainly Buddhist.
(b) The Ceylon Tamils. They represent about Ii per cent of the population, are concentrated mainly in the north and northeast of the island, particularly in and around Jaffna, are Hindus by religion and speak Tamil.
(c) The so-called Indian Tamils. They are a slightly larger minority group, accounting for another 12 per cent. Hardier and more energetic than the Sinhalese, they were originally brought in by the British nearly a century ago, under indenture, to work on the

92 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

tea and rubber estates, where they provided a cheap, relatively efficient and probably
sweated " labour force.
(d) The Muslims and Malays, amounting together to about 6 per cent.
(e) The Burghers. They are mainly of mixed Dutch and Sinhalese origin, though there is a smaller group of so-called Portuguese burghers; that is to say, Portuguese whose ancestors married Sinhalese when Ceylon was invaded by the Portuguese in the sixteenth century. To my mind the Dutch burghers, who number about 50,000, constitute the most fascinating community in the island. Descendants of the Dutch invaders of the mid-seventeenth century, who married Sinhalese, they have the misfortune of belonging really neither to East nor West.
Under the British Raj (which, incidentally, has left very mixed feelings in the minds of the people, respect for British justice, probity and fair play being tempered by evil memories of the colour bar) all these various communities lived together in relative harmony, although there always existed jealousy between them. But since the Ceylonese were granted their independence in I948 more serious dissensions have arisen. In the first place, a movement sprang up to expel the Indian Tamils from Ceylon, chiefly on the grounds that their jobs on the tea and rubber ,estates were wanted for Sinhalese nationals. So these unfortunate Tamil coolies, unless they can show that their fathers and grandfathers were born in Ceylon (often a difficult thing to prove to-day owing to lack of ptoper registration in times past), are faced with a return to far more terrible economic conditions in the barren lands of Southern India. Many of them have already gone back, though not yet in great numbers, the Indian Government being reluctant to take them. At the moment the situation is one of virtual deadlock, not to speak of appalling confusion for various reasons. But the measure of the reluctance of the Indian Tamil to leave the island may be gauged from the numbers of his countrymen who, despite patrolling motor boats and the vigilance of customs and police, illicitly enter

the island from Southern India every year in search of work.
The position of the Ceylon Tamils is less insecure since they have been here for generations; indeed many of them are descendants of those Indian Tamils who, in successive waves, invaded Ceylon long before the European powers - the Portuguese, Dutch and British-ever set foot on it. But they are now threatened with discrimination of one kind and anothen At the moment, for instance, there is heated controversy all over Ceylon, in Parliament, in the Press and amongst the general public, as to whether Sinhalese is to replace English as the official language of the country, or whether Sinhalese and Tamil are to enjoy equal status as national languages. If the " Sinhalese Only" faction win, the Ceylon Tamils rightly feel that they will be at a grave disadvantage, both culturally and economically; and there is even a movement amongst them (they are mostly concentrated in the Jaffna peninsula) for secession from the rest of the island.
As to the proud little Dutch burgher community, they stand to lose whatever is the outcome of the language issue, since in the main they speak only English; and all their orientations are European and Christian. In any case they allege discrimination against them by the Sinhalese in the matter of jobs, and a great many of them have already left the island, chiefly as emigrants to Australia. This means virtually the break-up of their community and its long traditions.
It may be added that the British planters here are meeting with much the same fate; they are gradually being ousted from the island because their jobs are urgently required for the Sinhalese. There are thousands of Sinhalese young men waiting to step into their shoes as superintendents or assistant superintendents on tea and rubber estates.
The present Prime Minister* is said to wish that Ceylon should become the Switzerland of the East, but his well-meaning intentions are not reflected in this racial picture existing
* Since this was written there has been a change of government in Ceylon. EDITOR.

IINTO THE MADDING CROWD

93

in the island to-day. As mentioned already,
there are probably various factors accounting for it, but one of them is undoubtedly population pressure: too little food, too many
mouths to feed, and above all too few jobs. Not long ago a Ceylon Tamil, a prominent civil servant, concerned with these problems at high Government level, remarked that, if it were possible to control the expansion of
the Indian coolie population on the estates, the Indian Tamil situation might eventually resolve. itself.
In this article it has not been possible to do more than skim the surface of these

various problems with which the Ceylonese have had to cope since independence, but it
has been made clear, I think, that the population question finds its way, directly or indirectly, into most of them, and that it is a
question which, to say the very least, merits study and consideration by the leaders of the -country. I cannot resist adding that. the Ceylonese are, on the whole, one of the friendliest and most tender people in the world, while their island, I believe, contains more natural beauty to the square mile than in any other comparable area on the surface
of the earth.

