PROBLEMS OF CHILDBEARING*
By J. W. B. DOUGLAS, B.Sc., B.M., B.Ch.

IN I946 a joint committee of the Popula- there has been a rapid enlargement of the

tion Investigation Committee and the scope of the maternity services, and in this

Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynae- period large sums of public money have been

cologistst made an inquiry into the social spent on them. It was to have been expected,

and economic problems of childbearing. The then, that some attempts would have been

reasons for undertaking this inquiry were twofold. First, the health services were
about to be remodelled under the National Health Services Act, and it was felt that if
the background of circumstances and needs were not taken into account, the new maternity services would only incompletely fulfil the functions for which they were designed.
Secondly, it is well known that in Britain fertility has fallen very markedly since the
I870's. There are reasons for thinking that
the medical and other costs associated with
the birth of a baby may to-day be a serious deterrent to parenthood, not only for the lower income groups, but for all sections of
the community. There is, then, an excellent
case for reducing the financial burden of childbearing, but we have no idea how great it is or what measures would be likely to be effective in reducing it. There are, of course, other deterrents than monetary ones, for example, unsatisfactory conditions of confinement are often dictated by shortage of beds, or by the ties of a large family; unnecessary pain during labour may result
from a shortage of trained midwives. In fact, all aspects of the maternity services are of potential interest to the demographer.

made to measure what return, in improved
health and reduced mortality, has been
made from this expenditure. Thus it would
have been of the greatest value to know how the use of the services had spread through different sections of the community, and to have observed the changes in the demand for maternity beds and in the proportion of midwifery undertaken by doctors. It would also have been interesting to have been able to plot trends in the incidence of prematurity and breast-feeding, and to study changes in the medical and other costs of childbearing. But in no case were suitable data available.
The Ministry of Health, it is true, send each year to local authorities a form which asks for certain statistics relating to the local provision of maternity services and the use made of them. Many of the statistics collected in this way have been shown to be misleading, for though they give a rough measure of the number using the services they show neither the extent to which each mother uses them nor the adequacy of the attention given. Local authorities, also, collect detailed records of all women who use their maternity and child welfare ser-

Information Available Before this Survey vices. But the data recorded vary from one

It is surprising that this inquiry was authority to another, and even information needed at all. During the past thirty years common to the records of many authorities
may be collected in a variety of ways, making

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on December 7th, 1948.
t Chairman: Professor James Young; secretary:
Professor D. V. Glass; director: J. W. B. Douglas; research assistant: Miss G. Rowntree; members: H. G. E. Arthure, Miss A. J. M. T. Barnes, G. F. Gibberd, Sir Eardley Holland, David Maxwell, Rufus Thomas, C. P. Blacker, 1. G. Davies, Miss C. L. Melly, R. M. Titmuss, Lady Rhys Williams.
Funds for this inquiry were generously supplied by the Nuffield Foundation and the National Birthday Trust.

comparison very difficult. A further disadvantage is that the records are collected
on a great number of separate cards and forms, sometimes as many as ten or twelve, each form containing a part, but not all, of the information required. A summary is seldom available, and it is very rare for the
forms to be filed together.

32

PROBLEMS OF CHILDBEARING

33

Nature of the Inquiry

individual answers in the questionnaires and

Such considerations made it clear that the the reality of recorded grievances.

type of information required could be The sample of mothers interviewed were

obtained only by personal interviews with fully representative of married women con-

mothers whose experience could be regarded fined in March I946. Refusals were en-

as typical of the whole population of women countered in less than 2 per cent of cases,

now bearing children. These interviews but a further 7 per cent could not be inter-

would have to be undertaken in every type viewed because they were away, ill, etc. A

of administrative authority, in all geo- relatively high proportion of such contacts

graphical regions and among all social groups. had illegitimate or stillborn babies, but this

It was, moreover, felt that the value of the fact does not materially reduce the value of

interviews would be greatly increased if they conclusions drawn from the whole sample.

were carried out by people who had an The results of the inquiry are set out in

intimate knowledge of the mothers' prob- considerable detail in the joint committee's

lems, and who had access both to the report,* and only two aspects will be con-

mothers and to the records of midwives and sidered here. The first is the unequal avail-

local authorities.

ability of the services; the second, the

This inquiry was made possible by the tendency for services to be designed to suit whole-hearted help of the medical officers of the convenience of medical and adminis-

health of 424 maternity and child welfare authorities (92 per cent of all such authorities

trative staff rather than that of the mothers who use them.

in England and Wales) who allowed their health visitors to undertake the interviews; by the careful interviewing of the health visitors and by the co-operation of the mothers. It was decided to attempt to interview the mothers of all children born in the first week of March I946, and in fact successful interviews were completed with 90 per cent of them. In all, a total of I3,687 mothers cooperated, of whom 7,287 answered a questionnaire dealing mainly with the availability of the maternity services and the use made of them, and 6,400 a questionnaire on expenditure on medical and other costs associated with the birth of their babies. These interviews were made eight weeks after the confinement, as it was thought that after this interval mothers would have returned home, purchased the layette, pram, etc., and received bills for confinement care. On the
other hand, details of expenditure and ex-
penses during pregnancy and the lying-in
period would still be fresh in their minds.
A background to the questionnaire survey
was provided by detailed studies in five
authorities of the quality of the maternity
services and the administrative problems

Unequal Availability of Services
There are great inequalities in the maternity services available in different parts of the the country and to different social groups. From the eugenic point of view the social inequalities are the more interesting and will therefore be studied in some detail. In all aspects of maternity care well-to-do mothers get better attention than those who are poor. They come under antenatal supervision earlier; thus 6i per cent of the wives of professional and salaried workers start super-
vision during the first three months of their pregnancies as compared with only 37 per cent of working-class wives. This is a matter of some importance, because the inquiry clearly shows that inadequate antenatal supervision is associated with an increased risk to the baby, who is more likely to be premature, stillborn or die during the first month of life. At the present time there are many new incentives for women to put themselves under supervision early in pregnancy. Thus it is necessary to book early in order to secure a bed in hospital, and fear of forfeiting her booking will ensure the mother's subsequent regular attendance.

associated with them. At the same time it was possible to test both the accuracy of

* Maternity in Great Britain. 1948. Oxford Univer-
sity Press.

34 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Extra rations for expectant mothers supply nursing home there would be nobody to help

a further incentive. Yet in spite of in the house.

this many working-class women attend too The restrictions imposed by large families

late to obtain the full benefits of antenatal are especially evident if we consider the

care. number of children under five years of age.

It seems that domestic ties and the diffi- One-third of those whose previous children

culty of leaving young children are reasons were all over five years were confined at

for many late attendances, and consequently home, but the proportion increased to 56

it is the mothers of large families, especially per cent when there was one child under

those with young children, who get the least five, to 68 per cent when there were two, and

satisfactory care. This is easy to under- to 83 per cent when there were more than

stand when we consider the difficulties which two. Although it is just these mothers with

women encounter when they attend clinics. a large number of younger children who

These are often situated in unsuitable and would most benefit from a rest in hospital,

cold buildings far from the mother's home the shortage of home helps and an almost

and from where she usually does her shop- complete absence of residential nurseries

ping. Appointment systems are seldom in makes it impossible for them to leave home.

operation, and she may well have to wait for For these reasons home confinements fre-

two to three hours on a hard bench before quently take place in unsuitable and over-

being examined. Many a busy housewife, crowded conditions. Some of the conditions

even if she can find someone to look after her described in the questionnaires were very

children while she is away, will feel that the, bad indeed. Thus, one woman living in her

to her, rather intangible benefits of super- parents' house slept during her confinement

vision are a poor return for a morning or in the same bed with her mother and sister;

afternoon of waiting. To encourage better another slept in the same room with her

attendances appointment systems are needed husband and three children who, while she

and also clinics serving small areas and was in labour, had to wait on the landing

located near shopping centres. Greater outside. In the whole sample of home con-

efforts should also be made to publicise the finements one out of five was in a home that

antenatal services and stress the importance was crowded more than two persons to each

of early and regular supervision.

room. It is surprising that such overcrowded

The well-to-do are also much more likely home conditions, apart from the poverty

to be confined in institutions) largely because with which they are associated, do not by

they can afford a nursing home bed if no themselves increase the risk of stillbirths or

hospital one is available. But within the neonatal deaths. On the other hand there is

working-class group itself there are large much to suggest that domestic ties result in

variations in the availability of hospital beds, many women being confined at home who

and these are often determined by family would more safely have been confined in

ties, though also, of course, by the fact that, hospital.

when allocating maternity beds, priority is Social class inequalities were particu-

given to women about to have their first larly striking when considering relief from

babies. How great a tie the younger children pain. In I946 analgesia was to a great extent

can be is shown by the reasons given for reserved for the well-to-do; and the position

choosing the place of confinement. As size of is still far from satisfactory, though since

family increases, family ties exclude more that date analgesia has become more widely

and more women from hospital confinement; available. Well-to-do women were more often

thus, of those confined at home only i per given analgesia because they could afford to

cent of those expecting a first baby, but as arrange for a doctor to deliver them. But

many as 38 per cent of those expecting a even among those attended by doctors it

sixth or subsequent baby, are confined there, seems that relief is more likely to be given to

because if they went into a hospital or rich than to poor women. Thus in home con-

PROBLEMS OF CHILDBEARING

35

finements 74 per cent of well-to-do wives
attended by their doctors were given analgesia, but only 44 per cent of working-class wives. This may be because the better educated more insistently demanded relief, but this explanation does not excuse a discrimination that has given rise to numerous complaints.
Throughout this inquiry it is apparent that larger families restrict the use mothers are able to make of the maternity services. There is no fundamental reason why this should be so, but in the past it has proved much easier to ignore their special needs. Undoubtedly the position could be greatly improved by the better siting of centres, by equipping them with playrooms, by arranging appointment systems and by providing a more efficient home help service or system of residential nurseries so that women with many younger children would be able to leave their homes to have their babies in hospital.
Services for whose Convenience?
The second aspect of the inquiry which we are considering is the tendency for services to be designed to suit the convenience of the medical and administrative staff rather than of the mother. This is found in all aspects of the service. It has been found convenient in many larger towns to concentrate supervision at a central clinic. For the doctors this cuts down travelling and eases the problems of filing records and obtaining special examinations; but for the mother it may mean long journeys and long waiting. It may, moreover, reduce the continuity of care, for at such antenatal clinics sessions are often taken by health visitors rather than by midwives, these health visitors seeing expectant women who come from outside their own area and for whose children they will have no later responsibility. For the midwife, too, the central clinic has disadvantages, as it may mean long journeys from her area of work, and in fact often means that the antenatal care of her patients is largely taken
out of her hands. The hours of sessions are also often
arranged to suit neither the midwives nor the mothers. Thus, in some of the authorities

visited it was found that the antenatal clinics were held at times when the midwives were on their rounds and could not attend. Because of this midwives often held afternoon or evening clinics of their own, thus duplicating the supervision and putting an unnecessary
burden on the expectant mother. Another way in which the unsatisfactory
nature of the serviceS shows itself is in the number of different people through whose
hands each expectant mother passes. She will often be seen by several different doctors, midwives and health visitors, each of whom may have only an incomplete acquaintance with the history of her condition. Even during labour she may be successively in the charge of several different midwives; thus one woman passed through the hands of three midwives, each of whom took a different view of her case. It is, of course, frequently impossible for women to remain under the care of the same person throughout pregnancy and confinement, but the present low standard of continuity of care could undoubtedly be raised.
To judge by the complaints of mothers, and also by our experience during visits to selected authorities, conditions in hospitals leave much to be desired. Insufficient care has been taken in their design and even in
some comparatively new buildings there is an unnecessary lack of privacy. Many women
complained that the labour rooms were too near the lying-in wards: e.g. " would it be
possible to have mothers in labour in a sound-proof room, as the noise some of them make is very upsetting to the rest having their babies." Even when labour
rooms are well removed from the wards they
sometimes open into each other without intervening doors, or contain several beds
which may be in simultaneous use. To have labour rooms near the wards and opening
one into the other is probably convenient for
the staff, but can be most distressing for the patients.
The impression was also formed, from com-
plaints and from visits to hospitals, that the comfort of mothers often comes second to hospital routine. It is, of course, necessary
for mothers to be awakened early in the

36 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

morning to feed their babies, but it is diffi- sive administrative readjustments which in

cult to understand why in some hospitals many cases have not been made.

they are awakened at 4.30 a.m. and in others Not only in hospitals but throughout the

at 6 a.m. There is also great variation in maternity services there is an emphasis on

visiting hours. Some hospitals allow visits the abnormal side of childbirth which has

every day for an hour in the afternoon and meant that other important aspects have not

an hour in the evening; others rigidly limit been given the attention they deserve. If

visiting to two or three half-hours per week. women are to be encouraged to have children,

Some matrons feel that even the latter is too much more attention needs to be paid to the

much, and would prefer to stop visiting material and psychological needs of expectant

altogether. Then, again, visitors are usually mothers. This would involve both a rearrange-

admitted singly, but in a few hospitals there ment of the services and reorientation of the

is no limit to the number. Often the baby training of doctors and midwives.

can only be seen once a week by the father,

but other hospitals allow visitors to see the Conclusion

baby whenever they come. The case for the Many of the foregoing criticisms arise from

restriction of visitors is that they are liable the fact that the maternity services have

to introduce infection, and are therefore a grown haphazardly without any guidance

potential danger to the infant, especially if based on knowledge of the extent to which

he is premature. For this reason some they are used and the results they have

restriction of visiting is necessary, but a achieved. In the future they will cater for an

compromise should be sought between satis- even wider section of the population, and it

fying the natural wish of the mother to see is more than ever important to see that they

her friends, and protecting her and her baby are designed to meet the changing needs of

from the risks of infection.

mothers and children. Many of the services

Some of these unsatisfactory conditions provided will, moreover, be of an experi-

arise from the fact that, in the past, maternity hospitals were primarily concerned with abnormal midwifery and with patients who could be legitimately regarded as ill. But to-day approximately 40 per cent of expect-

mental nature, and rapid and objective
estimates of their success will be necessary. The present survey has defined the type of information likely to give a reliable indication of the adequacy of the maternity services, and it is hoped that in the future the

ant mothers book a hospital bed, the majority Ministry of Health will periodically make

of them being healthy women undergoing a similar inquiries which will help to guide their

normal physiological process. This change in policies and enable them to allocate their

the hospital population calls for very exten- expenditure to the best advantage.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION
"For the promotion of knowledge of the course of legislation In different countries, more particularly In the several
parts of His Malesty's Dominlons, and in the United States."
President: The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O. Chairman of the Executive Committee: The Rt. Hon. Lord DU PARCQ Editors: Sir ARNOLD McNAIR, K.C. Sir CECIL CARR, K.C.B., K.C.,
assisted by Professor H. C. GUTTERIDGE, K.C., and F. H. LAWSON, Esq., D.C.L.
Honorary Secretary: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.
Annual Subscription - - - ONE GUINEA
Address: THE ROYAL EMPIRE SOCIETY, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, LONDON, W.C.2
Eugenics Review, Vol. XLI, No. 1

