THE FERTILITY OF GRADUATE WOMEN*

By JUDITH HUBBACK, M.A.

Introduction

persuaded to communicate. I believe it

T HE honour the EUGENICS SOCIETY
has paid me in asking me to read a
paper to its members is very consider-
able. I would like at the outset to thank the
Society for entrusting me with this task of analysing for you some facts on the fertility of educated women in Britain to-day on the basis Qf a more general piece of work which had been done earlier, and for making available funds for visits to the homes of some of the women who had not answered the original postal questionnaire.
So that no one should be misled as to my qualifications for addressing a learned society, in these august surroundings, I must explain, in parenthesis, before going any fuFther, that I am no statistician nor expert on population problems. The facts are that I once studied, and then taught, history, I have views on the education of girls and I have a family.

usually happens that, in the course of sociological inquiries, the research worker discovers aspects of the subject which at first he did not foresee. The fertility of the women in my sample was not my main interest and in consequence I have not all the facts which would be ideal for the present
purpose. Those at my disposal are not exactly parallel in all particulars to those collected in the national census of I95I and to those recently made available in the report on the family census of I946, organized by the Royal Commission on Population. I cannot produce for you a statistically perfect comparison between the average size of the families of all university-educated married women on the one hand, and the average size of the family of couples in social class I on the other. The facts I offer are an indication of what is happening,
but they are of course not necessarily true of those who were not included in my sample.

Background of the Study

In the analysis of the national census, the

The political and social events of the I930S and '40s led me to consider the present
position of married university women in its
relation both to the great days of the women's
movement and to various probable future
developments. This train of thought decided me to research into the lives, occupations and views of a number of married women who had taken their degrees at British universities in and after I930. My main interest was not a demographic one, but was directed towards trying to find out how far their qualifications and education were being used, directly or indirectly, in their present occupations. As I was sending out questionnaires to 2,000 graduates, it seemed worth while collecting the maximum number

population is divided into various social classes according to the occupation and income of the husband. The woman does
not come in to the picture, except in so far as her marital status, age and production of children are concerned. The facts on fertility which I have to offer are those relating to a sample of I,I65 wives collected on the basis of an educational qualification. Their husbands do, in fact, mostly fall into the category called social class I, which happens to be convenient for the present purpose. Moreover, there are about I,500 women of the right age for our purposes in the i per cent sample of the I95I census results. Comparison with this group is
therefore appropriate.

of relevant facts which they could be Composition of the Sample

* A paper read at a Members' Meeting of the Eugenics Society on February i6th, 1955.

The sample consists of i,i65 graduate
wives who took their degrees at various

107

io8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

British universities between I930 and I952. The reason for selecting I930 as the first year of graduation was that for social and economic reasons that date represents a watershed in time. They were not asked their age in order to reduce the probable number of non-answerers, but the dates of graduation and of marriage. The age of twenty-one has been taken to be the average age at graduation.
The sample is not scattered evenly over
graduates of all British universities, partly because names and addresses were not always obtainable. The following colleges and universities are represented: at Oxford, Somerville and Lady Margaret Hall; at Cambridge, Newnham and Girton; at London, Westfield and Bedford; at Durham, St. Hilda's; Birmingham; St. Andrew's; Aberdeen; Nottingham; Reading; the University of Wales and the University College at Hull. In selecting names no account was taken of the subject studied, nor was the class of degree considered, as all results are not divided into classes, so that the exceptionally clever ones are not over-represented, if it is assumed that ability is more or less evenly spread over all the universities selected. Although there is no means of accurately comparing the academic standards represented by degrees from the various universities, intelligent girls in sixth forms throughout the country do in fact try for admittance to the older universities first where the standard is certainly high. The sample was intentionally weighted in favour of Oxford, Cambridge and London; three quarters of the questionnaires were sent to their graduates. A higher proportion of those graduates filled in and returned the forms, thus further weighting the results.
Those Who Did Not Answer
Sociologists had warned me before I started work that postal questionnaires normally elicit from 30 to 40 per cent of answers even when they are sent out with the backing of a national institute or organization. In the event, 58 per cent returned filled-in forms, which was reasonably satisfactory, but tantalizing. Among

those who did not answer, were there more with small families, who might be less interested in the inquiry, or more with large ones, who might be too busy to tackle it ? Checking a sample of non-answerers had to be done by means of home visits. The sample was selected at random from nonanswerers living in London and fourteen other counties. Out of i8o possible interviews, only seventy were effective, the main difficulties being that people had moved from the address where they were thought to be living, or were out whenever the interviewer called. A change of address does not necessarily point to a smaller family: in fact the address given in the university list might be that of the graduate's parents, and her reason for not living there might be because she had married and had a family. But being out of the house when the interviewer called suggests more strongly no family, or a numerically smaller one. And in fact, among the non-answerers who were interviewed, there are fewer with three children than among those who answered in the first place. Further reference to this fact will be made later.
Marriage Rates Among Women Graduates
Before reaching the central subject of fertility, I should mention another preliminary consideration: it is that of the proportion of graduate women who marry. It is an important point, because even if it is found that the fertility of married women graduates is above the average, that fact would lose much of its satisfactory eugenic force if there were proportionately many more spinsters among graduates than in the rest of the population, seeing that the number of illegitimate children born to educated women can be taken to be minute.
It is not possible to find out exactly how many of those women who graduated between I930 and I952 were married by the time the survey was made. The figures are not known nationally, so the only method to be followed is to examine the records of individual colleges. Some colleges, notably the residential ones, maintain better contact with their old students than others do.

THE FERTILITY OF GRADUATE WOMEN

IO9

But even the colleges whose records appear to be the best cannot be sure that their old students inform them of their marriages. Consequently, the figures I have to offer are quite certainly an underestimate of the
proportion of married graduates. But it is impossible to know the extent to which they underestimate. At any rate, there can be no charge of exaggeration.
What is happening is that the marriage rate is undoubtedly going up. This can be shown by examples from various universities and colleges, selected because records were
kqpt from which the relevant facts could
easily be discovered. A secular rather than a short-term change is illustrated. At Westfield College, London University, 45 per cent of those who took their degrees before I900 were known to have married sooner or later; of those graduating in the- I930S, 57 per cent had married by I950. These figures show a moderate rise in the marriage rate. A greater proportionate rise can be seen in the comparable figures for Newnham College; of those graduating before I900 only 25 per cent appear to have ultimately married, but of those graduating in the
I930s, 6o per cent were married by I950. Different sets of figures have been worked
out for Aberdeen and St. Andrews and Birmingham Universities, and Lady Margaret Hall at Oxford.

TABLEI

GRADUATES MARRIED IN 195I (Minimum Percentages)

Age L.M.H.* St. Aberdeen Birming- General

Andrews

hamt Population

43 57 57 52 45 8o

38 72 6i 43 33 83

33 70 66 52 27 84

28 56 41 3I 22 80

* Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford.

t 2 years younger.

In this table the figures for Lady Margaret
Hall are the most reliable because this college appears to have reasonably good
contact with its old students, but the secretary is convinced that the marriage rates are an underestimate. The Birmingham figures were derived from the university register: the registrar attempted to bring his facts up to date in I948, but only one graduate in four supplied the information required. The numbers who are married

must therefore be much higher than shown on this table; it is impossible to say by how much.
All these figures are considerably below the national figures. Personally I think about three-quarters of women graduates get married; that means something between 5 and io per cent less than in the rest of the population. This is not a very great difference and certainly far less than it used to be.

Earlier Marriages
There is a tendency in the population at large for women to marry younger than they used to do. According to the i per cent sample of the I95I census, among those who had married by the age of thirty between I932 and I936, 66 per cent had married under twenty-five years old. For those who married in the years I942-I945, the proportion had gone up to 79 per cent.

TABLE 2

MARRIED WOMEN AT 195I CENSUS (G-B.) ACCORDING TO AGE AT MARRIAGE (one per cent sample)

Year of marriage

Under 25

Age 25 - 29

Total under 30

1932-36 1937-41
1942-45

66 34 69 3I
79 2I

100
I00
100

This table shows a marked drop in marriage age. The changes in marriage habits of the graduates are in a similar direction. They have been worked out in a slightly different way and illustrate the gap between graduation (at average age of twenty-one) and marriage.

TABLE 3

CHANGING INTERVAL BEFORE MARRIAGE

Interval until Marriage

Year of Graduation

o - 4 years

5 - 9 years Total under io

1930-34 1935-39 1940-42

Oxford and Cambridge Other Oxford and Cambridge Other Oxford and Cambridge Other

° 77 46 27 31
I39 71 48 44
ioo 85 72 65

° 89 54 6I 79 56 29 62 56
i8 25
38 35

years
i66 88
195 I1o
ii8 IIO

From these two tables it is clear that, among the graduates questioned, there has been a very marked and progressive tendency to marry before and including the age of twenty-five, rather than before and including
the age of thirty.

iio THE EUGENICS REVIEW

The relevance of this fact is that, speaking medically, women are more liable to have children at the younger than at the older age, and if they marry young they have before them a longer period when they may have children.
On the average, graduate wives do not have so many children in the first five years of marriage as do the women in the rest of the population. It is after five years of marriage that they catch up and surpass the remainder. Presumably, therefore, the earlier marriages of graduates are now being contracted because women can go on working after marriage in almost all the professions. They postpone motherhood but not marriage.
Fertility, General
A woman's chances of marriage are not substantially lowered by going to a university, as used to be the case. In the future the equalizing of the numbers of men and women in the population will mean that the present trend will continue, unless some unforeseen factor of a social or economic kind enters into the scene. Now that the marriage bar has been abolished in virtually all the professions, marriage need not be postponed by the young woman graduate who wishes to work before settling down to motherhood. As the years spent at the university correspond to those when she is very likely to fall in love, and as, for a wide variety of social and psychological reasons, far fewer young men are now prejudiced against the idea of an intelligent and educated wife, there is every reason to believe that the proportion of graduate spinsters will decrease.
In view of that fact, the fertility of those at present married takes on a double significance: its force by itself as affecting the numbers of children of socially desirable parents (I hope you will forgive me for begging that question) and also its influence as an example, or as setting a fashion, for the next group of graduate wives.
In the sample of graduate wives, there is less childlessness than in the general population: there are fewer small families and more with three or four children. The following table illustrates this point.

TABLE 4

PERCENTAGE FAMILY SIZE DISTRIBUTION OF SAMPLE OF GRADUATES COMPARED WITH ALL GREAT BRITAIN
(295I one per cent census sample)
Age 0 I 2 3 4 5 6 7+ Numberin group
30 - 34 Graduates 25 i8 35 22 7 2 I 0 292 Great Britain I6 3I 3I 24 5 2 I I

35 - 39 Graduates 25 II 29 26 27 2 I °
Great Britain 14 27 32I 5 7 3 2 2
40 - 43 Graduates r I I I 32 28 I4 3 I 0
Great Britain I7 26 27 I4 7 4 2 3

322 232

From the i per cent sample analysed from the I95I census returns and from the wives in my sample it has been possible to compile the next table which shows the average fertility of the general population according to the woman's age at marriage and the duration of marriage, and in each case compares the fertility of those in the graduate sample, category by category.

TABLE 5 FERTILITY

GRADUATES IN SAMPLE COMPARED WITH txENERAL POPULATION, GREAT BRITAIN
(Numbers of graduates in each group given in brackets)

AGE AT MARRIAGE -24 Graduates Great Britain

DURATION OF MARRIAGE (YEARS)

5-6

7 - 9 IO - 14 I5 - 24

I29(52) 2.0(95) 2-6(i65) 2-8(9I)

2-5 I-7 2-I 2-6

25-29 Graduates . -7(51) Great Britain I.3

2.4(78) 2-5

2.3(208) 2-6(64)
I-7 7-7

30-34 Graduates

2.3(22)

Great Britain I22

I-6(20) I-3

1-8(23)
1-3

-

It will be remembered that the age of the
graduates is assumed to be twenty-one at the
time of taking the first degree. The women
in the i per cent sample of the census returns
were those for all married women under fifty. They are closely comparable to my sample, but the census figures were collected two years earlier. In the interests of simplicity, the averages of children born in the first five years of marriage are not shown. The important point is that from the fifth
year of marriage onwards, the married graduates' fertility, as demonstrated by this sample, is higher than the average for
Great Britain, at whatever age they marry. This conclusion must of course be qualified. Those who replied to the questionnaire
probably have more children than those who did not reply. It will be remembered that we have facts about the families of seventy non-repliers. This does not, unfortunately, constitute a large enough group from which to correct the figure arrived at for the average fertility of married graduates.

THE FERTILITY OF GRADUATE WOMEN

III

I will give such figures as I have. Of those who replied, the average fertility of those married under thirty-five and after ten years of marriage is 2-5. The comparable figures for the non-repliers who were questioned, is i-8. To exactly what extent the average would have to be reduced to get a really accurate figure it is impossible to say. It is a question of judgment. It has been suggested to me that the real fertility of graduate wives, married under thirtyfive, after ten years of marriage should perhaps be estimated at 2-2, to allow for the lower fertility discovered in the small sample which was tested among those who did not answer. Even at 2-2 it stands considerably higher than the comparable average for social class I, I-73, and a little above the comparable average for the population at large.
Fertility and Age at Marriage
The graduates who marry between the ages of twenty-five and twenty-nine are very
nearly as. fertile as those marrying under
twenty-five. In the population at large, according to the 195I census, the average fertility of those marrying under the younger age (twenty-five) is 2'5 by the time their families are completed, and the corresponding figure for those marrying between twenty-five and twenty-nine is I-7, a considerable drop. But among the graduates here analysed, the comparable figures are
2z8 for the younger marriages and :26 for
the older ones. The reason why age at marriage is now a
relatively less important factor than it used to be in determining fertility is that the desired size of family can be achieved by the woman marrying later rather than earlier, because the desired fertility is lower than the physiologically possible one. The spread of family planning, although of course its effectiveness is far from general, has meant
*that the educated woman who marries between the ages of twenty-five and twenty-
nine can achieve on the average almost as large a family as does the potentially more fertile younger woman. The relatively high fertility of the younger age-at-marriage

group in the general population mnay well be due to the partial failure of family planning.

Fertility of Social Class I Compared with Graduate's Fertility
The report of the family census of I946
undertaken by the Royal Commission on Population provides valuable figures of the fertility of different social classes. The more recent i per cent sample of the I95I census (about I,500 women of comparable age) also contains very useful facts for comparison with the graduate wives' sample. The next table shows the two sets of fertility, analysed according to age at marriage and duration of marriage. Here again the graduates, from the fifth year of marriage onwards, show higher fertility rates.

TABLE 6

FERTILITY

GRADUATES IN SANIPLE COMPARED WAITH

SOCIAI, CLASS I (HUSBAND)

Age at

Marriage

Duration of Marriage (years)

-24 Graduates Social Class I

5-6
I-9 I-3

7-9

10 - 14

15 - 24

2-0 2-6 2-8

I-8 1-8 I-9

25-29 Gradtuates I-7 2-4 2-3 2-6
Social Class I I-3 17 I-7 1-6

30-34 Graduates I.3 i-6 I-8 -Social Class I I-6 I-3 1-2 I-2

The point worth noticing here is that for those marrying under twenty-five years old, who have been married the longest, the graduates (in this sample) achieved an
average fertility of 2-8, while the wives in social class I only reached I-9. Like that of the graduate wives, the fertility of women married to men in social class I is little affected by whether they marry under twenty-five or between twenty-five and twenty-nine.
The qualification made earlier, when the general figures for the whole population were discussed, also of course applies here. But even taking those facts into account, it looks as if higher education for women has certainly not led them to restrict their families more than have other women of
approximately the same social and economic class; on the contrary, higher education has been associated with rather larger families. I suggest it is possible to go so far as to say that, in the professional classes in Britain

II2 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to-day, other things being equal, the higher the education of the wife, the larger the family. It is also very important to notice
that this is not a post-war association; we do not yet know the size of the average completed family of graduate women who married after the war.

Fertility According to Academic Success
It is the opinion among those Fellows of women's colleges whom I was able to con-
sult, that more of their first-class students
marry than do the less outstanding ones. One incidental corollary to this is that it is increasingly difficult for the colleges to find
unmarried Fellows, or at any rate increasingly necessary for them to be willing to employ married ones, if they wish to keep up the standard of scholarship at the high table. It is not possible to confirm this
opinion with figures, because it represents a
trend which is not yet reflected in any satisfactory working sample. Colleges usually know which of their students marry very soon after graduation, rather more fully than they know about those who marry after several years' delay. Those with first-
class degrees who may originally have been
more career-minded than those with thirds, can risk marrying young now that the marriage ban has virtually disappeared, and postpone having children for a few years, while they get experience at work which will be very useful later in life.
In the sample I have worked on, there are not proportionately more women with firstclass honours than there are among women graduates in general. But their average fertility is distinctly higher than the fertility of women with other classes of degree.

TABLE 7

FERTILITY BY TYPE OF DEGREE

Oxford Numiibers

Degree

and of

Cambridge womiien

Others

Ist Class Honours 2-32 2nd Class Honours 2.27

72 366

532-02 I.64

3rd Class, 4th Class

Honours

2-I5

Pass, or equiva-

104

1-37

lent 2-0 I9

I.57

Numbers of
womyien
24I 41 I8I

The average number of children per woman
in the whole sample is I-97. Among those with first-class honours (who number I25) the average number of children is 2-2.

A further separation was made by extrac-
ting the Oxford and Cambridge graduates and analysing their fertility, grouping all ages at marriage and marriage durations together according to the class of degree they gained (fourth classes have been grouped with thirds). It then emerged that the Oxford and Cambridge firsts have an average fertility of 2-32, the seconds, 2-27,
the thirds, 2-I5. The women in the other universities showed the same trend except that the pass group is here much more numerous and shows an intermediate fertility; here the large pass group includes the many able women who took the Scottish M.A. degree. These figures are, admittedly, calculated on the selection of women who took the trouble to fill in the questionnaire. It cannot be absolutely correct. But it is an indication of the fact that academic success, far from discouraging motherhood, in fact has a tendency to do the opposite. This is merely a confirmation of the generally observed fact that people outstanding in one sphere are frequently successful in others as well. It is not a new observation: " Unto every one which hath shall be given.. ." (St. Luke. ch. XIX, v. 26).

Oxford and Cambridge v. the Rest
A separate analysis was made of Oxford and Cambridge graduates on the one hand, and the other universities on the other. This difference was apparent in table 7. In table 8 it is shown by age and duration of marriage rather than by class of degree.

TABLE 8

FERTILITY

OXFORD AND CAMBRIDGE COMPARED NVITH

OTHER GRADUATES

(Numbers in each group given in brackets)

Age at

Duration of Mlarriage (years)

Marriage

5 - 6 7 - 9 I0 - 14 I5 - 24

Oxford and

-24
25-29
30-34

Camilbridge Other
Universities Oxford and Cambridge Other UIniversities Oxford and
Cambridge Other Universities

2-I(19)
I-8(33)
1-9(2I) I-6(30) I-5(I3) I*°(9)

2.2(50)
I-8(45) 2-4(43) 2-3(35)
I-6(I2)
I.'(8)

2-6(13) 2-9(68)
2-5(52) 2-6(23)
2-3(I19) 2-7(40) 2-I(89) 2-3(24) I-6(7) 2-0(6)

It is clear from this table that graduates

from the older universities are slightly more

fertile than the others.

THE FERTILITY OF GRADUATE WOMEN

II3

In the whole graduate sample married under thirty-five and after ten years of marriage the average number of children is 25; in the population at large it is 2-02. For the Oxford and Cambridge graduates, again married under thirty-five and after
ten years of marriage the average number
is 2-6. For the Rest it is 2-4. The suggestion has been made that this difference is due to the husbands' incomes. Perhaps Oxford and Cambridge women marry more successfully than do other women graduates from a financial point of view? That would mean there were more Oxford and Cambridge graduates in the over Li,ooo group. This was not the case and table 9 compares the Oxford and Cambridge graduates who have less than 7i,ooo p.a. with all graduates having less than LI,ooo p.a., showing that the Oxford and Cambridge graduates with relatively low incomes still have quite a
high fertility.

TABLE 9

OXFORD AND CAMBRIDGE, LESS THAN £I,ooo p.a. COMPARED

WITH ALL GRADUATES, LESS THAN ki,ooo p.a.
(Numbers in each group in brackets)

Age at

Mlarriage

Duration of 'Marriage (years)

5-6

7-9

I0 - I4

I5 - 24

-24 Oxford and

Camlbridge

I-6(7)

2-2(i8)

2-5(26) 2.8(II)

All Graduates I.4 2-I 2-4 2-6

25-29 Oxford and

Cambridge

I-6(7)

2-7(9)

I-7(27) 2-6(8)

All Graduates I-4 2-5 I-9 2-0

30-34 Oxford and

Cambridge

1-5(2)

All Graduates o-6

I-0(6)
III

13(3)
i-8

Fertility. and Income
It is known that the families of professional people react more rapidly, where size is concerned, to changing circumstances than do the families of manual workers. The factor of income is one which very materially affects family size, since most families in the professional classes are now planned. Most professional men can look forward to a regular increase in salary up to a certain stage and do not reach their maximum salary in their twenties, as manual workers do. Although family allowances modify this fact to a certain extent for the lowestpaid worker's wife, yet the professional man's

wife can continue to have children with the assurance that her husband's rising salary will, up to a point, keep pace with an increasing number of children, born when she is in
her thirties. With this fact in mind, the graduates'
fertility was analysed in terms of income. Table io shows the comparative fertility rates of those whose income is under £i,ooo (that is, joint gross incomes of husband and wife combined) and those with over fi,ooo. This is, of course, a very rough and ready classification, but it was selected in order to minimize the number of people who
might refuse to answer.

TABLE Io

FERTILITY AND INCOME

ALL GRADUATES, UNDER Li,ooo p.a. AND OVER £i,ooo p.a.

(Numbers in each group given in brackets)

Age at

Mlarriage

Duration of Marriage (years)

5 - 6 7 - 9 I0 - I4 I5 - 24

-24 Under £i,ooo p.a. I-4(25) 2-I(34) 2.4(38) 2-6(I5)

Over,kiooo p.a. 2-5(27) I-9(6I) 2-7(I27) 2-8(76)

25-29 Underi,0ooo p.a. I-4(I7) 2-5(22) I9(47) 2-0(22)
Over ki,ooo p.a. I-9(34) 2-3(56) 2-3(I6I) 2-9(42)

30-34 Under £I,ooo p.a. o-6(9) I*I(9) I -8(8) Over£r,ooo p.a. 1-7(13) 1-9(11) i-8(5)

-
-

A higher income seems to encourage the professional couples to increase their family.

Conclusion
From the sample of university-educated wives described in this paper it has been possible to show that fewer are childless after ten years of marriage than are women in the rest of the population. The graduate women have larger than average families, fewer have only one or two children, and more have three or four children, than do women in the rest of the population. This is not due to what is popularly known as the "post-war bulge " in the birth rate; the figures for completed fertility were worked out from the families of graduate women who had already been married for over fifteen years in I952. Those who were most successful in academic terms, gaining firstclass honours degrees, were shown to have larger families on the average than those
who were less outstanding.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVII, No. 2

