246 EUGENICS REVIEW.

small towns than in large, and leads one to question whether the agri-

cultural labourer is so badly off as he is sometimes represented.

Another interesting application of the method is to the study of

the effects of child labour on the development of the child. In Bra'dford

children of the age of twelve are allowed to spend half the day in school

and the other half-day earning wages. This is known as the half-time

system. Mr. Greenwood shows that the average of the height and weight

indices (the combinied index number) is low in Bradford for children

of twelve years old. Its value is actually 9547, whereas for children of

eleven in Bradford it is 99'2, and for children of twelve in Leeds, Sheffield,

and Wakefield, where the half-time system is not in use to so great an

extent, it is 97'4, 97'8, and 96'8 respectively. He argues from these

figures that the half-day's labour has a deleterious effect on the physique

of the child, a result which seems natural enough and is supported by

evidence of another kind brought forward in another section of the work.

But he makes no mention of the fact that at thirteen years the combined

index number goes up again in Bradford to 98'7, which is considerably

higher than the corresponding index in Leeds, Sheffield, or Wakefield.

In presenting the figures without mentioning this Mr. Greenwood shows

a certain bias, at any rate a strong desire to arrive at his conclusion

rather than let the statistics lead him where they will. In Oldham the

material allowed a direct comparison between the half-time children

and those who spend the whole day at school. But the half-timers are

throughout larger and heavier than the full-timers. The explanation

of this unexpected result is given by the medical officer for Oldham as

follows: " (I) That those working half-time are on the average older than

those not working; (2) that the tendency would be for the stronger and

better developed children to go to work, while the weaker and delicate
children would be kept at school; (3) that the worker, as he is bringing

in a wage, is better fed than those who are not wage earners." Possibili-

ties which might have an opposite tendency, as for example, that the

children of the poorer parents were more likely to be sent to work, are

not considered. The question is thus seen to be a complicated one,

which will not be solved without the collection and reduction of better

data. This should present no particular difficulty, as the exact age of the

children in the two groups, their physique, and home oonditions might

without difficulty be removed from the realms of conjecture and properly

allowed for. But though the simple comparison made in the worK under

review cannot be said to have led to a definite conclusion, it is not for that

reason without value as it serves to point the way for future work.

We will conclude by tempering the wind of general commendation

which issues naturally from us, by the question, " Why are the diagrams

so very sketchy.? "

EDGAR SCHUSTER.

Pearl, R. A Contribution towards an Analysis of the Problem of Inbreeding. Amer. Nat. XLVII.; I913; pp. 577-614. Genetics and Breeding. Science XXXVII.; 1913; pp. 539-546; and Parshley, H. M. Data on Sex-Determination in Cattle. Biological Bulletin XXIV.; 1913; pp. 205-225.
IN the first of these papers Dr. Pearl presents a method for determining the intensity of inbreeding. He points out that it is important to start
from the individual and work backwards into the ancestry, rather than to start from the ancestry and work downwards. The method adopted consists in finding a coefficient which shall represent the ratio of actual ancestors in any generation to the total possible number of ancestors. For example, if brother is mated with sister for three successive generations, the offspring will have only two great-grandparents instead of the
eight which they would have if there were no inbreeding. Three-quarters of the ancestors in that generation have thus been eliminated, and the co-
efficient of inbreeding for the three generations is therefore 75 per cent.

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

247

More generally, if n is the number of generations in the pedigree, p the

possible number, and q the actual number of ancestors in nth generation,

then Zn the coefficient of inbreeding for n generations is given by the

formula Z2 = 100 (0n+r-qnn+-)

Pn+I Dr. Pearl points out that in repeated brother-sister mating Zn soon

approaches Ioo per cent., so that if no effects are produced in a few

generations, any subsequent changes are probably not due to inbreeding

as such. Practical methods are given for working out the coefficient in

long and complicated pedigrees. The latter part of the paper discusses

the relation of inbreeding with continued self-fertilisation, but contains a

mistake which vitiates a considerable part of the argument; this mistake

is corrected by the author himself in Amer. Nat. XLVIII., p. 57.

The second paper is the presidential address to the Animal Section

of the American Breeders' Association, 19I3; it points out the importance

of the knowledge of the recently discovered principles of heredity in

checking the empirical methods commonly used by breeders of animals.

In the third paper the authors have collected records from breeders

of 480 births in cattle, in which it was known whether service by the bull

took place "early," " in the middle," or " late " in the heat period of the

cow. The "early " class contained 248 births, with 125 J, 123 ; the

" middle " class contained 125 births, 67 a, 58 ?; the " late " class contained 107 births, 65e, 42 T. The ratio of males to females thus rose from 98'4r,Io0 in the "early" class to iis5d 1OOS in the "middle," and 1548 ,ioo ? in the "late" class. It is concluded that these changes in
the sex-ratio cannot be ascribed to any known cause except the difference

of time of fertilisation, and that possibly " staleness" of the ovum may

tend to destroy the activity of a female-determining chromosome, and

allow the ovum to develop into a male.

L. DONCASTER.

Laughlin, H. H. Report of the Committee to Study and to Report on the best practical means of cutting off the Defective Germ Plasm in the American Population. I. The Scope of the Committee's Work. II. The Legal, Legislative and Administrative Aspects of Sterilization. Eugenics Record Office. Bulletins ioA and ioB. Cold Spring Harbour, Long Island, New York; 1914; Prices 20 cents. and 6o cents; pp. 64 and 150.
BULLETIN No. ioA appears to cover the whole scope of negative eugenics. First the numbers of " Socially inadequate in the American population " are estimated, and then " Cacogenic varieties of the human race," that is to say those who are socially unfit on account of defective inheritance, are classified with great minuteness. The ten main classes to which they are referred are the feeble-minded, paupers, inebriates, criminals, epileptics, insane, the asthenic class, the diathetic class (i.e., those who have a tendency to some specific ailment). The deformed and the cacaesthetic (those suffering from hereditary defects of the sense organs). The remedies which have been proposed "for purging the blood of the
race " from the defects enumerated then receive consideration. They are
catalogued as follows. I. Life segregation. 2. Sterilization. 3. Restrictive marriage laws and customs. 4. Eugenical education of the public and of prospective marriage mates. 5. Systems of matings purporting to remove defective traits. 6. General environmental betterment. 7. Polygamy. 8. Euthanasia. 9. Neo-Malthusianism. io. Laissez-faire. We rather suspect that numbers 7, 8 and io were put in owing to the committee's affection for the decimal system. In any case they are dummies easily knocked down. Neo-malthusianism also receives rather scant courtesy, and the efficacy of any " systems of matings purporting to remove defective traits " is questioned. " General environmental betterment " is briefly conceded its place as a necessary part of social reform,

