THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY
TO TWINNING, WITH SOME OBSERVATIONS
CONCERNING THE THEORY OF HEREDITY
GENERALLY
PART II.
By JAMES OLIVER, M.D., F.R.S. (Edin.), F.L.S.
(Continued from page 53)
REGARDING twins we are quite familiar with the fact that there are two types. There is the type in which the twins are so dissimilar in every way, physically as well as mentally, that it is difficult for us to comprehend how they could possibly have been begotten at the same time. Authentic cases for example are on record where a Negress with a Negro husband has given birth to twins, one of which was an Albino with a skin and complexion as fair as that of any European child whilst the other infant was as black as coal, and again where a Negress with an English husband has given birth to twins, one of which was as black as the mother herself, whilst the other was a typical mulatto, the recognised type of offspring, that is, of a white father and a black mother. We are of course cognisant of the fact that two ova extruded from the ovary at or about the same time may be fertilised by sperm elements emitted by the same male at two different but not widely removed times as well as by inseminations separated by short intervals of time effected by two individuals.
The second type of twins is that in which the twins resemble each other more or less closely, so closely in fact, that during early life they can only be distinguished the one from the other by their own immediate relatives and associates, and twins of this class are invariably of the same sex. There is good reason to believe that twins of this type are caused by the splitting of the primary egg-cell into two parent egg-cells through the action

THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING

I55

of one spermatozoon. If, as sometimes happens, the two parent egg-cells thus produced are not completely divorced from each other but continue more or less extensively united, or even fuse together later, then compound monsters are formed. Again the individuals may be distinct, although joined together, as in the case of the Siamese twins. Such co-twins are always of the same sex, and they are always knit together by homologous aspects of the body, such as dorsum to dorsum, that is back to back, as in the case of the Hungarian twins, or ventral aspect to ventral aspect, that is face to face as in the case of the Siamese twins. To twins of this type we shall refer later.
Now the sea-urchin's egg for many reasons lends itself so very admnirably for all experimental fertilisation purposes that it is looked upon as a classical object and it is found that from one egg twin sea-urchins can be produced at will by merely altering the chemical constitution of the medi'um-viz., sea-water-in which the animal lives and moves and has its being. Incidentally, however, we may here observe that the naturally fertilised sea-urchin's egg will not develop in still water. In order that it may segment and grow, it must be more or less violently and perpetually tossed about and agitated. It is very noteworthy, too, that although during incubation the egg of the domestic hen must not be shaken, yet whether hatched naturally or artificially, it must be turned every day, otherwise the chick will not hatch out. Now there cannot, of course, be the least shadow of a doubt that the metabolic changes associated with the earliest phenomena of life are not the same in all animals. There are many degrees of life, and we can readily appreciate the fact that the unfertilised egg-cells of very analogous and closely related animals might not be equally responsive to chemical and mechanical actions to which they may be subjected. Mathews teaches this, for he informs us that he has induced segmentation and development in the unfertilised eggs of the star
fish by merely shaking these eggs violently in a test tube, but he
observed that the same kind of treatment failed to arouse any sign of life in the unfertilised eggs of Arbacia. Even unicellular organs evince very varying degrees of sensitivity and irritability. If, therefore, we would avoid biological pitfalls, it behoves us to

i56

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. Oliver :

guard against accepting too implicitly some of the dogmas promulgated regarding the way not only in which the germ and sperm elements in man act and re-act upon each other, but may be affected by chemical substances to which in the ordinary course of events they may be exposed, unless those conclusions are tempered with evidence of a more substantial and convincing nature than that based simply and solely upon experiments carried out upon the reproductive cells of animals low in the scale of life.
Driesch and others have taught us that twins may be produced from one fertilised egg-cell in consequence of the first two segmentation cells or blastomeres becoming more or less completely separated from, and developing independently of each other, each acting on its own initiative, and being dominated by its own self-regulatory power. In the case of the sea-urchin's egg this state of affairs can be brought about by merely changing the chemical constitution of the sea water. Herbst observed this when he placed the fertilised eggs of that animal in sea water from which the calcium salts had been removed. Loeb, pursuing further this same revelation, discovered that sea water which had been deprived either of its potassium or sodium ions was equally as capable of producing sea-urchin twins as sea water from which the calcium ion had been abstracted. This authority found, however, that for the success of these experiments it was necessary that the altered sea water should be neutral, or at all events, that it should not be alkaline in reaction. Loeb, describing his procedure, says "the eggs are fertilised as usual in normal sea water, and then after repeated washing in a neutral solution of sodium chloride (of the concentration of sea water), are placed in a neutral solution of potassium chloride and calcium chloride, or of sodium chloride and potassium chloride, or of sodium chloride and calcium chloride, or of sodium chloride and magnesium chloride. The eggs must remain in this mixture until half-an-hour or an hour after they have reached the two-cell-stage. They are then transferred into normal sea water and allowed to develop. From 50 per cent. to go per cent. of the eggs of Strongylocentrotus purpuratus treated in this manner may develop into twins, and these twins

THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING

I57

may remain separate or grow partially together and form double monsters, or heal together so completely that only slight, or even no imperfection indicates that the individual started its career as twins. It is possible also to control the tendency of such twins to grow together by a change in the constitution of the sea water. Use as a twin-producing solution a mixture of sodium, magnesium and potassium chlorides (in the proportion in which these salts exist in sea water), and the tendency of twins to grow together is much more pronounced than if we use simply a mixture of sodium chloride and magnesium chloride." Now, far be it for me to belittle the importance or worth of these and like experiments, but umbrage must be felt at the conclusions which are drawn therefrom. Loeb says: " if for some reason the liquids which surround the human egg a short time before and after the first cell division are slightly acid and at the same time lacking in one of the three important metals, then the conditions for the separation of the first two cells and the formation of identical twins are provided."
Regarding these deductions I have not the slightest hesitation in affirming that it is quite impossible for any clinicist to believe that the production of twins in man, or for that part, in any uniparous mammal, is dependent upon accidental conditiorls and may be determined by a marked deficiency of lime, potassium or sodium, or by any untoward alteration in the relative proportions of these metals which may prevail in the tissues of the female generative tract during the sojourn of a fertilised ovum therein. It is well known that the salts of these metals are essential constituents of all living tissues, and that they are necessary to the irritability and normal reactions of living tissue, but we have as yet no evidence that they are of any value as direct sources of energy. When in any living structure there is either a diminution or an increase in the relative proportions of these metals, then the irritability of the cells concerned is heightenedior lowered. The salts of these metals play also a most important part in regulating the flow of water to and from the tissues, and they serve to maintain a normal composition and osmotic pressure not only in the tissues but in the liquids bathing the tissues. So far as we know,

I58

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. Oliver

however, those metals possess no metabolisable value, and they are incapable of inducing metabolic activity. When in the tissues of the female generative tract calcium salts are present in excess proportionately over potassium and sodium ions, then the
musculature concerned with the process of gestation becomes so resistant and unyielding that a developing embryo experiences the greatest difficulty in battling successfully against its untoward conditions, and sooner or later abortion is likely to result. Furthermore, when the relative proportions of the potassium or sodium ions are unduly deranged, then the irritability of the musculature of the female generative tract is correlatively heightened or lowered, and since under such circumstances the foetal and maternal structures do not act and react harmoniously upon each other abortion is on the slightest provocation extremely apt to ensue. If, therefore, the experiments upon the eggs of the sea urchin justified the conclusions arrived at by Loeb regarding twinning in man, we should then expect the majority of abortions to be either twins or some form of double monster, but this is contrary to every-day experience. Moreover, there is not even a shadow of a possibility that in the human female the medium in which fertilisation takes place could be of the requisite acidity at the right moment, and for just that length of time which is necessary for causing the separation of the first two blastomeres, and could, furthermore, be deficient in just that amount of lime or potassium or sodium which is needful for the causation of twins.
In man twins may be caused in six different ways. i. Through the simultaneous or almost simultaneous rup-
ture of two Graafian follicles and the escape of an egg-cell from
each. 2. Through the rupture of a Graafian follicle containing
two ova.
3. Through the presence of two germinal vesicles or nuclei
in one egg-cell. 4. Through the second polar body re-uniting with the egg-
cell and the first two segmentation cells developing independently of each other.
5. Through the presence of an accessory sperm centrosome

THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING

I59

and the first two segmentation cells being each dominated by a parent centrosome.
6. Through the action of a spermatozoon possessing two nuclei.
From an inheritance point of view all interest in the question of twinning centres in the last three causal modes, where the twins are due to the more or less complete separation and independent development of the first two segmentation cells. In

AC

B

FIG g.-Dwarf and double embryos of Amphioxus. A. Isolated blastomere of the two-cell stage segmenting like an entire egg. B. Twin gastrulas from a single egg. C. Double cleavage resulting from the partial separation, by shaking, of the blastomeres of the two-cell stage. D.E.F. Double gastrulas arising from such forms as the last.

I60

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. Oliver :

order that we may be enabled to interpret this procedure aright, it behoves us to glean what enlightenment we can from experiments upon animals bearing on the questions of the equipotentiality and totipotentiality of the first two blastomeres as formed under ordinary circumstances. Herlitzka informs us that by mechanical means alone he has effected a complete separation of the first two blastomeres of the Newt's egg, and has found that each of these blastomeres thus separated will develop into a com-
plete but dwarf larva. Wilson also has isolated mechanically
the first two segmentation cells of the Amphioxus, and this observer, too, remarked that each cell thus separated behaved from beginning to end like a primary parent egg-cell, but that the larva resulting thereby were only half the normal size. Zoja again has not only separated the first two segmentation cells and got larvae therefrom, but in the hydroid Clytia he has developed larvae from segmentation cells separated in the four cell, the eight cell and even the sixteen cell stage. This observer also remarked, however, that the larve thus produced were dwarfed, those from the four cell and eight cell stages being respectively about one-fourth and one-eighth the usual size. Experiments of this character teach us that in the case of some animals the first two segmentation cells at least contain all the formative and regulatory forces requisite for the production of new organisms. Hertwig, who agrees with this opinion, considers that the left or the right blastomere uinder ordinary circumstances merely develops into a left or a right half of the organism because of the polarity or mutual relationship of these cells to each other. In corroboration of this tenet an experiment of Schultze's may be cited, for this authority observed that by inverting the Frog's egg when it was in the two-celled stage and
keeping, it in the inverted position until development was well advanced he could thus cause more or less complete double monsters to be formed, see Fig. 9. The result thus obtained is due, no doubt, to the polarity of the two blastomeres being altered by inverting the egg. In spite, however, of the large amount of experimental evidence which can be adduced in favour of the view that the first two blastomeres are most probably always both equipotential and totipotential, Weismann nevertheless asserts

THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING

I6I

that the nuclei of the first two segmentation cells cannot possess the same character of idioplasm as the parent cell. Facts generally do not support Weismann in this belief and the majority of authorities are agreed that conjoint and identical twins are due to the splitting of the primary egg-cell into two parent egg-cells. To me, moreover, there seems to be no apparent reason why twins of different sex may not be similarly caused, for it not infrequently happens that a woman gives birth to twins on
three occasions, and as two of these sets may be bi-female and one set male and female we may assume that all these sets are caused in avery similar manner. Into an explanation of the way in which the three different sets of co-twins may be produced we have not time to enter. I am, however, disposed to believe that boy and girl co-twins are likely to be produced when the second polar body re-unites with the segmentation cell; that female cotwins are likely to be caused when an accessory centrosome is present; and that male co-twins are most probably the work of aH spermatozoon endowed with two nuclei. Be this as it may, we know that human twins are not more likely to be dwarf than children born singly, so we naturally assume that twins are not caused simply and solely by the splitting effected by an ordinary germ and an ordinary sperm cell. To ensure the separation and full development of the first two blastomeres into new organisms some extra substance is necessary, and this, as we have already remarked, may either be a something retained in the egg-cell or a something introduced by the sperm element.
We have evidence, too, that in such uniparous mammals as the mare, the cow, and the sheep, there exists an inherited tendency to twinning. In the sheep, in fact, this proclivity is so very pronounced in certain breeds that it practically assumes the proportion of a fixed hereditary character and it is highly probable that a careful study of the sperm cells in the whitefaced breed will eventually throw valuable light on the subject of twinning.
Conjoint twins, as we have already observed, are always either bi-female or bi-male-most commonly bi-female-and they are always knit together by homologous aspects of the body. Fortunately for the individuals concerned co-twins of this nature

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. Oliver :

seldom survive their birth. There are extant, however, the records of three such sets of twins which lived for a greater or less length of time, and regarding the question of twin inheri-
tances we may glean from these abnormal cases important and
not otherwise obtainable information, because in virtue of their
untoward circumstances twins of this kind are to all intents and purposes exposed to exactly the same influences throughout their whole existence, spending as they do their post-natal as well as their pre-natal life perpetually in the presence of each other. The three conjoint twins just referred to may be designated respectively the Hungarian, the Hindu, and the Siamese twins. The two former were each bi-female; the latter were bi-male. The life history of the Hungarian twins is full of interest. They were very intimately knit together-organically even by the bowel-in the gluteal and loin regions, and they were consequently placed back to back. Their progression under ordinary circumstances was a forward movement on the part of one and a backward movement on the part of the other, but for more rapid movement each in turn carried the other on her back. Up to the age of six the minds of these twins acted very much in unison, and physically they resembled each other so closely that the one could hardly be distinguished from the other. At this age, unfortunately, one was seized with hemiplegia-a form of paralysis affecting one half of the body but which tends as a rule towards more or less complete recovery-and thereafter this twin
was never physically nor mentally equal to her sister. This affliction interfered slightly with the growth of the affected twin and she remained throughout life the smaller of the two. She, nevertheless, like her sister, spoke five different languages. At the age of nine they providentially entered a convent, and spent therein the remaining thirteen years of their lives. Their immunities and susceptibilities to infectious diseases were undoubtedly alike. At one time they were simultaneously infected with measles, whilst at another they were simultaneously infected with small-pox. It is most noteworthy, however, that they did not menstruate simultaneously. At the age of twenty-two, the more robust twin contracted pneumonia-inflammation of the lungs-and although there was free and extensive vascular inter-

THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING

r63

communication between the two sisters, yet this did not suffice to sustain life in the affected one, and so sympathetically interdependent were these two lives, that immediately the one sister died, the other also perished.
The Hindu twins were likewise bi-fernale, but they were joined together anteriorly by the chest and upper half of the abdomen, and they consequently opposed each other face to face. They were more ciosely united than but were similarly circumstanced to the Siamese twins, and as we shall discuss the latter especially we need not notice the Hindu twins further than to state that these two sisters were physically and mentally very like each other.
The Siamese twins were bi-male, and were born of Chinese parents. Like the Hindu twins, they were knit together by the chest and upper half of the abdomen, and they consequently faced each other. The tissues, however, which bound the Siamese twins together were more extensile and more loose than are the tissues which usually bind co-twins of this nature together, and to them this was a matter of great consequence. On this account it was possible for one brother to adopt a somewhat reclining posture whilst the other maintained a more or less erect attitude. Apart from a slight disparity in their stature, these twins were throughout life very like each other, both physically and mentally. To circumstances they adapted themselves most marvellously. For all purposes in which two hands are generally employed these brothers each made use of an opposing upper limb, that is, one twin always utilised the right whilst the other always utilised the left hand. To all intents and purposes the remaining upper limb was discarded by each twin, and it was thin and ill-nourished compared with its fellow.
As the union between their bodies was not very close these twins were enabled to walk in a somewhat oblique manner, and in adopting this mode of progression they here again, as in the case of the upper limbs, wvere each restricted to the use more particularly of one leg. The remaining lower limb of each
was seldom actively employed for any purpose. In consequence of these manceuvres the right half of the brain of one twvin was

i64

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. Oliver:

co-partner with the left half of the brain of the other twin, and the two brains and two bodies acted so in unison that they practically lost their individuality, and virtually became merged into one. Here, in fact, were twin souls with a single brain and a single body, and this condition of affairs was only rendered possible on account of their abnormal union, and because they started on their voy-age through life each possessed of the same mental and physical inheritances.
We have already taken notice of the fact that the carrier and
transmitter of all inheritances is supposed to be the substance known as chromatin, but a careful scrutiny of the many experiments which tend to throw light on this very vexed point leaves us with much misgiving on the matter. Time, however, will not permit us to dw-ell at present upon this and other problems connected with the chromosomes, so we hasten to deal very ctursorily with a few pertinent questions relating to the germ plasm itself.
In considering the constitution of the germ plasm we must ever remember that man in common with the majority of animals is merely a congeries of unicellular organisms banded together, and undertaking each such duties as are required of them, not only for their own good separately and collectively, but for the well-being and benefit also of the species to which they belong. At the present time there exists undoubtedly an overweening desire to attribute all the phenomena of life to the action of forces and materials of an inorganic nature, but if we dispassionately contemplate the behaviour of many unicellular organisms we find it impossible to acquiesce with this dictum. Time was when the epithelial cells lining the intestinal tract were looked upon as inactive bodies, and the membrane constituted of them was viewed as a mere filter which discharged its functions in a purely mechanical manner. Investigations, however, prove that each epithelial cell in the bowel behaves as any independent living unicellular organism might do, grasping its nutrient materials and dealing with them in accordance with its inherited precept. This holds good, not only with regard to the action of cells concerned immediately in sustaining the life of the individual, but applies with equal force to those cells which may be called

THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING

I65

upon to furnish the requisite food for any progeny which may be
begotten of this individual, and we may truly marvel at the faultless manner in which each epithelial cell of a mammary gland abstracts from the blood organic and inorganic substances
in the exact proportions necessary to supply the needs of any offspring which has for a greater or less length of time to rely exclusively upon the mother's body for its nourishment. We know, moreover, that the relative proportions of the many constituents of the diverse mammary secretions vary according to the specific inheritances of the different animals. Now, in consonance with a multitude of facts, we have much justification for believing that the reproductive cells, which by the way are extremely refractory, are nothing more nor less than somatic cells. In opposition to this hypothesis we have that advocated more
especially by Weismann, and which is, that a part of the specific germ plasm is not used up for constructive purposes, but is reserved unchanged for the formation of future generations. Weismann,
who is, in fact, the author of this theory of the " immortality of the germ plasm " states that" a continuity of the germ cells does not now take place, but this does not prevent us from adopting the theory of the continuity of the germ plasm." We find, however, no lack of evidence that cells endowed with powers different in no respect to those of true reproductive cells are nothing more nor less than somatic cells. It is common knowledge that plants are easily raised from pieces of a Begonia leaf as well as from pieces of a potato tuber, and that in the many cases in which cuttings will produce roots, the roots and plants thus obtained differ in no way from those reared from seeds.
Consider, too, what obtains in many animals. Corals for example can produce new animals, either from buds or from ova and spermatozoa, and this is likewise true of certain Annelids and Ascidians. Or take the simplest form of Coelentera, an animal with a sac-like body, open at one end, and closed at the other. It possesses an ectoderm or outer body-wall layer and an endoderm or inner body-wall layer. Here the reproductive cells are derived indiscriminately, either from the ectodermic or the endodermic layer, and they are nothing more nor less than somatic cells. If, moreover, we cut a Hydra longitudinally into
4

166

EUGENICS REVIEW

J. Oliver:

two halves, each half wili, in the short space of twenty-four hour., form itself into a fully equipped Hydra, and will thereafter be indisting,uishable from any other Hydra. A Hydra may in fact be cut into several pieces and each piece can develop into a new animal.
It is well known, too, that if an earthworm be cut into two pieces, the piece carrying the head forthwith develops a tail, and the portion possessing the tail in like manner rapidly produces for itself a head, and thus two complete and functionally active earthworms are formed. It is extremely remarkable, however, that if an earthworm be cut into three pieces, the head and tail portions behave as though the animal had been cut into two pieces, but the middle piece is endowed with Ino regenerative power at all, and it consequently soon perishes. Many other animals possess regenerative powers and such facts teach us that, at least in some animals, the body cells possess reproductive force and reproductive material, and should convince us too, that between somatic and reproductive cells there is no wide gulf fixed.
There are also other facts which preclude us from accepting the theory of a continuity, and of an immortality of the germ plasm. Take the question of the development even of the ovaries. If we are to believe in the continuity of the germ plasm, does it not seem very remarkable that in the majority of higher animals, two blastemic masses instead of one should be set apart for reproductive purposes, and that these two blastemic masses, instead of uniting to form one organ as happens with the two blastemic masses which go to form the liver, should become so divorced from each other that eventually one becomes lodged in the right and the other in the left half of the body cavity. So interdependent, moreover, are the reproductive cells, and the blastemic mass which goes to form the uterus, that if the right or the left blastemic mass requisite for producing an ovary should be wanting, then the corresponding half of the uterus is also absent. If, furthermore, we are to believe -in the immortality of the germ plasm, how comes it that, although the majority of birds start life with two ovaries possessing the same constitutio11, one only is destined to become functionally active.

THE HEREDITARY TENDENCY TO TWINNING

i67

Again, there is overwhelming evidence that the reproductive glands behave like and are subject to exactly the same physio-
logical and pathological influences as any other somatic structure.
The cells of the Thyroid gland secrete a substance which exercises a mighty influence over all metabolic processes in the body, not excluding, even those of the reproductive glands. Langhans, who has examined carefully the ovaries of adult Cretins, informs us that in consequence of Cretinism the follicles are ill-developed, and very few show any evidence of having advanced beyond the fcetal state. That the Thyroid gland exercises a powerful influence over the metabolic processes in the ovaries and reproductive tissues generally has been proved by Lanz. This authority took two young hens of the same brood, and he excised from one the Thyroid. It was then observed that the fowl which had been deprived of its Thyroid did not grow like the other, and that its plumage was meagre and lustreless. It was further
remarked that the laying power of the two hens was different. Four months after the operation the hen which had no Thyroid laid one egg, and this egg, the only one ever laid by that hen, possessed not only an extremely thin shell, but weighed ten times less than any ordinary hen's egg.
If then, the cells of such organs as the Thyroid, the Suprarenal and the Pituitary gland can influence all the cells throughout the body, there is no apparent reason why the cells of the ovary or the testicle should Iiot be influenced by all the important cells of the body, possibly through the nerve cells. As, moreover, the epithelial cells of the mammary glands, which, by the way, are merely modified sweat glands, can abstract from the blood with the utmost precision just those materials which are requisite and necessary for sustaining life, there appears to be no reason why the reproductive cells should not be capable of abstracting and transmuting from the blood those male and female materials which are essential for the metabolic activities which are life when such materials are brought together through the affinities of their respective male and female agents, and are energised under advantageous circumstances.

