REVIEWS OF BOOKS

has collected a vast amount of disparate material

(52 pages of unclassified references) for which

many people will be grateful to him. They would

have been even more grateful if, by cutting out

dead wood and a less discursive way of presen-

tation, he had presented the material in half its

present bulk.

H. GRUNEBERG

COLOUR BLINDNESS
Kalmus, H. Diagnosis and Genetics of Defective Colour Vision. Oxford, 1965. Pergamon. Pp.
x+114. Price 50s.
THIS IS AN authoritative work on the detection and differentiation of types of colour blindness and their inheritance. It opens with a brief history of the discovery of colour vision defects, which is believed to have started with Plato. Details of the history of the subject have been published several times before, but it is useful for this book to open with Dr. Kalmus's account of them. Then he proceeds to a very clear statement of the essentials of colour theory based on the trichromatic system. He considers that those aspects of colour vision and colour blindness which accord with Hering's four-colour theory or modifications of it do not arise at the receptor level.
The next chapters deal with subjective aspects of defective colour vision, types of defect and their compounds and interactions. Dr. Kalmus accepts three degrees of protan defect (protanopia, extreme protanomaly and protanomaly), and of deutan defect (deuteranopia, extreme deuteranomaly and deuteranomaly), but he thinks, as the reviewer does, that there must be mord than three abnormal genes in each group. It is interesting to have his notes on cone and rod monochromats, night blindness and tritan defects. He gives useful tables of the possible frequencies of female gene combinations for the one and two locus theories.
The chapters on the detection of colour blindness are likely to be of considerable interest to field workers and others engaged in research and practical problems of colour blindness in industry and elsewhere. Dr. Kalmus mentions verbal tests, description of the spectrum, lantern tests, the observation of Maxwell's spot and

pseudo-isochromatic tests in Chapter VI. Ano-
maloscopes are discussed in the next chapter, together with Farnsworth's 100-Hue and Dicho-
tomous Tests.
The reviewer still considers that it is unsatis-
factory to base anomaloscope testing on the principles (a) that the subject of the test himself
manipulates the controls, and (b) that he makes settings ofthe red-green mixture to match various
brightnesses of the yellow taken more or less at
random. The essential measurements to be made
are the two limits of the matching range. To do
this the yellow must first be matched in bright-
ness with the red-green mixture when a colour
difference is apparent, and then taken right
through the matching range until the appearance of the other colour difference, several times each way, step by step, always equating brightness
before a report of colour equality is accepted. The mid-point is the middle of the matching range, whether it is small or large. For dichromats the matching range extends to the ends of the scale and the concept of the mid-point becomes arbitrary.
The reviewer and others have described extensively the use of the anomaloscope in this way, and, if this technique were adopted, many difficulties and discontents would be overcome. We should not continue to feel, as Dr. Kalmus does, like many others, that the anomaloscope is unsatisfactory and must be supplemented by pseudo-isochromatic tests. The same applies to other anomaloscope tests, such as the yellowblue and blue-green equations.
The remainder of the book deals with the hypothetical pathology of colour vision defects and the problems of the genetics of sex-linked defects in which there are two loci (protan and deutan) and allelic genes at each locus having their characteristic dominance orders, which are normal (most dominant), protanomalous, extreme protanomalous and protanopic, at the one locus, and normal (most dominant) deuteranomalous, extreme deuteranomalous and deuteranopic at the other. Dr. Kalmus introduces a set of gene symbols which will be useful, but he does not mention that of Walls and Mathews (1952) or of the reviewer (1951).
The varying frequency of defective colour vision in different human groups is considered,

31

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and also the possible influence of relaxation of

natural selection through civilization. The sup-

posed colour blindness of many mammals, pig-

mentation and colour vision, colour blindness

in art and industry, and colour naming in

different languages are among the further

problems considered in Chapter XII. It is not

necessary to add that this is a most valuable

book.

R. W. PICKFORD

SOCIOLOGY
Benjamin, Harry and Masters, R. E. L. Prostitution and Morality. London, 1965. Souvenir Press. Pp. x+495. Price 70s.
THIS BOOK IS sub-titled "A definitive report on the prostitute in contemporary society and an analysis of the causes and effects of the suppression of prostitution". Some qualification of these words is needed, however, if an accurate description of its contents and the authors' intention is to be conveyed. "Contemporary society" means, for all practical purposes, the United States; and the reference to "the suppression of prostitution" discloses the themefor this is, in essence, a frontal attack upon the official legal attitude of all the states in the Union, which is Prohibitionist. The Prohibitionist system aims at the prohibition of prostitution in all its aspects, and is now the policy of only a few states other than America; most countries favour the system rather confusingly termed Abolitionism-that is, the abolition of all regulation of prostitution, whether specifically by law or by the establishment of brothels and the operation of a police des moeurs. Abolitionism is the system favoured in this country, and the authors regard it as the least obnoxious method of dealing with prostitution by the conventional means and processes of law; but in reality they would accept nothing less than complete toleration of the prostitute and all her works, and their final chapter, "Sex as Service" indicates concisely their view of the matter. Most men, they contend, need regular coition; but not all can obtain it. The prostitute can offer a coital service which could buttress the cooling marriage, assist the therapy of the psychiatrist or physician, minister to the prisoner and the member of the armed services, and contribute to the education

of the young-if only moralists and the like
were not so blindly prejudiced towards her!
The case for toleration is supported by what may be felt to be a needless volume of "porno-
graphy" (using the word in its strict sense).
Neither the material nor the tone are those of
a "report"-an objective, factual statement in
the neutral language of a sociological document.
All aspects of American prostitution are racily
depicted, and are garnished with case histories;
we certainly learn a lot about the subject, but
it is not so certain that we are the wiser, or that the authors' plea for toleration is enhanced
thereby. The historical aspects of the question are also briefly treated, but unfortunately the complete absence of specific and detailed documentation makes it difficult to check the state-
ments made, some of which appear to one historian of sexual relation to be of doubtful
accuracy. The weakest feature of the book, however, is
that though it purports to deal with the moral aspects of prostitution it never, in fact, shows any sign of coming to grips with the real issues. The word "morality" appears in the title, but not in the index, and any references to the subject are incidental. It is assumed that sexual gratification is an almost universal human need which
must be met, and the authors follow the logic of their argument to the point of justifying a "sex service for the female". But this assumption is not subjected to any rigorous criticism. Coition, like all else involving two human beings, is a personal relation-and one of a peculiarly intimate and searching kind; yet there is no discussion of the nature of relation as such, and of sexual relation in particular-and no attempt to examine seriously the contention that prostitution is essentially an exploitive relationship in which man and woman betray their humanity. It has been argued that coition should always be an act of love (in other than the sentimental or superficially romantic sense) and an expression of a common life. Such a view of coition implies an outright rejection of prostitution as a moral
act, and it has been seriously propounded by others than the straight-laced fanatics whom the authors condemn. It is a view certainly open to discussion, and no book dealing with prostitution and morality in a responsible way should neglect

32

