CORRESPONDENCE

The Eugenics Society is not responsible for opinions expressed by correspondents

CORRECTION

Almost all members of the Society will agree

Internal Factors in Evolution by L. L. Whyte

Mr. Whyte twice misquoted his reviewer in

the letter which was printed in these columns in

December (1965, 57, 208-9): "or of sickle trait"

should read "or for the sickle-cell trait". "It

would have been better if this book had never

been published" should read "It would have

been better if this book had not been published".

The reviewer does not maintain that the book

would never have been useful in the past, only

that is not useful at the present time.

It is much regretted that these misquotations

were not corrected before Mr. Whyte's letter was

printed.

EDITOR

with this thesis and welcome Professor Titmuss's initiative. The correct principle is that once a child is born the community must do its best to minimize any medical, social or educational handicaps to which the child is prone because of either genes or family environment.
Professor Titmuss's second and more controversial thesis, mainly set out in the first
article, is that the present system of tax allow-
ances for children is not in the public interest.
It encourages those with larger incomes to have
larger families and this is undesirable at a time when Britian is experiencing a western-type pop-
ulation explosion. Such families tend to set the
fashion. He wrote:

All the evidence points in fact to a rise in

THE POPULATION EXPLOSION
To the Editor, The Eugenics Review

the average ultimate family-size of women
married at all ages under forty-five. What may also be significant is that fertility rates have

Sir,-Under the general heading of "The Popu- increased most sharply in the more middle-

lation Explosion" two articles by Professor class, non-manual regions of the country,

Richard Titmuss appeared in The Times last and among women married over the age of

October. The first was entitled "Child Endow- twenty-five. In the taxable income range of

ment Reappraisal?" and the second "Plan for £5,000 and over in 1962-63 about 22 per cent

Children in Poverty". Professor Titmuss, a of all children for whom tax allowances were

member of the Eugenics Society's Council, had claimed were in families of four or more.

two theses of much interest to eugenists. One Nearly half were in families of three or more.

thesis, that of the second article, was the need On the face of it, these seem high proportions

for further help for children in low income for the upper-income classes. They are

families. He wrote:

probably surprising figures to those who, in

Quantitatively, the underprivileged family the 1940s and early 1950s were deploring the

of to-day is predominantly the family of three, decline in family size among these classes.

four or five children. The primary cause of In consequence the projected increase in popu-

their hardships is to found in low earnings. lation for the next thirty-six years was two-and-

A secondary cause of child poverty is due to a-half times as large as in the last thirty-six years.

the absence of a father, or to the fact that the He continues:

father or mother is disabled, seriously handi- For this to happen in one of the most

capped, or chronically ill.

densely-populated and congested countries of

and went on to propose that:

the world could present any government with

One possible answer might be to reduce tax appalling problems of urban planning and

allowances by stages and to increase family renewal, land use, housing and traffic manage-

allowances. But could the latter be raised to ment, to say nothing of the difficulties of

levels adequate for poorer families without staffing the schools, the hospitals and many

the cost to the Exchequer becoming prohibi- other services. The physical and psychological

tive? An alternative approach is to extend the disciplines required to maintain any semblance

benefit of the tax allowance to those below of environmental and social order might well

the tax-paying level, and to accompany this diminish the applicability of market principles

measure with a series of other changes in the in various sectors of the economy. There can

structure of benefits and subsidies.

therefore be few thoughtful observers pre-

53

