REVIEWS OF BOOKS

rapidly acquired speech, and his IQ score rose. Monsieur A. Isambert describes the develop-

At eight he entered a school for the blind, and at ment of the well-known "Schools for Parents"

sixteen the Royal Normal College for the Blind. which have been successfully developed in

At eighteen he was a well-poised young man France since the last war, having been founded

with considerable charm and good looks, and in 1929 as part of a scheme to overcome the

wide interests. The remarkable change in mental indifference of parents to their children's sexual

and emotional development was due to skilled and emotional problems. The school in Paris

teaching, warm interest and affection.

at first concentrated on teaching parents about

child development, based on psychoanalytic

HILDA LEWIS principles, but was later drawn into much

broader fields of educational psychology and

sociology. It also provides personal psychological

Aspects of Family Mental Health in Europe. By various authors. Public Health Papers, No. 28. Geneva, 1965. WHO. Pp. 124. Price 8s. 6d.

help for the parents themselves, marriage guidance, and advice for young people. M. Isambert enumerates similar organizations in
other European countries, but comments on the relatively slight interest shown in Britain.

THIS BOOK, CONTAINING papers written by Among other papers dealing with the role of

psychiatrists, therapists and other workers from individual and group psychotherapy in clearing

a number of European countries, is evidence of up family upsets, an account by Drs. Jirina

the current widespread interest in the family. Knoblochova and Ferdinand Knobloch of the

The first paper is a stimulating account by methods practised at the Psychiatric Department

Dr. H. Hoffmeyer of the work done for the of the University Polyclinic, Prague, shows how

mother and the family particularly in Scandi- far such efforts have advanced in Central

navian countries, through family protection Europe.

schemes, and specifically in Denmark through The British contributions include an account

the famous "Mothers' Aid Centres". These of the Family Discussion Bureau at the Tavistock

centres provide legal, social, medical and Institute of Human Relations, and of the Child

psychiatric services for unmarried as well as Therapy Clinic at Hampstead, described by

married women. They have a duty to interview Mrs. L. Pincus and Dr. Joseph Sandler

and help women seeking abortion: to provide respectively.

contraceptive advice, to supervise adoptions,

HILDA LEWIS

to support with financial and other aid over-

burdened mothers, and to help resolve family

discord. There is much in these schemes which

ABORTION

is relevant to the revision of our own abortion laws and the Seebohm Committee's inquiry into better ways of integrating our local authority

Abortion: An Ethical Discussion. London, 1965.
Church Information Office. Pp. 70. Price 4s. 6d.

and personal social services.

THIS REPORT IS the work of a committee set up

Among the papers dealing with practical by the Board for Social Responsibility of the

social welfare, there is an interesting account by Church Assembly of the Church of England,

a psychiatrist of the slowly changing situation under the chairmanship of Canon I. T. Ramsey,

in the employment of women in Spain-a Nolloth Professor of the Philosophy of the

country particularly late in making use of this Christian Religion at Oxford, the secretary being

reservoir of labour and talent. Various suppor- the Reverend G. R. Dunstan. It is lucid, impartial,

tive schemes and centres to protect the family and thorough, and presents a cogent argument

from breakdown have already been found for a limited reform of the present law, while

necessary, although at the same time the stopping short of the proposals made by Lord

cultural value of widening the women's horizons Silkin in the Bill which has recently been before

has been recognized.

the House of Lords.

167

