THE RELATION BETWEEN EYE-COLOUR AND DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION

By CYRIL BURT, M.A., D.Sc., L1.D.
Professor of Psychology, University of London

IN an early paper in the EUGENICS
REVIEW* dealing with inheritable char-
acteristics in man, I cited as suitable instances where systematic study might throw new light on the relations between physical and mental constitution, the pigmentation of the iris, on the one hand, and defects of colour-vision, on the other. Many psychologists have believed that differences in hair- and eye-colour are connected,
though no doubt indirectly, with differences in mental and temperamental qualities; and among the latter, differences in sensory discrimination are the easiest to detect and
assess. I In conformity with these suggestions, during inquiries on backward and subnormal children carried out for the London County Council and other authorities, I have endeavoured to secure records of the more obvious inheritable physical characteristics and to apply systematic tests of colour-vision, in addition to the usual tests of more complex abilities and traits. In nearly every survey I found consistent indications of a correlation between pigmentation and colour-discrimination; but the size of the correlation was too small to be accepted as conclusive without a far more extensive inquiry. The results, however, more recently obtained during the examination of recruits for the fighting services provide material which well repays analysis from this particular standpoint.
It. is the object of this paper to summarize the evidence so far available, and to review the possible hypotheses which that evidence suggests, in the hope that readers may be sufficiently interested to submit further data, in the shape of pedigrees, family records and individual cases* for psychological investigation.
* I9I2, 4, 36-50.

Defective Colour-Vision among Children;
School Surveys
In my earlier surveys of school children,* I relied mainly on Stilling's pseudo-isochromatic charts; these can be used as a group-test, and borderline cases thus detected were examined individually by wool, bead or lantern tests, and in the more doubtful instances by tests of colour mixture. Among the boys I found 3 - I per cent suffering from a defect of colour-vision sufficiently pronounced to be regarded as " partial colourblindness" (nearly all instances of redgreen colour-blindness, with darkening of the red end of the spectrum in about one-third of the cases). In addition there were another 3 per cent suffering from milder deficiencies of colour-vision of various degrees and types -e.g., less pronounced forms of red-green. confusion and various anomalous deviations.t Among the girls only o-2 per cent were found to be suffering from " partial colour-blindness"; but cases of weak or anomalous colour-vision were not uncommon (I-3 per cent), and appeared disproportionately frequent among relatives of colourblind boys. Altogether, it will be seen, defects of colour-vision, innate and probably inheritable, and often severe enough to constitute a grave handicap in practical life if they pass unrecognized, are far more fre-
*Cf. The Backward Child, p. 217. t The large proportion of defective cases included in,
Table I is due to the fact that many were referred by teachers and that additional efforts were made to investigate the brothers and sisters of cases of deficiency found in the survey. I should like to emphasize what I have said elsewhere (I.C., p. 217), that, in addition to the more familiar types of colour-blindness, there are a number of deficiencies " difficult to classify under the usual headings'"; some of these rnay be regarded as extreme deviations in the normal distribution of ordinary trichromatic vision ; but others-the " red weak," the " green weak," and other anomalous forms (as well as definite red-green blindness)-differ qualitatively as well as quantitatively.

'49

I50 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

quent and 'far more various than has commonly been supposed. The total figure for males cannot be far short of 8-io per cent.
For colour of hair and eyes, a grade was assigned on a sevenfold scale, the various degrees being roughly defined in accordance with a normal distribution, with the probable error as unit (giving frequencies in round figures of 5, I0, 20, 30, 20, I0, 5 per cent). The numbers observed are shown in Table I. The figures after eye-colour denote the specimens in the Martin scale correspond-
ing to each grade.*

seven categories for eye-colour to a twofold classification (dark and not dark), and apply the tetrachoric method, we obtain much the same figure, namely 0 - I93. The correlation would therefore seem to be of the same low order as correlations between other physical and mental characteristics, such -as bodytype and temperamental tendency.
For hair cQlour the correlation with defective colour-vision was somewhat smaller, O I0o4-a figure which in a group of this size is well below the level of statistical signifi-
cance. Here and elsewhere, on partialling out

TABLE I

DISTRIBUTION OF EYE-COLOUR AMONG CHILDREN WITH NORMAL AND DEFICIENT COLOUR-VISION

Eye-Colour

C o0o u r-V is ion

Grading

Martin

Normal

Deficient

Total

Scale Number Per cent Number Per cent Number Per cent

Blue-Grey

... ... ... I6, 15, 14

24

4.6

2

i*6 26

40-

Light Grey ... ... ... I2

48 9.2 7 5-6 55 8-5

Light Mixed ... ... ... 13, 8

122

23.2

2I

i6*9 143

22-0

Medium Mixed ... ... ... II, 10, 9 I64 3I12 39 31'5 203 3I.3

Dark Mixed ... ... ... 7, 6

89 I7'0 28 22-6 117 i8*o

Medium Brown... ... ... 5, 4

6o II.4 x8 14.5

78 12*o

Dark Brown ... ... ... 3, 2, 1

I8

3'4

9

7-3 27

4.2

Total

... ... ...

525 IOO 0 124 1000o 649 100I 0

In the first three categories (light-eyed) the correlations of both hair-pigmentation

there are decidedly fewer colour-blind children and colour-vision with eye-pigmentation,

than we should expect; in the last three that between colour-vision and hair-pig-

(dark-eyed) decidedly more. Applying the mentation is reduced virtually to zero. So

usual test for statistical significance, we find far as the present data go, therefore, any

X2=i1i8; with 6 degrees of freedom this association between defective colour-vision

gives P o-o68. In non-technical language and dark hair-colour is apparently due

that means that the odds are only I4 to I simply to the fact that both happen to be

against such a set of differences arising by associated with dark eye-colour.

the chances of random sampling; so that

the relationship cannot be accepted as con- Defective Colour-Vision among Adults

clusively established.

(a) Regional Surveys. During the present

It is instructive to estimate the probable amount of correlation, supposing it to exist. For purposes of calculation we may assume that both pigmentation and variations in colour-discrimination are distributed more or less in accordance with the normal curve. With the biserial method we find a correlation of 0* I74; if we ptefer to reduce the

war, results obtained with the Ishihara tests, when applied to naval candidates, have exhibited remarkable differences at different centres. The investigators inferred that there must be " genuine geographical differences in the distribution of colour defect, analogous to differences in the distribution of blood groups or intelligence"; and the data
were referred to me with an inquiry for a

* Prof. Riddell has drawn attention to the fact that possible explanation. On plotting a map to

the various sets issued by the manufacturers are not quite the same (" Classification of Eye Colour," Ann.

show the relative frequencies in various

Eug., 1942, 11, 252).

regions of Great Britain, I found that they

EYE-COLOUR AND DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION

151

at once displayed a striking correspondence
with the known distribution of hair- and eye-
colour. The proportions ranged from 4 per cent in S.E. Scotland to io per cent in Mid-
Wales. Grouping the figures by counties, and correlating the percentages in each
county with the best available estimates for pigmentation, I found a correlation between
defective colour-vision and dark eye-colour
of 0 73, and between defective colour-vision and dark hair-colour of o 62. A correlation
of 0-73 based on groups might easily be produced by correlations of about O-I5 to o020 among individuals.* In passing it will
be observed that the high percentage
reported for the country as a whole (7 per
cent) confirms what was noted during the school surveys-namely that defects of
colour-vision are far more numerous than the figures usually quoted for colour-
blindness might lead one to suppose. (b) Individual Surveys. From the Royal
Air Force, data are available for over 3,ooo individuals. Every candidate was first examined with the Ishihara tests; and
those making more than a few slips were
subjected to two lantern tests.tj- The dis-
* Burt, Cyril, Local Differences in Defective Colour Vision (Memorandum to Senior Psychologist's Department, Admiralty, Aug. 3ISt, 1943). For help with the estimates of pigmentation, I am much indebted to Dr. Bowen, Lecturer on Anthropology in the. University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, and to one of myresearch students, Miss Crawford, who has also assisted in the calculations: a more detailed analysis of the data, with map, is contained in her thesis on the subject (Psychological Laboratory, University College, London). Through the kindness of the Editor of Man I have recently received more up-to-date figures for pigmentation for certain parts of the country; and we should be most grateful to receive data on this point from readers of this journal.
t The data were obtained by Dr. J. Grieve, who was good enough to send me the figures for statistical analysis. Since, in individual studies, such as the present, the grading for hair- and eye-colour is dependent on the investigator's judgment, and the reader may suspect the possibility of unconscious bias, it may be noted that Dr. Grieve's expectations differed from mine. He himself had formed " the clinical impression that defective colour-vision was more common in redhaired candidates"; but from an inspection of his data at a later stage he concluded, not only that this "clinical impression was ill-founded," but also that "there was no relationship between the presence of poor colour perception and the nature of the pigmentation of the iris." Our more detailed tabulations of the results, with a full statistical analysis, will be found in an article on " Defective Colour Vision in relation to Pigmentation" (Man, I945, 82, I03 f.).

tribution of eye-colour and visual deficiency is summarized in Table II. " Dark-eyed" includes all whose irises show a " medium grey" or " dark grey" background together with "medium brown " or " dark brown" colouring; "light-eyed " includes the remainder.

TABLE II

ASSOCIATION OF DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION WITH EYE-COLOUR: ADULTS

Colour-Vision

Percentage

Eye-colour Normal Defective Total Defective Light-Eyed ... 2,46I 322 2,783 I i*6

Dark-Eyed ... 368 8o 448 17-9

Total ... 2,829 .402 3,231 Diff. 6*3

It.will be seen that among the dark-eyed
the number of colour-defectives is more than
half as many again as among the light-eyed. The difference observed (6 - 3 per cent) is nearly four times its standard error (± i * 69)
and therefore fully significant. The odds against such a difference arising from the fluctuations of sampling are about 50,000
to I.
To compare the amount of correlation with that obtained for children, I have reclassified the records into seven grades for
eye-colour (Table III).; but, since the
method of recording eye-colour differed somewhat from my own, it was not always
possible to make each grade exactly identical
with the corresponding grade in Table I. With the larger numbers now available, we can here calculate not only the percentage from each grade found among the normals
and the colour-defectives, but also (what is
far more suggestive) the percentage of
colour-defectives found in each grade; with one exception, the increase is steady and striking.
A biserial correlation based on the seven-
fold classification yields a coefficient* of
O I34: a tetrachoric correlation based on the fourfold table above yields a figure of o I62. The correlation for adults is thus of
the same order as that found for children.
For hair-colour the correlation is much lower, and statistically non-significant. To some extent it appears to be reduced by the fact that, in these islands, dark hair is not

152 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

TABLE III

DISTRIBUTION OF EYE-COLOUR AMONG ADULTS WITH NORMAL AND DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION

Eye-Colour
Blue-Grey Light Grey or Mied ... Moderate Grey or Mixed Dark Grey or Mixed ... Medium Brown ... ... Dark Brown ... ...

Normal

Number Per cent

362 I2*8

... 814

28-8

... 888

3I.4

... 397

14*0

... 313

II*I

... 55

1n9

Colour-Vision

Defective

Total

Number Per cent Number Per cent

35 8.7 397 12*3

90 22-4

904 28-o

I38 34 3 1,026 3I17

59 I47

456 I4.I

65 i6*2

378 II.7

15 3.7

70 212

Percentage ColourDefective
8*8
I*0
13.4 I2*9 I7.2
2I.4

Total

... ... ... 2,829

I00-0

402 I00*0

3,23I 100,0

12.4

infrequently accompanied by light or bluish eyes. With the present data it is not easy to allow for this with any exactitude; but, when an approximate deduction is made, there are indications of a small but just significant relationship. What slight correlation exists, therefore, could be fully accounted for as an indirect consequence of the correlation of hair-colour with eyecolour.
Genetic Linkage
In view of the agreement between these three independent inquiries, there can, I think, be no question about the existence of some kind of correlation between defects of colour-vision, on the one hand, and pigmentation of the iris, on the other. Since the same correlation is discernible from comparatively early years, and since (apart from slight changes with increasing age) eyecolour remains almost unaffected by postnatal factors, it would seem that the relation must either be itself innate or else rest on some innate characteristic of the individual constitution. The simplest explanation
would be to postulate some kind of genetic linkage. Evidence has already been found for linkage between colour-blindness and one or two other characteristics (chiefly those for which the genes are supposed to lie on the non-pairing portion of the X-chromosome, e.g., hemophilia); and more than one writer has suggested that eye-colour may itself be
in some small degree sex-linked.
Among my cases there were eighty-eight pairs of brothers whom I could classify as definitely normal or deficient in colour-vision and also as definitely light-eyed or dark-eyed.

If linkage is present,* we should expect the number (a) of those who were similar in both
colour-vision and eye-colour and (b) of those who were dissimilar in both to be disproportionately large. The numbers actually observed are shown in Table IV.

TABLE IV NUMBER OF BROTHERS SIMILAR OR DISSIMILAR IN COLOUR-VISION OR IN EYE-COLOUR OR IN BOTH
Colour-Vision Similar Dissimilar Total
Eye-Colour { SDiimsisliamrilar 3I54 2127 3517I

Total ... ... 49 39 88

X'=2-I5

P=O- I4

The chi-squared test shows that it is quite

possible, though perhaps not very probable,

that these slightly excessive numbers have

arisen by chance. Four out of the five pairs

that included a case of definite colour-

blindness are in the doubly similar or doubly

dissimilar sub-groups. If, therefore, we could

separate out certain types of colour deficiency

instead of being forced by lack of numbers to

pool all types together indiscriminately, we

might eventually obtain clearer and more

cogent evidence. But the most pressing need

is a collection of relevant pedigrees, giving

precise indications about both characteristics

for three or more generations.

Physical and Bio-Chemical Explanations It seems clear, however, that, even could
it be demonstrated for certain special types, genetic linkage will not cover all the phenomena. For these, alternative interpretations
* The statistical test here adopted is that used by Penrose for testing linkage between*eye-colour and blood-grouping (Ann. Eug., I935, 6, I33).

EYE-COLOUR AND DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION

I53

must therefore be sought in the more direct explain more than a small proportion of my

effects of pigmentation (or its underlying own colour-defective.cases.

causes) on colour-perception. To determine (ii) The photochemical substances respon-

the possible explanations we may briefly sible for colour-vision in daylight are almost

summarize what is known about the chief certainly pigments; but their existence has

pigments present in the eye.*

not as yet been definitely established.

(i) A small area on the retina, in the Unfortunately, therefore, their chemical

neighbourhood of the part of clearest vision, nature remains unknown.

is somewhat pigmented, and on this account (iii) The only retinal pigment about which

is known as the macula lutea or " yellow much is known is the photo-sensitive pig-

spot." Except when the translucent tissues ment of the rods, usually called "visual

are discoloured by jaundice or old age, the purple," or " visual yellow" when acted on

yellow-brown -pigment of the macula is the by light. It is a pigment of the carotenoid

only pigment through which the focused group, and is essential to the colourless

light-rays pass. Its intensity is known to vision of the dark-adapted eye. Before the

differ widely in different individuals and in war, researches on individual differences in

different races. Clerk Maxwell believed that dark-adaptation were carried out in my

such differences in macular pigmentation laboratory by Lythgoe and Phillips. How-

would account for certain anomalies of blue- ever, no correlation was found between such

visiont; and Hering invoked them to differences and variations in eye- or hair-

explain the distinction between the two colour.*

main forms of red-green blindness.$ Hering's (iv) The outer stratum of the retina, which

theories, on this and other points, were is continuous with the posterior pigment

strongly opposed by McDougall, in whose layer of the iris, contains a pigment (fuscin)

laboratory I myself received my training; related to melanin; and, like melanin, is

and it occurred to me that, since the macular also acted on by sunlight. It appears to play

pigment is apparently related to the melanin a part in the regeneration of the rod-pigment

pigment of the hair, iris, and skin, light and possibly in that of the cone-pigment.

would be thrown on the problem by exam- (v) The pigment which mainly determines

ining the colour-vision of dark-haired and differences in the visible colour of the iris is
dark-eyed persons. This, in fact, was one of identical with, or at any rate closely related

the original motives which led to the investi- to, the melanin pigment responsible for dark

gations here recorded.

hair- and skin-colour. Melanin is a pigment

The yellow pigment of the macula chiefly absorbs spectral rays from the blue region of the spectrum. We should therefore expect blue-vision to be chiefly disturbed; and the disturbance would be confined to the central
part of the visual field. Both these effects
are noticeable in test results from dark-
skinned foreign races§; but they do not

of the indol group: dopa, its precursor,
appears to mark a stage in the conversion of tyrosine into adrenalin. Its formation appears to be affected by disturbances of the adrenalin glands and (like that of rod-
pigment) by deficiency of vitamin C. From these various facts we may infer
that differences in eye-colour might con-
ceivably be related to differences in colour-

* I am much indebted to personal communications vision in at least two ways-physical or

from Sir John Parsons and Dr. Katherine Lythgoe, who have been good enough to check my statement of

chemical.

The physical effects are more

present knowledge on these matters.

likely to influence blue-vision than red- or

t Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc., i86o, 150, 57. t Lotos, i885, 6, 142: cf. Trendelenburg, Klin. Med., 1939, 102, 769.
§ Cf. Parsons, Colour Vision, 1924, i6o. For summaries of more recent work, cf. P. Clements, " Racial Differences in Colour-Blindness," A m. J. Phys. Anthrop., *1930, 14, 4, and T. H. Garth, " Incidence of ColourBlindness among Races," Science, J933, 77, 333.

green-vision. And, if we prefer a chemical explanation, two slightly different theories are still conceivable: first, the amount of
pigment present in the iris might prove to be.
a rough but comparatively direct indication
* Phillips, Proc. Roy. Soc., 1938, 127B, 405.

154 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the amount of pigment present in the children and young adults. In addition to
related epithelial layer of the retina; second, .the usual mosaic and wool tests, I have used
and more indirectly, differences in the size-, speed-, and colour-mixture tests, for amount of pigment produced in all the visible nine standard colours about equidistant on tissues-skin and hair perhaps as well as the colour-circle. The observations* were
iris-might indicate differences in the general made upon I46 school children (boys aged chemical metabolism of such pigments in the II-I4) and 8i students (men and women
body as a whole and therefore in the retina in aged I9-25). Owing to slight differences in particular. In either case, if, as some writers technique, the correlations were calculated have argued, the chemical substances re- separately for the different groups and then sponsible for red and green vision are the averaged. With a total number of 227 any
latest to be evolved, we might expect these correlation below o I34, and any factorto be the substances that would most saturation below o*366, will be of doubtful readily be affected by individual variations.* significance.
It seems evident, therefore, that the chains The intercorrelations are shown in Table of causation must be far more complex than V. They have been factorized first of all by
might at first have been supposed; quite simple summation (Table VI,A).t With this
possibly we have to deal not with one, but method the first factor has positive saturawith several different influences. Conse- tions for all nine colours, and thus suggests quently, pending further knowledge of the the existence of a single " general factor" underlying physico-chemical processes, the for colour-discrimination entering into every most profitable line of study will consist in test; roughly speaking, this cQnclusion an endeavour to discover with greater pre- -means that, if a person fails badly in discision what is the nature of the various criminating (say) yellow, he is likely to be deficiencies in colour-vision, which are at poor at discriminating most other colours, present, in a more or less indiscriminate e.g., red, green, and (in a lesser degree) blue. fashion, picked out by the tests in current However, the contribution of this factor
use. to the total variance (see foot of table) is

Colour

Crimson

... ...

Red ... ... ...

Orange ... ... ...

Yellow

... ...

Yellow-Green ... ...

Green ... ... ...

Blue-Green ... ...

Blue ... ... ...

Violet ...

... ...

TABLE V

CORRELATIONS BETWEEN TESTS FOR COLOUR-PERCEPTION

C ... (.276) ... *I62 ... o89 ... 256
... .043
... - *oI8
... - 005
... 26I
. *286

R *I62 (710) .502 *489
*120
.013
- *I47 -*050'
.125

0Y *o89 *256
*502 489
(-443) *496
*496 (-705)
*226 *294
2I2 .340
004 0o63
--oo6 ,-214 IO09 *277

YG G
'o43 --OI8
* I20 .013 *226 *212
*294 340 (.402) *462
462 (.598)
.253 * 377
*og6 *II8
'052 0I5

GB
- 005
- 147
.004
.o63
'253 377
(.298)
*I9I
*021

B
*26I
- 050
--oo6 *214
*o96
*II8
* 9II (*438)
* 30I

V
*286
125
*IO9
.277
*052
OI5 02I
*30I (*292)

Factor-Analysis of Colour-Vision Tests With a view to learning more about the
reliability, the mutual consistency, and the differential effects of the simpler tests of examining colour-vision, I have -employed a number of different methods with groups of
* It is conceivable that the evolution of the fairskinned, light-eyed races of the ill-lit North have been accompanied by a further evolution or stabilization of colour-perception. In the older races of the South the darker pigmentation of the retina, like that of the iris and skin, may have served in part as a protection against the intenser light of the southern sun.

only 22 5 per cent, and consequently this " general factor" must here play a smaller part than general factors usually obtained from testing other cognitive processes.
* For help with the earlier experiments I am indebted to Mr. W. J. Williamson. Mr. P. Chatterji had planned to repeat the inquiry with improved methods, but his work was interrupted by the war. The investigations reported above were intended merely as a preliminary trial; but in view of the increasing interest in the whole subject they are briefly reported here.
t For the method used, see Factors of the Mind,
pp. 46I-6, 477-82. On the applicability of such methods to problems of colour-vision, cf. ibid., pp. 20, 84. I am indebted to Miss M. Cast for checking my calculations.

EYE-COLOUR AND DEFECTIVE COLOUR-VISION

I55

On the other hand, the bipolar factors display a marked overlap in the case of

play a larger part than usual. The first yellow. They are by far the most important

divides the colour-tests into two main groups elements in the analysis of defective colour-

-those concerned with the warmer end of discrimination.* The third group-factor

the spectrum (including violet) and those appears chiefly concerned with differences in

concerned with the cooler end, with red and bluish tints (including crimson) ; there is a

green respectively as the most dominant small but doubtful overlap on yellow.

colour in positive and negative portions. It was hoped that the two modes of

The second (less marked) introduces a cross- factorization might throw light on the con-

classification, with blue or blue-violet as troversy between the rival theories of colour-

most dominant in one, part and yellow as the vision. It will be noted that the results of

central test of the other.

the group-factor analysis-three specialized

Secondly, the factors thus obtained by factors, each displaying for the most part

simple summation were " rotated" to elimi- positive effects, with red, green, and blue

nate the negative saturations. The rotation respectively giving the largest factor-satura-

was effected in the usual way by making a tions-is in keeping with the three-colour

preliminary group factor-analysis, and then theory of Young, Helmholtz and McDougall;

introducing allowances for overlap by an nevertheless, with the wide margin allowed

orthogonal transformation. The final results by the probable errors, the observed cor-

are shown in Table VI,B.

relations can be accounted for almost as well

Colour

Crimson ... ... ... ...

Red ... ... ... ...

Orange ... ... ... ...

Yellow ... ... ... ...

Yellow-Green ... ... ...

Green

... ... ...

Blue-Green... ... ... ...

Blue

... ... ...

.

Violet

... ... ... ...

Percentage of Common Factor Variance ... ... ...

Percentageof Total Variance ...

TABLE VI

FACTOR SATURATIONS

A. Bipolar Factors

B. Group Factors

General Red-Green Blue-Yellow General Red Green Blue

.33I I75 *351

*473 .6I3 -* 264

*501 .274 -313

.769 229 -II45

*478 -*299 - *230

.520 - -492 - 288

.259 -.473

.017

384 -I157 * 501

*363 . I30

.371

.149 245 - I03 *427 * I2I *82I - 134 - °094
*22I .58o * i6i -* I51
.342 *689 *265 . I76
.025 .248 *574. *078
*o82 .127 .75I *053
I72 - I49 *474 .137
389 - 040 *091 I520
I94 .I58 - o6I * 455

50*8 28.3 20*9 105 40.6 30.5 I8*4

22.5 I2.6

9.3 4.8 i8.6 I3.9 8.4

With the elimination of negative satura-
tions the general factor (as usual) is greatly reduced in importance; it is now a " basic "
general factor rather than an " average "
general factor. Could we take its low saturations at their face value, they would suggest that, if we wanted only one or two tests for general discrimination, the best would be tests of blue and yellow discrimination. The bipolar red-green factor of Table VI,A is now split into two group-factors in Table VI,B, with red the most dominant in the one, and
green in the other; but the two factors

by the bipolar analysis, where each factor comprises two antithetical or antagonistic tendencies, on the lines of the Hering theory. However, it is doubtful whether the factors as they stand can be taken as representing simple causal agencies.
The immediate practical use of the fac-
* The fact that the red-factor contributes more to the
variance than the green-factor appears to mean (i)
that individuals differ more widely in their sensitivity to red than in their sensitivity to green, and (ii) that these individual differences affect a larger range of colours. Variations in sensitivity to green appear commoner, but more restricted in degree and in effect.

i56 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

torial analysis is this. It enables the investi- anomalous types. (3) The cases responsible

gator to re-weight the several tests, so as to for the. correlations with pigmentation are

obtain a measure for each of the chief com- --not so much the," severer and restricted

ponents. These measurements we can then defects that would )isually be classified as

correlate with degree of pigmentation. With red-green blindness; but (at any rate in a

the final form of the analysis the correlations large degree) the milder and more anomalous

are as follows: (i) general factor, o'2'i8.; defects. And it seems probable that the

(iia) red factor, o-I69; (iib) green factor, correlation revealed by the statistical exami-

o - o86; (iii) last factor, 0 * I27. Only the nation of groups is due to more causal pro-

first two coefficients are large enough to be cesses than one. (a) A tendency towards

statistically significant. The factor* most weakness in red-green discrimination appears

affected by pigmentation is the factor for to be to some extent of genetic origin and (so

general colour-discrimination; in this factor far as my pedigrees go) is rather more

the largest factor saturations are for blue and common among relatives (including female

yellow, which we might suppose to be most relatives) of the definitely red-green blind;

disturbed by yellow-brown pigmentation. some of these may therefore represent a

But the factor for red discrimination also heterozygotic form. The disproportionate

shows a significant, if somewhat smaller, frequency of dark. pigmentation in such

correlation. The last two coefficients are too cases may be due either to genetic linkage or

small to be significant. On correlating the to the fact that exceptional pigmentation (or

factor-measurements obtained by members some characteristic underlying it) may

of the same family, we get the following aggravate these latent tendencies. (b) In

figures for family-resemblance: (i) 0 I24, other cases the correlation with pigmentation

(iia) o*332, (iib) o0*278, (iii) o * o98. Here it seems best explained as an effect of differ-

is differences in the red- and green-factors ences in pigment-metabolism. (c) Defects in

which alone are statistically significant;. and blue- and possibly in yellow-discrimination

the small correlation for the first (or general) seem to be due, not to innate peculiarities in

factor is reduced practically to zero, when the photo-chemical reactions, but rather to

the influence of pigmentation is partialled the absorption of certain light-rays by the

out. more densely pigmented macula. (4) Pend-

ing further knowledge of the biochemical

Conclusions

processes involved, factor-analysis may use-

We may sum up the main results as fully be employed to distinguish the chief

follows. (i) There is a small but well- classes or types. Owing, however, to the

established correlation between deficiencies comparatively small number so far tested

of colour-vision and dark pigmentation' of for this purpose, and the somewhat crude

the iris. The correlation is discernible even technique employed, the inferences drawn

during childhood. (2) Defects of colour- must be regarded as tentative only. (5)

vision, however, appear to be more numerous There is an urgent need for more detailed

and more various than geneticists have studies of such cases and their relatives by a

commonly assumed. Previous statements wider variety of laboratory tests. Relatives

about inheritance of colour-blindness have *whose vision is apparently normal require as

too readily supposed that such defects con- intensive an examination as the so-called

sist of only one or two sharply distinguish- colour-blind. And it is hoped that readers

able types, such. as might be accounted for who may be acquainted with such families

by the presence or absence of a single sex- (which are far commoner than is usually

linked gene. In addition, it is essential to supposed) will bring them to the notice of a

recognize the existence of intermediate and competent psychological investigator.

Eugenics Review, VoL XXXVI, No. 4.

