Educability and Inheritance.*
BY A. F. TREDGOLD, M.D., F.R.S.,Edin.
/ When the brain of the new-born child is examined under the microscope it is seen to be in a very undeveloped condition. Many of its cells still retain their embryonic form and cell processes are simple and few in number. At this stage Mind is practically nonexistent. Gradually, and with the lapse of years, the mental functions come into being. The development of the sensory functions, whereby the child is put into communication with the outside world, makes perception possible; this process, in conjunction with association and memory, gives rise to the capacity to form mental images, to compare, to think, to imagine, to invent, to judge, and to reason. The linking up of these higher mental processes with his motor pathways makes possible the manifestations of will and desire, as seen in speech and those intelligent adaptations of the individual to his present and future needs which we designate conduct and behaviour.
Between birth and the age of 21 years the weight of the brain increases from an average of 300 grammes to one of nearly 1,400 grammes, or more than fourfold. During the same period the circum-
ference of the cranium increases from 14 to 211 inches. Theie is
reason to think, however, that all the component functions of mind have attained their maximum development by about the sixteenth year and that after this age increase of mental capacity is more a matter of increased knowledge and complexity of association than of the coming into being of any new function.
The development of the minci thus takes place pari passu with the development of the brain, and is the resultant of two factors; (1) an inherent tendency on the part of the brain cells to develop; (2) the stimulation of these cells by impressions and vibrations from without. Much of the external stimulation to which the brain of the child is subject is necessarily haphazard and fortuitous, but much is also deliberate and systematic. This latter, associated as it is with the imparting of definite facts and items of knowledge, constitutes what is known as Education, and the term "Educability" is often restricted to the capacity of the child to respond to this organised system of training and instruction. It seems desirable, however, that we should use it ill a wider sense, and for the present purpose I shall use it as meaning the general capacity of the child for mental development, that is, his capacity to respond not merely to the graduated and organised methods of development known as education, but also to those haphazard and
*Paper read at the International Eugenics Congress, 1921.

EDUCABILITY AND INHERITANCE.

165

unorganized factors which are inseparable from his environment. By Educability, then, I mean the capacity possessed by the child
for mental development; and by mental development I mean the growth of those functions of mind which are normal in his race and nation. It is obvious that this question of educability is not merely one of pedagogic, but one of the utmost social importance; for the presence in a community of any considerable number of individuals
who fall markedly short of the average standard must seriously diminish the efficiency and lead to the decline, and even decay, of that com-
munity; whilst it iL to the presence of an increased capacity for mental development that we must look for racial progress.
Now it is obvious that the development actually achieved varies very greatly in different individuals, and the question which arises isAre these differences due to inequalities in the methods of education anu faults in the environment, in other words are they due to inequality of opportunity; oi aire they the result of innate differences in individual capacity for development?
It is quite clear, and will be admitted by everyone, that the child whose educational advantages have been poor cannot attain the same degree of intellectual development as a child of similar innate capacity who has been more favouiably situated-a chill who has had no opportunity of learning the French language cannot be expected to talk French. On this point I may say that the:e is every reason for thinking that any extensive withholding of impressions from without, either as a result of disease of several organs of special sense, or of long continued seclusion, will so interfere with mental development as to give rise to a state amounting to mental deficiency; as witness the cases of Laura Bridgman and Kaspar IEauser. Further, there is no doubt that the development of the brain cells may be impeded by faulty hygienic surroundings and conditions of ill-health. For instance I have no doubt that the child who suffers from insufficient food, exhausting physical strain, defective sleep, as well as more definite disease, may thereby be considerably handicapped in his mental development. In a few cases the handicap may be so great that the arrears are never made up; generally, however, it is of a temporary nature only, and disappears when the cause is removed.
On the other hand we have to remember that good educational -facilities now exist in most civilized countries; in England, for instance, education has been compulsory for two generations, and yet, as every teacher knows, the capacity for response and the result achieved differ enormously even amongst children having exactly the same opportunities and coming from an identical environment. Some children, for example, will make rapid progress in art, music or languages with very little instruction, others will completely fail to master these subjects although they may be supplied with every facility and encouragement. The study of biographies shows that not a few persons have acquired considerable intellectual attainments and have even risen to a position of eminence, with very meagre educational advantages; and this has sometimes taken place amid wretched hygienic surroundings and under conditions of ill-health. These differences extend into the moral sphere, and there is a large and very important group of children known

166 1UGENICS REVIEW.
as moral imbeciles, who are characterized, amonigst other defects, bv a complete and incurable lack of the sense of social obligation or of the difference between right and wrong, although they may have been brought up with the utmost care and subject to the best example, the wisest precepts, and even punishment. Differences like these I have mentioned, ano I might specify many others, occur amongst children attending the same school and living in the same street, and are not peculiar to any particular class or section of society.
It is quite clear from these and similar facts that although the nature of the environment plays a part in the result attained, inasmuch as it may favour or handicap development, it does not under ordinary conditions play the essential part. The chief factor which determines the extent and the nature of the child 's mental development is his intrinsic and inborn potentiality for such development. In fact, I think we need have no hesitation in saying that just as every child is born with certain potentialities for bodily growth, in virtue of which he gradually develops the physical configuration of his race and stock, so is he borni with certain potentialities for mental development, both as to their nature and degree. The nature of the child's early experiences may of course mould his thoughts and shape his future life, but the total mental development to which he will attain, and the nature of his aptitudes, must, at the bottom, be dependent more upon his innate potentiality for such development than upon his environment, unless this is markedly abnormal.
Further, enquiries show that whilst in some cases these variations in educability occur sporadically, that is to say that one member of a family may differ very considerably either in an upward or downward direction from his parents and brothers and sisters, yet on the whole they show a strong tendency to be hereditary and to have a familial character.
With regard to endowments, the fact of the inheritance of general ability was first demonstrated statistically by the late Sir Francis Galton, the father of Eugenics. Galton selected one thousand men, each of whom was sufficiently eminent to rank as one man in four thousand, and comprising judges, generals, statesmen, poets, painters, scientists and divines. He then examined the careers of their relatives, and amongst these he found 89 eminent fathers, 114 eminent brothers, and 129 eminent sons; in all 332 immediate relatives of the same degree of eminentce as those who were the subjects of his enquiry. Investigations into the next degree of kin showed the presence of another 200 men of the same eminence.
Galton showed from his researches that the chance of a son of an eminent man showing eminent ability himself was about 500 times as great as that of a son of a man taken at random. I may remark that Galton's own genealogical tree is itself a very apt and striking confirmation of the facts which he demonstrated; for including the allied families of Darwin and Wedgwood there have been no less than 16 men of the highest scientific note, of whom 9 are Fellows of the Royal Society. Galton's conclusions have been confirmed in more recent years by the enquiries of Karl Pearson and W. C. D. Whetham.
The above mentioned researches refer more particularly to the

EDUCABILITY AND INHERITANCE.

167

inheritance of general ability; there is evidence that ability in a specific direction may be similarly inherited. We see this in regard to Art in the case of some of the great Italian painters. For example, Jacopo Bellini and his two sons Gentile and Giovanni; AntonioVivarini and his younger brother Bartolommeo, together with the two Luigis, also members of the same family; Ludovico Carraci and his two cousins Agostino and Annibale; Lippo Lippi and his son Filippino; Gaddo Gaddi, his son Taddeo and his two grandsons Agnolo and Giovanni. Doubtless in many of these instances the individuals were brought up in an atmosphere favourable to the development of their talent; but as all those I have mentioned were not merely local celebrities, but were painters of European fame whose works now adorn the leading galleries of the Continent, it is evident that they must have been possessed of conspicuous natural ability-this is particularly evident when we bear in mind the hopeless failure which often resuilts in the case of individuals who spend almost endless time and money upon tuition but who have no natural aptitude.
Music also furnishes examples of the inheritance of special ability, and perhaps the most remarkable is that of the Bach family, to which I may briefly refer. The earliest musician in this family appears to have been Veit Bach, born in 1550, a miller and baker by trade, but with a great fondness for playing the flute in his leisure hours: his sons Hans, a carpet weaver by trade, acquired a considerable local reputation as a violin player: Hans' son Heinrich was the organist at Arnstadt, whilst several other sons possessed great mnusical talent. In the next generation three members, Christopher, Michael and Ambrosius, were professional and distinguished musicians. In the next generation we have the two brothers, John Christopher and the most celebrated member of the family, John Sebastian. John Sebastian Bach (born 1685, died 1750) is a striking instance of the inheritance of musical talent revealing itself at a very early age. He was never afforded any special advantages, because his elder brother John Christopher, in whose care he was left from the age of ten owing to the death of his parents, appears to have been so jealous of his gifts as to have refused him access to some sources of musical education which were available. John Sebastian married twice and had a family of 11 sons and 9 daughters. All the 11 sons were musicians of marked excellence, but four of them stand out conspicuously, namely, Wilhelm Friedemann, Master of the chapel of Hesse-Darmstadt; Karl Philip Emmanuel, Director of the Orchestra, Hamburg; John Christopher Frederick, Master of the Chapel at Buckeburg; and John Christian who went to London, where he acquired great reputation as a composer. To summarise, I may say that in the four generations of this family no less than 50 members were professional musicians of marked ability, and several of them of such excellence as to rank amongst the immortals.
The same hereditary tendency is seen with regard to diminished
developmental potentiality. I have known several families of which many members found difficulty in spelling, others which found arithmetic a stumbling block, and others which showed a pronounced inability to acquire school knowledge, although they were sharp enough in looking after their interests and successful in life. It is well

168 ETUGENICS REVIEW.
known that a-large proportion of disorders and diseases of the mind andi
nervous system are the result of a particular family tendency, and I showed many years ago that that serious imperfection of mental development which constitutes mental deficiency, or feeble-mindedness, is strongly hereditary.
These differences of innate developmental potentiality, however, are not merely familial; there would appear to be differences with regard to social class and race. I have no knowledge of other countries, but in England I do not think there is any doubt that, taken in the mass, the children of the professional classes show a relatively higher degree of educability than do those of the lower labouring classes. With regard to race I think it is also a fact that certain sections of the yellow and black races compare unfavourably with whites. It is also affirmed that in schools in America where black and white children are educated together, the blacks keep pace with the whites up to about the age of puberty, but subsequently show a definite inferiority, having apparently reached the limit of their educational potentiality-
There is, however, nothing surprising in the fact that differences in educability should be inherited. Since we have seen that educability is largely a matter of innate potentiality it follows that it is germinal in origin, and its hereditary transmission ensues as a matter of course. At this point, however, we have to carry the matter a little further; inheritance is simply the mechanism of transmission, can we say how these differences arose in the first instance?
It is quite true that this is a problem of not merely academic, but of great practical importance: it is, however, one of very great difficulty, for it must be corifessed that our knowledge of the causation of germinal variations-which is what the question comes to-is still very imperfect.
In considering this point I shall exclude minor differences of potentiality; these are probably but manifestations of the tendency to vary within narrow limits which is normal and universal in life, and I shall confine myself to a consideration of those larger differences ofincreased or diminished capacity for development which we have seen to characterize different families, social grades, and races.
At this point it is desirable to emphasize the relationship which exists between educabilitv and brain structuie and function. It is true that our methods of microscopical examination may not at present be sufficiently delicate to enable us to demonstrate this in the majority of cases; nevertheless it has been shown that in mental deficiency there are definite changes, namely, a numerical shortage of the cells and processes of the brain cortex, together with an irregularity in their arrangement and an imperfection of their development. It has also been shown that in conditions of chronic mental decay there is a degeneration of these same cells; whilst it was pointed out by Kaes that certain layers of cortical fibres which are associative in function undergo a gradual increase with normal mental development. From these findings I think we are justified in concluding that differenceb either in the structure or chemical constitution of the nerve cells, or in the functional contractility of the processes of these cells, constitute the material basis of the varying differences in educability. Good general

EDUCABILITY AND INHERITANCE.

169

ability is dependent upon keen and accurate perception, good powers of attention, memory, visualisation, comparison and judgment, and well-coordinated motor response, and these qualities I regard as the natural and normal result of the healthy physiological functioning of a well and harmoniously developed brain. In marked inferiority, on the other hand, some or all of these qualities are defective, and it is
justifiable to conclude that this is due to some defect of br4in structure
or function. Let us first of all consider those cases in which mental development
falls markedly below the normal average of the race and class to which the individual belongs. It has been suggested that the various races of mankind were not evolved from a single pair of ancestors, or even from the same pre-human species, but that they are the descendants of different, although closely related species, which possessed fundamentally different potentiality for development. It is argued that these fundamental differences account not only for the differences in educability in regard to race, but that the mixture of these different races to form the nations which exist to-day accounts for the variations in educability amongst members of the same nation. In other words that defective mental development is either the expression of a defective potentiality which has existed ab initio or is due to atavism, or a harking back to a former condition. It is undoubtedly true that most nations are a blend of several different racial types, and this is certainly the case in the British and American nations; further, the phenomenon of atavism is well established; so that if we grant the hypothesis of inherent racial differences of potentiality it is quite possible that some cases of defective educability might be thus explained as a throw back. It is to be remarked, however, that this is an hypothesis only; we have to remember that the black and yellow races are for the most part the descendants of peoples who have for many generations lived in surround ings little cultivated to favour intellectual development; where the opposite conditions have prevailed, as for instance in the Chinese and Japanese, the degree of educability would not appear to be inferior to that of civilized whites. I shall refer to this matter again presently, but it is not improbable that these racial differences in educability are due to the continued lack of stimulus in the past rather than to any inherent germinal defect of developmental potentiality.
It seems to me that in the majoirty of cases in which there is a marked failure to attain the degree of mental development which is normal to the class to which the individual belongs we have, not a condition of atavism, but one which is pathological, and due to germinal potentiality having in some way been impaired. In my opinion there is not the slightest doubt that this may actually take place. My enquiriei into the causation of mental deficiency have led me to the conclusion that certain disea6es of the individual (i.e., alcoholism, tuberculosis and syphilis) may so devitalize and impair the potentiality of his, or her, germ plasm as to prevent the normal development of the offspring. The effect of these deleterious agencies would naturally be greatest upon that "determinant" of the germ plasm which represented the most delicate and most recent evolutionary achievement, namely, the germinal representative of the bmain. As a result of a

170 EUGENICS REVIEW.
comparatively slight devitalisation of the germ the offspring is born
with an increased instability and diminishecu powei of resistance of the nervouis system, and- this condition mav be manifest as hysteria, epilepsy, neurasthenia, insanity, and a defective capacity to develop the acquirements which are necessary for successful social adaptation, in other words a defective educability. With a more pronounced degree of germinal impairmeat there is an actual imperfection of structure, giving rise to the various grades of mental deficiency.
The number of persons who are actually mentally defective, that is to say who are so defective as to be unable to maintain their existence without some form of supervision or assistance, is very considerable. I estimate that in the United Kingdom there are at least four such persons per 1000 of the total population. There are, however, a still larger number of persons who, although not defective to this extent, are yet subnormal, inasmuch as they are defective in the power of developing the higher mental qualities to the average extent. I think that a very large proportion of these owe their conditions to a germinal impairment, and that they are not the descendants of a race which has never evolved, but that they represent a definite retrogression, being in fact manifestations of degeneracy. It is important to note that a defect of this kind is transmissible, and that the propagation of these persons may in course of time produce a very serious depreciation in the aggregate efficiency and capacity of the nation.
At this point there arises a very interesting and important question, namely, if the developmental potentiality of the germ plasm may be diminished, may it not also be augmented? Or, to put the question specifically with regard to educability -Is it possible as a result of the stimulus afforded by the process of education and the subsequent exercise of mind, continued generation after generation, so to augment the germ potentiality for mental development that the educability of the race may be increased?
This question is obviously one of supreme importance both to the educationalist and the sociologist; there is, however, probably no problem in the whole of biology which has been, and still is, more keenly discussed, and regarding which opinions are more widely divergent-for it is the old question of the transmissibility of acquired characters.
Lamarck, in 1809, answered it in the affirmative and both Darwin and Herbert Spencer supported this view; indeed until the last 40 or 50 years it was accepted without question. It was then ohown by Weismann that the germ plasm was not, as was formerly thought, manufactured anew by each individual, but that it was developed by direct continuity, and from this there arose the theory that it was unalterable. In consequence there appeared a school of Neo-Dai-winians, which not only denied the fact of the transmissibility of characters acquired by the individual, but which affirmed such to be impossible.
Space will not allow me to enter into the pros and cons of this controveisy; there are distinguished biologists upon both sides, and although the question must still be regarded as sub judice, I must confess that there are many facts which seem to me to justify Lamarck's view, and which are only explicable on the assumption that certain

EliDUCABILITY AND INHE'RITANCE.

171

qualities acquired by the iiidividtual imav bring about stuch a chanige in
his geenm plasm as to produce ain inicreased tendenicy to the development of those qualities in his descenidanits. Charles Darwin supposed that
the germ plasmn was miade up of "gemmules" derived fromn the various organs of the bodv, and that it might consequently be thus inifluenced by chaniges in those organis. This explaniation has Inow beeA disproved, and the opponents of the iniheritance of acquiremen-ts base much of their
arguinent upoin the asSumlitioii that not only does no mechanism for
such iniheritance exist, but that it is imnpossible to conceive of any such neclhanism. More recent researches, however, have throwni a new
light upon this problen, and tencd to show that although Darwin was
wirong as to the actulal details he was probably right as to the principle. This question is of such intere.t and importance that it mav not be
out of place if I shortlv allude to it. In the humani body there are
certaini glands, namely, the thyroid, thymini, suprarenal, etc., whose function, owing to the fact that they are niot prox ided with excretory
ducts, was fornmerlv a complete enigima. But it is now knowa that
these glands furnishi ani ''intern-al'' secretion pa.,sing directly into the
blood stream, an-id which has a most remarkable action upon the development and function of certain bodily organs. For instance, a deficiency of thyroid secretion during the earlv t ears of life causes an arrest of development of the cells of the brain, so that a variety of idiocy knowin as cretinism results. A deficienicy of this same seeretion
after full development has been attained produces a condition of marked
hebetude of mind. On the other hand, ani excess of this secretion pro-
duces tremors and other marked disturbances of the nervous system. The other glant s I have mentioned exercise a simila. profounid influence tupoin development and metabolism; so much so that their removal or disease may be followed by death. Further, there is nowN good reason for thinking that Inot only these glands, but many, of the organs and
tissues of the body, such as the brain and muscles, each produce their ownI specific secretioni, wshich is essential to the well-being of the
organism.
Now there is not the slightest doubt that the germ )plasm contains within it in sonme form or other representatives of all the organs andi
tissues to which it will give rise when fertilized; anid these representatives are kniown as "determinants." May it not be then that the specific secretion produced by each organ of the individual may have a selectiveaction upon the corresponding determinant within his germ plasm, and by its nature or amount tend to increase the developmental potentiality of that determinant? To put the case in more concrete form may we not imagine that an increased development and activity of brain may be accompanied by an increased brain secretion, which will so stimulate the corresponding germinal determinant, as to increase its potentiality for growN-th?
This, of course, is at present mere conjecture, but it does not seem altogether unreasonable. However this may be, I am strongly disposed to think that there is evidence to the effect that qualities acquired by the individual which are the result of increased development may, in course of time, lead to a heightened capacity for such development in his offspring; indeed I regard this as one of the means by which pro-

172 EUGENTCS REVIEW.
gressive evolution has been brought about. I see no reason why the
development of mental capacity produced in the individuial by the
stimulus of education and exercise of mind, continued generation after
generation, should be any exception. The social grades in democratic couintries are not separated by any
rigid barriers, they are connected by alnmost insensible gradations; nevertheless there are many individuals who are the descendants of stocks who have for generations worked with the heads, and there are other stocks who have for generations worked with their hands and toiled with the sweat of their brow in a simple capacity. I think -there is no doubt that the educability of the former is distinctly higher than is that of the latter. MIay this difference be explained in the manner I have just described? May the same explanation account for the differences existing between different races? I thiink it is Inot imnpossible.
It is to be remarked however, that if an augmentationi of this kind takes place, it is certainly extremely slow: there is nio question of quiick returns, and it is practically certain that many generations must elapse
before any change could be perceived. Further, for such progiessive
evolution to take place, not only must the necessarv stimnulus be coItinued over a long period, but the germ plasm must be lhealthy aindI of unimpaired power of response. Given these conditions, then I think that a high degree of educability and good mental capacity are the natural and normal sequence. And when we look back upon the course of evolution, and note the enormous development in capacity which has gradually been brought about in the nervous system and sphere of mind, one might even hazald the thought that man, as he exists to-day, can hardly be the culmination of such a nmomentous
process. We may now briefly consider the origin of 'Genius' since I think
that this stands upon a different footing to general ability. Genius has been defined as an 'infinite capacitv for taking pains'; there ne7er was a more inappropriate definition, for this is just what genius is not. The real genius, from the psychological aspect, is totally diffeTent to the man of marked ability. This latter owes his condition primarily to a healthy brain of high developmental potentiality, but the full realization of this potentiality necessitates good educational facilities and sustained application; in other words marked ability is the result of the two factors, high potentiality and optimum environment. In genius, on the other hand, the developmental potentiality is usuallv in one particular direction only, outside this the genius is often a complete fool, but this potentiality is so great that whilst other persons, even of considerable ability, are mastering the subject at the expense of gieat pains, the real genius grasps it almost intuitively, and he develops without effort and often in the teeth of the most adverse environment. The characteristic of genius, in fact, is that it is a one-sided development, and I am disposed to think that it is often pathological and the result of an acquired germinal instability. Some confirmation of this view is affoeded bv the fact that the genius is often sterile and that a disproportionate number of his relations are cranks, mentally unsound, or mentally defective. This connection has so far

EDUCABILITY AND INHERITANCE.

173

been recognised that an argument not infrequently brought forward against any attempt to limit the propagations of the neuropathic is that we might by so doing deprive the world of a genius. But I think
this is a fallacy, for the birth of a real genius is very exceptional and I believethatthe good he doesmight be morethanoutweighed by the harm and interference with racia I progress resulting from the presence of his degenerate relations.
To summarise the chief points regarding eduacability we may say:--
(1) The degree of educability varies in different individuals, being determined by an innate potentiality for mental development which cannot be exceeded; this applies equally to what is known as general ability and to special aptitudes. The full realisation of this potentiality necessitates an optimum environment, under which term is included the stimulus of education. Since the environment never is perfect, it is doubtful whether any individual attains the full develop-
ment of which he is inheiently capable. (2) Minor variations in educability aie of little significance,
being merely manifestations of a universal tendency to varv within normal limits.
(3) A marked diminution in educability occurs in two forms.
In one, occurring in inferior races and section, of society, it is probably due to non-evolution owing to lack of intellectual stimulus continued
for many past generations, and is not pathological. In the other,
occurring in familie. and stocks not confined to any special social stratum, it is probably pathological, and the result of a-i impairment of germinal potentiality brought about by devitalizing agencies.
(4) There is reason to think that, provided the germ plasm is
healthy, the stimulus of education and the exercise of mind, continued generation after generation, may gradually increase educability. Cases of defective educability due to non-evolution are therefore improvable with the lapse of time.
(5) Defective educability due to germinal impairment i, probably unimprovable, and the perpetuation of stocks so affected may have a serious result in causing racial decline and decav.
(6) Every individual in a community should be afforded oppor-
tunity for the realisation of his innate potentiality, but the failure to recognize variations in capacity, and particularly defective capacity, is a source of great waste of time, labour, and money. What is wanted is not "equalitv of opportunity," but an education adapted to the capacity of the individual, as determined by periodical scholastic and psychological examinations.

