HENRI TAJFEL
University of Oxford
Co-operation between Human Groups

THE COMPLEXITIES OF human social behaviour
are not the preserve of any single discipline. There has always been a great proliferation of
theories about the social nature or behaviour of
man. These ideas were sometimes expressed in the form of modest and cautious inferences from empirical data; sometimes as systems of social or political philosophy related to postulates about such-and-such inherent characteristics of"human
nature"; and sometimes they took a sweeping
analogy as their starting point and emerged at
the other end with a cosmic all-embracing theory. The difficulty we have to-day is to distinguish between what is useless and what useful for further inquiry; the subject matter is so vast that almost any system of ideas is likely to contain much truth. For example, as Plamenatz 10 wrote, there is no doubt that modern social science could learn a good deal more than it has until now from the ideas of social and political
philosophers of the past. When one considers the problem of co-opera-
tion between human groups and other related problems, such as competition and conflict
between groups and aggression displayed by one group towards another, it is not too difficult to identify two general assumptions which formimplicitly or explicitly-the basis of much theorizing on the subject. These assumptions represent, in some ways, two entirely distinct ways of approaching the problems of human interaction in society. One concerns itself with the "instinctive social man", the other with the "utilitarian social man". One attempts to explain the course of relationships between social groups in terms of instinctive characteristics of man; the other relies on a rational calculation, by members of a group or by their leaders, of the future utility of various possible courses of action. I shall try to argue from the evidence gathered by social psychologists that

both these views are inadequate; that co-operation or hostility between human groups cannot be understood fully on the basis of calculations of utility; and that they can be understood even less on the basis of sweeping assumptions about the role of instinct in the social behaviour of man. The "social psychological man" stands somewhere apart both from the instinctive and from the utilitarian man; he is a good deal more complicated than the two other homunculi could ever become.
Psychological Analysis
A psychological analysis of the problems of co-operation between human groups can be undertaken only if its limitations are clearly kept in mind. Such an analysis cannot provide an explanation of large-scale historical or social events. Each case of co-operation or of conflict must be understood in its own right, in terms of its own conditions and determinants which may be economic or social, political or historical, and are most often a mixture of all these. No set of a priori psychological principles can replace the detailed knowledge which is necessary for the analysis and understanding of a concrete social situation. The social phenomena which arise from it pursue their course in terms of their own logic. Modern wars, for example, cannot be "explained" on the basis of hostile attitudes harboured by large masses of individuals living in the countries engaged in armed conflict. Such attitudes may contribute to the creation of a conffict, they may facilitate an explosion, they may even be fostered to serve these ends. But large-scale social and political events are not predictable from a crude algebra of attitudes and motives of millions of individuals.

77
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, June 1966, 58, 2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

To stress this point I can do no better than emotional identification with a group? What are

quote from a recent paper byWithey and Katz 16: the conditions for the stability of such an

The social psychological approach to war and peace is commonly misconceived as viewing inter-

identification? What are its effects on an individual's attitudes and behaviour towards

national conflict either in terms of the personalities of national leaders or in terms of a national character which suffuses the masses and the elite in similar fashion. Relevant social psychological processes are not revealed, however, by imputing to the character of the people in the system the outcome of system

members of his own group and towards other groups as a whole or their individual members? And, finally, as a special case of all this, what are the conditions leading to co-operative attitudes and behaviour towards groups other than one's

processes. For example, a nation declares war, own?
hence, its people or its leaders are regarded as

aggressive or warlike. This is the group mind fallacy in reverse, because there is the attribution of system Aggregations or Social Groups?

outcomes such as belligerent or conciliatory actions to the personalities of the individual actors (p. 65).

If in the attempt to provide some form of answers to these questions one turns first

Once these reservations have been made, the task of identifying the contributions that can be made by social psychology to problems of
co-operation between human groups becomes a
little more tractable. The diversity of ways in which mankind can be classified into groups is practically infinite. Every one of us belongs to a large number of them, some as transient as a journey in a lift, some as permanent as a family, a tribe or a nation. For the purposes of the

towards studies of animal social behaviour, such as those discussed in the preceding papers, some general points can perhaps be made. According to Etkin5 and to many other workers in this field, animal groups can be roughly classified into aggregates and genuine social groups. This classification is based on the nature of the response made by individuals to other individuals. Thus, as Etkin puts it, animal groups are social:

present discussion I shall define a group as a when the members stay together as a result of their

category of people fulfilling two criteria: the first, that an individual identifies himself as belonging to that category; and the second, that

social responses to one another rather than by responses to other factors in their environment. Groups that are held together by responses to such other factors will be called "aggregations". Thus a

this identification is to him of some emotional significance. Let me add immediately that there are many other possible definitions, but their adequacy is not vested in some sort of absolute criterion of "truth". They are useful only in

flock of sheep is a social group, since it is maintained by the social responses of the animals to one another; but the massing of insects around light at night is an aggregation, since it results from their common attraction to the light (p. 4).

relation to the problem for which they are Despite the fact that there may be many cases

needed. And a second point: this definition, when it is difficult to decide which of these two

though it takes two subjective criteria for its types of response determines the coming together

point of departure, need not remain "subjective" and the functioning of a group, there are also

at the level of empirical investigation. There are many animal groupings which can be assigned

many behavioural indices which can be used to without too much hesitation to one or to the

decide whether an individual does or does not other class.

feel himself to be a member of a group in the There is little doubt that many human

sense just indicated.

aggregations can be found to exist. But they

Thus, a group has been defined here not in undoubtedly constitute the most temporary and

terms of its physical characteristics or of its social least complex type of human groups, and they

structure, but in terms of its psychological become social groups in a more adequate sense existence for an individual. The main empirical only when, because of various pressures and

problems that arise within the framework of this needs, they give rise to more stable organizations

definition would then be as follows: What are whose members can be shown to display the sort

the origins of an individual's conceptual and of identifications to which I previously referred.

78

CO-OPERATION BETWEEN HUMAN GROUPS

A comparative study of animal groups consensus of opinion reached by several members

exhibiting the second type of response-the one of a distinguished panel of contributors ranging

which is genuinely "social" in the sense employed from ethologists to social anthropologists.

by Etkin-can teach us a good deal about the Indeed, one of the papers7 consists mainly of

origin and the functioning of human social an impressive array of examples showing the

groups. It remains true, however, that facile horrifying incidence of cruelty, sadism, torture

analogies from animal to human are easily and massacre in the history of mankind. The

derived from the results of such studies. The less author concludes that nothing but the existence

is the social behaviour of a species determined by of an innate aggressive tendency could explain

its capacity to show flexibility and variability due all these phenomena. The argument has an

to learning, the more likely it is that such undeniable ring of plausibility; but using another

analogies will be widely off the mark. Studies of selection of examples one could infer with equal

animal social behaviour have shown that, in plausibility the existence of innate tendencies

many species, learning plays an important role in underlying the incidence in human affairs of

various forms of social behaviour; for example, co-operation, altruism, patriotism, self-sacrifice,

in individual recognition between parent and or even perhaps of changes in fashion and of

offspring, in differences in aggressive behaviour beauty contests. There are two principal reasons

shown towards members of in-groups and out- why all such explanations must remain unsatis-

groups, in territoriality, in the establishment of factory: one is that, without further independent

social hierarchies. Even this brief and incom- evidence, they are tautological; the other, that

plete enumeration shows clearly the striking they are not based on a detailed analysis of

similarities of some aspects of animal and human conditions under which the behaviour in question

social behaviour. The question that arises con- occurs or does not occur. As has been well

cerns the extent to which the processes under- shown in studies of animal social behaviour,

lying these phenomena display the same sort of only such an analysis would enable us to make

similarity.

testable inferences concerning the causal factors

The study of the role played by innate and that may be involved. Even if it were true that

acquired patterns of behaviour in animal social there are innate tendencies lurking behind

groups is usually based on a careful analysis of various forms of human competition, conflict or

its various relevant aspects. This would include a co-operation, the complexity of social behaviour

detailed and painstaking account of a sequence in man is such that explanations of this nature

of behaviour, its relation to physiological would not take us very much further than

mechanisms, to the ecological features of the statements relating the development of the rich

environment, and also the analysis ofthe possible variety of gastronomic traditions to man's

functions and survival value of the sequence. No undeniably innate need for food and drink.

self-respecting student of animal behaviour

would commit here the "group mind fallacy in reverse", which would consist in this case of Identification with the Group

"explaining", for example, the intra-species One of the basic phenomena of human social

aggressive behaviour of members of a group interaction has been well brought out by

towards members of another group by a simple implication in a paper by Thompsonl5 when he

attribution of this aggressive behaviour to an wrote "the language of the bees is not the

innate tendency to be aggressive. And yet, in the language of love". Human language is also very

case of human social behaviour we are often often not the language of love. But it must be

offered this type of statement with its implicit remembered that as the human being matures,

injunction that we can now rest content since we one of the primary features of his development,

have explained the phenomenon. For example, without which he would not be able to adapt to

in a recent symposium on aggression,4 its the society of other human beings, is his increas-

attribution in human affairs to an aggressive ing capacity to deal with his environment in

instinct seems to be, according to the editors, the abstract and symbolic terms. In most (if not all)

79

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

cases of social interaction in animals the social Definitions of most of these groups are not based

responses cannot be related to a capacity of on a set of recognizable and invariant physical

perceiving the events from the point of view of characteristics of their members; they are

another individual. The simpler processes also abstract class concepts.

no doubt play an important role in human social We know that co-operation within a human

behaviour; but they are inserted, as it were, group is likely to develop as a function of

within a larger framework of symbolic activity. various concrete common needs. It must,

The eminent Swiss psychologist Piaget has however, also be remembered that the only

shown in much of his work that as the child possible basis for such co-operation in any

progresses from one stage to the next in his complex social situation is to be found in the

intellectual development, he becomes increasing- conceptual processes of the sort that Piaget

ly more capable of transcending the concrete investigated in children. To return to

perceptual context of the moment and of Thompson's 15 reference to bees, the language of

drawing inferences about the environment on the the bees is not only not the language of love; it is

basis of invariant rules applying to situations also not the language of co-operation. The

which may differ widely in their concrete possibility to co-operate in most human situa-

perceptual characteristics. If this were not so, we tions is based on the ability to perceive a

would never be able to teach our children that situation from the point of view of another

the area of a square with sides of 6 in. is equal to individual, and then to make use of the informa-

the area of a rectangle with sides of 2 in. and tion so obtained as a guide for subsequent

12 in.; or that if a child in Ibadan lives further actions. If co-operation were not based on the

south than a child in London, this means that implicit or explicit use of this ability to become

the child in London lives north of the child in allocentric as distinct from egocentric, it could

Ibadan. These examples point to a universal happen only sporadically, by chance encounters

human phenomenon which is sometimes ignored of parallel or complementary actions, and it

in discussions of human social behaviour. could never form the basis of a complex and

Emotional and conceptual identification with a co-ordinated sequence of behaviour originating

group consists of more than invariant responses from many individuals.

to clear-cut stimulus configurations.

If it is true that co-operation largely depends

The origins of identification with a group-or upon this capacity to see the world from the

with a large number of groups-are to be found point of view of someone else, then its success

in early childhood. The Freudian accounts of must depend upon the conditions which make it

the manner in which the young child internalizes possible or impossible to engage in this type of

emotionally his relations with his parents and behaviour. This is clearly the case in modern

other members of his family are well known. societies with their complex checks and balances

The important aspect of these accounts from the due to a tangled network of competitive and

point of view of the present discussion is the fact co-operative interests. In such social systems the

that the transfer of these early emotional "zero-sum-games"-all loss to one and all gain

reactions to other people or to groups of other to the other-are becoming increasingly in-

people is possible only through the use of frequent, particularly at the level of large-scale

symbolic activity in which one individual is social events.

made to stand for another. It is just as true, An individual's identification-conceptual and

however, that independently of these early emotional-with a group has many psychological

emotional experiences and of their possible aspects. One of the most important is in the

transfer in later life, we also come to identify sharing of social norms. There are several ways

with a complex matrix of human groups in a in which a social norm can be defined. Three of

manner which seems to have, at best, tenuous these can serve as examples: "social norm" may

links with these early emotional reactions. We refer to contractual obligations accepted and

are all members of national, professional, shared by members of a social group; it may

religious, social and many other groups. refer to shared ideas about what ought to be the

80

CO-OPERATION BETWEEN HUMAN GROUPS

way to behave in a variety of situations; and it events in the environment is sometimes not

may finally refer to observed uniformities of sufficiently appreciated. It will be obvious that

behaviour in a social group, large or small. The under conditions of "common fate", such as

manner in which a society comes to create and shared threats, dangers or goals, this convergence

perpetuate norms in all these three meanings of in behaviour is bound to become more marked.

the term is a very vast issue fraught with But it can also be found in cases where the

implications which I should neither wish nor feel function of concerted behaviour does not appear

competent to discuss here. This issue has always at all obvious. For example, there are many

been a joint focus of interest for historians, social psychological experiments showing the extent to

philosophers, sociologists, lawyers, social an- which individuals are prepared to accept the

thropologists and many others-and this repre- unanimous verdict of a majority even in tasks as

sents too many toes for anyone to dare to tread simple as judging differences in length between

on. I should like, however, to attempt a discus- several lines, and even when this majority

sion of the manner in which an individual comes verdict flatly contradicts the evidence of their

to share the established norms of social groups own senses.1

in which he enters. In doing this, I shall mainly One example can perhaps be briefly described,

be concerned with the third meaning of the term since it will serve as a transition to the next stage

"norm" which I previously mentioned: the of this discussion. It concerns the so-called

observed uniformities of behaviour.

"autokinetic phenomenon": when a stationary

Many psychologists engaged in the study of pin-point of light is shown in complete darkness,

animal behaviour reached the conclusion that it appears to move. When several observers are

some aspects of animal learning cannot be put together in a dark room, their judgements of

adequately explained unless one postulates the the extent of this apparent movement tend to

existence of a drive or a tendency to explore the converge.13 In an interesting modification of this

environment.2,8 The biological survival value of procedure, various degrees of insecurity were

getting to know one's surroundings is obvious. introduced into the situation. This was done

Some of the greatest achievements of mankind through varying the size of the pitch-dark room,

would never have taken place had it not been for placing obstacles in the subject's way, making

the existence of a similar urge to explore and to him wander through complicated routes, and

understand. But in the case of man, there is one varying the degree of pleasantness and help

essential aspect of gathering this information shown to him by the experimenter. The most

about the environment which appears only in a extreme of these experimental conditions led to

very rudimentary form in non-human behaviour. considerable disorientation and confusion in the

An enormous amount of human knowledge subjects. Two successive experimental sessions

about the environment-physical and social-is were used at an interval of several days. In the

not collected through the direct experience of an first of these, each subject was alone; in the

individual but through information transmitted second, they were in pairs. As a function of the

to him by other members of the social groups to increasing degree of confusion there was, from

which he belongs. Each human being learns that the first to the second session, an increasing

one of the efficient ways to evaluate the informa- convergence between the subjects in their

tion he has about his surroundings, about him- judgements of the extent of the apparent

self, about the consequences of his actions, about movement.14

other people, about the relative probabilities of The interpretation of results such as these

various possible future events, is to rely on the leads one immediately into one of the chicken-

information provided by others.6 In addition, and-egg situations so common in social psycho-

the more an individual perceives other people as logy. The feeling of intense confusion creates

similar to himself, the more will his behaviour be presumably a situation in which the subjects see

determined by his perception of their behaviour. themselves as confronting together the same

The importance of this phenomenon in the difficulty. It is not, however, clear why this

determination of human reactions to all kinds of shared crisis amongst wreckage in a pitch-dark

81

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

room should lead them to greater uniformity in drop a load of bombs from a height or to press a

judging the movement of a point of light. This button releasing a missile than to plunge a knife

agreement cannot conceivably have anything to into someone's belly even when there is no

do with any rational attempts on their part to danger of retribution. And to present a counter-

deal with their plight. And thus, it appears that a part to our dead chicken, pet-lovers are well

group situation in which people share common known for their attribution of all sorts of subtle

needs or difficulties leads in turn to the develop- characteristics to the objects of their love. The

ment of a need to create a variety of norms. This creation of a psychological distance between

emergence of norms seems therefore not only oneself and one's victim is probably responsible

determined by the utility value of co-operating for at least as much murder and massacre as is

in order to remove a difficulty, but also as an the much vaunted sadism and the presumed

emotionally autonomous consequence of affilia- ineradicable aggressive instinct in man. The

tion with a group, whatever may be the original recent play by Weiss The Investigation based on

causes of the group coming together. There are the Auschwitz trial in Germany does not show

many experiments in social psychology which most of the men involved as towering monsters

show the strength of these so-called "normative" of inhuman proportions. They were little men

effects of group membership.

who managed to do what they did partly because

It is for such reasons that the model of they were able to dissociate themselves com-

"utilitarian social man" to which I previously pletely from recognizing in their victims a

referred is no more adequate for the explanation similarity to themselves, some form of a common

of co-operation in human groups than is the denominator.

model of the "instinctive social man". Shared In mentioning the executioners of Auschwitz

needs and shared background lead to shared one approaches a level of dissociation from

norms; shared norms lead to more shared back- other human beings which veers on the border-

ground and to an emotional investment in the line of psychopathology. But milder versions of

creation of more shared norms. All these inter- this phenomenon are by no means uncommon.

locked processes result in the strengthening of No one needs a psychologist to tell him that in

group identification, and to the increased situations of intense conflict between human

capacity for perceiving those who are in the groups, of real threat, or of eruption of violence,

same group as essentially similar to oneself. It hostile attitudes between members of the groups

will be obvious that this perception of similarity involved intensify rapidly. The conditions for

makes it much easier to adopt in any relevant coexistence of human groups living in a common

situation the point of view of those who are environment are such that, in one way or

categorized as being "in" in contrast to those another, some forms of competition between

who are perceived as being "out".

them are bound to arise sooner or later. A

discussion of conditions which may facilitate

Dissociation from other Groups

co-operation cannot be based on utopian dreams of a world free from competing interests. The

These phenomena are of direct relevance to question is rather to what extent, in Rapoport's

what is often referred to as "depersonalization". terms, fights can be transformed into games or

Many people who are passionately humanitarian debates. Fights have no rules; games and

do not experience the slightest stirring of con- debates are ritualized. Ritualization and the

science when they confront half of a dead establishment of norms which effectively guide

chicken on their plates at lunch. There has never behaviour, are only feasible when one of two sets

been much of sharing of norms with a chicken, of conditions is satisfied: either when compliance

nor much opportunity of seeing the world from to established norms is enforced through the

the chicken's point of view, But it may be worth existence of an authority superordinate to the

remembering that the dead bird on the plate groups involved; or when, despite the competi-

represents no more than an extreme case of a tion the other group, while remaining definitely

familiar phenomenon. It is notoriously easier to "other" in some respects, is at the same time

82

CO-OPERATION BETWEEN HUMAN GROUPS

perceived as similar in fairly fundamental ways. membership as dissimilar in some fundamental

It is likely that the creation of both these sets of ways from those who are-to use a current

conditions is interdependent: the existence of a phrase-our kith and kin, that things can be

superordinate authority would lead to a slow done to him which we would not otherwise

change of attitudes; a change of attitudes would dream of doing. This inability to conceive the

facilitate the creation of such an authority. Both world reciprocally leads directly to a further

these processes have happened many times in compounding of difficulties: namely, it creates

the past.

blocks in communication. This may take one of

There is a good deal of evidence that hostile two forms: either we assume that members of

attitudes towards an outgroup are closely related another group must be able to communicate in

to its perception as essentially dissimilar from ways which are familiar to us (though we do not

one's own group. This process starts early in have to repay the courtesy)-and if they do not,

childhood, and it is very difficult to decide this only serves to strengthen the case for their

whether perception of dissimilarity leads to essentially alien character; or it is assumed that

dislike, or dislike leads to the perception of they may have acquired the gimmick of pretend-

dissimilarity. In some research that we have ing to be like us in order to be able "the better to

recently done in co-operation with colleagues eat us up". This wolf in a grandmother's bonnet

from the University of Leiden in Holland,9 we has now unexpectedly come to life in a context

found that there were high correlations between far removed from a fairy story. A colleague who

children's preferences for one or another foreign had returned to the United States from a trip to

country, and their perception of these countries the Soviet Union presented to a group of

as similar to, or different from, each other; i.e. American children photographs of a tree-lined

the greater was the gap between two countries on street in Russia. In his informal report he

a preference scale, the greater tended to be the writes: "A hand went up: 'Why do they have

judged dissimilarity between them. It is also trees along the road?' A bit puzzled, I turned

known from research on highly prejudiced the question back to the group: 'Why do you

people that they differ from those who are not suppose they have trees?' Another hand rose for

prejudiced in the differentiations they make eager answer: 'So that people won't be able to

between their own group and the other. Two see what's going on beyond the road.' A girl had

examples will make this clear: in one experi- a different idea: 'It's to make work for the

ment, (Secord, Bevan and Katz 11) after a prisoners.' I asked why some of our roads had

preliminary assessment of the degree of anti- trees planted along the side. 'For shade.' 'To keep

Negro prejudice, the subjects at the two extremes the dust down.' "3

of the continuum of prejudice were asked to rate

the shade of skin in a series of photographs, some of which were of Negroes and some not. It was

Conclusion

found that the highly prejudiced subjects tended I should like to conclude by stressing a few

to exaggerate more than the other subjects did points which perhaps hardly need stressing.

the differences in skin colour between those First, this paper is not a plea or an argument for

photographs which they assigned to the category the disappearance of differences between human

"Negro" and those which they assigned to the groups. The world would be a sad and boring

category "white". A related finding is that place to live in if this ever happened. Secondly,

prejudiced subjects tend to be less accurate than I was concerned neither with social, economic nor

others in recognizing individual Negroes whose political causes of conflicts between groups nor

photographs they had previously seen.12

with any policies relating to these aspects of

The depersonalization or dehumanization of inter-group problems. My purpose was to discuss

members of out-groups must be closely related those psychological aspects of inter-group

to these effects of emotional attitudes. It is only hostility and inter-group co-operation which are

because a member of another nation, class, race vested in the attitudes and behaviour of

or any other group is perceived by virtue of this individuals who compose the groups. It is my

83

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

view that one of the essential ingredients of these attitudes and of the behaviour relating to them is to be found in man's capacity to see others as men like himself, however different they may be from him. No one needs to be told that this is far from being the case to-day. It would be a form of academic escapism, however, to leave it at that and not to attempt some conclusions about concrete problems. Though no one can expect any sudden changes in the attitudes of millions of people, some attempts to induce changes can certainly be made. It seems to me that-with regard to the psychological aspects of these problems-these attempts should be concentrated on two fronts: education and law. A good deal is known about the development of hostile outgroup attitudes in children. Very little of this knowledge has penetrated into the curricula of primary or secondary education and of teacher training colleges. As to law, the point can perhaps be briefly stated as follows: discrimination without prejudice leads to discrimination with prejudice; conversely, prejudice shorn of its capacity to manifest itself in discrimination withers away little by little. Strong and strictly enforced sanctions against any form of discrimination or exercise of brute force, whether in national or international affairs, would certainly not succeed overnight in eliminating blind outgroup hostility. But they would go some way towards bringing it home to all of us that the life and rights of every human being are a matter to be seriously considered.
REFERENCES
1. Asch, S. E. 1952. Social psychology. New York, Prentice Hall.

2. Berlyne, D. E. 1960. Conflict, Arousal, and Curiosity.
New York, McGraw-Hill. 3. Bronfenbrenner, U. 1961. Some problems in com-
municating with Americans about the Soviet Union. Mimeo report. 4. Carthy, J. D., and Ebling, F. J. (eds.) 1964. The Natural History of Aggression. London and New York, Academic Press. 5. Etkin, W. 1964. Cooperation and competition in social behaviour. In Social Behaviour and Organization among Vertebrates. Ed. W. Etkin. University of
Chicago Press (pp. 1-34).
6. Festinger, L. 1954. A theory of social comparison processes. Hum. Relat. 7, 117-40.
7. Freeman, D. 1964. Human aggression in anthropological perspective. In Carthy and Ebling, op. cit. (pp. 109-20).
8. Harlow, H. F. 1953. Motivation as a factor in the acquisition of new responses. In Current Theory and Research in Motivation. Ed. J. S. Brown et al. Lincoln, University of Nebraska Press.
9. Jaspars, J. M. F., Van de Geer, J. P., Tajfel, H., and Johnson, N. B. 1965. On the Development of International Attitudes. Psychol. Institute, University of Leiden.
10. Plamenatz, J. 1963. Man and Society. A critical examination of some important social and political theories from Machiavelli to Marx. London, Longmans, Green.
11. Secord, P. F., Bevan, W., and Katz, B. 1956. The Negro Stereotype and Perceptual Accentuation. J. abnorm. soc. Psychol. 53, 78-83.
12. Seeleman, V. 1940. The Influence of Attitude upon the remembering of Pictorial Material. Arch. Psychol. No. 258.
13. Sherif, M. 1936. The Psychology of Social Norms. New York, Harper.
14. Sherif, M., and Harvey, 0. J. 1952. A study in Ego Functioning: Elimination of stable anchorages in individual and group situations. Sociometry, 15, 272-305.
15. Thompson, W. R. 1958. Social Behaviour. In Behaviour and Evolution. Ed. A. Roe and G. G. Simpson. New Haven, Yale University Press (pp. 291-310).
16. Withey, S., and Katz, D. 1965. The Social Psychology of Human Conflict. In The Nature ofHuman Conflict. Ed. E. B. McNeil. Englewood Cliffs, N.J., PrenticeHall (pp. 64-90).

84

