398 EUGENICS REVIEW

devil, nor is he mere clay in the hands of the potter. He counts

for something individual in the educational process." Evolution is

not the faultless system we sometimes read into it: " Nature

scatters her material broadcast on the hit-or-miss principle." There

is an interesting discussion on education as an instinct, though it is

hardly conclusive. The whole book is enriched by freshness of view-

point, and happy choice of illustrations.

It is a work to read and ponder. On the philosophical side it is

the most capable treatment of educational principles we have had in

English. On the prophetical side it is wisely daring and scientifically

careful. It will have great influence on educational thought.

(2.) Professor Thorndike's book has the virtue of simple phraseology

and the strength of logical arrangement, but it loses something of its

force in that the first chapters treat of education as a whole, whilst

the remaining chapters apply to school procedure only. It is thus

likely to be too specific for the general reader and yet incomplete for

the professional student. But it is full of wise things, and marks

the ever-increasing tendency to widen the influence of the school

beyond mere lessons. He rightly places a knowledge of the " ori-

ginal stuff of human nature " as the basis of education, but he makes

only one brief reference to the claims of eugenics.

There are some interesting facts included about American educa-

tion, and the author, as we should expect from his scientific work,

shows himself open to an unbiassed study of all the influences that

are moulding education.

(3.) " The Introduction to Experimental Education " is a striking proof

of the reality of the claim that educational theory has now entered

upon a new stage-the appeal to experiment. That such an excellent

book can be written indicates' how much good work has already been

done. The author summarises the experimental results of many in-

vestigators with great skill and discrimination, resisting'the tempta-

tion to dogmatise, and reviewing the evidence with commendable

absence of bias. The volume should prove an excellent stimulus to

many hitherto working without definite aim, and the wealth of refer-

ences given for further reading will be of great value to those who

desire more complete knowledge.

FRANK SMITH.

Castle, W. E., Coulter, J. M., Davenport, C. B., East, E. M.,
Tower, W. L. Heredity and Eugenics. A course of lectures summarising recent advances in knowledge in variation, heredity, and evolution and its relation to plant, animal, and human improvement and welfare. Chicago, 19I2. (London, Cambridge
University Press). Price Ios. net. THIS book consists in a course of lectures delivered at Chicago in I9II. The five lecturers each treated their special branch in their own way, with the result that there is some repetition, but this is not sufficiently serious to call for adverse comment. The book is intended for those who have made no very thorough study of the subjects dealt with, and in its general simplicity of style, the interest and suitability of the cases chosen, and the excellence of its illustrations it is, well adapted to its purpose. Each writer deals especially with his own investigations, and the field covered is a wide one; the student of human heredity in particular may find that more space than he quite approves is given to guinea pigs, beetles, and maize. None of these things, however, can be neglected, even by those whose interests are concerned with only one part of the subject, and the plan of the book as a whole appears to us to be excellent. The matter, of course, is not new, in the sense of being previously unpublished, but a far-reaching series of summaries of the work of wellknown investigators, such as the book contains, is of value to the reader who has made some study of the subject, as well as to the novice.

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS

399

The chief defect of the book is the dogmatic attitude adopted. In lectures to a popular audience this is difficult to avoid, but in preparing them for publication it is regrettable that the authors did not make greater effort to indicate more clearly where well-established fact ends and unproved inference begins. The inference may, in most cases, turn out to be correct, but until its truth is established some indication should be given that it stands on a different footing from ascertained fact, and most of the writers give the impression that their inferences are no less infallible than their facts. In Professor Davenport's chapters on " Man "
there are also two serious slips-diabetes insiopdus (which appears to be
confused with common diabetes) is placed correctly among dominant affections, but its inheritance is described as if it were recessive (p. 277), and on p. 286, among the general characteristics of recessive abnormalities, the statement appears that " two affected parents have exclusively normal children," where affected children is, of course, meant. It is unfortunate that, in a book which, on the whole, is so well suited to the " general reader," more care has not been taken to ensure complete accuracy.
L. DONCASTER.
SOME RECENT AMERICAN PAPERS ON HEREDITY.
1. Davenport, C. B. Light thrown by the Experimental Study of Heredity Upon the Factors and Methods of Evolution. Amer. Naturalist,
46, I912; pp. 129-138.
2 Davenport, C. B. The Trait Book. Eugenics Record Office, Coldspring Harbour, N.Y. Bulletin No. 6, 1912.
& Davenport, C. B. Sex-limited Inheritance in Poultry. Journ. Exp. 2 vol. 13, 1912; pp. i-i8 (seven coloured plates).
4 Arkell, T. R., and Davenport, C. B. Horns in Sheep as a Typical Sex-limited Character. Science 35, I912; p. 375.
5. Arkell, T. R. Some Data on the Inheritance of Horns in Sheep. New Hampshire Experiment Station. Bulletin i6o, 1912.
6 Jordan, H. E. Studies in Human Heredity. Bull. Philosoph. Soc. University of Virginia, 1912; pp. 293-317.
(I.) This is an interesting summary of the changes that recent genetic research have brought about in our ideas of the process of evolution. The chief changes are: (I) that attention is now devoted rather to characters than to species as units; (2) the increased interest in the relation of continuous to discontinuous variation; (3) the importance of finding out what can be accomplished by selection; (4) the knowledge that characters are not permanently " swamped "
by intercrossing; (5) new light has been obtained on the relations
of somatic to germinal variation; and (6) not all natural characters are adaptive. (2.) " The Trait Book " is a classification of human characters of all kinds-physical, mental, and pathological-intended for the use of collectors of pedigrees. Its system is to give every human characteristic a number, arranged on a decimal notation so that the form of the number classifies the characteristic-all numbers beginning with 4 referring to mental traits, with 42 to feelings etc., and so forth. The numbers run up to five figures, e.g., 42,541
represent "pride," 42,615 "benevolence vs. malevolence." Apart
from the doubtful value of many of the " traits," it would seem simpler to keep the system of numbers for the larger classes, and within these to use an alphabetical system for indexing. Many of the traits are accompanied bv " marginal signs," intended, apparently, chiefly tor the indexer. One of these, placed usually opposite conditions known to* behave as dominants, refers to the instruction, " Do not

