THE EUGENICS REVIEW
THE FUTURE OF OUR RACE.
HEREDITY AND SOCIAL PROGRESS.*
The bearing of heredity on social reform is a question which may be regarded from many points of view. As to its historical aspects, though Plato may well be called a eugenic reformer, and though Shakespeare seems to have thoroughly grasped the difference between heredity and environment, yet this whole subject was but little mooted before the middle of the XIXth Century. Then was brought forward in a manner sufficiently practical to draw wide attention to it the theory of organic evolution; that is the view that all animals and plants are descended from a small number of common ancestors, or possibly from a single progenitor. The belief in this theory gradually spread from the scientific few to the educated many, until it may now be fairly said that it is only the uneducated who still reject it altogether. It was in fact a great revolution in thought. At first the advocates of these new views were attacked as being materialistic; but now it is generally admitted that the absence of individuaI acts of spiritual interference from outside is no proof of the absence of spiritual agencies, and that the most religiously-minded persons may believe that the world has been governed in the past by immutable natural laws. In consequence of this gradual evaporation of religious prejudices, we may now safely prophecy that organic evolution will continue to hold the field as a record of what has actually taken place in the past, though admittedly solving no religious problems. Now periods in which great changes in mental outlook have taken place have always been periods when there have also been great changes in practical matters; and it is for this generation to see to it that the inevitable changes in our social policy, consequent on the acceptance of this newly acquired belief in organic evolution, are both moral and wise in their effects, and such as tend to promote good citizenship in all directions.
Evolution conrsists in slow changes in the forms and qualities of animals and plants as the generations succeed each other; and in order to thoroughly understand how evolution has occurred in the past, it would be necessary thoroughly to understand the way in which natural qualities are transmitted from parent to offspring. Here we enter on
*A course of ten lectures was given this spring at the London School of Econ-omics in conjunction with this Society by distinguished lecturers. It is hoped
that several of these lectures will appear in the next issue of this REvIEw. MajorDarwin's lecture, here printed, was the last of the series, and in it he endeavoured to give a sketch in very broad outline of the whole range of Eugenic thought at the present time.

94 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the fields of study known by the names of heredity and genetics, studies which have been greatly stimulated by the controversy concerning evolution. Heredity, by which is meant the ways in which the inborn qualities of offspring are linked to the qualities of its ancestry, inevitably came to be contrasted with environment, including all those outside agencies which affect the qualities of the offspring independently of its parentage. In this discussion there arose much confusion of thought, a confusion still observable in quarters from which it ought long ago to have been expelled. Until we know exactly what we ourselves mean by heredity and by environment-by nature and by nurture-no advance can be made with safety by us in considering heredity in connection with social affairs.
Every man springs from a single germ, from a tiny globule of living matter; all oi r ancestors in like manner originated in somewhat similar microscopic germs; and the nature of the germs from which we have sprung depended on the nature of the germs from which our ancestors originated. These originating germs may therefore be called the agents of heredity or the carriers of ancestral qualities. During all the years when the germ is developing into the child and then into the grown man or woman, it is being, as it were, guided and aided in its development by its surroundings, by its environment. Without suitable surroundings the germ dies, whilst the kind of environment met with affects all the qualities of the finally emerging human being. Now if we imagine that two germs, absolutely identical in quality, were to start on careers in life which led them to meet witn different surroundings as the years went by, we know that under these conditions certain differences would make their appearance between the two human beings thus brought to maturity; and these differences might be fairly described as being due to environment. On the other hand, if two germs, not identical in quality or composition, were to grow into human beings in absolutely identical surroundings, then the differences between these two individuals could have nothing to do with their environments and might be fairly said to be due to heredity. Every observable difference between two individuals may, therefore, be due to both heredity and to environment, and all are indeed praccally certain to be due to both; and this is an important conclusion, because it indicates that if we are to improve mankind as much as possible, both heredity andenvironment must always betaken into account. If we look only to environment we leave aside all those benefits which might be derived from attending to heredity; and if we look only to
heredity, we miss all the most obvious methods of benefiting mankind.
Moreover, much confusion will be avoided in regard to these matters if we always speak of the differences between human beings and never of the qualities of single individuals. To say that a human quality is solely due to environment implies that heredity had no effect on its development; that is to say that there was no originating germ in the case. For a man to be without either surroundings or an originating germ is impossible; and when this truth is firmly grasped, heredity and environment will never again be regarded as two hostile deities so jealous of each other that to propitiate the one always offends the other. Both must always be propitiated or attended to.

THE FUTURE OF OUJR RACE.

95

That human beings can be immediately benefited by improvenments
in their surroundings is of course a mere truism; for in the past this has been the sole aim of philanthropy. Volumes might be and will be written on these immensely important methods of reform, but here
nothing will be said about them rherely because they do not happen to be the subject under consideration. Whether these immediate bene-
ficial effects, due to the improvement in the surroundings of those now
living, will be in any degree transmitted to posterity by natural inheritance is still a subject in dispute; bit in any case the highest
scientific opinion endorses the view-a view which cannot be too strongly emphasized that any such improvements in the inborn qualities of our descendants, if they do take place, would be so slow in making their
appearance, that this is a possibility which may be safely ignored by the practical reformer. As to the utilization of heredity in regard to social questions, on the other hand, this is as yet an almost untried method of reform, and many doubts may naturally be felt about it by those who
have not studied the questions involved. For instance it may be asked how is it possible thus to benefit those of us who have commenced our march on earth? For it must be admitted that the germs from which we sprang-the carriers of our hereditary endowments-are now quite unalterable. It is true that by a knowledge of the propensities handed on to us by our ancestry we may obtain timely warnings of dangers to come or useful encouragements to persevere in certain directions; but in what other ways could we be helped by even a perfect knowledge of the nature of the germs from which we originated? Here I must admit that the advocates of a study of heredity in connection with social reform have often stood in their own paths by not openly declaring that in a certain sense heredity may be said to be of no importance whatever to any existing human being. We must look to future generations exclusively in regard to racial reform; that is when considering the ways in which, by attending to heredity, succeeding generations can be made to be composed of nobler human beings than would otherwise
have been the case. It is clear that our aim should be to strive to ensure that each gen-
eration shall be endowed with natural propensities somewhat superior to those with which the preceding generation was endowed, thus ensuring a steady, even if a slow, progress of the human race. Evolution is the process by which man has been evolved out of some ape-like ancestor; and a short time ago it seemed as if all we had to do was to let evolution run its own course and human progress would inevitably be the result. Now we see that evolution is a process in which organisms may deteriorate in regard to all the qualities that we wish to promote and indeed in which species or races may disappear altogether. We must strive to make the evolutionary process proceed in the direction we hold to be desirable, which is a very different thing from letting matter, take their own course. But if we are to guide the evolution of mankind in the future, must we not base our plans on a knowledge of the way in which evolution has taken place in the past? And as this is admittedly a matter still in dispute, can we hope to advance with safety along this path before these scientific disputes have been decided ?
This is certainly a question to which an answer must be given.

96 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Possibly the point at issue may be made clear by means of an analogy, even though it be admittedly crude and faulty in many respects. If we deal out a pack of cards over and over again we shall expect never to pick up exactly the same hand twice running; and this though we know that no change whatever has taken place in the pack as a whole. In like manner, even when a population is perfectly stable in quality, no individual in any one generation is identical with any individual in the previous generation. Men may differ greatly one from the other, even though the race remains quite unaltered. But if before again shuffling the pack we were to throw away some of the hands in which there was a large proportion of black cards, then the pack, if exposed on the table after the deal, would befound to have taken on a redder hue. If we were to continue this process deal after deal, making good the loss of cards by such additions as would not change the complexion of the remainder of the pack, in timeall the pack would be composed of nothing but red cards; but herewould be a limit beyond which no further change could thus be made., In like manner, if we could eliminate in each generation a certain number of undesirable individuals, as judged by their natural qualities, the race would thus be made to steadily improve. But here again it seems that there would be a limit to the progress thus possibly attainable; for we have thus far seen no reason to suppose that we could thus. produce any human being in the future who would be superior to those who now either do or might appear on earth. This process is called selection; and as it is a process not under the shadow of any scientificdoubt, here is a method of promoting the advancement of the race by means of which vast beneficial, though perhaps not unlimited, effects could unquestionably be produced.
Where then do these scientific doubts come in? It has been assumed that, however many cards may be discarded, those remaining in the pack would be subject to no change. But in seeking to explain the crossing of such an immense gap as that which separates man from the little jelly-like organisms from which it is suggested he originally sprang, this analogy of the pack of cards breaks down entirely. To, illustrate what must have taken place during this marvellous process of evolution, we must assume that the very cards themselves are liable to change in colour or quality; in which case there would be no limit to the way in which the hands might come to differ from each other in successive deals. The question in regard to which biologists are at issue is -to continue my analogy-whether a continual throwing away of the black cards could not only alter the general appearance of the whole pack, but could also result in an alteration in the very cards themselves. Certain leading men of science hold that for selection to have produced such great evolutionary results as evidently have taken place is as impossible as my analogy seems to suggest, and that we are in fact still in many respects ignorant of the way in which existing species have been evolved from a common ancestry. My own belief is that evolutionary changes can be brought about by selection; but I am willing for the purposes of this discussion to assume that I am in error on this point. What I wish to urge is that our ignorance of' the ways in which evolution has taken place in the past gives us no,

THE FUTURE OF OUR RACE.

97

excuse whatever for not striving to produce racial progress in the future
by the admittedly effective process of selection. All agree that the evolutionary process, however it has been brought about, has been a
very slow process; and as selection between actually existing types
might produce marked effects in the course of a few generations, this is the line of advance to which our attention in regard to racial matters should at all events first be directed. We should now, and perhaps for ever, abandon the hope of creating a superman; that is a human being
so different from ourselves that he would have to be regarded as belong-
ing to a race or species different to any now on earth. On the other hand, the possibility of raising all mankind to the level of the highest existing human types, thus producing an almost inconceivable change for the better, opens out vistas of future reforms such as may absorb our
efforts for many a century to come. Is not this enough to satisfy all
our immediate aspirations? The possibility of utilizing selection as a method of promoting
racial progress obviously depends on the existence of different stocks or racial types amongst us, that is of men springing from germs which were not identical. No progress could thus be made if all men were exactly alike at birth; but that the necessary innate variety of type does exist is a conclusion which is imperatively forced on the minds of all students of nature in ways too numerous here even to be mentioned. The study of twins is especially instructive in this respect; for the only valid reason which can be suggested for their close similarity is that they sprang from closely similar germs. Ordinary brothers can, as a rule, only differ from each other to a greater extent than do twins because the germs from which they sprang were more dissimilar; and we thus see that the greater differences existing between ordinary brothers, as compared to that between twins, gives us a rough measure, at all events not exaggerated, of the amount of the variety due to heredity which exists amongst human beings, that is to say of the differences of type on which selection could operate with effect. But the most convincing of all the proofs of our innate inequality is, in my opinion, that which is founded on commonsense; for if we recall our school days, all of us must admit that we were surrounded by playmates many of whom, though having no advantages over us in regard to home surroundings, we knew we could never excel; whilst, as to others, we felt no pride in our superiority over them because we had no fear of falling to their level, however unfavourable might become the conditions of our lives. Commonsense tells us that all men are not created alike, and it is folly to seek to frame our social policy without reference to this important
truth. But as a method of practical reform, how would it be possible to
apply selection to civilized human beings? All the world knows that we cannot get rid of our black sheep by the simple expedient of murder. Indeed racial reform to be successful must be founded on sympathy now being felt for the sufferings of posterity, of those whom we shall never see; and such sympathy could not go hand in hand with a desire to exterminate many of our unfortunate neighbours, regardless of the misery thus caused. Compulsory marriage is also utterly out of the question; and indeed, for reasons too complex here to be discussed,

98 EUGENICS REVIEW.
this would be a policy not unlikely to promote racial deterioration. As regards the types undesirable from the hereditary point of view, whom we will call for short the less fit, all that can be done is to reduce the size of the families to be born in the future, or in other words to lower the birth rate; whilst in regard to the better types, that is the more fit, our efforts must be directed to increasing their birth rate. In these two directions must lie all our endeavours to promote
racial progress. That beneficial results would arise from selection of course also
depends on the fact that the natural endowments of those selected would be transmitted in some degree to their descendants; and those who desire to obtainr full proof that this would be the case, and under what laws it would take place, must be referred to the many scientific treatises oIn this question. If some practical proof of the benefits derivable from selectioni should be demanded, we cannot do better than to appeal to the experiences of the practical farmer. Of course we must anticipate and be prepared to ignore the stale cry about the methods of the stockyard, methods which we have just now unhesitat-
ingly repudiated. Our point here is, however, that every farmer knows that if he were careless about the breed of his herds, they would soon show signs of deterioration; and will not carelessness in regard to heredity inevitably produce similar results in the case of man? We may, it is true, often see lame sheep in our fields; but that is because the farmer looks to their wool or their flesh, rather than to their feet. Compare the look of the cart-horses in a well-kept farm with that of some of our C. 3 battalions during the war, and no one can doubt that selection might do wonders for man as well as for the lower animals.
This appeal to farnming experience is no doubt deceptive in one respect; for it seems to inmply that the todily qualities are those to which, in coniertionivwith selection, our main attention should be directed. The great superiority of man over other animals lies, however, in his conscience and his intellect, and this fact points to the directionis in whichi furtrher progress is most to be desired. We must not neglect physical qualities, including health and strength; but the
human mind has the first claim on our attention. And as it has been proved that mental qualities are passed on from one generation -to another to about the same extent and in accordance with the same laws as are bodily qualities, we now know that selection is as available in the one field as in the other. In deciding who are to be classed as being amongst the more fit or the less fit we must ook to mind even
more than to body. True, the mystery of mninid remains unsolved; but that is no reason for not utilizing the methods of human betterment which seem to be placed at our disposal.
Here the question may be asked as to whether it would be morally justifiable to attempt to keep out of existence an individual who would on the whole find life a desirable experience. Doubtless many feebleminded children, for example, may be said to lead lives fairly described as being happy on the whole, that is if they are properly cared for; but in many cases the decision whether an existence should be classed as desirable or undesirable raises problems too complex here to be touched on. One important point in this connection may, perhaps,

THE FUTURE OF OUR RACE.

99

be briefly suggested for cornsideration; for it is one nearly always ignored in connection with all these topics. It is not true, but it is
not very far from the truth to say that to prevent one child from being born allows another child to be born. We know as a fact that a high
death rate is nearly always associated with a high birth rate, and this
whether we look to different countries or to different periods of time. This association is partially explained by the fact that the death of
a child causes one less mouth to be fed and one less person needing to be supplied with adequate education and capital to make him selfsupporting, thus reducing the economic strain on the whole social group; and the prudence of parents being one of the many factors regu-
lating the size of families, such a lessening of economic strain must tend
to increase the birth rate in the group in question. In old days a couple in the country often could only marry when they found a vacant house, and in this simple way the marriage of one couple prevented the marriage of another couple. Matters are seldom quite as simple as this
nowadays; but it remains true that abandonment of one marriage has some tendency to promote another. One child not being born does
make it somewhat more probable that another will be born; and if selection is so applied as to lower the birth rate of the inferior types, it will, therefore, automatically tend to increase the birth-rate of the remainder, including all the superior types. Can it possibly be held
to be immoral to advocate a policy which aims at the replacement of the feebleminded, the insane, the unhealthy, and those whose propensities lead them to be criminal or inefficient, by citizens who are aided by nature to be good, wise, healthy and efficient?
By affecting the actions of the less fit in regard to marriage and parenthood, so as to diminish their birth rate, it could only be said that in each individual case the results would probably be beneficial; and it may be urged that we are only justified in demanding sacrifices when evil results would thus certainly be avoided. Careful consideration will, however, show that we are constantly basing our opinions in
regard to the morality of human actions merely on what is likely to occur, or on average results. For a parent to cease the training of his boy merely because no advantages would thus be quite certainly attainable would be held to be foolish or reprehensible; and in the same way a man with many insane relatives, for example, could not justify the production of offspring merely on the plea that they would not certainly be mentally defective. Moreover when we deal with large numbers, probabilities become certainties. The offspring of the less fit are certain to be inferior on the average to the offspring of the more
fit, and the replacement of the one by the other would certainly be beneficial to the race.
To raise the qualities of one generation would, moreover, raise the qualities of the next generation as the result of the mere contact between them; for our civilization is received by us from our ancestors mainly by tradition, and this points to a method of promoting civilization which is always overlooked. The manners and customs of the child when at school are much influenced by the kind of companions there met with; all school children would gain by the absence of playmates of low or defective mentality; and some of this gain would be

100 EUGENICS REVIEW.
passed on by them to succeeding generations by tradition. Again the feebleminded mother, for example, cannot create a high moral or intellectual tone in her home, and all children born therein, even if perfectly normal, would be without the immense benefits due to contact with high-minded parents, a loss in some measure again to be passed on by them to their childrem. The whole tone of a nation is permanently affected by that moral and intellectual contagion which is due to the presence in its ranks of persons of inferior types; and to increase the birth rate of the more fit, or to decrease that of the less fit, would produce beneficial results by relatively increasing the onward flow of good traditions. If the less fit are producing more offspring than the more fit, posterity would suffer in consequence, even if it were true that natural inheritance counted for nothing.
We are all of us in fact damaged in many unperceived ways by the mere presence in our social group, now or formerly, of those inferior to ourselves, whilst we are benefited-let us never forget it by the presence of our superiors. In this matter the moral and intellectual contagion just discussed is probably by far the most important agency for good or evil; but there are other more material advantages and disadvantages due to our social grouping with others which must not be overlooked. If there were no idle or incompetent persons in industry, or if nonc were absent from work on account of crime, sickness or drunkenness, then there would be an enormous increase in production, with a corresponding fall in prices. Under these conditions all of us would be able to buy more goods, or to work shorter hours, or to do both. Then again the grossly unfit citizen as a rule throws a heavy burden on the State, whilst even the less fit earn but relatively small incomes and contribute relatively little towards the national expenditure. Our taxes and our rents-for rents ordinarily include rates-are increased by the presence of undesirable neighbours and would be proportionately decreased if desirable neighbours were to take their place. Again in many industries wages are regulated to no small extent by the amount of work which the average man will do; and competent artizans, who could often with ease do more work, have their wages dragged down because others are idle or less competent. The healthy and careful man who insures against any future contingency has to pay higher premiums because the government or the company, as the case may be, has to look to the risks due to dealing with the unhealthy, the careless and the fraudulent. Even the manufacturer and the shopman has in effect to insure against bad debts by raising his prices to all his customers. Thus we see that in connection with every monetary transaction without exception, that is to say every time we either draw our pay or receive any income, or pay for anything whatever, we are suffering materially from the presence of the unfit in our ranks. This is a colossal burden which we can in a measure lift from the backs of our descendants.
This is all very well, it will be said, but is it possible to suggest any practical methods of obtaining these most desirable results? There are some types, the feeble in mind for example, who are so likely to pass on a defective inheritance to their offspring that in their case parenthood
is now generally conrdemned. Mentally defectives and pronounced

THE FUTURE OF OUR RACE.

101

epileptics should for the most part be kept in institutions, where the
sexes would be kept apart and where they would be in all other respects treated as kindly as possible; for under these conditions they would generally be happier than if left at large. In regard to habitual crim-
inals, wastrels and drunkards, it must be remembered that lengthy periods of confinement would diminish the size of their families, and that the less onerous the confinement the longer it might be maintained without injustice. The hopelessly insane are anyhow kept in confine-
ment, and in their case no question of parenthood arises. As to in-andout cases of insanity, they should all, if possible, be persuaded to allow themselves to be sterilized before leaving the asylum. In these and other similar ways the number of the descendants of the grossly unfit could be greatly diminished in future generations and enormous benefits could thus be secured for posterity.
There are, however, strong reasons for believing that, by dealing
only with these extreme cases, an adequate safeguard would not thus
be obtained against a slow and steady deterioration in the qualities of the nation as a whole. If we wish to prevent the British Empire from following in the footsteps of the Roman Empire and of many other civilizations which have flourished for a time and then disappeared, we must advocate the adoption of more widespread reforms. Many uf the symptoms now clearly discernable in our social condition are the
same as those which we know were discernable in Europe before the advent of the Dark Ages, and we must bestir ourselves in many directions if we are to avoid a similar period of decay in the future.
To emphazise this point, may I return once again to my admittedly faulty analogy of a pack of many cards? The gradual elimination of the worst human stocks by the prevention of parenthood amongst them
may be compared to the throwing away at each deal of a few hands
-containing say some nines or tens of clubs, these being, therefore, very black hands, the remaining hands all remaining in the pack. In this way the pack would become less and less black until all these particular cards had been eliminated, and then no further change in the appearance of the remainder of the pack could thus be brought about. To make my analogy also apply to an increase in the birth rate of any section of the people, we must imagine that some of these remaining hands might be duplicated or multiplied by some magic process; and, this being granted, we see that if many hands with but a slight preponderance of black cards were thus to be multiplied, the whole pack might become more black in general apperance in spite of the removal of all the nines and tens of clubs. In fact a decrease in the birth rate
amongst the grossly defective may take place simultaneously with an increase in the birth rate of such a much larger number of less defective types as to result in a lowering of the racial qualities of the nation as a whole, thus leading to a slow national decay. This is, in my opinion, no fancy danger, but represents what is probably now taking place in our midst.
To face a danger boldly is the first step towards overcoming it; and I have no doubt that the nation, if acting in this spirit, could turn racial decay into racial progress. But if actual progress is to be made -without a great dimunition in our numbers, we must not be content with

102 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the mere elimination of the less fit; for to compensate for the losses thus caused, the more fit must be made to multiply more quickly than at present by an increase in their bilth rate. Here again, however, if it were only the families of persons of marked superiority which were to be increased in numbers, the average qualities of the whole nation could thus only be slightly improved; for the numbers thus effected would be small. The results might be highly beneficial within a limited range; but if racial progress is to be secured, the birth rate amongst the great mass of efficient, law-abiding and healthy citizens must be made to increase, whilst a corresponding decrease in the birth rate must take place amongst the inefficient, the careless, the weak and the stupid. In this way alone can a final catastrophe be avoided.
The views here expressed as to the necessity for adopting racial reforms which would affect a considerable proportion of the population are not, it must be admitted, as widely held as they ought to be, in my opinion; this being perhaps partly because they open out many difficult problems for solution. Dealing first with the endeavour to increase the rate of multiplication of the more fit-of the mass of really useful citizens-something could doubtless be done in this direction by lessening the economic strain on fathers of families; a subject which will not, however, here be discussed. The main effort to promote racial advancement in this manner, must, I am convinced, take the form of a vigorous moral and patriotic campaign; a campaign in which the following points should be made widely known. In a population which remains stable in numbers, the disappearance of one couple must, on the average, be made good by the appearance of another couple, no more and no less. From this it follows that, if a nation is not to decrease in numbers, married couples must on the average produce at the very least two children who themselves grow up and marry. But as many children die when young, to maintain our numbers, the size of thefamily must be three at the very least, and this is also obviously trueof each section of the population taken separately. Hence those parents who are deliberately limiting their families to one or two children are acting as if they thought that they belonged to stock which was not worth preserving. Many sections of the community endowed with excellent qualities are thus dooming themselves to slow extinction, unless some change takes place in their social customs; and this is a grave evil which can onlv be combatted by a wide awakenring to the belief that it is both immoral and unpatriotic for a fairly healthy couple, if with no marked hereditary taint, to limit the size of their family so that they would not be playing their part in maintaining our numbers. It may not be very difficult to win a wide approval in the abstract for these views; the difficulty will be to induce individuals willingly to put up. with the personal disadvantages often entailed in carrying them into practice. For the nation to be prosperous in the future, the more fit must be ready to make sacrifices so as to insure that future generations shall be largely recruited from their ranks.
It will, however, be in attempting to lessen the rate of multiplication of those inferior types which are not obviously defective that the greatest difficulties will be met with; and as here we shall be entering on very debatable ground, I shall be brief. We have seen what a heavy

THE FUTURE OF OUR RACE.

1.03

burden is thrown on their neighbours by those who cannot win an average wage,or, more correctly, cannot produce goods in value up to the average production of the social group to which they belong. For their incapacity they are often in no sense to blame; but for the sake of
posterity we must remember that their inefficiency is in most cases partly dependent on their natural qualities; qualities which they will in a measure transmit to posterity. Whatever might be the result in individual cases, we may be certain that to lower the birth rate of the mass of the inefficient, would result in future generations becoming somewhat more efficient. How is this to be accomplished, while at the same time striving to lessen the suffering of all who are in any way
afflicted ? That is the question. Many proposals have been brought forward with the object of lessening the strain on parents, and if com-
plete success were ever to attend any such efforts to make the burden of rearing large families no greater than that of rearing small families, two results would inevitably follow. In the first place there would
ensue a great increase in the population, together with an inevitable lowering of the standard of living. In the second place there are good
reasons for anticipating that this increase in numbers would occur to
the greatest extent amongst the inferior types. In fact if our nation
is not to go steadily down the hill, some check on the increase in numbers will always have to be maintained, at all events amongst the careless and the improvident. That the strain of family life often causes grievous and, as it seems to us, unnecessary suffering, we are fully aware; yet some warning must be given that it is a reprehensible act to bring into the world large families probably destined to throw a heavy burden on the community. A
warning to be effective must involve some suffering; and I know
of no check on the population which would be widely effective which would not be of a financial nature. Some financial pressure must be applied to the careless and improvident; but until this broad principle is admitted, it is hardly worth while discussing what should
be the nature of this pressure; which is in truth a most difficult problem. Here I am only concerned to point out that if all those incapable of earning an average wage were to limit their families more than at
present, either in accordance with the dictates of common sense or on
account of some warnings of financial difficulties ahead, much misery
in many households would in consequence. be obviated and future generations, would gain greatly because they would thus be made to receive on the average both better natural endowments and better traditions. The future may show us means of securing these benefits far better than those here suggested; but this possibility affords no excuse for not following such lights as we now possess.
But how about those parents who continuie in spite of all arguments
or warnings to bring into the world large families probably destined to
suffer grave disabilities? All the disadvantages to posterity, which have just been pointed out as likely to result from parenthood by the less fit, would in such cases be felt in an aggravated form; because such
parents would by their conduct prove themselves to be selfish, reckless or very stupid. The homes in which any such reckless production of children would take place in spite of all warnings would be homes in

104 EUGENICS REVIEW.
which children would be brought up in poverty and squalor, and in which a high death rate would exist; and these will more and more certainly become the centres from which bad influences will radiate and from which bad natural endowments will flow on to posterity. Ought not some drastic action to be taken to prevent large families from coming into the world if they would be likely to be composed of persons of low morals, poor intelligence, or marked inefficiency? The nation must answer this question in the affirmative if our race is to advance in social well-being as quickly as may be.
Here it may well be asked why racial reforms have received so little attention in the past if their future advantages would really be so
great. The reason seems to me to be clear enough. In the first place many reformers have acquired, I am convinced, the harmful habit of belittling the efforts of other reformers with the entirely unconscious motive of concentrating public attention on their own proposals, and in this way many a useful infant reform has been killed at birth. Then again, by merely striving to improve the inborn qualities of future
generations no benefits could be won by the politician for the voter, by the schoolmaster for his pupil, by the doctor for his patient, by the philanthropist for his suffering neighbours, or by us for ourselves. Racial reform must b% pursued in a spirit of pure unselfishness and pure patriotism; and if Britons in the future are to feel the same pride in our country that we feel in it to-day, our patriotism must make us look to the future even more keenly than to the present.
In all racial questions we are, in fact, concerned with future generations, and what we plead for is that posterity should now receive fair but not undue attention at our hands. The introduction of racial reforms would undoubtedly in some cases involve suffering on the part of existing citizens; but is not the whole basis of our moral code founded on a willingness to suffer for the sake of others? Do not future generations count amongst those of our neighbours for whom we ought to be ready to make sacrifices ? Even if, as I strongly hold, most good will always, on the whole, be done by voluntary actions, yet may not some compulsion be exercised when such sacrifices are not willingly undertaken? We have now knowledge enough, I am convinced, and we shall soon have courage enough, I hope, to introduce many reforms by means of which many advantages will be bestowed on future generations through the agency or natural inheritance. This will not be accomplished without some pain and some risks. Men and women must learn that it is not only in war that they are called on to make sacrifices for their country; for, if poorly endowed by nature, they must be prepared to forego some of the pleasures of parenthood, or, if of good stock, to face the responsibilities and burdens of rearing an adequate family. In this way they will reap the true patriots' reward, a sense of having done their duty. As to risks, we may well adopt Shakespear's words as our motto:-
"Our doubts are traitors And make us lose the good we oft might win By fearing to attempt. "

