THE EUGENICS REVIEW

final chapter deals with the future prospects for during the one year preceding the inquiry gave

effective control by which is implied "the con- a completed family size of seven children per

traction of differences, reconciliation of cultures, woman. The level of fertility has not shown any

and the satisfaction of personal needs and change during the life-time of these women; the

achievement of personal happiness with the aid number of children they actually had by various

of institutions and disciplines in a manner which durations of marriage tallied with the numbers

will further man's still unknown destiny".

they were expected to have according to the

The extent of the author's research is im- marriage duration-specific fertility rates based

pressive but her book would be easier to assimi- on the births during the year of the inquiry.

late, and its impact on the general reader might Moreover, no significant difference was found

be greater, if some of the chapters were shorter in the fertility of the various groups according

in content and all were more concisely expressed. to their occupation, religion, caste, education or

It contains, however, much information for the income. Indeed no differences could be expected

student and, as the author intends, may well owing to the complete absence of the practice of

stimulate further consideration of the many family limitation. Over 90 per cent of the males

studies and reports now available on aspects of and females interviewed in connection with the

population and birth control; no doubt with practice and attitude towards birth control were

this in mind she has appended a useful biblio- unaware of the methods of family planning and

graphy divided under chapter headings.

only 2 per cent had ever adopted any method

There is an adequate index.

F.B.S. of birth control. Further, about three-quarters of

the males and over four-fifths of the females

Pethe, Vasant P. Demographic Profiles of an Urban Population. Bombay, 1964. Popular Prakashan. Pp. xvi+144. Price Rs. 15.00.

interviewed showed no desire to get full information about family planning.
The attitude of the respondents towards the general notion offamily planning was favourable.

THIS IS A report on the results of a demographic- About half of them supported it. The support

economic survey of the city of Sholapur. A was greater among advanced communities and

random sample of 1,203 families was interviewed occupational grades of higher status, and in-

in 1955. Due to the expansion of the cotton creased with the increase in education. Nearly

textile industry, the city has grown rapidly half of the respondents considered a medium-

during the last two decades. Manufacturing sized family of four or five children as the

industry being the main source of employment, optimum size.

over half of the heads of the families interviewed With this situation in 1955, the reader is left

were manual workers. As about seven-tenths of wondering about the reactions of the people in

the families were employed in low-paid occupa- this urban-industrial population to the propa-

tions, their standard of living was found to be ganda for family planning that presumably was

very low. The dependency ratio was high; a undertaken during the Second and the Third

family on an average had 1-6 earners and 4-1 Five Year Plans between 1955 and 1964. The

dependents. The level of literacy, especially for author points out that in the two family

the women, was low, and about one-third of the planning clinics which, till 1955, were the only

adult males and over four-fifths of the adult ones to operate in this city of about 300,000

females were found to be illiterate.

population, only 56 persons took advice on an

The urban-industrial character of the city average in a year, but gives no indication of any

made it an especially interesting area for the increase in the number of clinics or in their

study of patterns of fertility and reproduction. attendance since then.

A total of 1,337 women, who were currently This book is another addition to the large

married, and were between thirteen and fifty amount of literature showing the puzzle that in

years of age, were included in the study of India, while most couples desire a medium-

fertility. The age-specific marital fertility rates sized family, and also have a favourable attitude

computed on the number ofbirths which occurred towards family planning, no significant practice

36

REVIEWS OF BOOKS

of contraception has emerged even in urban and motivational tests. He can and does quote

areas.

SAVITRI THAPAR numerous examples of striking group differences,

good achievers obtaining different factor scores

PSYCHOLOGY
Cattell, Raymond B. The Scientific Analysis of
Personality. A Pelican Original. Harmondsworth, 1965. Penguin. Pp. 370. Price 6s.

from poor ones, delinquents, leaders, homosexuals, neurotics, etc., differing from normals. But the personality test scores of individuals, and these group differences, tend to be highly unstable and chancy, and there is really very

RAYMOND CATTELL IS such a prolific writer of books in the area of personality and of experimental articles, that this Pelican will be welcomed for providing a relatively simple overview of his contributions. For the most part it covers the same ground as Personality and Motivation Structure and Measurement, but seems to have rather more to say about practical applications of personality tests (in education, counselling, clinical work, social investigations, etc.). Moreover, like all his writings, it sparks off novel ideas on every other page. Thus it is the ideal answer for the student who has been told to read up something about Cattell (and one hopes that most serious psychology students are so told).
Whether it can safely be recommended to the intelligent layman or the scientist from another

little evidence that personality tests can give consistently accurate diagnoses. Indeed Cattell himself points out, more clearly than in his previous writings, how much test performance depends on the characteristics of the measuring instrument, how the individual reacts to it, his temporary moods, the social role he is playing, etc.; and while in theory these can also be measured, we have not got very far in controlling or allowing for them in practice. Cattell's psychology, then, is supremely adventurous and provocative, which is all to the good, but apt to be over-optimistic and dogmatic. Another example of this dogmatism may be drawn from his discussion of hereditary vs. environmental determination of his factors, where he claims to have arrived at the perfect technique for
analysing such questions. Surely a technique

discipline who wants to know what personality which fails to show that more intelligent parents

psychology has accomplished, is another matter. give greater intellectual stimulation to their

Cattell is the leading exponent in America, like children than dull parents, and which proves

Eysenck in England, of the view that clinical that spelling ability is more dependent than most

(e.g. Freudian) and literary approaches to per- cognitive traits on heredity, should be regarded

sonality will get us nowhere; we must measure as decidedly fallible. Or is one merely being

personality characteristics objectively, and sort obscurantist?

out the complexities by correlational (factor) Besides these more basic sections, the book

analysis. Most of the book indeed is devoted to contains a lot of very sensible (though equally

expounding these arguments, describing illus- provocative) discussion of the scientific psy-

trative tests, and bringing out the implications chologist's approach to human affairs, education,

of the very large number of factors that he has clinical diagnosis and treatment, guidance, etc.

discovered. But though one sympathizes with Cattell writes vividly; and although the more

his aim and applauds his ingenuity and energy theoretical parts are heavy going, there is very

in pursuing it, the reviewer at least is less certain little statistics, and what there is is explained

that he has reached his goal, or that scientific with remarkable clarity. One feature of the

personality testing for practical purposes is now volume that may intrigue psychologists is the

feasible; and the generality of psychologists extent to which he seems to be seeking a rap-

also seem to have their doubts. So often Cattell prochement with Eysenck, whose philosophy is

appears to over-reach himself, as when he indeed similar, but who differs from him on a

claims to be able to raise the variance in school number of rather fundamental points which are

achievement which can be predicted from about here glossed over. Finally: a minor complaint.

25 per cent by intelligence tests alone, to over No bibliography is provided, only a few refer-

75 per cent by combining intelligence, personality ences for further reading at the end of each

37

