A MEDICAL SERVICE FOR THE TREATMENT OF INVOLUNTARY STERILITY

By MARGARET HADLEY JACKSON, M.B., B.S., D.R.C.O.G., J.P.*

A NUMBER of years ago a courageous difficulty was overcome through the courtesy

woman, Councillor Mrs. Rachel Allen, of Dr. Charles Wroth, Radiologist to the

fought a small battle with a city health Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, who

authority to get a grant for sick and needy allows us to take clinic patients to the

patients to receive contraceptive advice free hospital X-ray department for salpingo-

of charge. Having won her battle to the tune grams; in solving the second, we were

of 7s. 6d. for each patient dealt with, she particularly fortunate in having as our clinic

then set about finding premises and staff and assistant secretary a biologist, Mrs. C. C.

raising funds to start a clinic. In this also Harvey, who had had special training by Dr.

she succeeded, and in January 1930 the Baker at Oxford in the handling and exami-

Exeter and District Women's Welfare Associ- nation of semen. Through her husband,

ation opened its first clinic in Exeter. It was lecturer in biology at the University of the

always Mrs. Allen's wish that the clinic South West, she had access to laboratory

should not only be able to give advice on space, and through the generosity of several

contraception to those who needed it, and good friends we have been able to acquire

could not afford to get it elsewhere, but various bits of expensive but essential equip-

should also be able to help those who wanted ment and apparatus. More recently the

but had failed to have children. It is a matter Family Planning Association, to which the

of regret to me that she did not live long Exeter clinic has been affiliated since I93I,

enough to see the positive side of the work has allotted Mrs. Harvey a research grant.

take root and flourish. In fact this only hap- It is largely through her efforts that we have

pened very gradually, and it was not until been able to elaborate and gradually improve

1937 that any appreciable number of patients our methods of examining vaginal and

came for advice because of sterility. It was seminal fluid and cervical mucus. Her

our intention in the first place to refer such husband, an experienced cytologist, out of

cases as needed full investigation and treat- the kindness of his heart, now cuts and stains

ment elsewhere, but it soon became apparent the endometrial biopsy material. In the early

that facilities for getting this done adequately days, before our demands got too heavy and

and in a well-co-ordinated manner were lack- Mrs. Harvey took on our laboratory work,

ing and that, if it was to be done at all, we Dr. Robb, Pathologist to the Royal Devon

had better do it ourselves. Having only small and Exeter Hospital, did an occasional

funds available, and patients with equally seminal analysis and sectioned the endo-

small incomes, we have had to build slowly metrial biopsies for us. He still does our

and with an eye constantly on expenses. pregnancy diagnosis tests and, more recently,

When we set out to be something more than has arranged for collection of blood for

a sorting station it became obvious that, in Rhesus factor testing. I should like to take

addition to acquiring some new skill and a this opportunity of recording our gratitude

few new instruments, two other things were to Dr. Robb for his friendly criticism and

essential; first, access to an X-ray depart- advice and for lending us his charming and

ment; secondly, access to a laboratory and long-suffering wife, who has been our clinic

the help of someone skilled in handling and secretary for many years and who guides a

examining biological material. The first wayward medical officer and our voluntary

* A paper read before the Eugenics Society on May 23rd, I944.

secretarial staff with unfailing tact and good humour. Through the generosity of a number

"17

II8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of commercial firms, Organon, Boots and developed at the Exeter clinic. This seems

Parke Davis & Co. in particular, we have to be what people want and incidentally pro-

been able to obtain supplies of endocrines vides a small contribution to the population

either free or at a reduced cost for those problem. That such centres are required

patients needing this type of treatment. may be conceded, but the problem of their

Those needing operative treatment are location is more controversial. It may be

referred to the surgical staff of the Royal that in some districts such a centre would be

Devon and Exeter Hospital or of one of the best run in connection with a hospital, or by

North Devon hospitals, who accept our a local health authority; in others, as in

diagnosis and evaluation of the factors Exeter, a long-established birth control clinic

responsible for the sterility in any given may provide its natural home. The leanings

case, thus saving much time and duplication and capabilities of medical staff would pre-

of investigation. The hospitals, for their sumably tend to settle its habitat. If still

part, send many cases of sterility which need more F.P.A. clinics expand along these lines,

investigation to the Devon Family Planning as it is hoped that they will, it is essential

Association clinics.

that they should make it their business to be

Without the co-operation and voluntary closely linked with their local hospital and its

help of all these people this sterility service consulting staff so that cases may be referred

could never have come into being; with to and fro and not be, as was suggested by a

their help we are now able to carry out at correspondent in the B.M.J. of October 23rd,

any rate some of the tests upon the results I943, " cut off from properly staffed and

of which rests the diagnosis of the causes of equipped hospitals." Perhaps we are lucky

subfertility, and also to provide or refer for in Devonshire, but a less obstructive, less

treatment those cases which in our opinion jealous and a more friendly and co-operative

are treatable. In the early years many of the collection of honoraries it would be difficult

patients came on their own initiative; now to find.

more than go per cent. are referred to us by With regard to the organization of a

their own doctors, by the hospitals, or by service for the investigation and treatment of

nurses.

involuntary sterility, with which we are more

In the fourteen years during which I have particularly concerned to-day, a few points

been associated with the work at a birth need stressing. The handling of sterile

control clinic it has repeatedly, and more and couples as at present done by many, hospitals

more forcibly, impressed itself on me that is incomplete and slipshod; it is not work

the positive and negative aspects of family that can be carried out as a small side-line.

planning should be dealt with under one in a busy hospital gynaecological or urological

scheme and, if possible, by the same doctor out-patients' department; too often women

or team of doctors. The ideal family plan- are subjected to examination and operation

ning centre should, in my view, be a friendly without their husbands having been asked to

place where married couples could come for submit a seminal specimen for examination;

advice not only on family spacing and and, if both partners are examined, too often

limitation and marital difficulties, but also on there is no piecing together of the evidence

involuntary sterility and minor gynaeco- and no co-ordinated planning of treatment

logical troubles; where pregnancy tests can for the couple as a unit.

be carried out; where women can be guided The study of human fertility and sub-

and helped when pregnant, and where they fertility is an absorbing and time-consuming

can come and ask questions about the best business, and in charge of a sterility service

arrangements to make for their confinements, there should be one medical officer able to

and so 'forth. From such a centre they could give much time to the matter, who must be

when necesgary be referred to private primarily responsible for co-ordinating the

doctors, midwives, or hospitals. I speak from results of examinations carried out by him-

practical experience of how the work has self and by others, and for discussing and

A MEDICAL SERVICE FOR TREATMENT OF INVOLUNTARY STERILITY IIg

plannxing treatment, for seeing that it is ,of their relative or absolute childlessness.

properly controlled by further tests, and for Another fact is equally patent, that adequate

organizing a follow-up system in order to facilities to deal with all these unfortunate

learn as fully as possible the results of treat- people who want help are at present sadly

ment. This medical officer, so as to retain an lacking in this country.

undistorted judgment, should also constantly The members of the Executive and Medical

be dealing with fertile, or better still super- and Subfertility committees of the F.P.A. are

fertile, couples. Thus a contraceptive and a\ fully aware that its clinics, if expanded along

sterility clinic are useful bed-fellows, the the lines outlined above, can contribute most

cases coming for advice to the former pro- usefully to the solution of this problem and,

viding invaluable material for control obser- in fact, that they are in many ways the best

vations on patients attending the latter. possible places for barren couples to come

Returning now to the West Country, it in the first instance for encouragement and

may be of interest to follow the general trend advice. At its conference of branches in June

of attendance at these small provincial F.P.A. I943 the question of how best to deal with

clinics (i.e. Exeter and its branch clinics at the numerous cases of subfertility turning up

Barnstaple and Totnes). The total number at the clinics for advice was discussed, and

of new patients seen each year has increased Mr. Alec Bourne and Mr. Lane Roberts

more or less steadily during the past fourteen addressed the meeting. Later in the year a

years (Table I), but most noteworthy is the brief post-graduate course was organized at

marked increase in the percentage of patients which methods for investigating subfertile

coming for advice because of their inability cases were demonstrated by Mr. Bourne, Mr.

to conceive.

Lane Roberts, Miss Moore White, Mr. Nixon,

TABLE I

and myself. Still more recently the F.P.A.

Showing annual total of patients coming for advice on has appointed a doctor willing to carry out

contraception and involuntary sterility and the percentages in each group

Years

Total

For

For

the work of examining seminal specimens for the clinics in the London area, and is arrang-

Attendances Contraception Sterility ing and paying for his special training in this

Per cent. Per cent. work.

1933 ... 1934 ... 1935 ...

I46
172
i8i

99.25
98.9
99.5

0.75
I.I

It may be of interest briefly to outline the

0.5 procedures we have adopted in dealing with

I936 ... 1937 ... 1938 ...

i86 '75 I89

96.8 94.3 92.6

3.2 cases seen in this F.P.A. " sterility service,"

5-7
7-4

and to give a few particulars about the clinics

1939 ... I98

90.9

9.I and the cases themselves. Each clinic has a

1940 ... 194I ... I942 ...

220 355
413

90.9 88.8
84.5

9.1 II.2
I5.5

waiting-room, a room for history taking, and an examining room. The Exeter clinic now

I943 ... 486 66.9 331I has, in addition, a small operating-room.

Our experience at these clinics is only a Most of the patients have been seen at the

reflection of a much more widespread move- Exeter clinic or at its branches in Barnstaple

ment and indicates a new consciousness on and Totnes, some have been seen in private

the part of the public that something can be practice. The majority are in the lower

done about sterility and a desire to get income groups, nearly all the wives are

something done. How much this is the result working and, since the war started, many of

of war conditions, or to the gradual seeping the husbands are in the Forces. Our aim has

out of information about scientific and therefore been to keep the procedures ambu-

medical advances in knowledge on this sub- latory, simple and inexpensive, incidentally

ject and how much to a natural increase in avoiding the unnecessary use of hospital

subfertility, it is impossible to say-there are beds. The causes of .a sterile or subfertile

simply no figures to go on. But the fact mating, including habitual abortion, have

remains that there is an increasing demand obviously to be sought in both partners, but

on the part of subfertile couples to be cured at clinics of this sort it has so far been possible

120 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

only to deal in person and in some detail with pregnancy appears in a few months, it is as

the wife; an estimate of the husband's well to carry out further investigations. In

health and fertility has to be arrived at by doing this it is not always possible or desir-

questioning her, by getting information from able to do things in the same order: the

his doctor, or referring him for examination, husband's leaves and feelings and the wife's

by examining samples of semen, and by doing menstrual cycle have to be taken into con-

repeated post-coital tests on the wife; mani- sideration, but in an obstinate case it is

festly an incomplete procedure, but it is essential that both husband and wife should

hoped after the war to establish a session submit to thorough examination and that

where husbands can come in person for in- the couple should be dealt with as a unit if

vestigation and advice. Our work has also any degree of success is to be attained. The

been restricted because of lack of funds, time examination must be planned so as to obtain,

and space, and much that might have been as far as possible, answers to the following

done has of necessity been neglected. We points:

have had to dispense with such things as i. Are there any endocrine defects in

estimations of the hormone content of blood

either husband or wife ?

and urine, B.M.R. estimations and testicular 2. Are there any toxic factors at work to

biopsies, and the treatment is therefore to

depress gonadal functions ?

some extent empirical and improperly con- 3. Are there any faults or difficulties in

trolled. However, the methods of examina-

delivery or reception of the kemen ?

tion and tests which have been adopted do 4. Are there sufficient normal sperm being

make it possible to sort out at any rate a

produced, and is their motility and

proportion of the cases and to estimate to

viability adequate ?

some extent the results of treatment.

5. Do the husband's sperm survive .well

Complete and absolute sterility in either

in his wife's genital tract and are they

men or women is comparatively rare, but

likely to reach the ovum?

minor degrees of infecundity appear to be 6. Is there any obstruction, complete or

relatively common there is, in fact, a steady

partial, in either genital tract ?

gradation down the scale from extreme hyper- 7. Is ovulation occurring and at what

fertility to complete sterility with the curve

point in the menstrual cycle ?

piled high in the middle regions. The question 8. Are conditions favourable for em-

may be asked, at what point should a

bedding ?

marriage be labelled subfertile; when is it 9. Are any genetic lethal factors at work ?

sensible for a couple to ask advice and io. Are any psychological. difficulties

justifiable for a doctor to intervene ? Obvi-

present ?

ously there is no universal answer, but as a

very general rule it may be stated that if a Record Keeping

couple have lived together and remalted A case card designed by Dr. C. P. Blacker

barren for twelve months without using any and members of the medical subcommittee

form of birth control they will be well of the F.P.A. is used both for patients coming

advised to seek help; such things as dyspa- for contraceptive advice and for those seeking

reunia, impotence and early miscarriage may advice because of sterility. This card was

well call for intervention sooner. All cases designed partly with a view to collecting

do not need full investigation right away, this statistics for the Population Investigation

becomes apparent after taking a history and Committee and on it are spaces in which can

doing a pelvic and perhaps a post-coital be entered details relating to age, parents,

examination. Some quite simple advice and siblings, occupation, education, religion and

treatment, such as advice about fertile days, income of both husband and-wife; date(s)

frequency of coitus, relaxation, or the clean- of marriage(s); details about pregnancies;

ing-up of an unhealthy cervix, and so forth, use of contraceptives; sexual habits and

may be all that is needed. If, however, no frequency of intercourse; medical history;

A MEDICAL SERVICE FOR TREATMENT OF INVOLUNTARY STERILITY 121

general and pelvic examination; and records cannula with a fair-sized lateral hole near

of subsequent visits and progress of the case. the tip with a stiff rubber bulb or a io cc.

All records are made at the time of making syringe to effect suction has been found to.

examinations and tests.

answer the purpose best. The mucus is ex-

In addition to this the patient is asked to pressed on to a slide and is immediately

keep a personal record of menstrual dates; examined under a microscope withouit dilu-

dates of husband's leaves or of coitus, and, in tion. The character and amount of the

certain cases, if sufficiently co-operative and mucus is noted and the slide is then taken to

intelligent, a chart of morning and evening the laboratory; part of the mucus is used

rectal temperatures.

for making films for staining and part for the

determination of pH. This is one of the most

Examination

valuable tests and provides information not

After having her history taken the patient only about the viability of sperm and the

is examined and a decision arrived at as to numbers in which they reach the cervical

whether the case warrants fuller investiga- canal, but also about the degree of genital

tion or whether the effect of simple treat- hypoplasia present in the wife, the state of

ment and advice, as outlined above, should her endocrines, and the presence of infection.

first be tried. In the investigation of the Repeated many times in the same patient,

more obstinate cases some or all of the often at different intervals following coitus,

following examinations are carried out: it also provides a most valuable check on the

Examination of Vaginal Fluid.-By effects of treatment. We have not yet

means of wet and stained films and electrical arrived at a conclusion as to what is the most

determination of pH. Material is collected useful and convenient post-coital time in-

in a small bakelite spoon and a loopful in terval to make a routine test nor exactly

saline is examined microscopically at the what constitutes a " good " or " bad " result.

clinic; the remainder is taken to the labora- In its simplest form (examination of a wet

tory for the rest of the examination. Infor- film) this test has now been done about 400

mation is thus obtained about the presence times on fertile and subfertile women on

of sperm and of trichomonas vaginalis and most days in the cycle and at times after

monilia, about the predominant bacterial coitus varying from i hour to 14 days, and

types present and about the character and motile sperm have been found up to I50

percentages of the various cellular elements. hours after the last intercourse. The pH

This examination provides valuable corro- has been determined in some 150 samples,

borative evidence of endocrine deficiencies, the range being 6-4 to just over 8*o.

of certain forms of impotence or premature Endometrial Biopsy.-The material is ob-

ejaculations and, when repeated at intervals, tained with a Sharman's biopsy curette and

a means of assessing the effect of treatment. fixed in Bouin, and serial sections are stained

We have examined between 400 and 500 in haematoxylin and eosin. The procedure

samples of vaginal fluid both from subfertile takes a few minutes and is only very slightly

and -fertile women and at all times in the painful unless the cervical canal is markedly

cycle. The pH range has been found to lie distorted and the internal os almost cartila-

between 4 - 2 and 7*o; more than go per cent. ginous. It is worth making a note at the time

of all samples (subfertile and fertile) have a of taking the specimen of how easily it was

pH of less than 6*o.

obtained and of its macroscopic appearance;

Examination of Cervical Mucus (Post- the bottle is labelled at once with the patient's

Coital, Sim's or Huhner's Test), also by name and the date of taking the biopsy; the

means of wet films, stained films and elec- dates when the previous and subsequent

trical determination of pH. This mucus may period starts are also recorded. A special

be extremely difficult to extract quickly and register is kept where these particulars are

in sufficient quantity and many methods and entered, together with the microscopical

instruments have been tried. A metal report on the sections. Thus it is easy to see

1I22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

whether any given specimen shows development compatible with the stage in the cycle when it was taken. This examination does not provide a complete answer to the question whether normal ovulation has occurred or will occur, but it does provide important information about ovarian function and
endometrial response. Some 500 biopsies have been taken from
more than 250 women (both fertile and sub'fertile) at all stages in the cycle. It may be mentioned in passing that it has been possible from the specimens of endometrium in this series to support Sharman's findings that anovulatory cycles are comparatively rare and often spasmodic in their occurrence,
but not his findings of tuberculous endometritis in 5 per cent. of biopsies from sterile women,* but a further search is being made. It is noteworthy that in about a dozen cases no period has followed the taking of a biopsy in the premenstrual phase (i.e. presumably after fertilization has occurred). The slight trauma inflicted not only has not interfered with pregnancy but, it would seem, has encouraged dicidua formation.
Tubal Insufflation.-Gordon King's ap-
paratus has been used and has been found satisfactory and easy to handle; the kimographic tracing is filed with the patient's
notes and the date of doing the insufflation, and the occurrence or not of referred shoulder pain is recorded at the same time. If there is indication of spasm, stenosis or blockage on the tracing, the test is repeated, sometimes after giving atropin. The test provides information as to the degree of patency and peristaltic action of the Fallopian tubes. It would appear to have a therapeutic value in some cases. More than 250 insufflations have been done, the majority between the ninth and twentieth days of the cycle, though later days have been used. No unpleasant sequelae have been reported in any of these patients. Cases showing complete tubal blockage confirmed by two or more insufflations are in our experience rare (under IO per cent.). This fits in with the lower incidence of endometrial tuberculosis in this series.
* Quoted by Sutherland (I943), J. Obstet. Gynevc. Brit. Emp. 50, x6iI.

Uterosalpingogram;-In order not to trespass too much on the time and good nature
of the radiologist and his staff only carefully selected cases are subjected to this examina-
tion: those in which a block needs localizing or confirming, or in which distortion of the
tubal or uterine cavity or cervical canal seems likely. Some fifty have been done also without any ill effect and in a few cases with
immediate benefit. It should be noted that these examinations
have been done in the small operating or
examining room at the clinics or in the hospital X-ray department, all (with the
exception of a few tubal insufflations, which
were done immediately before a D. and C;) without anaesthesia and apparently withc,ut discomfort or damage to the patient. Asepsis
is, of course, observed and the presence of
active pelvic inflammatory conditions ex-
cluded. Seminal Analysis.-When we have ascer-
tained that the husband is willing to be examined he is given a thin-walled glass tube with a waxed cork, a slip for entering name, date and hour of collection of the specimen
and date of previous emission and written
instructions of how to collect and deliver the specimen to the laboratory. We have found it important that the tube should be warmed
to blood heat before receiving the seminal fluid (sperms stand sudden chilling badly)
and that a sheath should not be used. We prefer the specimens to be produced as a result of coitus interruptus, though selfproduced specimens appear to be satisfactory except from the point of view of a fair esti-
mate of volume. The specimen should reach the laboratory as soon as possible after production; the outside limit for the examination to be of full value is five hours. In these days of husbands coming and going on short leaves we have not found it possible to insist with any success on an interval of more than two or three days since the last intercourse. It is sometimes possible to arrange for a specimen to be collected on the first, day of the husband's leave, but this is often after a period of abstinence of six to twelve weeks (with irregular and unrecorded emissions), and our impression is that it is no sounder, if

A MEDICAL SERVICE FOR TREATMENT OF INVOLUNTARY STERILITY I23-

as sound, to judge a specimen after a long one case only. Patients needing pregnancy

period of abstinence than after a recent diagnosis tests and collection of blood for

coitus (always provided that this has Rhesus factor testing are referred to Dr.

occurred more than twenty-four hours pre- Robb at the Royal Devon and Exeter

viously).

Hospital. Examination of bloodfor W.R. and

The examination of the specimen includes: G.C.F.T. and of cervical mucus and urethral

estimation of volume, consistence and ap- smears for G.C. is done by the city and

pearance, density and character of sperm county bacteriologists, the specimens having

population, and percentage of initial activity been collected at the clinic.

and of viability, under various conditions,

up to forty-eight hours. Two or more speci- Evaluation of Evidence and planning

mens are examined in as many cases as Treatment

possible, more particularly in those cases Having collected as much evidence as pos-

receiving treatment, and we have made an sible about the couple from their history,

effort also to obtain specimens from menstrual calendar, temperature chart,

husbands of women coming to the clinic for general examination and special examina-

contraception. In all some 350 specimens tions, an attempt is made to assess which

have been examined from more than 250 factors in husband and wife or both are

men. A point of considerable importance mainly responsible for the sterility. Only

that does emerge from our records is that it occasionally is one factor in either partner

is not safe to pass an unfavourable verdict solely responsible; more often both partners

on the evidence of one unsatisfactory speci- show evidence of subfertility in one or more

men. It is only after several analyses have directions. Some of the cases respond to quite

confirmed the first gloomy picture that this simple advice and treatment, and not infre-

can safely be done. For example, we have quently one of the diagnostic procedures is

had four samples with counts below io million immediately followed by conception; e.g.

sperm per cc., the last coitus in three cases biopsy, tubal insufflation, salpingogram.

being reported as having taken place more Others may require much patient work and

than three days previously; in three of these frequent reconsideration of old and fresh

cases counts of 30 to II5 million were evidence. For some the chances ot success

found on other occasions, while in the fourth are so remote that the couple have to be

it has not yet been possible to repeat the advised that there is no reasonable hope, and

count, and in all four cases these men have that adoption is their best chance of acquir-

fertilized their wives, since their unfavour- ing a child; in a few, one is left in the

able counts, without receiving treatment. exasperating position of saying " conditions

Clearly our methods of assessing male are apparently favourable for conception,

fertility are still imperfect. Another small why doesn't it occur? " Obviously, one has

point: it is important to be tactful in giving missed some point in the diagnostic chain.

out reports on husbands if they prove to be No small part of the difficulty in dealing

subfertile. A happy marriage can be wrecked with these patients is to keep them hopeful

and the husband's self-confidence and potency yet not over-anxious, and undismayed by the

seriously upset by a too abrupt and final many examinations. They like being told

unfavourable report. The treatment of how things are going and what all the tests

inadequate spermatogenesis is uncertain; are for, and what their chances are. Husbands

check-up on the results of treatment by are encouraged to write or make personal

repeated seminal analysis is important, contact if they wish.

though the evidence obtained from this not At the clinic we are able to carry out or

infrequently conflicts with clinical results. arrange for most of the treatment likely to

be needed; much of it is purely advisory,

Other Investigations

either to the patient by word of mouth or to

Testicular biopsy has been done, so far, in the couple's doctor by letter, 'about such

I24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

things as diet, vitamins, clearing up of septic foci, rest and exercise, frequency of coitus
and fertile days. Certificates for husbands in the Forces, so that their leaves may be timed
to coincide with their wives' fertile dates,
have met with remarkably sympathetic
response from commanding officers. Psycho-
logical treatment may be needed for certain
cases of impotence, or premature ejaculation and vaginismus; though many cases with
minor degrees of the former can be dealt
with by ordering the husband a short holiday, building up his self-confidence, or giving him short intensive courses of Methyl Testosterone, and of the latter by persuasion and
gradual dilatation of the introitus, sometimes accompanied by treatment with oestrogens to build up a thin hypersensitive vaginal mucosa. Discharges (unless gonococcal) are dealt with at the clinic by local treatment of one sort or another (including electrical cauterization of the cervical canal if neces-
sary), supplemented by endocrine treatment or measures to improve general health. Uterine misplacements are corrected if possible. Endocrine treatment, if indicated, is
planned for husband and/or wife and supplies
of endocrines and dosage schemes are sent
to the patient's doctor. Regimental Medical
Officers have been extremely helpful in dealing with husbands. A few have received their dosage of endocrines by means of im-
plants of crystalline hormone done at the clinic. Some of the wives have been sent to Dr. Wroth for pelvic diathermy, or smalldose X-ray therapy to ovaries or pituitary. Those needing operative treatment (D. and C., myomectomy, salpingostomy, etc.) are referred to the appropriate surgeon. For cases where there are faults of delivery or reception, or where the semen is lacking in vitality, artificial insemination from the husband is attempted (so far without much success).
The treatment of habitual abortion is a big
subject and involves the use of endocrines in adequate doses, diet, vitamins and rest. For those unfortunate couples in whom a pronounced Rhesus incompatibility has produced a crescendo of foetal disasters artificial
inseminaation from a donor compatible with

the wife is a possible solution, but has not yet been attempted.

Findings and Results
No attempt can be made here to discuss our findings, the groups into which the cases may be classified, or the detailed results of treatment. The data we have accumulated have not yet been fully analysed; our delay in doing so is partly due to lack of time, but mainly because we were determined to accumulate a number of observations on both fertile and subfertile patients before making
judgments. Some of the early work has been discarded because of faulty methods or be-
cause it seemed to be leading nowhere. However, one general observation and a few figures from the groups, subfertile and fertile, may be of interest. From the point of view of general health (endocrine deficiency excepted) the women in the subfertile group are on the whole a fitter sample than those in the fertile group. Up to the end of March I944, 389 women have been seen complaining of complete or relative barrennebs. Taking this group as a whole, the average ages of both partners and the average length of their married life and the number of conceptions have been calculated from particulars taken at their first visit. As a control similar figures have been obtained from a random sample taken consecutively of 300 patients attending for contraceptive advice. The comparable figures for the two groups are shown in Table II:

TABLE II

389 SUBFERTILE AND 300 FERTILE WOMEN COMPARED
Figures calculated from particulars -noted at first visit

Subfertile

Fertile

Average age .fWHiufseban..d. 33023'0770

2392*'2755

Years married (av.) ..5. .2.6..TV
No pregnancies before first visit ... ... 264 (68%)

35 (II3%)

Having been pregnant

before first visit ...

I25

265

(64 LB, I48 M) (726 LB, 77 M)

Live births (LB) per

woman ... ... o0I6

2`4

Miscarriages or still-

births (M) per woman 0o 38

0*26

The groups are closely comparable with regard to age and length of marriage; per-

A MEDICAL SERVICE FOR TREATMENT OF INVOLUNTARY STERILITY 125

haps the most noteworthy, if not unexpected,
feature about the pregnancy figures is the close association between subfertility and the tendency to miscarry which will be seen again in our table of results. In considering
'efforts at contraception before the first visit -t is of interest to compare these two groups
again (see Table III):
TABLE III
CONTRACEPTION BEFORE FIRST VISIT IN 389 SUBFERTILE
AND 300 FERTILE WOMEN
Contraceptive history Subfertile Fertile Not used, or used for less than
3 months ... ... ... io8 (28%) 27 (9%)
Used for 3 months or longerCoitus interruptus only ... I07 (27%) II5 (38%)
Sheath, cap, and/or chemical I4I (36%) I4I (47%)
Inadequate data ... ... 33 (9%) 17 (6%)
This does not suggest that the use of contraceptives induces sterility, but rather that the superfertile woman makes somewhat fruitless efforts to control her fertility by using birth control of one sort or another.
We have attempted to keep in touch with all the patients who have been investigated or treated in any way, but as always, and more particularly owing to the mobility imposed on many wives by war-time conditions, a number have vanished. Of the 389

women in the subfertile group rather more than IOO have either not been seen since their first visit or have apparently given up the idea of continuing investigation and treatment and have been lost trace of. Of those about whom we have news I35 haves conceived on one or more occasions.
Those pregnancies that have terminated have done so as follows:
Live births-74 (3 the result of artificial insemina-
tion). Still births or miscarriages-46.
29 are at presqnt known to be pregnant (one the result of artificial inEemination).
It is our custom to ask patients who have achieved a child to send us a photograph of the offspring. Proud mothers quite often being their infants to the clinic and take great pleasure in exhibiting them to the as yet barren but hopeful crowd in the waitingroom.
The degree of successes as indicated by the above figures may appear meagre in propor-tion to the work involved. The compensation, however, lies in the fascination of exploring this still incompletely charted territory, the pathetic gratitude of the parents, and the gardener's satisfaction in having made a blade of grass grow where none grew before.

SOCIETY OF COMPARATIVE LEGISLATION

"For the promotion of Inowledge of the coune of legIlation in different countries, more particularly in the
veral parts of His Majety's Dominion., and in the United States."

President: The Rt. Hon. S. M BRUCE, CIL, MIC.

Chairman of the Executive Committee The Rt. Hon. Lord MACMILLAN, G.C.V.O.

Honorary Secretaries: C. E. A. BEDWELL, Esq.

Professor H. C. GUTREDGE, L.C.

Annual Sudscription

-One

Guinea

Addres: 28 Essex Street, London, W.C2

