THE MECHANISM OF HEREDITY
AND E VOLUTION.
By C. C. HURST, Ph.D. (CaIitab.), F.L.S.
Abstract of Paper read before The Eugenics Society, 23rd March, 1927).
Gregor Mendel was the first to conceive a mechanism of heredity 'in his experiments with Peas published in 1866. Unfortunately Mendel's important paper remained unknown to Scieice until it was ,discovered by Hugo de Vries in 1900. Several authors, from Hippo-crates to Herbert Spencer, had previously suggested the general idea *of vital particles in an organism, but it was Charles Darwin who in 1868 provided a sound basis for the later fruitful investigations and theories of the mechanism of heredity, in his comprehensive conception of Pangenesis. In the theory of Pangenesis (modestly announced as a provisional hypothesis) Darwin suggested a mechanism of heredity based on the existence of minute representative living gemmules in the cells. This conception was of vital importance, since it led directly to the work of Galton, de Vries, Weismann, the discovery ,of Mendel, the experiments of Bateson and others, and to the experimental discoveries of Morgan and his colleagues. To-day, after more than half a century of revolutionary experimental investigations in heredity, Darwin's conception of represexitative living units *in the cells, remains the fundamental principle of the mechanism of heredity. Darwin's speculative gemmules of the nineteenth century have become the experimentally demonstrated genes of the twentieth ,century, and the reality of their existence in the cell is now as certain as that of the electrons in the atom.
The fundamental importance of the gene in biology is certainly as great as that of the electron in physics and the atom in chemistry.
Francis Galton, the founder of the philosophy of Eugenics, after' ,considerable criticism and modification, was the first to accept Darwin' s theory of Pangenesis in 1875. The discovery of Hertwig in the same year, and of Van Beneden in 1883 that the nucleus of the cell is the actual vehicle of heredity, cleared the way for the important development of Darwin's concept of Pangenesis by de Vries in 1889 in his

20 EUGENICS REVIEW.
theory of Intracellular Pangenesis which placed Darwin's original theory on the firm footing of the observed facts at that date. In 1892 Weismann, accepting Darwin' s "ideal theory" of Pangenesis as modified by Galton and de Vries, demonstrated the importance of the chromosomes as the carriers of the units of heredity. The discovery of Mendel's long lost paper in 1900 heralded a new epoch in the history of heredity, since it provided an experimental demonstration of the existence of the units of heredity postulated by Darwin and his successors. In 1902 and later, Bateson and others extended Mendel' s genetical experiments with Peas to all kinds of plants and animnals. In r9JIIQbrgan.published.the first results of his genetical experiments with the- Fruit Fly Drosophila, culminating in 1925 with the convincingmonograph on the Genetics of Drosophila which experimentally demonstrated the mechanism of the genes in heredity. Morgan and others have established the relative locations of many genes, in each of the four chromosomes of the Fruit Fly Drosophila melanogaster, and have demonstrated a linkage system of these genes within each chromosome. So far about 400 genes have been located in this species, of which about 150 are in the sex chromosome so that the characters. which they represent are sex-linked in their inheritance. Morgan's results in Drosophila have already been confirmed in other genera of animals and plants and are being rapidly extended.
As a result of this work it is now experimentally demonstrated that the genes representing the characters of plants and animals are carried in the chromosomes of the nucleus of each cell. Consequently the mechanism of the chromosomes in development and in the formation of the germ cells has a fundamental significance in heredity and evolu-. tion. In other -words the mechanism of heredity and evolution is the mechanism of the chromosomes and the genes therein.
Mechaniam of Development.
Chromosomes are remarkably similar in appearance in plants and animals. 'If a group of cells be taken from a plant and compared with a group of cells from an animal each cell will be found to have a central nucleus, and in the cells about to increase by division, the chromosomes appear in the nuclei as rod-like bodies which divide longitudinally, one half of each chromosome going to one pole of the cell and the other half to the other pole, eventually making two cells out of one. The two new cells formed contain the same number of chromosomes as the original mother cell. This mechanism of development which is known as Mitosis, is carried through by the chromosomes. in every somatic division of the multitudinous cells of plants and animals as growth proceeds.
The remarkable technique developed by Chambers in his tissue cultures shows that the living chromosome is a gelatinous extensible and contractible body, with a definite structure of granules arranged in rows about a non-granular core. Wenrich took 18 chromosomes of the
B pair from 13 individuals of the Grasshopper (Phrynotettix magnus)
and these showed a striking constancy in size and arrangement of the principal chromatic granules or chromomeres,and the same constancy was shown in the different cells of a single individual.

THE MECHANISM OF HEREDITY AND EVOLUTION. 21
On the other hand he found that different chromosomes have ,different arrangements of chromomeres. This is visible evidence that -the chromosome is a compound body with a definite longitudinal differentiation. In view of these visible indications of structural differentiation in the chromosome it is not difficult to appreciate the existence of more minute structures beyond the visible chromomeres into the invisible ranges of the gene.
Alechanism of Heredity.
In the formation of the germ cells quite a different mechanism of the chromosomes is seen both in plants and animals. At a certain stage known as the maturation or reduction division, both the male and female germ cells in plants and animals reduce the number of their chromosomes by one half. For instance, to take two extreme cases,
the Nematode Threadworm (Ascaris megalocephala univalens) has only two chromosomes in its germ-cells before maturation. At the
reduction division one of these chromosomes goes to one pole and the other chromosome to the other, so that the eggs and sperms contain only one chromosome. Similarly in the Crayfish (Cambarus virilis) which has 200 chromosomes before maturation, at the reduction division 100 chromosomes go to one pole and 100 chromosomes to the other pole. This mechanism of heredity is known as Meiosis, and is carried through by the chromosomes in every reduction division in the formation of eggs and sperms in both animals and plants. As Weismann foresaw, in 1892, this reduction mechanism of the chromosomes is of fundamental -significance, for if the chromosomes segregate at random in the reduction division, and each chromosome carries a different complex of genes, then the possibilities of variation in the eggs and sperms are multitudinous. That the chromosomes do actually segregate at random in the reduction division has been fully demonstrated by Miss Carothers in several genera of Grasshoppers (Orthoptera) and also by other observers in other plants and animals.
This qualitative reduction of the chromosomes in eggs and sperms is the mechanism of Mendelian heredity, and provides a complete explanation of the Mendelian ratios in independent assortments.
The quantitative reduction of the chromosomes in eggs and sperms is also one of the essentials of the process of fertilisation, since -the union of the reduced maternal and paternal chromosomes in the act of fertilisation provides the normal number of chromosomes for the -embryo plant and animal,and enables its development to proceed on normal lines, so that each cell in the body contains an equal number of maternal and paternal chromosomes.
Sex Chromosomes.
In many animals and plants with separate sexes the male and
female sexes are assbciated with the presence or absence of certain chromosomes in the nuclei of their cells. For instance, the hemipteran
insect Protenor has 13 chromosomes in the male and 14 chromosomes in the female. The largest chromosome is the sex chromosome, the
male having one sex chromosome (X) and the female two (XX). In the hemipteran insect Lygaeus there are 14 chromosomes in the male and fe-

22 EUGENICS REVIEW.
male, but in this case the smallest chromosomes are the sex chromosomes,. the female has two sex chromosomes of equal size while the male has. two sex chromosomes which are unequal in size. Consequently after reduction the sperms are of two kinds, carrying X or Y, while the eggs are all of one kind carrying an X chromosome. Fertilisation therefore produces on the average equal numbers of males XY and females XX.
In the flowering plants with sexes on separate plants (Dioecious Angiosperms) the Tape Grass (Vallisneria) has 17 chromosomes in the male plant and 18 in the female. The Water Thyme (Elodea) has 48 chromosomes in each sex, the male plant having XY chromosomes and the female XX. Other plants and animals have similar mechanisms of sex chromosomes with variations. In the Sorrel Plant (Rumex), for instance, the X chromosome is represented by a large M chromosome, while the Y chromosome is apparently a compound of two small mm chromosomes. In the Nematode Threadworm (Ascaris megalocephala) there is in the male a single small X chromosome which is. usually attached to the end of one of the other chromosomes.
A number of insects, domesticated mammals and lizards belong to the XO type of sex chromosomes, while other insects and mammals, including monkeys and Man, belong to the XY type of sexchromosomes.
Wilson reports that in the hemipteran insect (Metapodius) the
Y chromosome may be either present or absent, so that it is probable that the XO type has been derived from the XY type through the loss. of the Y chromosome. In Lepidoptera (Moths) and Birds, the female produces two kinds of germ cells rather than the male, the same mechanism is found but the sex chromosomes are known as ZW instead of XY in order to distinguish the female digametic from the male
digametip organisms. For instance in the Moth (Talaeporia tubulosa) Seiler found 59,
chromosomes in the female and 60 in the male, with two kinds of eggs containing 29 and 30 chromosomes respectively, hence the female is
ZO and the male is ZZ. In another Moth (Phragmatobia fuliginosa).
Seiler found 56 chromosomes in both male and female, but the male is ZZ with two like sex chromosomes, while the female is ZW with two unlike sex chromosomes.
A chromosome mechanism of sex of the XY type in the male has been found in the lowly Liverwort (Sphaerocarpos) a Bryophyte related to the Ancient Mosses.
In Man all the recent evidence shows sex chromosomes of the XY or XO type, and Painter has demonstrated the XY type clearly in both white and negro races. The value of a knowledge of the sex chromosomes in Man to Eugenists is seen when such complicated sex linked characters as Colour Blindness are investigated, for without a knowledge of the mechanism of the sex chromosomes the observedfacts are puzzling and paradoxical. All observations show that a colour blind father and a normal mather have all their sons and daughters normal. All the daughters can transmit the defect to future generations, but none of the sons can do so. If the daughters marry normal men the defect will be transmitted to one half of their children of both sexes, but only the sons will be colour blind. On the other hand if the daughters marry colour blind men, one half of their daughters and one half of

THE MECHANISM OF HEREDITY AND EVOLUTION. 23
their sons will be colour blind. In such cases the affected sons and daughters will carry on the defect, and if an affected daughter marries a colour blind man all their children, sons and daughters, will be colour blind. The unaffected daughters will still carry on the defect, but the unaffected sons will not. The explanation of all these complicated facts is to be found in the simple mechanism of the X and Y chromosomes. The gene for colour blindness is located in the X chromosome and not in the Y chromosome. If X represents the sex chromosome
carrying the gene for normal colour perception, and X represents the sex chromosome carrying the gene for colour blindness, then all males are either XY normal or XY colour blind. Females on the other hand
are of three kinds XX inormal, XX normal, or XX colour blind, one
dose of the gene makes a man colour blind, but it takes two doses of the gene to make a woman colour blind. The Mendelian segregation of the X X and Y chromosomes in the reduction divisions of the eggs and
sperms and their random matings in fertilisation, provide a simple explanation of the complicated facts of the inheritance of colour blindness in Man.
Specific Sets of Chromosomes.
Recently Cytology with its modern refinements of technique has made remarkable progress in the analyses of chromosome complexes. So far, no less than 2,845 species of plants and animals, representing 1,326 genera, 417 families, 181 orders, 77 classes and 33 phyla, have been examined.
The chromosonme numbers found in these species range from 1 pair
in the Nematode Threadworm (Ascaris) to more than 100 pairs in the Crustacean Decapod (Cambarus) (Crayfish), while in plants the numbers range from 2 pairs in the Fungi (Eumycetes) to more than 100 pairs in the Horsetail (Equisetum) and the Ferns (Ophioglossum and Ceratopteris. In all recent cases where large numbers have been examined by several observers, it has been found the number of chromosomes or chromosome sets is constant and characteristic for each species.
It is now possible therefore to present a more precise conception of a species. A species is a group of individuals of common descent, with certain constant characters in common which are represented in the nucleus of each cell by constant and characteristic sets of chromosomes. Specific sets of chromosomes may differ in number, size and shape of chromosomes, structure, behaviour and gene content, the whole constituting a dynamic specific complex present in all the cells of all the individuals of a species.
It is important, however, to emphasize the fact that visibly identical chromosomes sets may be entirely different in their genetic constitution, they may have similar genes in different combinations and arrangements or they may have entirely different genes. For this reason chromosome numbers in certain species are only of secondary importance. Comparison of the chromosome sets of different groups of plants and animals at corresponding stages often show wide differences in number, size and shape of the individual chromosomes. On the
other handin many cases there is a pronounced family likeness within

2.4 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the order or the family, as in the genera and species of Orthopteran Grasshoppers and the Dipteran Flies.
McClung and his students have examined more than 100 genera, including 800 species of the Acrididian shorthorned grasshoppers, and throughout the family the males as a rule contain 23 chromosomes and the females 24, while the eggs have 12 chromosomes and the sperms 11 or 12. This group of animals has existed for millions of years and only an extremely precise mechanism could have preserved this common series of chromosomes in all the multitudinous cells that have existed in this group through the ages.
The 12 pairs of chromosomes in this group represent a graded series of sizes from the smallest to the largest, and the largest may be 10 times larger than the smallest. Each genus of this family differs from the other in the size and form of its chromosomes, and here it is evident that the degree of relationship is as clearly expressed in the chromosome complex as in'the external characters of these genera, indicating a descent by modification from a common ancestral series of chromosomes paralleled by corresponding modifications in the bodily structures. A practical demonstration of this was seen when McClung in 1917 discovered a new species of Mermiria based on a difference in the form of one chromosome, which was in 1919 confirmed taxonomically by the systematist Rehn. In an analysis of the chromosomes of 30 species of Flies (Drosophilideae) Metz has reduced the different chromosome sets to 12 principal types differing from one another in number, size and form. These species have 3, 4, 5 or 6 pairs of chromosomes of different sizes and shapes, and there is good genetic evidence to show that all these types of chromosome sets have been derived from 1 or 2 original types by segmentation, loss or fusion, and it is evident that the degree of relationship between these species is equally manifest in the chromosomes as in the characters, indicating descent from a common ancestral species by modifications of the chromosomes.
Similar specific differences in the chromosome sets are found in plants. In the Hawksbeard (Crepis) for instance, species are found
with 3, 4 and 5 pairs of chromosomes. Nawaschin has sorted out the chromosomes of 10 of these species
into 5 different shapes, and finds that A, C and D shapes occur in all the 10 species, B shape is in all but 1 species, while E shape is found in 3 species only. The same shaped chromosomes however differ much in length, and presumably carry variable numbers and arrangements of
genes. The genus Carex the Sedge Plant is one of the most variable of
plant genera in its chromosome numbers. Heilborn's work shows 44 species with 22 different chromosome
numbers varying from 9 to 56 pairs. In this genus the different numbers and sizes of the chromosomes in each species clearly havetaxonomic significance, and Heilborn found that species belonging to the same section of the genus have chromosome numbers of about the same height.
Blakeslee's genetic experiments with the Thorn apple or Jimson Weed (Datura Stramonium), show another way in which in such a genus as Carex the chromosome numbers may have increased one by one through the non-disjunction of a pair of chromosomes in the reduction

THE MECHANISM OF HEREDITY AND EVOLUTION'. 25
'division. The normal number of chromosomes in this species ofDatura is 12 pairs ofvariable forms and sizes. In Blakeslee' s experiments varieties frequently arose, through non-disjunction, with an extra chromosome,
i.e., 25 instead of 24. In course of time Blakeslee succeeded in getting 12 distinct heteroploid varieties of this species, each with an extra chromosome, thus demonstrating that each of the 12 chromosomes carried different genes. A similar case has been found in the Evening Primrose (Oenothera Lamarckiana) by de Vries, Gates and others. In this species there are 7 pairs of chromosomes, and de Vries and Gates have identified 7 distinct varieties of this species corresponding with the 7 chromosomes.
The recent work of Clausen with Viola points to the probability that some species in this genus have arisen in this way.
Polyploid Varieties. Various kinds of chromosome sets peculiar to different species, genera and families of plants and animals have been reviewed,and it has been noted that as a rule the number of chromosomes is constant and characteristic for each species. Recently a number of cases have been found in which individuals suddenly appeared with double the number of chromosomes characteristic of the species. These are the fourfold or tetraploid varieties, so called because the gametic sets of chromosomes are fourfold in the somatic or body cells instead of the normal twofold. One of the first tetraploid varieties in plants was discovered by de Vries in the Evening Primrose (Oenothera Lamarckiana) and called 0. gigas. Later it was found to have 28 chromosomes instead of the 14 usual in the species, consequently it may be regarded as a tetraploid variety of the diploid species. This tetraploidvariety is larger in all its parts. Gates has made careful measurements of various cells of the different tissues and finds them to vary from 1i to 4 times larger. Later, triploid varieties of this species were found with 21 chromosomes. In Datura Stramonium, Blakeslee has found haploid, diploid, triploid and tetraploid varieties of this species, with 12, 24, 36 and 48 chromosomes respectively. As all these 4 forms belong to the same species, the specific characters are the same, but varietally they are distinct, and as the number of chromosomes increases the characters become larger as a rule. This increase in size following the doubling of the chromosomes is a marked feature in many tetraploid varieties that have arisen under cultivation, though not in all. Recently I have found 3 cases of tetraploid varieties in 3 diploid species of Rosa (R. macrophylla, R. cinnamomea and R. indica). In each case the wild diploid species has 14 somatic and 7 gametic chromosomes, while the cultivated tetraploid varieties have 28 somatic and 14 gametic chromosomes. The giant tetraploid varieties are indistinguishable specifically from the wild diploid species, though varietally they differ in size and other minor details. Several triploid varieties of R. indica with 21 somatic chromosomes have also been found. These cultivated polyploid varieties with duplicated chromosomes should not be confused with the wild polyploid species of Rosa with differential sets ofchromosomes,

26 EUGENICS REVIEW.
which are specifically distinct in their characters. Other polyploid varieties with duplicated chromosomes are found in the Tomato
(Solanum Lycopersicum), the Nightshade (Solanum nigrum), which were artificially induced by grafting in Winkler' s experiments. It is interesting to note that these two species of Solanum have a multiple series of chromosome numbers, the Tomato having 12 gametic and 24 somatic chromosomes, and the Nightshade 36 gametic and 72 somatic. The tetraploid varieties of each species have 48 and 144 somatic chromosomes respectively. The Iceland Poppy (Papaver nudicaule) has a decaploid variety with 70 somatic chromosomes, the diploid variety having 7 gametic chromosomes. Ljungdahl has raised from these, by crossing, a regular hexaploid variety, with 42 chromosomes, and a regular tetraploid variety with 28 chromosomes.
In animals polyploid varieties are well known in the Nematode Threadworm (Ascaris megalocephala). The diploid variety has 1 gametic and 2 somatic chromosomes,while the tetraploid variety has 2 gametic and 4 somatic chromosomes. Triploid, hexaploid and octoploid embryos have also been found in this species by Boveri and Zur Strassen.
In the Phyllopod Brine Shrimp (Artemia salina) there are two varieties, one with 42 somatic chromosomes and the other with 84 as shown by Artom.
The diploid variety from Sardinia produces only sexual eggs, while the tetraploid variety from Capodistria produces only parthenogenetic eggs.
In the Fruit Fly (Drosophila melanogaster) there are diploid varieties with 4 pairs of chromosomes, triploid varieties with 12 chromosomes, and tetraploid varieties with 10 chromosomes. As Morgan and Bridges have shown, the true triploid flies are females because they have 3 X chromosomes balanced against 3 of each kind of ordinary chromosomes. This is the same balance that produces the normal diploid female which has 2 of each. Experiments show that if there are only 2 X chromosomes present against 3 of the others,the fly is an intersex, while if only 1 X is present against 3 of the others,the fly is a supermale.
Similarly the tetraploid flies are female, as expected. All this goes to show that sex is determined by the reaction of the sex chromosomes with the other chromosomes, and is not due, as was at first thought, to the sex chromosome itself.
Po4yploid Species.
The recent discovery of differential polyploidy seems likely to throw considerable light on the problems and mechanism of evolution. Differential polyploidy was first recognised in 1923 in the wild species of the Dicotyledonous genus Rosa. Up to that time all polyploids. were regarded as simple duplications of chromosome sets,and no dis-
tinction was made between duplicational polyploidy and differential
polyploidy. The distinction between these two kinds of polyploidy is vital and fundamental. Perhaps the best way of expressing the difference between them is that duplicational polyploids are polyploid varieties, while differential polyploids are polyploid species.

THE MECHANISM OF HEREDITY AND EVOLUTION. 27
Polyploid varieties have duplicated sets of chromosomes, while polyploid species have differential sets of chromosomes. The somatic formula of a tetraploid variety, where each letter represents a gametic set of chromosomes, is AAAA, while the formula of a tetraploid species is AABB, and so on with hexaploid, octoploid, and decaploid varieties and species. Thus an octoploid variety is AAAAAAAA, while an octoploid species is AABBCCDD.
In Rosa both polyploid varieties and polyploid species are found, but so far all the wild polyploids are polyploid species, and all the polyploid varieties have apparently arisen under cultivation.
The genus Rosa is one of the largest and probably the most polymorphic genus of plants and animals. The chromosomes of this genus have been more extensively studied perhaps than any other genus. Tackholm has counted the chromosomes of 293 species and forms, Blackburn and Harrison 30, Penland 9, and the writer 624, making a total counted to date of 956 species and forms, representing all the various sections of the genus. Of these 369 are diploids with 7 gametic chromosomes, while 587 are polyploids with gametic chromosomes in multiples of 7. The diploids have 14 somatic chromosomes, triploids 21, tetraploids 28, pentaploids 35, hexaploids 42, and octoploids 56.
It will be observed that all the chromosome numbers in Rosa are in multiples of 7, and in the wild state, at all events, these septuple numbers are maintained without exception. In consequence of this. multiple series of 7 in Rosa, the chromosome sets are known as septets. Unlike many other genera in plants and animals the chromosomes of Rosa are approximately equal in size, and no pronounced differences in shape have yet been recognised.
A detailed examination and tabulation of the characters of the 369 diploid Roses combined with genetical experiments in crossing various forms, demonstrate that in Rosa proper there are 5 differential septets of chromosomes known as A, B, C, D and E septets. Each septet of chromosomes carries the genes representing at least 50 differential characters. Some of these characters are homozygous and specific while others are heterozygous and varietal. Some characters are morphologi cal and taxonomic while others are physiological and ecological.
Consequently there are 5 diploid species in Rosa with septet formulae AA, BB, CC, DD and EE, where each letter represents a septet of chromosomes carrying the linked genes of the specific char-
acters. A detailed examination and tabulation of the characters of the 587
polyploids, combined with genetical experiments in crossing various forms, demonstrate that 10 of these are polyploid varieties of several species. These are simply varieties with duplicated septets of chromosomes as in Oenothera, Datura and other plants, and in Ascaris and Artemia in animals. The remaining 577 polyploid Roses are quite different in their nature, being polyploid species with differential septets of chromosomes instead of duplicated septets as in the polyploid varieties. Intensive analyses of these polyploid species and genetical experiments show clearly that they are composed of various combinations of the A, B, C, D and E septets of chromosomes and characters of the 5 diploid species. On this basis 31 regular septet

`28 EUGENICS REVIEW.
species of Rosa are possible in the genus. So far 23 of these have been identified, leaving 8 to be found (if they exist). As a matter of fact one of the missing species has already been made genetically. Space will not allow one to deal with the numerous irregular septet species possible in these combinations, though a large number have already been worked out.
The chief point is that in the septet species of Rosa we arrive at a new conception of the nature of a species, and find a new mechanism for the origin and evolution of species. As one species differs from another by one or more septets of chromosomes and characters, septet species in this genus are precise taxonomic units, and being subject to experimental verification by both genetical and cytological methods these -species are no longer abstract concepts as of old,but concrete realities and quantitative and qualitative entities.
Incidentally the septet species provides a new and precise method of classification of the species of the genus.
Confirmation of the nature of differential polyploidy came in 1926 in the Monocotyledonous genus Triticum.
The genus Triticum contains a large number of sub-species and varieties of Wheats, which fall naturally into 3 groups of good species. The Einkorn group (T. monococcum),with 14 somatic and 7 gametic chromosomes. The Emmer group (T. dicoccum),with 28 somatic and 14 gametic chromosomes. The Bread Wheats (T. vulgare), with 42 -somatic and 21 gametic chromosomes. The chromosome sets in Triticum, as in Rosa, are in sevens or spetets. So far only 4 septets of chromosomes and characters have been identified, A, B, C and D, as suggested by Gaines and Aase in 1926. T. monococcum is probably AA, T. dicoccum AABB,andT. vulgareAABBCC. It seems not unlikelythat the closely related Aegilops cylindrica is CCDD, and Aegilops ovata BBDD. All the species except T. vulgare are from wild species, and -there is little doubt that Percival's suggestion of 1921 that the Bread Wheats have evolved under cultivation by the hybridisation of the above wild species is substantially correct.
Other genera in plants and animals have not yet been sufficiently worked out to test the nature of their polyploidy, but many are now working at these problems and the future is full of promise. In the meantime among many others the Composite genera Chrysanthemum and Senecio, though not yet fully worked out in their chromosomes and characters, seem likely to have polyploid species like Rosa and Triti.cum.
Tahara found multiple sets of chromosomes in 12 species of Chrysanthemum, the diploids had 9 pairs of chromosomes, the tetraploid 18 pairs, the hexaploid 27 pairs, the octoploid86 pairs, and the decaploid 45 pairs of chromosomes.
The sets in Chrysanthemum are therefore in nines or novets instead of septets as in Rosa and Triticum. All the polyploids in Chrysanthemum appear to belong to wild species, while the species usually cultivated in gardens seem to be mostly diploid. In view of the circumpolar distribution of the octoploid species of Rosa, it may be significant that the decaploid species of Chrysanthemum is apparently -arctic.

THE MECHANISM OF HEREDITY AND EVOLUTIOCN. 29;
In the genus Senecio (Groundsel) Afzelius found in 40 species a multiple series of somatic chromosome numbers 10-20-40-50--(60180,and in 20 species of 10 genera in the same Tribe (Senecioneae) he found a similar series 1-20-40-- 50-60.
The lowest gametic number was 5, so that in Senecio and Senecioneae the chromosome sets are in fives or quintets instead of septets as in Rosa and Triticum. In the different sections and sub-sections of Senecio it is remarkable how constant the chromosome numbers are and the correlation between chromosomes and characters is clearly close.
It is evident that a wide field of investigation lies open in many large genera of plants and animals to determine the facts of differential polyploidy and its significance in heredity and evolution. In order to achieve this purpose intensive studies of the chromosomes and characters of all the species and sub-species of the large and polymorphic genera and families are necessary, and combined with these studies, genetical experiments are indispensable. An individual worker can' hardly expect in his life-time to complete the work in one large genus even, but every genus thoroughly worked out taxonomically, cytologically and genetically will represent a forward step towards a complete knowledge of heredity and evolution.
In the meantime it may be permissible to speculate on the possibilities and probabilities of the mechanism of evolution, but only so far as our present experimental knowledge will take us.
Evolution of Rosa.
In view of the presence of the characters and chromosomes of 2 or more diploid species in the polyploid species of Rosa, it is tempting to assume that the polyploid species have arisen by hybridisation of the 5 diploid species followed by a duplication ofthe chromosomes, and that in the septet species we have a working mechanism for the origin of species by hybridisation. The possibility of this has already been demonstrated in Primula, Triticum, Narcissus and Nicotiana. That some of the irregular septet species have arisen in this way is most probable, and it is not impossible that some of the regular septet species also originated in this manner. There are however serious difficulties in the way of accepting the theory of hybridisation as a complete
explanation of the origin of the genus as a whole. The facts of geographical and ecological distribution seem to demand an alternative explanation.
These facts point rather to an origin by descent from an Arctic decaploid species with 5 septets of chromosomes and characters, generalised and adapted to extremely variable conditions of life, which by successive losses of whole septets of chromosomes gave rise to the lower polyploid species, and eventually to the 5 specialised diploid species. The septet species mechanism of evolution however works either way, an ascent from diploid to polyploid species by hybridisation in a centri,petal direction, or a descent from polyploid to diploid species by septet speciation in a centrifugal direction. Most probably the mechanism alternates in both directions.

380 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Distribution of Species of Rosa.
All the species of Rosa are confined to the northern Hemisphere. The higher polyploid species, the octoploids with 56 chromosomes art -circumpolar in their distribution, while the diploid species with 14 chromosomes extend south to the Tropics. The hexaploid species with 42 chromosomes and the tetraploid species with 28 chromosomes occupy more or less a middle position. This distribution coincides with the view of the Arctic origin of the land flora of the -northern hemisphere, and points to an origin by descent from an arctic polyploid through the loss of whole septets of chromosomes and characters. Loss of septets by disuse under extreme changes would be natural, as each septet represents an ecological value expressed in -the ecological isolation of the 5 diploid species. In this sense extreme changes in the conditions of life would directly determine the trend of -speciation and provide the material for the natural selection of indivi duals.
The octoploid species R. acicularis with 56 somatic chromosomes has the septet formula BBCCDDEE. The crude ecological values of these septets (as expressed in the present distribution of the diploid species) are B=warm and dry, C=cold and dry, D=cold and wet, E =warm and wet. So that this species should be able to thrive under extremely variable conditions, and its distribution is circumpolar. I have received seeds of this species collected in Alaska, where it grows 30 miles north of the Arctic Circle, and also from Russian Lapland, where last summer Professor Gates found it growing even further North of the Arctic Circle.
With regard to the evidence for septet speciation by loss of septets, in my material I have seen 7 cases of the actual loss of whole septets of chromosomes in 2 polyploid species and 1 polyploid variety. It is remarkable too that these cases have only been observed in species that have been subjected to extreme changes in their conditions of life, and after centuries of cultivation in distant countries. One of the species is Rosa damascena, the actual plant of which is said to have been introduced from Persia to Italy and Spain about 1531.
The septet formula of this tetraploid species is AACC, and the existence since 1800 of a triploid form growing with it in cultivation, -and said to be a bud sport, with the formula AAC, may be significant, since it suggests that in this case it is the cold and dry septet C that has been lost in a temperate and wet climate. The second species is a triploid CDD, which arose from the tetraploid species CCDD R. virginiana introduced into England from Virginia about 1640.
This evidence shows that the loss of a septet of chromosomes giving rise to a new septet species is a possible mechanism in evolu-tion, and also that it seems to be associated with extreme changes in the conditions of life maintained for a considerable period of time.
In view of the extreme changes that have undoubtedly occurred in secular time especially during the Ice Ages of the Pleistocene, one would expect many such changes to occur.
The original decaploid species, representing on this view the genus Rosa, would most probably arise by the duplication of the septets

T!HE MECHANISM OF HEREDITY AND EVOLUTION. 31
-of an ancient diploid species under luxuriant conditions, possibly after a sudden chill, just as duplicated varieties have arisen and are arising to-day under cultivation and in a wild state. This duplication of septets would be followed in secular time by a differentiation of the septets by duplicational segregations and gene mutations, thus giving rise within itself to the potentiality to throw off numerous new septet species in a later epoch according to the geological conditions.
In this way evolution would be an alternating process carried out by the mechanism of the chromosomes. In the primary phase there would be first a quantitative increase of septets of chromosomes from diploid to polyploid, and then a qualitative change of genes in the septets, which would be a truly creative phase in the sense that the new ;septets of chromosomes with the new gene complexes representing the new species would be formed, though as yet only partly expressed in the generalised polyploid species.
In the secondary phase the successive throwing off of the septets of chromosomes would lead to a truly emergent phase in the sense that the new species would appear with increasing expression, until finally the diploid species would emerge in which full and complete expression would be given to all the wide range of characters laid down in the creative stages ages before, and now at last emergent in terms of ecological values.
In both of these phases it is evident that the mainspring of the mechanism is to be found in the response of the chromosome sets of the organism to the extreme changes that have taken place in the conditions of life in different geological periods, so that the evolution of new species has been determined by the interaction between the organism and the conditions of life. These rhythmic cycles of alternating creative and emergent evolution, working by means of the mechanism of the chromosome sets in association with other processes such as gene mutations, syngamy and hybridisation, duplication, non-disjunction, fusion and segmentation of the chromosomes, would also serve to explain the origin of tribes, families, orders, classes, phyla and larger divisions ofthe animal and vegetable kingdoms, including the numerous extinct species, genera and families eliminated by natural selection. The emergent species of to-day may be represented as the expression of the creative phases of past ages, and this creative process is evidently continuing to-day to be expressed in the emergent species of the future.

