ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES OF
CHILDREN;
By R. M. FLEMING.
Some ten years ago, with the guidance and help of Professor Fleure, of the Department of Geography and Anthropology, University of Wales, Aberystwyth, I began to study race type in women, and from the study of divergent-race characteristics for the sexes there naturally emerged a desire to follow up growth in children, and see how far and in what way racial type affected development, if it affected it at all. For this purpose it seemed essential to follow the course of growth year by year in individuals; there are numerous studies of different batches of children at different ages compared as to various physical characters. This method, however, does not bring out either what actually happens in individual cases, or allow for racial variations. On the other hand the method of following up growth in individual children is a slow and laborious one, and though, for the past eight years, some thousand children have been under continuous observation, the work is still far from complete. Last year, at the suggestion of the Eugenics Society, Professor Fleure and I took some measurements on children of mixed parentage (coloured and white) in various seaport towns. In its initial stages the work had for its main aim to record developmental changes and their correlation, if any, with different race types. As the work has progressed other possibilities have developed-the marked differences in rate of development according to sex led to some conclusions as to the desirability of recognising the sex factor in school curricula, and the Advisorv Committee to the Board of Education asked for the data. Further, the extensive studies of racial types carried out by Professor Fleure and his students have afforded a basis on which to consider some possibilities of special aptitudes associated with particular race types. In the course of my visits to secondary schools I am often asked by children and their parents for help in deciding on a possible career for a youth or girl who seems "pretty good all round," "likes nearly everything," &c., and is obviously as yet not fully developed in knowledge of what will finally be the special bent. No claim is made that special aptitudes must go with particular physical types, or vice versa, but the claim is made that in many cases it is possible to say that to many people of a certain type, a certain side of life appeals, and therefore to suggest this as probably the right one. To take a concrete example. In taking

ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES OF CHILDREN. 295
measurements at a boys' commercial secondary school in an industrial
centre, where most lads were of Scotch parentage, a lad was brought to me with the half-jesting suggestion that perhaps the callipers could find out why he had done such consistently bad work for the 18 months that he had been in the school, though he had headed the scholarship list on entry. It happened that the lad was of a striking physique
noted freqluently among photographs of old Welsh bards and preachers.
In conversation it turned out that the lad was of Welsh extraction, that a relative had just won a bardic prize, and that the lad' s interests were all literary. Following a talk to the head master the lad was removed to a school where his literary ability had scope, and later I heard that he had done brilliantly and was now in a University. Head teachers in some schools are now helping me to record special aptitudes, and eventually the cards should help, it is hoped, in the problems of advisory committees on the occupation of adolescents. An important scientific aspect of the work is the effort to record ancestry, and so to work out to some extent the heredity of the child and its relation to each of its parents. The advantages from this point of view of studies of children of negro and white, of Chinese and white, &c., are obvious, since some results of crossing are written in obvious characters, whereas
in the blending of the races so long living side by side in our cwn island,
the problem is much more intricate. Turning now to results obtained from studies of children of white
parentage and considering the boys' cases first. The general indication seems to be that an increase of 22 25 mm. in head length, and one of 23 -75 mm. in head breadth may be expected during the years 3 to 17. A marked development of both length and breadth, but of breadth more than length occurs between the ages of 3 and 7 years, while between 13 and 16 years there is another spurt of growth, this time with the special increase in length more marked than that in breadth. At 19-20 years, head growth, though slight, was still going on in the cases measured. As regards colouring the tendency seems to be for boys to be fairer in infancy than girls, and to continue their darkening of eye and especially of hair, to a much later stage; but they are still less dark in the final stage than girls. This fits in with a general rule of growth, that an early start followed by rapid development achieves a greater intensity finally than a late start even if that is followed by a more prolonged development. I may perhaps say that experiments carried out oni growth by Professor J. S. Huxley, confirm this. Up to 7 years there seems little difference in forehead shape between boys and girls, both having the marked forward projecting curve of infancy. After that age developmental forehead changes in boys are slower than those in girls. But it has become increasingly clear to me that these general statements are of relatively little moment compared with the variations depending upon racial heredity and studies of the various types represented in the samples of population observed have been worked out. The cases referred to in this paper are all of observations taken annually on the same children year after year for periods of 6, 7, and 8 years.
GROUP I. -Sixty cases were observed annually for periods varying from 5 to 8 years, and at the final measurement were markedly long-

296 EUGENICS REVIEW.
headed in type. It may perhaps be as well to point out that though changes of a very marked type in head proportion do occur, these cases are rare. Several cases of alteration of cephalic index (ratio of length to breadth) by 4, 5 and 6% occur, but the most usual total change
is 2-3%. This very dolichocephalic group, however, showed less
change in this respect than others to be discussed later. It was also fairly stable as regards colouring, the greater number beingrecorded as dark in eye and hair, though a number had light eye and dark hair at the final measurement. Only 3 cases increased by more than 2 in C. I., 16 by more than one, and the rest either increased by less than one or actually decreased by one or less. Indications of the type are dark eves and hair, receding forehead, long narrow head, rather short stature. It is a type with which literary and musical ability is often associated, and one which often displays capacity for original lines of thought and work. In this group the adult type seems to be indicated at a fairly early age in childhood, and there is little tendency to broaden in head shape or to alter much in colour.
GROUP II. -Cephalic Index 78 6-80-5. In this group, which was broader headed than the dolichocephals, growth was markedly different. The tendenev to broaden with age was marked; of the 60 cases falling in this group, 13 increased by 2 or more in C. I. as against 3 in the 60 dolicho cases, and whereas all 60 dolichos were in that group throughout the period of years when they were measured, only 35 were in this group consistently, some grading down from a broader headed group, and some up from the narrower headed group. Only 25 % were dark in eye and hair at the first measurement, and some were fair at the final observation. This group, like the first, showed a tendency to develop a receding forehead.
GROUP III.--Cephalic Index 80-6-82 5. In the next group (50 cases) which approximated to the broad heads rather than the long heads, but which was of an intermediate type, there was a general stability all through. The actual increases were small and steady in proportion, there was much less tendency to receding forehead, the colouring at the first measurement was fairer, and though darkening occurred in a steady way the group at the final stage was much lighter in colouring than either the very narrow long heads or the very broad short heads. The importance of this in its bearing on evolution will be referred to later.
GROUP IV. -Cephalic Index 82 * 6-84 9. (42 cases). The next group of broad, but not very broad heads, showed a tendency to marked increases in breadth rather than in length, and the type was not clearly indicated at the first stages, nor were actual growth records very steady or uniform.
GROUP V. -Cephalic Index 85 0 and over. (20 cases). In the smaller group where the head was very broad the type seemed stable all through. 25% were fair in colouring at the first observation and remained so throughout the years when they were observed, and the remaining 75 % were dark at the first measurement and remained so, though all darkened somewhat. The final type was thus clearly indicated at the first measurement, and the growth was of a steady and uniform type.

ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES OF CHILDREN. 297
It. thus appears that of the 5 groups, three tend to be decided in character at an early age, and to develop in a steady way, while there are two intermediate groups in which characters are much intermingled and growth is more erratic.
The stable group of moderate proportions, has that quality very probably because those proportions may be fundamental ones in the history of men of modern type. The stability of the very longheaded,. dark group may again have a historical interpretation, as it is now reasonably established that the development of this extreme longheadedness was an important early step in the evolution of men of modern type. The very broadheaded group is one concerning which I should prefer not to say much as the number of cases followed is. insufficient since the type is comparatively rare in these islands.
It is unnecessary here to go into the differences group by group between girls and boys. Differences between boys and girls as regards head growth seem to be that (1) the whole growth is slightly less, (2) that the proportion is different, growth in breadth tending to be more
marked than in length-a growth of 18-6 mm. in length and 25-6 in breadth may be expected (as against 22-25 L and 238 75B in &) between the ages of 3 and 17 years. Darkening sets in earlier and progresses more rapidly, the full forehead of infancy disappears at an earlier age. As in boys a marked spurt occurs after the age of 3 years, but it dies down earlier. There is no spurt of lengthening in the teens. as there is in boys, but between 11 and 13 years there is a spurt in broadening, and the general increase in breadth is greater between 7 and 11 years than in boys.
Along with these marked physical developmental differences according to race type go certain marked differences in mental and artistic development, and it seems important to try to adapt education so that marked aptitudes shall have more opportunity to develop, and the best in the heredity shall have a possible outlet.
PART II. CHILDREN OF MIXED PARENTAGE.
The observations on children of English and foreign parentage have only been carried out for the last year, and so results are based on much smaller numbers, and no growth data are available. The conclusions given are therefore merely in the nature of an interim report and should not be taken as final.
Several children whose fathers were Chinese, and mothers English were measured; in one case the father was Chinese and the mother Anglo-Chinese. Parents were measured in some cases.
As regards physical characters, 47 .3% had inherited the fold of the eyelid characterised as Mongolian. One unfortunate lad had this fold and an orbit of Chinese shape on one side only. His eyes also varied, one being the characteristic "opaque" brown of the Chinese, and one being a light grey-brown English eye.
Skin colour. Although the mothers were usually of the fair "Nordic" type, only one child had a really fair fresh skin, and 68 4°/,
had inherited Chinese skin type and colour.
Eye colour. 68 - 4%/o had the characteristic "opaque" brown Chinese
eye, and only one child had blue eyes.

298 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Hair. No child had the flaxen hair so common among English
children, and only one had curly hair. 4783 % had hair colour like
their Chinese father. It should be mentioned that some had a curious "intermediate" type of hair,soft and rather lifeless to feel, straight and silky in appearance. In view of the importance attached to hair character by some anthropologists, notably by Dr. A. C. Haddon, it has seemed worth while following this result in detail, and work is being carried out on sections of specimens of such hair, with a view to microscopic illustration of such variations.
Nose. 55% had broad flat noses. Lips. 47. 3% had broad lips, resembling those of the Chinese
parent in shape.
Head Shape. 40% had a curious conformation of the parietals
characteristic of some Chinese. Only 15% had the broadheadedness of the Chinese, and some were markedly longheaded.
General Conclusions. The most unexpected result was that in these particular cases broadheadedness was not the dominant factor, and 85% of the children were longheaded. This is in direct opposition to a statement often made that in crosses between broadheads and longheads, the offspring tend to be broadheaded. The numbers are, as stated above, too small to be conclusive, but it is an interesting point, and one would much like to see measurements taken on children in Chinese ports where the fathers are white and the mothers Chinese, to see whether sex-linkage has any bearing in the handing on of special characters. The fact that only in one case were blue eyes and fair skin inherited may have significance in the racial history of the type.
It is certainly a striking result that both in this case and in that of negro crosses the dark skin seems to be a dominant factor. This point may have bearing on present discussions as to the disappearance of the Nordic type.
From another point of view it is interesting to note that among these Anglo-Chinese children:
1.-No case of mental or moral deficiency or "anti-social" tendencies was recorded.
2.-Several cases of exceptional literary or artistic talent were recorded, one of marked musical abilitv. Two cases were of outstanding "general" ability.
3. -Even the older children seemed frank and free from conscious ness of social stigma, but the parents seemed very bitter on this point, both the English and the Chinese parent.
4. -In one case personally examined (and others were reported), a lad was going to be sent to China and had a future educational career mapped out. One thoughtful girl of 11 years wanted to become a woman doctor, and to return to work among the Anglo-Chinese community.
Social Workers agreed in reporting that the Chinese were good husbands, and especially good fathers, and insisted on care of the children. This was borne out by what we saw in visiting the homes, where the Chinese father often seemed most anxious to get the children to be at their best intellectually when we went in. Several Chinese w,ere bitter about the impossibility of getting good housing conditions.

ANTHROPOLOGICAL STUDIES OF CHILDREN. 299
The children often seemed affectionate and to have complete confidence in their Chinese father, whereas in the negro-white home the children clung to the mother. The unions of Chinese and White were more usually stable than those of Negro and White.
In the one F2 case, where the father was Chinese and the Mother Anglo-Chinese, most of the characters, including headform, were Chinese, but the Mongolian fold was not noted and the nose was English. The lad had marked artistic and mental abilities, and Chinese friends were sending him to China and had promised funds for his education there.
CHILDREN OF NEGRO AND WHITE ANCESTRY.
PHYSICAL CHARACTERS.
Skin colour. With three exceptions skin colour had been inherited from the coloured side to a greater or less degree. There were several cases of negro father and half-caste mother, and in these cases the skin
was distinctly negroid. In all cases, Fl and F2 reckoned together, 92% showed some degree of negro colouring. Marked variations of intensity
in pigmentation occurred, and it was noticeable that in many children the forehead seemed specially dusky, in others the arms and legs and neck varied much in intensity of shade. In cases of Portuguese and Spanish negro crossed with English half-caste, the skin was a beautiful gold-orange tint with a deep red in the cheeks. In the case of negro ancestry of American origin there were indications of North American Indian in skin and eyes, etc. It is hoped to follow up this question of inheritance of skin colour in larger numbers, andto get data on the effect of sex linkage.
Eye colour. 30% had English eyes, 70% had the peculiar velvety deep bluish brown negro eye. Onlv one child had really blue eyes.
There were several cases of a grayish rim to the eye which had the appearance of the ring due to age, and in two cases cataract had developed. It would be interesting to work out whether this had any relation to the different light conditions, i.e., the eye had developed its intensity in tropic conditions and that intensity may possibly not be suited to our cloudier conditions
Hair. A little over 50% had hair negroid in type and in colour, 25 % had hair English in type and colour. The remaining 25% exhibited some curious mixtures-hair tight and frizzy in type, but flaxen in colour surmounting a quite black face, in another case hair partly woolly in type and partly straight, and ranging from light brown
to black, and so on.
Lips. About 12% had lips like the average English child, 50%
had wide everted lips, and the remainder had one lip wide and everted and one English in type.
Nose. 70% had the broad flat negro nose. Limbs. 70% showed negroid features in the slimness of bone or in the bulbous appearance of the joints. General appearance. 43% immediately gave the impression of being distinctly negroid. 5% might have passed as English children,
and the remainder were half caste in appearance. There were some

300 EUGENICS REVIEW.
striking anomalies, e.g., negro skin and flaxen hair, negroidcolouring and white scalp-in this peculiar case, almost the only thing that
betrayed any English blood was the very white scalp-the hair was
woolly and black. In another case the eyes and lips were English in type, the skin colour a rich brownish red, the hair dark and the scalp, very light. Other peculiarities were the long hairs often growing on the check bones and outwards from a central vertical space in the forehead. The fact that 25% admitted half-caste blood on the mother's side shows that this intermixture is going on steadily in our seaport
towns. Head Shape. In most cases the head form was markedly long and
narrow, as is to be expected since the mothers were mainly fair long heads and the negro is long headed.
General conclusions. The negro side of the ancestry tends to be very apparent in both Fl and F2 generations. Skin, eye and hair colour are not all inherited together, but vary most curiously and unexpectedly, giving the children at times a most disharmonic appearance.
Most of the Anglo-Negro children observed came from poor homes, and frequently children of the same mother had different fathers e.g. a family where the mother was recorded as sub-normal, included pure European, Anglo-negro, Anglo-halfeaste children, and a child of uncertain fatherhood. Oine such Europeani child in a mixed family was a girl of aristrocratic features anid bearing, who had an expression of suppressed and sullen inward rage and shamnefacediness that was painful to see. There were pleasant exceptions to this rule of bad conditions, notably a family where the father was a well educated, musical and intelligent negro, and the woman an intelligent and devoted European mother, who insisted that the father was her superior in mind and ideals. One girl in this family took a prominent part in school activities and athletics and was popular with both staff and scholars. Her frank, happy and intelligent expression was a refreshing contrast to the sulky, half shamed expression too often seen on the face of the adolescent half caste girl in our crowdecd cities. Yet even in this case teachers were finding it difficult to plan out a future occupation for the girl.
In 14% of the Anglo-Negro cases considered, the children were recorded as mentally deficient, but in each of these cases the mental deficiency was proved to be hereditarv from the English mother's side.
This is only to be expected so long as our present system of allowing mentally deficient girls to struggle for a living in the streets continues.
The problem of the half caste girls in seaport towns is an urgent one. Teachers and social workers are all agreed that the half caste boys can obtain work, but that girls with indications of "colour" are up against our social system. Racial prejudices, combined with an over supply of young English giils, prevent them from obtaining work in factories. Few women care to make the risky experiment of employing a half-caste domestic servant, especially as these girls leave school at thirteen, and an untrained child of this age is likely to be a difficult problem to a mistress, rather than a help. It seems useless to argue the pros and cons of the "advisability" of an interracial cross, since our Imperial Commerical system is linking all possible races in our

ANTIIROPOLOGICAL STUDIES OF CHILDREN. 301
seaport towns, and has been doing so for some generations. One thing might, however, be done. The great difficulty of the half caste girl is lack of employment during adolescence, which throws her into the dangers of the streets, and, as in the case of the English mentally deficient girl, increases the number of illegitimate children with poor heredity and bad environment. If homes could be established where girls of this type might be boarded and taught useful occupations during adolescence, it would at any rate mitigate the difficulties and dangers imposed upon them by our social conditions. This is a problem which, I hope, will come within the scope of this society's activities.

