OUR AVERAGE AGE

By Sir CHARLES ARDEN-CLOSE, K.B.E., C.B., F.R.S.

T HE public of this country has been age of those killed did not differ greatly from

warned by letters and articles in the the general average.

newspapers and by the reports of the
Royal Commission on Population that the numbers of old and elderly persons continue
to increase in comparison with the numbers
of the young. And, broadly, the correct idea is spread that our population is becoming older. It is, however, doubtful if there is generally any clear notion as to the character

The average age is affected by the general health of the community, by epidemics, by wars, by migration and, of course, by the rates of birth and death. But the general health, as indicated by the life table, is, no doubt, the largest factor, and we may congratulate ourselves and the medical profession on the remarkable progress shown by the

of the process and how it can be measured. diagram.

As a fact we can measure the general effect
by calculating the average age of the population, and this kind of simple calculation is 3f -

hI=D AD VWA
AVIAGYUG, 1aa to L9
--

rendered easy by the use of a table of popula-

tion by age groups, such as that published by

the General Register Office in its excellent

pamphlet entitled Matters of Life and Death

(H.M.S.O., I948). I have calculated the

figures for I84I, i86i, i88i and I9OI. The

figures for I921, I93I, I94I and I947 have

/8 __ _t861

_

do/ ___9Ve

been kindly supplied by the General Register Office. I had also calculated the figures for
I93I and I947, and these agree with the results given by that office, so I hope that there are no mistakes in my arithmetic! The following table gives the results:

Let me here quote a passage from that

Dublinvaluable work by

and Lotka, entitled

Length of Life, published in New York in

I936: " Could we sum up before the mind's

eye the conditions of fifty or a hundred years

ago we should be looking on a world much

THE AVERAGE AGE OF THE POPULATION OF ENGLAND AND WALES Average Age
Year in Years

saddened by the frequency of death. In a community of a given size funerals were in
those days two or three times as many as

I841 ... ... I86i ... ... i88i ... ...
I90I ... ...

25.9 26.5 26.3
27-4

they are to-day.... And the darkest side of the picture was that so many deaths were those of very young children, adolescents

192I ... ...

1931 ... ...

I94I ...

...

1947 ... ...

30-5 32.7 34.9
35.5

and adults in early maturity." In this country also, a hundred years ago, we had large families and a fairly high death-rate,

But it is difficult to realize the meaning of and this was still more the case in the

these figures unless they are plotted. The eighteenth century; many a village church

diagram below shows clearly what has is a witness to the prevalence of death

been happening. We may say that, for the in early and middle life. Now we live longer

last seventy years, the growth of the average lives and have smaller families. So far as

age has pursued a fairly steady course. It is numbers are concerned the smaller families

curious to note what little effect seems to have tend to counterbalance the increase due to

been made by the two world wars, in which our improved health.

so many of our men between 20 and 45 were To come back to the diagram, the increase

killed. That is perhaps because the average in the average age is to be noted first about

'55

I56 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

i88i, with an increasing increase until about
I93I, and then a slight tendency to a decreasing increase. It looks as if the census of I95I would show an average of rather more than
35-5 ; but we shall see. The general picture is encouraging; our average age has increased mainly because we are healthier and live

longer. The mean expectation of life at birth, in England and Wales, has gone up, almost to 69 years, a truly remarkable figure. We are fitter than we used to be at middle age and in old age, and it is for consideration whether our various schemes for retiring ages and pensions do not need revision.

NOTES AND MEMORANDA

N.A.M.C.W. Annual Conference

These meetings will be held at the Rooms

THE National Association for Maternity and Child Welfare (June 28th-3oth) successfully

of the Royal Society, Burlington House, Piccadilly, W. i.

tried out a new form of programme for their Annual Conference. On the first day there

The Library

was a series of twenty-minute addresses by OUR grateful thanks are due to Mrs. Bram-

experts. The first of these addresses was well, who has donated to the library

given by Dr. Fraser Roberts on " Eugenics numerous books which belonged to her

and the Influence of Heredity." The con- late husband, Mr. B. S. Bramwell.

ference then split up into groups each to

discuss the points raised by one of the Publications Received

speakers. On the final day the rapporteurs Annali della Facolta di Economia e Commercio. 2,

of each group presented an account of their proceedings to the main conference.
Dr. Fraser Roberts's address and the report of the group which discussed his address presented by Dr. C. 0. Carter was published

2. I 948; 3, I and 2. 1949.
Anuario Demogrdfico, I949. Bowater Papers, I950, No. i. British Journal of Delinquency. 1, I. July 1950. British Library ,of Political and Economic Science.
Annual Report, I948/49.

in full in the August issue of Mother and Connell, K. H. The Population of Ireland I750-

Child.

I845. Oxford, 1950. Geoffrey Cumberlege. Pp. xi + 293. Price i8s.

Members' Meetings

Cuardernos de Politica Social, I950. Nos. 5 and 6.
Darlington, C. D., and Mather, K. Genes, Plants

TUESDAY, October I7th, I950, at 5.30 p.m. " Colonial Medical Policy in Relation to

and People. London, I950. George Allen and Unwin Ltd. Pp. xxi + I87. Price i6s. Dickinson, R. L., and Gamble, C. J. Human

Population Growth." Speaker: Professor Sterilization: Techniques of Permanent Con-

T. H. Davey, O.B.E., M.D., D.T.M.

ception Control. U.S.A., 1950. Waverly

Press Inc. Pp. 40.

Wednesday, November I5th, I950, at Endeavour. 9, 35. I950.

5.30 p.m. " The Constitution and Mental Handbook of the Japanese Societies of Natural

Illness: the Limits of Psycho-analysis." Speaker: Emanuel Miller, Esq., M.A., F.R.C.P., D.P.M.

Science and Cultural Science. I949, Vol. 4 (Medicine). Scientific Data Section, Scientific
Education Bureau, Ministry of Education, Japan.

Tuesday, December i9th, I950, at
5.30 p.m. " The Ideal of an Elite." Speaker: Paul Bloomfield, Esq.

Holmberg, Allan R. Nomads of the Long Bow. The Siriono of Eastern Bolivia. Smithsonian Institution, Institute of Social Anthropology. Publication No. io. Pp. 104. Price 65 cents.

