EUGENICS AND POVERTY

By RICHARD M. TITMUSS and FRANCOIS LAFITTE

EUGENICS is the use of scientific means product, so scanty still is our knowledge of

to attain an ethical end. The end is a human genetics, that no eugenist can afford

higher level of mental and physical to neglect the study of environmental

health, an increase in the biological efficiency factors-especially of economic and social

of human beings; the means are such conditions. As long as there remain vast

measures as tend to improve the inborn inequalities of financial and social oppor-

qualities of future generations, to raise the tunity it will not be possible to determine

proportion of those who are " well born." which socially important differences* be-

Eugenists seek a higher level of health-i.e. tween human beings can safely be attributed

of " wholeness "-as an end in itself, because to genetic endowment rather than to

the human personality is an end in itself, environmental circumstances. The Eugenic

and because they wish to see human beings Charter must therefore of necessity comprise

in the mass become more completely human. the twin aims of providing the healthiest

They wish to bring about al) increased inborn mental and physical endowment for future

capacity for " wholeness," and also a fuller generations, and of insisting on the healthiest

realization of that capacity by creating environment for all so to ensure that potential

conditions in which inborn qualities can health can be turned into actual health. In

attain full expression. The Nazis, on the reviewing Seebohm Rowntree's new social

other hand, are interested in human health survey of York,t concentration on the forces

and biological efficiency only to the extent of " nurture " does not therefore imply that

that they further the immoral purposes of a we are ignoring the importance of trans-

tyranny whose highest aim is total warfare. missible biological factors.

Eugenics is only one contribution to the It is the study of Rowntree's work which

production of human beings who are mentally has impelled us to re-state our conception of

and physically " whole," capable of living eugenics as a preliminary to taking stock of

full harmonious lives and creating a healthy Britain's position after forty years. If the

social order. The adult human being is the world is to be rescued from its present

product of an endlessly complex system of misery, our conception of society after the

interactions between " nature " and " nur- war and our ideas of the form which recon-

ture." Inborn qualities by themselves do not struction should assume must take account

suffice to produce "whole " human beings. of deficiencies in our pre-war society, and,

The " well born" individual requires a what is of equal importance, the pace at

healthy environment (nutrition, activity, which social change takes place. Poverty and

economic and social opportunities, psycho- Progress has much to tell us of the effects of

logical and moral atmosphere) if he is to pre-war environmental conditions on the

grow to that full mental and physical mass of the population and it gains in value

stature of a " whole " adult which is potenti- from the fact that it repeats a survey made

ally his. Few eugenists would hold that the in i899+ and thus renders possible some

unmistakable increase in the average height measurement of forty years of change.

and weight of British school children over * Subnormal mental ability, epilepsy, invalidism,

the past generation is evidence of genetic poor physique are socially important. Rare hereditary

improvement. It is evidence of improved environment, which may or may not have

diseases are not very important. Jewish or Negro " blood" is important only to Nazis and other race fanatics.

masked an actual deterioration in hereditary t Rowntree, B. Seebohm. Poverty and Progress. A

endowment. We do not know. So entangled are the factors of " nature " and " nurture," of which each human being is the end-

Second Social Survey of York. Longmans, Green & Co.
1941. I5s.
: Rowntree, B. Seebohm. Poverty, A study i's Town
Life. I9OI.

xo6

EUGENICS AND POVERTY

io0

The city of York is Rowntree's laboratory. the York survey made by P.E.P., which

It is fairly representative of English urban should be referred to by those who requiry

life. The changes that have taken place in more detailed information.*

York between the two surveys correspond
fairly well to the changes that have occurred during the same period in town life in general; and England is a highly urbanized country. The growth in the population of York by i8 per cent (from 75,800 in I899 to
89,7oo in I936) has been somewhat less than

The amount of work involved in the survey is such that it seems a pity that Rowntree selected as his yardstick a theoretical standard and practically ignored actual dietary and spending habits. It would have been preferable to have ascertained how family

that for the country as a whole (27 per cent) income actually was expended and to have

but in other respects the correspondence is built up a poverty standard from actual

very close. Thus the birth rate in York has spending habits (assuming reasonable

been halved in thirty-seven years from 30 to economies necessary for life at a poverty

I5 per i,ooo population, whilst the rate for level) instead of using rigid theoretical

the whole of the country fell from 29 to I5. minima. To obtain " the necessaries of a

Similarly, the proportion of children in the healthy life " Rowntree takes as his standard,

population fell by 30 per cent in York as for an urban family of man, wife and three

against a national decline of 32 per cent; dependent children, the sum of 43s. 6d. per

and, just as the average age of the population week after excluding rent and rates. This

of England and Wales has been rising, so it figure is made up of food 20S. 6d., clothing

has in York. Accompanying this continuous 8s., fuel and light 4s. 4d., household sundries

fall in fertility and progressive ageing of the is. 8d., and personal sundries gs. Unfortun-

population there has occurred a dramatic fall ately the author does not tell us how these

in mortality.

items are calculated but refers us to his earlier

This is the background to the 1936 study book, The Human Needs of Labour.t To ap

of the social and economic environment of preciate fully what these items mean it is

I6,362 families (55,206 individuals) whose essential to consult this book and to refer also

chief breadwinner earned up to £250 a year. to the I933 Report of the British Medical AssoThe book ranges over many departments and ciation. Rowntree describes the B.M.A. diet as

activities of daily life, but it is not correct a minimum; but although he constantly

to describe it-as the publisher does-as " a refers to his diet as the B.M.A. standard it

complete picture of working-class life." The is actually lower, for, amongst other things, vitally important aspect of work itself and all he replaces fresh milk by condensed muilk its associated problems is not dealt with. and stipulates that all bread be home baked. The dominant Motiv of the whole work is, as It should be recalled that the B.M.A. diet,

the title implies, the standard of living of the whilst not termed a minimum one, was

working classes, who are defined as those earning not more than £25o a year and who
comprise 57 per cent of York's population.
As the standard of living, which, as we have
said, is controllable by man, largely condi-
tions the environment, it is as well for us to
see exactly what the standard of measurement used by Rowntree implies, particularly
as so much attention has been given to his

certainly not an optimum standard and it was lower than the " standard ration " of Army
troops at home stations (I933) and considerably below the standard ration supplied to Territorial soldiers during their Army training season, both of which diets are usually supplemented from various sources. Examined from these and other angles therefore Rowntree's diet, which is below that sug-
gested by the B.M.A., is indefensible. In

main finding that 3I per cent of the working- other respects Rowntree's diet is inadequate

class population is below " the poverty line."

In investigating Rowntree's standard we have drawn liberally on an examination of

* Planning, No. 179. Published by P.E.P. Oct. 194I.
t The Human Needs of Labour. Longmans, Green & Co. Revised edition. 1937,

io8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

and out-of-date because he ignores the fact So far as food is concerned we may thus

that the B.M.A. experts subsequently found conclude that Rowntree's standard of 20S. 6d.

that the diet in question was lower than could is inadequate in the light of up-to-date

be justified; and because he applies the nutritional requirements. His other items

Cathcart-Murray scale of " man-values," are also open to criticism for not only do they

co-efficients which express the caloric needs allow no margin for contingencies but no

of children and adults of different ages as provision is made for furniture, bedding and

percentages of the requirements of a other household equipment made necessary

" normal " man of " average " stature and by the normal wear and tear of family life.

physique performing " moderate " work. For young married couples Rowntree states

This scale is now regarded as too low for the on page 3I that he allows for equipment,

caloric needs of children aged 5-i8; and, as hire-purchase obligations, etc., a sum of 5s.

the Chief Medical Officer of the Ministry of per week where there is one child and 3s. for

Health pointed out in I937,* it cannot be a couple with two children. On page 456,

applied to the protein, mineral and vitamin however, it is stated that 5s. is allowed for

requirements of women and children. a couple with no children and 3s. for a couple

" Recent work has shown, for example, that with one child. The sum of gs. on personal

a child of I2-I4 years requires about 90 gm. sundries may appear high but when itemized*

of protein per day for adequate nutrition, the allowance is far from extravagant. In

whereas the needs of the adult male are in particular, the sum of 3s. 4d. on " all else "

the region of 70 gm. per day. The Cathcart has to cover, in addition to the items men-

and Murray scale on the other hand places tioned by Rowntree, such recognized neces-

a child of this age as o*9 of a ' man,' whereas sities as the dentist and optician, shaving

on the basis of protein requirements he would materials, toothbrushes, toilet paper, hair-

be regarded as I-3 of a ' man.'" Thus- cuts, drugs and all the innumerable small

Rowntree's co-efficients for children are low; items of household expenditure. As eugenists

and it is not surprising that, in his analysis we might well add birth control, a subject

of a few family budgets, his four groups which curiously is completely ignored in this

(whose weekly incomes after paying rent book, despite its obvious importance to a

were 24s. 8d., 33s. gd., 57s. gd. and 69s. 7d.) community which has succeeded in halving

were all deficient in calorie intake: all its fertility in forty years.

deficient in total protein and first-class It has been necessary to examine rather

protein; all deficient in calcium and iron. closely the basis for the poverty line of

Apart therefore from the facts' that no 43s. 6d. per week (53s. including average

allowance at all is made for meals taken at rent) in order to obtain some conception of

restaurants or canteens, and that, as the the environment which must inevitably

author stresses, " the housewife must possess accompany such a standard. Rowntree

an unusual amount of knowledge of the fully recognizes the " fodder basis" of life

nutritive value of different foodstuffs," it can at his minimum level, but the measuring rod

be appreciated that Rowntree's food diets used to gauge different levels of living needs

are extremely vulnerable to criticism on very careful working out, and it would have

nutritional grounds and also because they

are theoretical measurements. It is not possible therefore to accept the statement

*Unemployment and Health Insurance
Contribution to sick and burial clubs

s. d. I7 oI

that a farnily of five could be adequately fed on 20s. 6d. weekly at 1936 prices. (We may

Trade Union subscription

.6.

...

6

Travelling to and from work

oI

Such necessaries as stamps, writing-paper,

mention that the cost of feeding five mentally

etc., for the family

6

defective children in State institutions amounted, at I936 prices, to over 30s. per week.) An p r P

A daily newspaper 7.... ..

Wireless

. ..... ....

All else: beer, tobacco, presents, holidays,

books, travelling, etc. ....

7 6 34

* Anlnual Report for 1937, p. 129(.

90

EUGENICS AND POVERTY

log

been preferable to use a somewhat less less than 8 per cent-more than one person

stringent standard and one more in keeping in twelve-whose income was at most

with modem nutritional knowledge. It is equivalent to i8s. 6d. for a family of five,

really time we began to think and act in after paying rent.

terms of the average price of optimum diets The main cause of poverty in Class A was

and not of the minimum price of minimum unemployment (42 per cent), inadequacy of

diets. To go on repeating research work wages of breadwinners in regular work

directed to finding out the minimum ex- (20 *5 per cent) and old age (I2 * 8 per cent);

penditure on which life can be kept going but in Class B 43 - 2 per cent of poverty was

must, both consciously and subconsciously, due to inadequate wages, I7 3 per cent to

be inhibitive of progressive thought.

unemployment and i6 * 2 per cent to old age.

Even on this unduly low standard, how- Rowntree does not tell us, however, what

ever, Rowntree found that in I936 (a proportion of working-class children-or,

relatively prosperous year) no less than for that matter, of all children-were in

3I*I per cent of York's working-class poverty through unemployment. One sus-

population, including 43 per cent of working- pects that, proportionately, children suffer

class children, were living at or below the from unemployment to a greater extent than

poverty line thus defined. Rowntree believes adults, a suspicion which is borne out by

that roughly another 9 per cent were not in examination of Unemployment Benefit and

fact enjoying the " necessaries of a healthy Allowances statistics. Of all persons below

life " because their income, though sufficient, the minimum no less than 32 *8 per cent were

was not spent according to his theoretical there because of inadequate wages, and

minima. The York survey's findings may be another 9*5 per cent, persons in casual

summarized as follows:

employment or working on their own

Class

Available income in terms Percentage of of a married couple with working-class

account, because of insufficient eamings; 28 * 6 per cent were below the minimum

three children

population through unemployment. Thus largely econo-

mic causes were responsible for nearly three-

E 63s. 6d. and over D 53s. 6d. to 63s. 5d.
C 43s. 6d. tO 53s.5d.

36.I quarters of all poverty. Old age was the most

I3-9 18*9

important " natural " cause (I4- 7 per cent), followed by widowhood (7-8 per cent) and

B 33s. 6d. to 43s. 5d.

I6-9 illness (4.I per cent). Notwithstanding the

A under 33s. 6d.

I4.2 development of social services, Mr. Rowntree

shows that if a man was unemployed his

Below the minimum only IO 5 per cent chances of being in poverty were nearly nine

of breadwinners were skilled, compared with to one. Half of all unemployed heads of

3I per cent in Classes C and D and 49 per families were in fact in Class A. For a man

cent in Class E. The average family below in regular wage-work the chances were nearly

the minimum, although not the largest, nine to one against. In sickness the chances

contained most dependent children (I *I3 in of life below the minimum were nearly two to

a family of 3-37 persons) and the smallest one; in old age they were even. In con-

number of supplementary earners (0o57); sequence 86 4 per cent of the unemployed

whereas the average family in Class E, and their families were living below the

although the largest (3- 6o persons) contained minimum. Among other groups the per-

the fewest dependent children (o * 63) and centages were 63 for the sick, 44 4 for the

most supplementary earners (i * IO). Classes aged, 40 * 7 for the widows and 55 * 8 for

A and B together comprised I7,185 persons, casual workers and those working on their

of whom 5,677 (33 per cent) were in families own account. Even among regular wage-

whose average income fell short of the earners I5 *8 per cent-just over one person

minimum by at least 3s. per head. The in six-were below the poverty line.

deficiency was 5s. or more per head for no The contribution made by public social

IIO THE EUGENICS REVIEW

services to the income of each poverty group were ending their lives below the minimum,

varied considerably. The unemployed de- while over one-quarter were living below the

rived four-fifths of their income from social poverty line in middle life, the period when

services, the aged derived two-thirds, the they were bearing and rearing their children.

sick 56 9 per cent and the widows 50 7 per Although half of the children below the

cent. Social services contributed 38 2 per minimum had fathers in regular employment,

cent of the total income of all below the Mr. Rowntree shows that 96 per cent of them

minimum (54. 2 per cent in Class A and would remain below the minimum for at least

28 * 8 per cent in Class B).

three years, 89*i per cent for at least five

It has been repeatedly shown by advocates years, 66 *i per cent for at least nine years, and

of family allowances that children are a no less than 49 per cent for at least thirteen

cause of poverty. It is difficult to analyse years-the whole of their childhood. " There

this factor in great detail as, unfortunately, is not one of these children," writes Mr.

nowhere in the book are there adequate Rowntree, " whose physique will not be

statistics relating to the age, sex and occupa- permanently injured through the privation

tional structure of the families in the different they have to undergo during the most

classes. There is some material, but much of critical years of life.,... But the injury done

it has to be collected together by the reader. to the health of these children is not confined

It is to be regretted that such a rare oppor- to the privations from which they suffer

tunity of obtaining a complete demographic during childhood, for the fact that a child is

picture of York was not taken. However, born into a family living below the minimum

Rowntree states that among adult male means that the mother was in poverty and

wage-workers earning less than 53s. a week her health consequently enfeebled, while

36-9 per cent were found to have three or bearing it, and so the child not only suffers

more children, compared with only I7 5 per after, but also before it is bom."

cent of those earning more than 53s. and

IIT* per cent of those eaming 70s. or more.

These differences are said to be mainly due

to the greater fertility of the poorer fathers.

But children were also a cause of poverty.

Families with four or more children con-

tained 23-6 per cent of all working-class

children in York; but 35.4 per cent of all

children below the minimum, and 48-6 per

cent of all children in Class A, were in such

families. The most revealing material in

Mr. Rowntree's survey is contained in the

chapter on " Three Periods of Economic

Stress." While 3I-I per cent of the total

working-class population were living below

the minimum, the proportions in poverty in

different working-class age groups varied

greatly:

Age Per cent Age

Per cent

Group below Group

below

minimum

minimum

This abbreviated summary of the main findings of the second survey of York shows that in many respects the standard of living of millions of people falls short of even a stringent poverty line, for there is no reason to believe that what is true of York is not also true of the majority of our urban centres. And if life at this level is what we conceive it to be. then the compelling forces of environment must inexorably weaken and impair the level of " wholeness " attainable by present and future generations. " Slow rises worth by poverty distressed " is just as true to-day as it was when written by Dr. Johnson. And if we re-calculate Rowntree's basic figure of 43s. 6d. and adopt a more generous standard of 62s. iod. weekly, we find that the amount
of poverty is thereby doubled. In other
words 64 per cent of the working-class
population would be below this standard.

Under i I to 4
5'to 14

52 5 25 to 44

28*8

49.7 45 to 64

207

39.I 65 and over 47*5

From this sombre picture we can extract some little comfort by comparing it with the

15 to 24

23.7

picture presented by the first York survey in

These figures show that half of York's I899. Then I5-46 per cent of the working-

workers were being born into poverty or class population were living in what Rowntree

EUGENICS AND POVERTY

III

called " primary poverty " *-a standard group is relatively worse off to-day than forty

much below that we have described-whilst years ago. The growth in the social services

in I936 the percentage had fallen to 6-8. has contributed to the reduction in absolute

" The economic condition of the workers is mortality, for whereas at the beginning of the

better by 30 per cent than in I899, though century the average contribution from social

working hours are shorter. Housing is services towards the welfare of a York

immeasurably better, health is better, educa- worker's family was 4+d. per week (at i936

tion is better. Cheap means of transport, prices), by I936 it averaged 6s. 6d. per week;

the provision of public libraries and cheap but it has apparently left untouched the gap

books, the wireless, the cinema and other between the different social groups.

places of entertainment, have placed within Turning aside from economic factors we

the reach of everyone forms of recreation find that since I899 there has been a striking

unknown, and some of them unthought of, decline in what may- be termed spiritual

forty years ago."

interests. Church attendance in particular

The causative forces of poverty were very has fallen greatly. Passive leisure pursuits

different in I936 than in I899. The factor of have grown enormously; but whilst drinking

low wages accounted for 52 per cent of has steadily declined, betting and gambling

"primary poverty" in I899 (the main have grown enormously. For example,

cause) against 9*2 per cent in I936. Sig- during the football season York was sending

nificantly, " largeness of family " as a cause i8,ooo to 20,000 letters a week to pool

has fallen from 22*2 per cent to 8 per cent, promoters. One naturally asks why, but no-

whilst old age and illness have risen in where in his book does Rowntree attempt a

importance from 5I per cent to 23-5 per diagnosis of these changes in leisure activities.

cent. These changes mirror the altered age Nor is there any attempt to study the

structure of the community. The main relation between financial and educational

cause of destitution in I936 was the unem- opportunity (a survey which would have been

ployment of the chief breadwinner (44 * 5 per well worth while); and the treatment of the

cent), a factor which in I899 accounted for social and economic effects of increasing age

only 2 3 per cent of " primary poverty." and declining fertility is extremely scanty.

Alongside these changes in economic The facts are stated-with occasional errors

conditions we find an all-round improvement -and in the main attractively presented,

in the heights and weights of working-class but apart from showing the economic

schoolchildren; a reduction in mortality effects of instituting family allowances* and

rates and a dramatic decline in infant of imposing statutory minimum wages,

mortality from i6i to 55 per i,ooo births. Rowntree deliberately refrains from clis-

This progress in improving environment is cussing remedies, and makes no endeavour

gratifying but it has taken us forty years and, to throw light on the underlying causes of

as Rowntree points out, the poorest section of the changes in social habits and fertility

the working class has only now achieved a patterns.t Yet these forty years have

general death rate comparable to that of the witnessed a biological revolution; the flight

highest working-class group in I899. More- from parenthood has set in and a community

over, whilst there has occurred a great which in I899 was more than replacing its

reduction in the infant death rate for all

classes we find that the rate among the poor- * 72V4 per cent of all persons in poverty on the

est workers exceeded that of the best-off by 43 per cent in I899 and by 88 per cent in

standard we have described would be raised above this

standard if an respect of each

allowance of 5s.
dependent child.

per week were paid in
'This, however, would

I936. Thus, it is true to say that the poorest

still leave a considerable number of persons in poverty and the number would greatly increase if the poverty

* Here again something has gone wrong with line were raised to a level consistent with modern

Rowntree's statistics. On p. 102 he states that the cost nutritional requirements.

of the I899 diet for a family of five is at 1936 prices, I tThis question of differential fertility is discussed in

I9S. 3d. per week, but on p. 83 of Human Needs of the Notes of the Quarter for the Oct. I94I issue of the

Labour the cost is given as i8s. 3d.

REVIEw, Vol. 88, No. 3.

112 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

numbers is now failing by at least 25 per cent
to effect replacement. Another forty years of the same trend will mean that there will be only an elderly York to survey. But this task will have to be left to others. Seebohm Rowntree, by his social studies and by the

valuable material he has given us, deserves well of all reviewers, and in a book of over
500 pages it is perhaps a little unfair to grumble if everything has not been said that every reviewer could wish for.

RACIAL MIXTURE IN GREAT BRITAIN: SOME ANTHROPOLOGICAL CHARACTER-
ISTICS OF THE ANGLO-NEGROID CROSS

A Preliminary Report
By K. L. LITTLE
(The Duckworth Laboratory, University Museum of Ethnology, Cambridge)

W1TTITH the exception of a large
~ number of family studies secured
VYby Miss R. M. Fleming,* little anthropological attention has so far been given to the question of racial crossing in this country, although the presence of some fairly extensive hybrid communities in most of our sea-port cities affords an excellent opportunity for anthropometric investigation, particularly in respect to the AngloNegroid cross.t The present paper, comprising-a brief statistical analysis of the measurements of some ninety Anglo-Negroid or " Coloured " children, together with a smaller " White " sample of forty drawn from the same environment, represents what it is hoped may be merely a prelude to a wider and statistically more adequate survey of the
subject, especially as far as the adult element
is concerned. The present data, including those of a small number of adults Nith one Fi adult exception, were gained entirely from a community in Cardiff, where all the subjects were born. In the course of the
* R. M. Fleming. " Physical Heredity in Human Hybrids." Annals of Eugenics. Vol. IX, Part i,
PP. 55-8I. I939. t K. L. Little. " The Study of Racial Mixture in the
British Commonwealth." EUGENICS REVIEW, Vol. 82. Jan. 1941.

enquiry the opportunity was taken of examining a further sample of some eighty subjects mainly of Anglo-Arab and AngloMediterranean parentage. These, however, have been omitted from the present dis-
cussion for considerations of space. The Anglo-Negroid adult sample is as yet too small for statistical treatment, and has similarly been omitted, although a few
particulars as to its characters are given below.*
Briefly stated, the aspects of racial crossing it is intended to cover comprise such questions as the segregation of both quantitative and qualitative physical characters in the hybrid population, the comparative variability of the respective groups, and comparative differences in growth and sex differences. In the light of these considerations it was decided to. employ as wide an assortment of characters as was practicable, and having regard to the specific racial stocks involved, i.e. Negroid and Caucasoid

* It comprises four males and four females. Five of
these are first crosses, and two may be listed as NNW and one as NWW (see later paragraph). Their cephalic and nasal indices work out as follows:

C.I. 74-1
N.I. 65*6

C.I. 75 2 N.I. 8i*8

