"EUGENICS
AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT."'
THE CHAIRMAN: Ladies and Gentlemen, it is but a short time-about 20 minutes ago-since -this Society did me the honour of electing me as
its President for the ninth time, and perhaps it would be a little ungracious
of me to suggest doubts as to the wisdom of that proceeding; but I cannot h1elp feeling that a new President would have felt a little less like an extinct volcano in the matter ,of presidential addresses, and would not have rejoiced 'as I do that we are to have a discussion rather than a solitary sermon on my part. Under these, to me happier, circumstances, all I have to do is, I -think, to state as well as I can what in broad outline is our subject of discussion for to-day.
We eugenists are all on common ground in regarding every grown
man and woman as the outcome of an individual originating germ and a particular set of surroundings, and in attaching great im-portance to both
these factors in the making of mankind. Many people appear to find it extremely difficult to, grTasp this distinction between nature and nurture. Yet when it has once been grasped it seems to meet one at every turn when discussing social problems.
When we are endeavouring to inculcate this lesson, we may liken human beings to, marble statues, the perfection of which depends botlx on the quality of the stone and the skill of the sculptor. The marble might be held to represent our in-born qualities, and the form of the statue may typify the effect of environment; and just as the quality of a stone cannot be altered after the artistic shaping is commenced, so it is with those of us who have begun our life on earth. We must adinit that the germ is unalterable and we cannot hope to change ouT inborn quali.ties. Hence we are all tempted to turn our whole attention to the sculptor, envirnment, who is for ever chipping at us and altering us in mind and body
all through. our lives.
In imperial matters we are too apt to consider only such questions as making the best of the territories which have to be occupied, or educating and training our citizens to fill innumerable situations whiich 'they will be called upon to fill; for this is the only thing we can do with regard to those of our fellow citizens who, as I have said, have begun their 'life on earth. But if we look to t'he future, surely we ought to consider whether we cannot improve, as it wexe, the maxble of whic.h the nation of the future will be composed. As things are, there is a real danger that inferior stone will be used in t;he coming days, and that the nation will slowly deteriorate as time goes on.
1 A Discussion held, after the Annual Meeting of the Society, under the Chairmanship of Major Leonard Darwin, Sc.D., at Bedford College on July
8th, 19I9.

" EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT."

125

The foregoing is the eugenic problem stated in broadest outline, and in popular language; and we are here to-day to consider how this method
of regarding public affairs ought to affect our imrperial policy and the great and scattered confederation of highly diversified people over whom the Britiish holid sway. Immnigration and emigration certainly stand first for oonsideration amongst imperial problems, for we all see the importance of keeping up the quality of the human marble which we are constantly exporting -to the Overseas Dominions, and of seeing ,that this export does not reduce the quality of the human stone which will have to be used in future for the building of our own nation. No doubt it will be urged by some that we should discuss all such -themes on a purely cosmic basis without reference to the interests of separate countries. Altogether to avoid looking at these problems from a national standpoint would, in my opinion, be a great mistake, *even with regard to international interests; foTr the world progresses best if each nation aand each man pays most attention to his own interests, provided, of course, that moral precepts in regard to our duty to others are always held in view. In; any case, we may safely prophesy that the Overseas Dominions and all other countries will become more and more careful, as tiime goes by, as to the class of immaigrants 'they will accept. In future the emigrants we send out will therefore have to be of good type, whether we wish it or not; and if we continue to piromote the import of inferior 'human marble, in the form of undesirable immigrants, the average quality of the stone of our people will raturally deteriorate, and we shall be like a sieve ca.tching everything which is rejected by other Governments.

Granted the imperative necessity of paying greater attention to the quality of our immigrants, we at once find ourselves faced with the
difficulty of judging of their qualities; an'd from the eugenic point of view i-t must be admitted that this problem is, at present, largely unsolved. We can judge of the quality of the finished statue with comparative ease, but we often cannot say whether its defects are due to flaws in, the marble
or to faulty workmanship on the part of the sculptor; and in -the same way we d;o not always know whether the defects of human beings are due
to heredity or environment. Now the Liberals of old, animated by a spirit which I for one greatly admire, would have had us admit every sufferer craving admittance from a foreign land; but this attitude they
adopted in the full belief that all the defects of these would-be immigrants were due to the inferiority of their home life in the country of their 'birth, and that the children', therefore, would be capable of indefinite improvemen,t. But even if this were correct, it would be doubtful whether we ought to expose our own fellow citizens to 'the moral contagion of contact with immigrants of iinferior type; but it is not correct. The inferiority of low-grade immigrants may be due ito the inferiority of the marble of their inborn qualities, in which case the amount of possible improvement in their progeny is strictly 'limited. All immigrants ough,t to be subject to a most 'rigid examination, both in mental and physical qualities; and admi,ttance should always be refused, in my opinion, if they do not come
up to a fairly high standard.

126 EUGENICS REVIEW.
There are several other racial problems connected with immigration which I must pass by almost in silence. To change my simile somewhat,
if human beings are compared to cast metal statues, the Overseas
Dominions and Crown Colonies are -like moulds of many different s1hapes, needing metals of very different types or kinds in order to form good
castings; and we ought to be caxeful to give each locality the appropriate human material. Again, in sending out our best stocks, we ought to secure conditions of living for them which will enable them to multiply rapidly. If our best men cross the seas and ouT best women stay at home, the whole Empire will be damaged.
Here, then, are a numlber of eugenic questions urgently demanding attention from statesmen, and for t'his purpose it seems to me that the
Government ought to make their central emig-ration authority as strong and as representative as possible.
Beside emi,gration there are several other racial questions affecting imperial politics which need careful consideration, but of these I shall mention only one. The British Empire is peopled by human beings of very diverse types, anid-to employ the same simile as before-the metals of which these human: statues are cast are being mixed together with harrdly any knowledge of the character of the human alloys which are thus being produced; and this indiscriminate mingling is going on whilst wve are all crying out that ouTr social policy ought to be based on a solid scientific foundation. We know that in! our Crown Colonies a great admixture of races is taking place, but our knowledge is based on mere vague statements, unsupported, for the most part, by statistical facts. Though confident assertions are made, in no case do we know for certain whether the human alloy is better or worse than either of the constituent races taken separately. We do not even know if this alloy, to continue my simile, will remain always an alloy, or whether in future castings the human races will separate out and appear again in their pristine purity. In short, what is urgently needed is a thorough scientific study of the mental and physical characteristics of mixed races, and of the laws of human inheritance governing their reproduction.
In orderito select a right policy, something more than facts, however, is needed; for there are certain subjects also urgently demanding attention.
For example, if it were to be proved that two races blended perfectly,
that is to say, that the blend was just as much superior to one parent stock as it was inferior to the other stock, would this method of making the human race mo-re uniform be a blessing ocr the revers? Does the improvement of one human stock justify the deterioration of another stock? Do these two things compensate each other? My own belief is that uniformity is not the goal to be aimed at, but I should like to see this question discussed much more thoroughly than I have ever seen it discussed.
Then again, if certain mixed races are especially suitable for certain kinds of inferior labour much in request, is this a legitimate reason for encouraging miscegenation ? The question whether we are justified in, as it were, attempting to breed human beasts of burden, seems to me -to open out rather an appalling vista of difficult ethical problems. But the

" EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT."

1 27

immediate point I suggest for your consideration is that the Overseas
Dominions and the Mother Country between them are responsible for a very large proportion of the population of the earth, and that in the whole
history of -the world' there is hardly any parallel to the way in which, these diverse people aire now being brought together and mixed wvithin the boundaries of our Empire. It is the greatest racial experiment t-ha-t has ever been made, and it is being carried out with a careless ignoran.ce of the facts.
I suggest that it is our duty as a Society to demand that more :light shou.ld be thrown on this most difficult situation. I ha.ve brought this before you rather as typical of the kind of way in which I suggest that
the subject should be approached by the eugenist. The environmental
point of view is extremely important, but we eugenists want the public to recog.nise the importance of looking, also, to the actua.l inborn qualities
of a race. (Applause.)
PROFESSOR ARTHUR KEITH, F. R. S. , said :-Mr. President, Ladies and
Gentlemen, I am extremely indebted to you for giving me the opportunity of discussing a top.ic which I admit, with you, is one of the most important wh,ich face the British Empire at t-he present time.
It so happens that I was born in a part of Scotland where we were accustomed to breed cattle of which we were very proud, for we sent it-hem over to the Paris Exhibition and they we-re awarded the first prizes against the whole of Europe. So that this is a matter which I have been watching all my life, and in ;my boyhood I saw all the horses of that wilde rural district improved' out of knowledge by breeding. But without knowing it I was also the witness of a very much bigger experiment in eugenics, because, to put it crudely, the district to which I belong manufactured
human goods foT the colonial market. Every year that 'region turned out
20 to 30 men who emigrated to New Zealand or Australia, sometimes to C.anada, and even to the UJnited States. Often they went to 'the big cities. By breeding fine men we were unconsciously building up the Briitish Empire. And I have lived long enough to see the sons of those young fellows come back to fight for the Empire. I mention that fact to you, because I can conceive of no better conditions for the making of men for our Colonies than those which prevailed' in that area, in which eugenics was quite unknown; and in taking positive measures eugenists must not only devise new means for accomplishing their objects, but also make
use of these old ones. I say nothing about the effects on the stoick left behind by the e.mi-
g.rants. To the best of my knowledge it i.s there stil'l. The.people come in from neighbouring parishes, but I believe the stock you see there to-day is the same that you would have seen 2oo years ago. The outgoing movement had been proceeding for 200 years, ever since the time of Elizabeth, not perhaps so much in that part of Scotland, but in England. It was
not meant to be eugenic, bu't it proved to be so in practice. Hitherto a:l
the great eugenic movements have been spontaneous in the same way; and I can hardly imagine any influence but education turning them into purposive undertakings to improve the race. Certainly Acts of Parliament would not do so. Perhaps, after all, the simplicity of life which

128 EUGENICS REVIEW.
results from lack of education produces finer men than scientific guidance would.
After witnessing these emigrations I spent four years in the Malay Peninsula, where I found out there was such a thing as race caste. Most people in England who live at home do not understand this, but those who have been abroad know something of what I mean by it. A great number
of thinkers at home will tell you i,t is a superstition, but Nature does not wo,rk in that way. As a rule she breeds a superstition for some very definite purpose. To return to miscegenation, which I found at work in the Malay Peninsula, I there came to know of certain qualities of the machinery of the human being which must be taken into account in any pro,posal we make to improve the race.
Not only then, but for centuries before, Chinese junks had come drifting down that coast, and hardly a junk came to the Siamese villages without leaving a Chinaman behind, so that in all the seaports you comne
across Siamese with -a great mixture of Chinese in them; and I think that physically and mentally the hybrid is proba-bly better than the Siamese, perhaps better than the Chinaman. At any rate, you would nearly always find the leading men of the village were of this hybrid kind. Well, thee was a case where hybridism was not acting badly.
Then I struck the other and much more difficult problem of the mixture that was springing up between Europeans and native races; and there again, of course, one's ex-pectations got upse.t somewhat. We are really very badly educ,ated for -a great Empire-we know so very little of the people who are fellow citizens, as it were, in that Empi-re. When I went to Siam I was under the impression that I was going to a land of barbairians, but it was a land, as I di:scovered, of old civilisation. The people had a d1ifferent creed from ours, and looked at things in a differrent way; but they were not by any means to be despised. Betweien them and the white men I found there was a curiouss .antipathy, which arose from race caste. But the sex instinct proved even stronger than this rajcial feelin,g. When Britishers, Frenchmen, and Malays were isolated intermarriages nearly always took place between them: and then if children c.ame the instinct of parenthood was brought into play; and it wa,s very ,rare .indeed' that -a white man, once he had broken through all these obstacles N.ature had set up, would leave that part of the world. But in communities where the British and the Europeans were numerous intermarriages with the natives seldom took place, because there the herd insti.nc,t, which is part of the race instinct, became strong and insistent.
Later I came across other races and race-mixtures in the Pacific. Of tthe former I have met with only one, of a different colour from ouir own, the members of which, by their manner and bearing, almost break through the natural antipathy that subsists between the white and thee coloured folks. I mean the Maoris, wrho a-re not unlike European.s in their habits and outlook.
I thought many a time, as I travelled, how great and how unintended an experiment the founding of the British Empire was. We looked upon the people in the countries we had conquered as inferior, so inferior that it was doing what appeared the will of God to wipe them off the earth

"EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT."

129

and occupy the land; and in that way we became heirs of the whole of
North Ameiica and of New Zealand and Australia. My travels also suggested a comparison between the British and the Spaniards and Portuguese as colonisers of America. The British went to the poor, country
districts; wheireas the Spaniards and Portugues,e went, in search of gold,
to the mo-st thickly populated areas, and they got drawn into that civilisation and downed.
Sometimes I have traced the difference between these gold-seekers and our people in this country, because the more I study our own origin, the more I am sure that we, the British people, are part of what I m_ay
call the great North Sea race. We have sprung up mainly round the shores of the North Sea, on the east as well as the west coast, and we are all the same people for the greater part, with very little Mediterannean
blood. To call us a Mediterannean people is one of the great fallacies of the times. We are very different from the people in the South of Europe
in one way, at any rate-the sense of race purity is much stronger in us.
I myself have a slight feeling, sometimes, even in Wales, which arises from this instinct. My explanation of this deep-seated instincit is that it is one of Nature's instruments for evolving a new species. She spreads among the people a spirit of a locality, gives them the feeling of
unity, and makes outsiders more or less enemies. The tendency is, therefore, to marry insi-d-e the district and preserve the distinction effeoted
by this isolation. National spirit is really a modified form of racia.l feeling, which becomes stronger stil.l when peoples have dealings with one another who are altogether different in feature and colour. I am arguing all through that the race instinct is a most valuable property not to be bred out, but rather to be encouraged. You can see I am not preaching a dootrine that is likely to help on the League of N.ations very much, but we must be straightforward and truthful and look the world in the face. I cannot even think of a League of Nations which would involve inter-
marriage between some of our Allies and ourselves. I am afraid I have not helped you very much to any solution, except
this, that you have to take into account, in all your endeavours in breeding human races, of the very strong instincts which are in us concerning
race purity. (Applause.) PROFESSOR E. W. MACBRIDE, F.R.S., said:-I have listened to the
remarks of my friend, Professor Keith, -and with a considerable portion of them I agree. I think that in the few minutes which fall to me in this debate, the most valuable thing I could do would be to deal with the small part of the problem that has come out of my own immediate knowledge. I have had the good fortune to spend more than io years in our greatest Dominion-greatest both in population and extent of territory-and in the couTse of those io or I2 years I travelled from the extreme east to the extreme west. I married in Canada and had children born 'there; and I think I know it from inside about as well as anyone who has spent that time in the country could know it. Now I agree wit.h Professor Keith that one of the greatest links that has bound this Empire together is the export of fine men and women from these islands, and more especially, may I remark, from the part of the islands to which

130 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Professor Keith has. referred. Certainly in the 'history of C,anada the export of men and women, from that part of the world has played an overwhelming part in building up the Dominion. Wherever you go, if
you take two or three generations, you find the leading Canadians sprung
from Scotch stock, and from the stock which has been raised on the land,
and which had the deepest interest in the rearing of cows and horses and sh,eep. It is 'those people who have bui,lt up Canada. Now atthe present
time there is a tremendous amount of f,alse sentiment abroad amongst us.
We feel we have lost large numbers of men in the war, and we think in some way ia huge gap has been. made in our ranks. It is an entirely mistaken feeling, because so far as we bhave this island alone to consi.der,
the best thing ithat possibly could happen to us would be the blotting out
of existence of about i5,ooo,ooo people, so as to reduce the population from 40,000,000, which is enormous for this area, to about 25,000,000.
But since what binds the Empire together is ;the emigration of men and
women of good stock,to the Colonies, the excuse for the encouragemen-t of
fresh interest in these questions is the possibility of sending out more such
people. We read in our papers frenzied a.ppeals to our sympathies to save the babies of the slums. Actually it has been pro.posed to tax the thrifty folk for -the unfit, people who want to have their children educated free, to get theitr food -below cost and have everything done fox them, so that they can have more babies. The question, I wish to put to you is: Are people of that kind ever fit to improve the Empire? So fax as Canada is concerned, absolutely no. They are the very last people who are wanted there. If ,they do go they are an, unmitigated curse. Consequently I consider all these efforts at stimulating the growth of population amongst the poorer classes i.n our towns -as dysgenic. If we want ito prepare a good product we must try to encourage the trural, thrifty, self-supporting population which Professor Keith commended. Let me tell you what some of the first settlers endured in Canada, not those w-ho were transported to the great prairie lands which have been opened up by the Canadi.an Pacific Railway, but those who arrived between I837 and I840, and laid the foundations of the province of Ontario. They were planted in the middle of wooded districts, and found that the summer sun barely thawed down more than a foot or two. Below
that all was frozen; ,and the small crops they raised wer,e largely killed by summer frost. For severa,l years after their arrival they were very nearly starved, but they did not give in. First of all they burned down the forests, because, of course, they had no means of dealing with such large. quantities of timber in any other way. Thus they thoroughly exposed the land, a good -deal of which was marshy, to the rays of the sun, and succeeded in dry.ing it. Then they set fire to the underlying turf, so that the sun managed to penetrate through the g.round which, in all probability, had been frozen since the glacial epoch, and they got down to clay soil beneath. The sons and grandsons of these pioneers are to-day among the most hardy and pros.perous inhabitants, rea,dy to endure hardships of that krind. Only people of their sort will help to build up a great Empire and should be encouraged, for that purpose, to inc.rease their numbers. If you are going to buil,d up a stock of that kind, you cannot enlarge your

"EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT."

I31

Dominions with the mushroom -speed with which, for example, certain settlements in the United States have grown. Now a great many patriotic Canadians were unable to reconcile themselves, I am sorry to say, to the slow, steady growth. The situation was try,ing to them. They saw next door to them this apparently colossal expansion caused by millions of emigrants pouring into the great Mississippi Valley from all parts of Europe and' evolving races like those which Professor Keith mentioned. To my thinking this indiscriminate inflow and mingling of peoples is a menace to health and peace in America. But the Canadians thought
otherwise ,and tried to get more 'than the 50,ooo to 6o,ooo immigrants who
were coming to their country each year. In the year of grace 1887 a tremendous effoirt was made, control was rel.axed, and, any out-of-work, any loafer, any person whom the steamboat companies got hold of, were
shipped off to Canada. About 207,000 were sent out that year. As. a resulit we had a perfectly -awful time in the succeeding winter. We ha.d thousands of people on the verge of starvation. The municipalities made extraordinary efforts to keep these p-eople alive; and in the largest city of Montreal there was an outbreak of burgl.ary and crime wh'ich had no precedent in the his-tory of thecity. Fortunately, it is easy to get into a Canadian city in the winter time, but very difficult to get out. The avenues of -escape atre few; and tramping along the roads, under four or five feet of snow, is, of course, impossible. Consequently the police were able, after some time, to track these criminals, who, it proved, had come from the City of London. They were people of Teutonic origin who had come from Germany, practised their trade in London, and' been exported to Canada. That year was enough for indiscrimiinate immigration in Canada. The Dominion Parliament, in my opinion with great wisdom, brought in -restrictive legislation and exercised a much stricter control. Now, after the war, we h.ave had an outbreak of Bolshevism in Cana-da, a totally unheard-of thing, because Socialism is not popular in Canada. There was a so-called Socialist Party in Montreal, but it would have taken a microscope ,to discover them. The agitators, the Government found, were gentlemen from Russia whom tihe .autho,rities had imported in their
haste to increase the population. If you are going to create sound colonies you must fill them with the best stock raised on the land both, in Scotland and in England. We have to give that stock the best chances of reproducing itself an'd discountenance the increase of the other population; and I would much. rather that a large portion of the offspring of our town population died in infancy than live to grow up into what yur PTemier has called C3 men. I am afraid these views will sound somewhat reactionary to some members of the audience, but I think they are sound eugenics. Let me close by giving you a Canadian problem-and that a Canadian .rural problem. A farmer who was sending his son into the ci,ty to engage a farm hand said to him " Get a man. If you can't get a man, get a Frenchman " (that is a French Canadian, a different race from any of the stock I have sppoken of). " If you can't get a, Frenchman, get two Englishmen." (Laughter and applause.)
MR. LIDBETTER said :-Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen, whenever a problem such as we have before us this afternoon crops up, I

132 EUGENICS REVIEW.
always feel that one ought to look on the practical side and' emphasise the
"education " which, to me, is the essential part of the title of our Society. Immigratio.n is a complicated subject, and before one's theories with regard to it can be put into practice a great number of other questions must be answered.
As the last speaker has pointed out, restrictive immigration laws are now in force in Canada. Similar laws have been passed in the British Dominions -and America; and sinice I908 certain minor regulations of the same kind have existed in this country, but ithey are so framed that they c,annot be carried out. All these laws without exception, however, miss the eugenic i.de,al entirely. They are based upon, the immediate
condition of the would-be emi.grants and immigrants and have no; relation to economic circumstances. They do not take family history into account *at a'll, -and now,here that I know of do they make any limitation as to race. It should surely be part of the cbjeot of this Association to get the eugenic ideal incorporated into all these regulations; and to that end it is necessary for us to move in the educational direction, i.n order to give a lead as to the sort of persons who should be admitted, apart from the immediate physical and mental condition. That is an absolute necessity, and it must
be the key-note of any advice that this Asso-ciatio.n can offer on, the eugenic question with regard to imperial troubles.
If we are to maintain stock fm which emigrants who are worthy of our Colonies -can spring, we must kee.p up the quality and tone of our own population. Here we have to consider problems which demand much more knowledge than we possess at present. I would mention a case to you now that I dealt with in about 1913. It is that of an Eastern European who had become insane in London. Enquiries brought -out the fact that this man had been -in England only four days. He h'ald come with his father and brother, and on the fourth day after their arrival in England they presented themselves at the offices of a travelling agent, asking for tickets to go to America. The agent looked at the three and said, CC Yes, you can have a ticket, and you can have a ticket for America, but that chap can't go." The man w.as good enough to get into the country, but not good enough to get out. He was in custody in, England for several months, and was finally rep,atriated to the country of his origin at considerable cost. There are many more 'like him. What is
'more, if that man 'had managed to dodge arr,est for 12 months, you could not have got rid of him -at all. He would have -remained here, the head of -a family that would have had 'to be maintained at the public expense.
A still broader question whi'ch arises out of immigration is that of race. I think no one who is conversant with East London at the present time can doubt the real danger in which we stand of vitiat,ing the British stock ,through marriage alliances with Asiatics who make a very undesirable blend with our own people. It is the mixture that is the peril rather than the presence of the oTiginal com-munity, the members of which, by themselves, have many good points, including a fairly high standard of bealth.
For the prevention of such admixture much information is necessairy.
One of the many subjects relating to emigration on which more light is

"EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENT."

133

greatly needed is that of the types of men and women that are the most useful for t,he Colonies. Surely it should be possible for some branch of
this organisa-tion to be establish-ed in the Colonies, the secretary of which would advise us not merely as to the best immediate types for emigration, but as to what the result of one or two generations in the new countries was likely to, be.
Another subject on which knowledge is needed is that of intermarriage betwieen English folk and foreigners in Lon-don. Extensive enquitry should be made into it, and the investigations should be so organised as to bring
the facts which they elicit before the general public. To my mind, this enquiry is a very urgent thing.
I think that the main thing for us to do is to preach the eugenic princi,ple in such a way that everybody will inevitably think of it in discussing and dealing with passenger movements, both inwards andd outwards. Until it is thus incorporated with all our thoughts and actions with regard to the incomings and outgoings of population, the eugenic ideal will be of no great value to th-e Empire. (Applause.)
MRS. A. C. GoTTo, O.B.E., said:-Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen, we are always being criticised as eugenists for having no practical policy. I think the subjects that have been raised this afternoon show what very practical questions do underlie the eugenic principle, and also what very practical alterations are needed even if the present amount of
knowledge of eugenics is to be usefully applied. The problem to me seems to fall into three different lines. We first have the consideration of the alterations that are immediately necessary in our own immigration laws. We also have the questions which will concern the new impeTial emigration authority which ;has just been set up by the Colonial Office. In this new department no steps -have been taken, -as far as I know, .to secure the sel-ection of types of emigrants who are suitable for different colonies.
Then again, we know that although the numerical difference between the sexes in the various Dominions may not be as great as most people suppose, the difference in numbers between men and women belonging to the same social tradition is very grjeat indeed. From the eugenic and
imperial point of view that disparity is, of course, most regrettable. The opportunity which the war has given to a large number of the best
Dominion men to selec,t wives of their own social tradition from, this ooun,txy is one of the few good things which have come out of evil. I believe there are between 35,ooo and 40,000 New Zealand, Australian and Canadian officers and privates who have married since they have been in this country. These marriages are going to be a very important eugenic step forward for the Dominions. But there are quite ,a number of other colonial problems for which a solution is required. If we are to have a good home tradition in all parts of the Empire, we shall have to see that the right sort of women are. attracted to the Colonies by the offer of suitable employment.
Our responsibility for our tropical Colonies opens up another group of questions.

I34 EUGENICS REVIEW.
For those regions we select the very best of our University men as administrators in the naval, military, police and medical seTrvices. Many of these places are now so much improved that it is quite possible for white women to live and rear families.there; but such -are the conditions of service that in the majority of cases it is impossible for the men to attain a financial position which will enable them -to marry until they are between 35 an.d 40. That is -an absolutely anti-eugenic position. If we
are going to choose the very best of our young men foir responsible work which wil.l shut them off firom their own kind and favour the sex -at the
expense of the race instinct in such a way that the purity of the race is imperilled, there is an added reason why the conditions of the coloniall service should be such as to encourage men to take wives to those parts
of the Colonies where it is possible for white women to live. (Applause.)
As you see, there is quite a number of really practical eugenic points that this Society would' do well to take up and press home now. Government departments are always very nearly strangled by red tape; but the war has done something to relax some of the knots, and one feels that if
pressure can be brought to bear now, before the knots are -tightened up again, we may make some impression.. Therefore I do hope we shall
come forwarrd during the next year and press these three practical points:
That we(i) Ask that our own immigration laws shall be carefully
scrutinised with a view to checking the ingress into this country of people wre cannot get rid of again, because they fall below the standards accepted by any other country. That is the largest step to take, but I cannot see any practical xeason why it should not be taken. (Applause.)
(2) Approach 'the Colonial Office and put as much pressure on them, and on Parliament, as we possibly can, to secu,re a general review of the conditions of service for our own administrative staffs in the Colonies and P.rotectorates as would encourage the young men who serve
there to marry. (3) Brinig to the notice of the Colonial Office the need for careful
eugenic consideration of the problems concerning the immigratiion within
the Empire of the different sections of our own race. Another whole group of subjects relates to scientific research. We
have just seen. the Medical Research Committee established. Thi.s, I believe, is to be under the Privy Council, which is an independent body capable of undertaking research on imperial lines. Is not 'the ascertaining of the fac.ts with tregard to miscegenation a very practical portion of the white man's burden that we are assuming? We are responsible for the settlement in far countries of sections of our own white race; and it is incumbent on us to obtain the best results from the countries and the p.eoples under our caTre. I am not now considering the question of the crossing of whit'es and blacks, but of inter-marriage between the members of races between which the differences are not so great. I.n such cases the product of the blending may be good. For instance, theire is some evidence to show that mixtures between different brown .an'd bl.ack peoples produce a fitter race th'an either of the two from which they sprung, and that the children as they g.row up can live better and produce more com-

"EUGENICS AND IMPERIAL DEVELOPMENI."

135

fort for themselves, because they are better workers than the oiriginal natives of the tropical groups of islands from which they come.
On these matters we ought to have positive knowledge; and I submit that this Society should urge the responsible authorities to obtain it, and, through the Press, should bring home to our own people the necessity of
discovering the effect of race mixture and not approaching this important
question with prejudiced minds.
I agree tthat our whole instinct warns us not to allow crosses to be made between races which differ widely from one another; and I certaimly
hope that science will prove this instinct to be correct, because although, like a good manny other people, I am quite ready to look upon tbhe coloured races as our brothers, I do not want to look upo.n them as our brothers-in-law-I think that is a very different matter. (Laughter.)
When, we move the thing from the ethical to the physical position, I think we shall probably find that science will confirm our racial instinc,t
in this respect, but whatever the reply, we have not the information,, yet, on which 'to base action, and I think we should get it. Therefore I uirge
that we shoulid take .practical steps, in these four directions, to bring imperial administration, more into accordance with existing knowledge of eug,enics an-d the recognised means of obtaining knowledge than it is at
present. (Applause.) THE CHAIRMAN:-Sir Harry Wilson cannot be present, but I will read
you an extract from a letter he has written. " I was going to 'say a few words on the way in which migration and land settlement are lik-ely to aff-ect ithe problem of imperial development. The marriage of so many Canadian, Australian and South African soldiers with women belonging to the Mother Country is an interesting f.actor in the situation. Of the Canadian Forces alone some 38,ooo have married on this side of the Atlantic; and as Colonel Avery said, when, at the Overseas Nursing Association Annual Meeting, he was estimating the total number of such marriiages at over so,ooo, 'they are 'probably only the vanguard of a great army. He emphasised the need for more and better maternity nursing in the outlying parts of the Empire, particularly in the prairie provinces of Canada 'and the back blocks of Australia and South Africa. This seems to me to be a problem which directly concerns this Society."
WVe have now ha,d an hour and ten minutes, and I think we had better bring our discussion to a close. I quite agree with Mrs. Gotto that we must try and pick up the threads of it and bring it to some practical issue. (Applause.)

