The Reith Lectures I959

The Future of Man

The Reith Lectures 1959 were delivered by Professor P. B. Medawar, C.B.E., M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S., on the B.B.C.'s Home Service in November and December of that year. Although the text of the Lectures appeared in the Listener, many will now welcome their appearance in book form, with added notes.* Professor Medawar is a Fellow of the Eugenics Society and we are fortunate in being able to print below comments on the Lectures by the Society's Honorary Secretary, its Honorary Librarian and by Professor P. E. Vernon, a member of its Council.

Dr. C. P. Blacker:

practice of birth control need not lead to the

T HESE LECTURES ARE entitled The Future
of Man. What do we learn from them about the future of man? Almost nothing
at all. But this is not Professor Medawar's fault. He tells us in a short Introduction that the title was proposed to him. He would not, he tells us, have been so arrogant as to choose such a title for the lectures as a whole, or, presumably, for the sixth and last lecture which is also called The Future of Man. This sixth lecture is concerned with the role of cultural tradition in man's future.
After hearing these stimulating lectures on Sunday evenings at the end of last year, I have enjoyed the further pleasure of reading them. The text consisting of the broadcast words is enriched by twenty-three pages of notes from which the reader will see how widely Professor Medawar has probed and how diverse (and also how up-to-date) are the sources from which he draws.
If the future of man is not the essential theme,

extinction of humanity. Man, moreover, being the possessor of a large brain, can transmit a cultural tradition of which the author makes much-some may think overmuch; he assigns to it a more important role (despite such noteworthy ancestral achievements as language and writing) in the future than it has performed in the past. Indeed, we are told that man is beginning to evolve in an entirely novel way; "our newer style of evolution is Lamarckian in nature"quite unlike the familiar older style. It will be seen that these conclusions are reassuring. They are even comforting and, the lecturer believes, humane. What then of Professor Medawar's attitude to eugenics?
Some people begin a book by reading the last paragraph. A member of our Society who read first the last sentence of the last chapter might feel encouraged.
... the bells which toll for mankind aremost of them anyway-like the bells of Alpine

what is? The lecturer tells us that he decided cattle: they are attached to our own necks, and that the lectures were to be about the process of it must be our fault if they do not make a foretelling rather than about what is actually cheerful and harmonious sound.

foretold. A full title, the reader surmises, might No one more ardently wants the bells to sound

be "justifiable and unjustifiable methods of fore- cheerfully and harmoniously than does the

casting (or assessing) man's future"; or "analy- eugenist.

tical methods of forecasting". But happily Nowhere in the lectures is the eugenist casti-

Professor Medawar digresses now and then gated; but nowhere is he specially encouraged.

from considerations of method. He advances The nearest approach to encouragement ac-

some general views on what the future has in corded to those who feel that differential fertility

store. Man, for example, is likely to go on is important (and no one who thinks it unimpor-

evolving; his evolution has not come to an end; tant should call himself a eugenist) is a tentative

advances in medicine and hygiene are not likely conclusion reached in the fifth lecture entitled

to undermine the fitness of the human race; the Intelligence and Fertility:

* Medawar, P.B. The Future ofMan. London, 1960.
Methuen. Pp.128. Price lOs. 6d.

Changes in the structure of taxation and in the award of family allowances and educational

14S
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, October 1960, 52, 3.

ER-C

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

grants may already have removed some of the The trouble comes less from scientists disregard-

factors which have discouraged the more ing facts than from how they interpret facts.

intelligent from having larger families; and in What matters is to which facts or sets of facts

twenty-five years' time we may be laughing at they assign major, minor or no importance. The

our present misgivings. I do not, however, abler and the more erudite the scientist, the more

think that there is very much to be amused at ingeniously and persuasively can he defend

just at present.

untenable positions adopted through prejudice.

Eugenics, while not unsympathetically treated Witness the subtly procrustean treatment ac-

by the Reith Lecturer, receives some passing corded in the past to facts by theologically in-

shots. The trouble, Professor Medawar seems to clined scientists whose bias of sentiment made

feel, is largely one of method. The shots, which them feel, perhaps more strongly than the rest of

seem to be aimed at certain exponents of eugenics us, that they were the only ones who paid proper

rather than at the subject itself, are fired in the respect to the really relevant facts. There are,

course of discussions of the following subjects: moreover, trends in scientific thought which have

the problem of adaptability, the meaning of nothing to do with ulterior sentiments. Here may

fitness, and what Professor Medawar calls be involved institutional rivalries, departmental

"geneticism". How do these shots land? Of the loyalties, the possible effects on one's career of

problem of adaptability, the lecturer says:

running (as in politics) against the prevailing

I feel ... that people who study eugenics ... currents, and the fear of receiving a public sometimes ... have in the backs of their minds castigation at the hands of a formidable, politithe idea of some one excellently well-adapted cally prejudiced, and ill-tempered senior.

all-round kind of human being who could be It is a merit of Professor Medawar's lecture

perpetuated according to the formula that that his are but minor prejudices. Indeed his

"like begets like"; in other words by "breeding polite expression of difference from Professor

true".

L. S. Penrose in a Note on p. 125 over the matter

This approach is related to:

of whether or not the population of Great

the classical idea of the elementary text-books, Britain is in a state of natural balance or genetic

the idea of a uniform, a predominantly homo- equilibrium is a welcome example ofindependent

zygous population of well-adapted individuals thinking, somewhat contrary to the prevailing

whose offspring are almost always exactly like current. But it may not be far-fetched to suppose

themselves.

that Professor Medawar has been sensitised to

Many of us have indubitably used the homely the incautious and unqualified use of phrases

expression "like begets like". But it is a matter of such as like begetting like by the nature of his

immediate experience that the truth of this scientific work. To the author of papers such as

simple formula is offset by the equally important those assembled in his The Uniqueness of the

truth that like begets unlike, every individual Individual (Methuen 1957), human variability

being unique. Each formula is, in fact, a half- would claim a recognition which seem to be

truth. Our attitude to eugenics can be influenced overlooked by users of stock phrases which stress

by which of these two half-truths we most stress. only genetic conformity.

The behaviour of scientists during the wars and The elementary truth is that, in Nature,

in the course of ideological polemics shows them variability and constancy, though antithetical, are

to be influenced much like other people by complementary to each other. Each is equally

political, nationalist and religious preconcep- necessary to the evolutionary process. Without

tions. In the sphere of eugenics we have splendid variability there would be fixity; without con-

demonstrations in the Nazi and Communist stancy the variant which enjoyed a biological

promulgations. Between 1933 and 1945, German advantage would not transmit that advantage.

scientists asserted that doctrines of race superi- Patterns of conformity are in various degrees

ority were validated by science; in Russia the generalised, being reflected in taxomonic sys-

opposite doctrines of Lysenko were till recently tems. There is a broad conformity with a pattern

proclaimed as equally well-grounded in science. of archetypal features within the range of a

i46

THE FUTURE OF MAN

phylum; the ranges shrink and the features certainly not sufficiently inapplicable to invali-

become less archetypal as we pass from classes, date the basic principles of eugenics. I don't see

orders, families and genera to species. When we that we should be ashamed of using it provided

get down to individuals, we find that each, that we recognize that, as a description of what

though conforming with the patterns of each happens in biological heredity, it is but a half

grade of the taxonomic hierarchy from phylum truth.

through to species, is unique. He is, in fact, an The second of Professor Medawar's side shots,

idiosyncrasy-a private or particular mix-up provoked by his discussion of the meaning offit-

(syn-Krasis)-whose uniqueness extends to each ness, may not have been specifically aimed at a

of his body cells.

target. The cannonade may have been more

A trend of change in the environment calling ceremonial than intentionally destructive. The

for adaptation favours variability; environ- Meaning of Fitness is the title of the second

mental monotony permits, or may even impose, lecture. Some may think that A Meaning of

constancy. When I studied zoology forty years Fitness or Meanings of Fitness might have been

ago, the Brachiopods Lingula and Terebratula, better; for the word is here used in a special

respectively unchanged since the Cambrian and (some may think in an obfuscating) sense to mean

Devonian epochs, were object-lessons in immut- net reproductive advantage. The criterion of fit-

ability. To-day we think of a nearer relative, the ness is biological survival. The survival of the

Coelacanth fish. Most students of human fittest hence means no more than the survival of

anatomy must have marvelled at the constancy the survivors. The values connoted by the

with which the imposing array of anatomical particle "eu" in eugenics are irrelevant to the

features of the corpses they dissect tally with the usage here paraded according to which an

descriptions in the textbooks; all students of alcoholic father of a dozen unwanted children

faces, voices and handwriting must have equally is a paragon of fitness; indeed his fitness

marvelled at the diversity of traits, immediately would become still more pre-eminent if as

recognized as unique in their experience, of the many as possible of his children, grandchildren

people they observe.

and later descendants repeated his procreative

The balance between change and fixity, performance.

between innovation and traditionalism, is a The argument about fitness is taken up in the

cultural no less than a genetic problem. How final chapter where it seems to be related to what

much that is customary and traditional should the lecturer holds to be a "humane solution ofthe

be retained as a stabilizing counterpoise when the problems of eugenics, particularly of the prob-

winds of change are mounting to gale force? The lems of those who have been handicapped by one

deeper and more heavily weighted a sail-boat's or another manifestation of the ineptitude of

keel, the less is it liable to capsize. How much Nature." The argument (which I may misunder-

keel should be retained? How much should the stand) seems to be that if, through human arts

helmsman yield to the wind? These questions are and the spread of humane feelings, victims of

no less fundamental for religious than for inborn defects (persons victimized by the inepti-

political leaders. Their themes will certainly tude of nature) survive and reproduce their

resound among the carillons pealed by the defects, they are, through their biological

Alpine bells, and will be fretfully debated by "fitness", worthy citizens of the future who

future students of campanology.

should not suffer from any sense of shortcoming.

I revert, after the digression, to the use of the Their defects, though transmitted to descendants,

formula "like begets like" by exponents of the should carry no stigma. Human ingenuities and

"classical" idea of the elementary textbooks. artefacts, by nullifying the ineptitudes of Nature,

Admittedly the formula fits better a situation in by drawing her teeth and claws, will prepare for

which all the offspring resemble their parents us a benign springtime; a new style of compen-

than one in which (as happens to beneficiaries of satory nurture will iron out her blunders. What

hybrid vigour) only half do. Nevertheless the we lose on the swings of a genetical system of

formula is not wholly inapplicable to the latter; heredity, we will gain on the roundabouts of a

'47

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

non-genetical or cultural system; on balance there will be no incubus, no call for anathema and no need for shame. There will be a "humane solution of the problems of eugenics."
But are there not here possibilities of misunderstanding? We can want posterity to be freed from inborn defects for at least two reasons. First, we might abhor the defects and therefore dislike and despise their victims, thus making them feel inferior and unhappy. That would certainly be inhumane. But we might alternatively wish that posterity should be free from the inconveniences of such defects, however effectively these were mitigated by arts and correctives. Thus I have a minus five degree of myopia which has caused me little trouble but which I would sooner not have had. It is a source of regret to me that I have transmitted a lesser degree to my three children whom I would gladly have spared the necessity of wearing spectacles and contact lenses. Is my regret inhumane?
The third side-shot is specifically directed at the protagonists of what is called geneticism.
Geneticism is the application to human affairs (or indeed to livestock breeding or natural selection or evolution) of a genetic knowledge or understanding which is assumed to be very much greater than it really is.
But this attack is obviously aimed at extremist exponents of applied genetics rather than against the subject of eugenics. The discharge is doubtless salutary.
These comments are intended not as criticisms but as a contribution to a discussion. The lectures will, I hope, be widely read.
Dr. C. 0. Carter:
EUGENISTS WILL BE grateful to Professor Medawar for taking up the challenge posed to him by the B.B.C. when they suggested the title
The Future of Man for his Reith Lectures last year. It is most valuable that the issues ofeugenics and the ways in which they may be studied should be put before such a wide public. In assessing the influence of these talks, the following points seem noteworthy: these are made from the restricted viewpoint of eugenics education, while Professor Medawar's aims were wider.
A considerable proportion of the British population will have been introduced to the

word "eugenics" for the first time, and others will now have a more correct appreciation of what is meant by eugenics. Many people still find it difficult to think and talk about eugenics without prejudice; Professor Medawar has obviously had experience of this when he writes in the Notes added to the published version of the lectures "the illusion still persists that anyone who entertains the idea that intelligence may be declining is conniving at a Fascist plot to discredit the working classes". The Reith Lectures, being well reasoned and dispassionate, will help others to think sensibly about eugenic issues.
Turning to more specific points, a personal viewpoint is that the lectures will have left a more correct impression of the eugenic aspects of differential fertility with respect to intelligence, than of the relationship between fertility and health. The fifth lecture on Intelligence and Fertility was an admirable analysis, and left the listener with entirely the correct impressions: that there may well be a decline at present in the average "innate" intelligence of the population, that a decline is to be deplored, that further investigation of the trend is needed, that it may be a temporary phenomenon with the change from unplanned child-bearing with a high mortality to planned child-bearing with a low mortality.
The second lecture on Fitness, however, may have left some listeners with the impression that we need not be concerned with a rise in the proportion of children born with genetic predisposition to disorders, which are treatable; also that genetic predisposition to disease is specific, so that deaths from malaria or tuberculosis, for example, give selection only for genes contributing to resistance specifically to each of these disorders. On the first point, effective treatment is likely to increase, though often very slowly, the frequency of the genes predisposing to disease, except where this frequency is entirely maintained by heterozygote advantage; the apparent paradox with sickle-cell anaemia disappears when the anaemia becomes treatable. It is true that, if medical science and the great pharmaceutical industries go from strength to strength, there is no immediate danger of a population dying out, even though an increasing proportion of its members become dependent on daily injections, special dietary regimes, or expert

i48

THE FUTURE OF MAN

surgical intervention in childhood. But it is perhaps not a purely professional viewpoint to see this as at least as undesirable as a decline in average intelligence. Professor Medawar, in his Notes, quotes Professor J. M. Thoday's saying that "the fit are those who fit their environments
and whose descendants will fit future environ-
ments". We may reasonably expect never to return to primitive conditions, but we cannot expect to control future environments completely and to become over-dependent on the medical and chemical professions is to lose adaptability. The only "treatment" which carries no eugenic risk is one that alters the gene itself and this is not yet possible. On the specificity of genetically determined resistance to disease, too little is known for dogmatism. Specific resistances are more readily detectable, but multi-factorial genetic factors controlling generalised resistances, and behaving like those controlling "innate" intelligence, may well be more important, particularly with common diseases.
Professor Medawar is perhaps correct in regarding the issue of intelligence as more urgent than that of health, since for intelligence there is evidence, not only of a reduction of natural selection forces, but of a present artificial dysgenic trend; but in both fields, in the long run there is need for artificial selection to balance loss by mutation. Fortunately, there is good reason to hope that the advent ofplanned childbearing may well result in eugenic trends through differential fertility, not only for "innate" intelligence, but for the relative absence of genetic predisposition to mental or physical ill health. On the negative side, the increasing use made of genetic counselling in the medical services will have just this effect; but one may guess that the positive aspect, that those who are capable, energetic and healthy will tend to plan relatively large families, will be more important, even though we know little of the genetic basis of the these qualities.
In the third talk on the Limits ofImprovement, Professor Medawar effectively described how a great deal of inequality and imperfections of men may be an inevitable part of a genetic system in which polymorphism is favoured by heterozy-
gote advantage and other mechanisms. He did
not, perhaps, make it sufficiently clear that this
does not mean that evolutionary "advance"

cannot occur, slowly but progressively under the influence of selection, by the raising of the population average, while the variability of the population is retained. Over geological time, this is what has happened in the course of the evolution, for example, of the volume of brain from 600-800 c.c. in the Australopithecines to 12501600 c.c. in man to-day.
A final point is that it is perhaps a pity from the standpoint of eugenic education that Professor Medawar referred to the possible effects of eugenic action by some sustained and consistent tyranny. This is just the concept that many of his listeners will have already had in their minds as the only means by which genetic "advance" may be brought about. The last lecture, in which Professor Medawar discussed the origin of non-genetical cultural inheritance in man, would have provided an opportunity for discussing how cultural inheritance and genetical inheritance may interact with each other. As mankind learns more and more of genetics, one may hope that individual parents, without any tyrannical outside direction, will increasingly feel a responsibility for the genes they transmit to their children. If this leads to a rise inaverage intelligence, the rise will in turn accelerate new discoveries in human genetics and new applications of this knowledge. Though the dream expressed at the recent Conference on Congenital Malformations by an American biochemical geneticist, Dr. Tatum, that man may, in time, be able to synthesise "better" D.N.A. in vitro and then incorporate it into its own germ plasm, is visionary, it does not appear impossible, provided that cultural inheritance and biological inheritance "advance" together.
Professor P. E. Vernon:
I HAVE BEEN ASKED to comment on the psychological issues raised by The Future of Man. In fact there are relatively few of these, and therefore I have little to say. The first four lectures are of considerable interest to the psychologist, in priming him on up-to-date genetic theory and methods. They warn him, for example, against such easy generalizations as that the human stock is at present degenerating, and that we know how to breed a more perfectly adapted species. If one criticism may be ventured

149

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

(albeit it probably reveals the writer's ignorance of genetics) it is that there may still be some grounds for anxiety about the success of modem medicine and of the comforts of civilization in helping less healthy members of the population to survive and breed. Professor Medawar demolishes this belief with gusto, but is apparently interpreting "fitness" in the narrow sense of the mean reproductive capacity of the population. The social scientist might wish to think of fitness as the range (not just the mean) of physical and mental resources, and ask-does not our artificially maintained population contain an undue proportion of individuals who are less capable of rising to emergencies, or of accomplishing outstanding feats of an intellectual or physical nature, than did populations in the
past? The fifth lecture Intelligence and Fertility, pro-
vides a lucid survey of the controversy over the decline in national intelligence which would seem quite acceptable to most contemporary psychologists. They would agree with Professor

Medawar that it is naive to expect intelligence
tests to measure pure inborn ability, though at the same time it is likely that much of their variance is genetically determined. He deduces from this that a slow decline is probably taking place under present legislative and social conditions, though this is much less than would follow from taking the observed negative correlation between parental fertility and child intelligence at its face value, and it may be largely offset by
improvements in health, education, etc. The last lecture also draws considerably on
psychology, but appears rather commonplace. I find that my stock lecture notes of twenty years ago stated that, through the development of symbolic thinking and language, man had virtually achieved a Lamarckian type of evolution, and I daresay I picked this up from some much earlier writer (Hobhouse ?). Equally it seems curious to have to labour the point that competition and aggression, growth and decay, are not inevitable features of human nature-
that societies can and do change.

I 5o

