STERILIZATION AS A PRACTICAL POLICY.
By R. LANGDON-DOWN, M.B., M.R.C.P.
It is claimed by many writers to-day that the enforced sterilization of all mental defectives is the proper and only wise means 6f reducing the number of mental defectives in the population, and this claim is based essentially on the hereditary nature of mental deficiency.
Assuming for the purposes of the present discussion that the method of sterilization now proposed is a reasonably easy and safe operation and that it produces no directly harmful results in the individual upon whom the operation is performed, and assuming further that so far as the individual subjected to it is concerned it is effective in preventing propagation, let us consider what other conditions would have to be taken into account in order to justify Parliament in giving legislative sanction to such a proposal and how far these conditions are satisfied.
When it is urged that legislation should be invoked to give effect to the proposal it is no longer sufficient to deal in generalities but it becomes necessary to enter into details and to be prepared with precise definitions, seeing that in a legal enactment one is dealing with not mental deficiency in the abstract but in each' case with a mentally defective person. It is just here that difficulties begin which are often evaded or slurred over.
(1) Presumably the first condition that would have to be secured to the satisfaction of Parliament, would be that in no case should sterilization be performed in which it was not reasonably certain that the person to be sterilized is the subject of a germinal abnormality, and that children procreated by that person would have similar defective inheritable tendencies.
(2) Secondly, it would be necessary to convince Parliament of the magnitude of the evil, which is held to justify the measure, by positive evidence, and to show that the evil is a growing one and that existing measures are, in their nature, inadequate to cope with it.
(3) Thirdly, it would be- necessary to bring forward evidence to make it appear reasonably certain that the beneficial result to be anticipated would be sufficiently great to justify the enforcement of sterilization, and that this measure, having regard to all the circumstances, provided the best way of accomplishing the end in view, and that any evil consequences that might result would be outweighed by the advantages to be secured.
Coming back to the first condition, while there is a general consensus of opinion that heredity provides a very large element in the production of feeble-mindedness statistically regarded (and for our present purpose it is not necessary to discuss the type or mode of inheritance) yet even the most ardent advocate of Sterilization and those who strongly insist on the influence of heredity in the production

206 EUGENICS REVIEW.
of mental deficiency, admit that there are considerable numbers of mental defectives whose condition must be attributed to other causes,
and many others the cause of whose condition cannot be certainly stated. For instance, l)r. Gibbons duly recognizes this in his paper in the last number of the REVIEW, and Dr. Goddard, in his book "Feeble-mindedness; its causes and consequences," classifies his
cases according as he regards them as hereditary and probably hereditary on the one hand and not hereditary on the other; the number in the former group is 198 and in the latter 129.
Similarly, in a recent American scientific work it is stated that there has always been some uncertainty in making a diagnostic distinction between native feeble-mindedness on the one hand and the acquired defect resulting in retardation on the other. That uncertainty may always exist.
On the other hand it may be argued that whether the particular case exhibits a transmissible defect, or not, does not really matter, as such a person is not likely to make a good parent of a family and that various evil consequences may follow, affecting his children and their
companions.. This may be true in fact, but it entirely alters the grounds on
which the main proposal is put forward, and the equity ofsterilizing a person because his offspring will be inherently defective is quite different from that of doing so because it is thought he will manage his family badly, and if it is felt that these totally different objects are being covered by the proposal, it will probably make Parliament look askance at it no less than does the Constitution of the United States, where, apparently, this very difficulty has led to the repeal of several of the State laws imposing sterilization as being unconstitutional.
The essential object, and the only sound defence. is that it will stamp out the hereditary taint.
Obviously for the non-hereditary cases segregation is the only justifiable measure.
That the presence of mental defectives in the communitv is a grave evil is commonly admitted, and also that their numbers are very great and ought if possible to be diminished. But when we look for positive proof of their numbers increasing we can find nothing reliable. Dr. Gibbons tells us that "it is evident from the tables of Mental Deficiency that it is increasing." All that the tables he refers to tell us is the number of mental defectives who have gradually been brought within the purview of an Act of Parliament, which even now is only in partial operation and was almost suspended till the end of the War. He states that heredity accounts for this increasing number, and also for the large numbers of confirmed criminals of which he gives tables. But these latter show no such marked increase as is claimed in the case of the former. Either then heredity cannot be the explanation of both these groups of facts or the real increase in the number of mental defectives is not as great as the tables suggest. The appearance of an increase in numbers may be due partly to the much greater interest taken in the matter and the consequently more general recognition of the condition, and partly to the tendency to draw the line

STERILIZATION AS A PRACTICAL POLICY. 207
between those who pass muster as normal and those who do not, at a constantly higher and higher level.
That the provision actually in existence for dealing properly with this great incubus is woefully insufficient is again pointed out in the recent Report of the Board of Control, which states that only 17 out
of 124 local authorities, that have this power, have made provision for their defectives. This does not show that the measures taken by Parliament are inadequate or inappropriate, but simply that they have
not been acted upon. The principle underlying the present policy of Parliament is
Segregation, and it is evident that Segregation has not yet been
thoroughly tried. In the absence of statistics, the tendency is to infer that there must
be a rapid increase going on because it has been shown that the feebleminded, when they have children, are more prolific than the average and that the families in which mentally defective children occur are, on the average, about half as large again as families including only normal children. Dr. Gibbons quotes a statement that they propagate from 2 to 6 times more rapidly than normal individuals. Such an excessive fertility, continued generation after generation, without any measures operating to prevent parenthood in the class, would surely have unmistakeably flooded the country with defectives if the common view as to their heredity and habits were true and there were no strong counteracting influences. I suspect, that, in addition to a higher death rate, the marriage or parentage rate of mental defectives is far lower than the normal and than is generally assumed in dealing with these computations.
It is known that a certain small class of defectives is highly erotic and that many defectives are easily led and lacking in self control, but on the, other hand some high grade defectives, though weak in intelligence, have a strong sense of principle and others again are very rigidly conservative in regard to the good habits in which they have been brought up, and furthermore, in the great majority the sex instinct, like other instincts, is less strongly developed, or less insistent, than in the normal person. I believe that a very general misconception exists on this last point.
Be that as it may, even in default of any complete working ofthe segregation principle, there is no proof of any such unmistakable flooding of the population with defectives, in the sense of the word at present recognized, calling for new measures.
Turning now to our third governing principle, that the beneficial results to follow should be such as to justify the proposal. The main beneficial results anticipated by Dr. Gibbons and others are a marked diminution of the numbers of mental defectives, and an enormous reduction of the cost to the State. Taking first the argument that the number of defectives will be greatlv diminished this would be equally true, within quite narrow limits of error, of a thorough-going effective system of segregation. But even in the later case it is easy to overestimate the diminution that may be expected. This is partly because there is no obvious reason why mental deficiency should not continue to arise "de novo" as it must have done in the past and as it still does,

208 EUGENICS REVIEW.
partly because it is only possible to segregate tllose persons whlo show
open and pronounced evidence of defect in their own persons, wlhile the more numerous carriers of defect, in whom it is not manifest, are at liberty to propagate, and so it happens that the great majority of our defectives are the offspring of persons who could not be dealt with as defectives. Dr. Tredgold writes- "the proportion of those who are the offspring of a certifiably defective parent, or parents, is extremely small, ' and so it happens in his opinion that the prevention of propagation by defectives has a relatively small effect on production, eveni though their absolute number is not inconsiderable. There seems then to be a danger of exaggerating the diminution that may reasonably be expected, whether the prevention of propagation is carried out by sterilization or segregation, but either method efficiently carried out would undoubtedlv lhave beneficial results in this way. At present, as we have seeln, Segregation has only been partially carried
out. In neither case can the extirpation of the trouble, within anv calculable tinle, be looked for and there must be some reasonable pro-
portion between means and results. If some statistics appear to contradict this view as to the direct
propagation of defectives by defectives, it should be boriie in mind
that a great deal more difficulty and cautioin is required in signing the necessary authorization, wlhetlher for Segregation or for Sterilization, than in attaching a descriptive label to a name in a pedigree chart; the process under the law must take place when the future of the individual is yet unknown, especially if, as is suggested, Sterilization is to be enforced at 16; in the latter case the experience of the later life lhistory is called in aid and greatly assists tlle observer's judgment.
It is argued by some that Sterilization could be authorized and
practised on defectives "not bad enough to be segregated." I regard this as slhowing a complete misapprehension of Segregation as properly
conceived and carried out. I cannot regard it as at all impossible, or improper, to segregate those boys and girls described by Dr. Gibbons, and if thiey are such as would be likely to enter into sexual relations, it is better oII all grounds that they should be segregated. It is not
onlly for those who are "bad enough" but for all those who are feeblemiinded and with the outlook of their kind, that the best mode of life (rather than best method of treatment) is the appropriate colony or the like. Dr. Gibbons rather confuses the issue by basing the claim for Sterilization on the ground that at the present moment the accommo-
dlation available is insufficicnt, but that, it may be confidently hoped, is
a temporary phase and not a sufficient ground on which to base a far-reaching change of policy. The dominating consideration in the minds of those who have intimate practical acquaintance with defectives is that in anv case, from the point of view of the defective's interests, Sterilization can never be a substitute for Segregation. Moreover, underlying Dr. Gibbons' argument is the assumption that it would be easy to certify persons for Sterilization whom it would be impossible to certify for segregation, which is by no means certain. But if Sterilization will not offer a substitute for segregation, then, even in regard to the provision of institutions, there is no reason to anticipate

STERILIZATION AS A PRACTICAL POLICY. 209
economy to the State, and if it did, this entirely leaves out of sight the expense caused by the socially harmful and wasteful existence of the mental defective at large in the outer world. This point has been so admirably dealt with by Tredgold in his paper in "Mental Welfare" for April 1926 that I cannot do better than refer to that as an expression of my own opinions on the relative expense to the community of Segregation and Sterilization. I would only add that the Sterilized defective who is given his freedom will, in course of time, as his natural guardians die and he is left stranded, very probably again need the care of the Institution. It will then be much more difficult for him to fall in with a mode of life to which he is, or has grown unaccustomed, and this will be an unnecessary additional hardship to him.
There can be little doubt that such a mode of dealing with the mentally defective would lead to an increase of anti-social conduct and result in the spread of veneral diseases and in the increase of crime and disorder.
Parliament would naturally ask what was the opinion and experience of other countries. The United States have been the pioneers in the policy of Sterilization. The surprising fact here is that the figures quoted by Dr. Gibbons in this paper show that though between 1907 and 1921 Sterilization laws have been in force in 22 States in America, the total number of operations performed up to
1921 was only 3,233, that is an average of IOj per State per annum,
but of these one State (California) accounted for 2,558, leaving 675 among the remaining 21. For the most part the States adopting these laws are not those that would carry most weight here, and New York, which adopted a law in 1912, repealed it in 1920 as being unconstitutional. It cannot be said that there is anything in these figures which would tend to encourage Parliament to take the step that is proposed. No evidence is brought forward to show that
it produced the result aimned, at but that perhaps is hardly to be expected
even in 19 years. The best that is said is that the operation produced no unfavourable symptoms.
The outcome of an official enquiry into the matter in Sweden (see Eugenics Review April 1924) was against any compulsory measure of Sterilization but in favour of permitting it in certain cases, subject to the consent of the person or his representatives and under certain ,conditions. Incidentally, in this report stress was laid on the view, already referred to in this paper, that at the present stage 'of science it is in many cases not possible to attain to any real certainty, but only -to a more or less high degree of probability, when making a prognosis as to the hereditary conditions of the posterity.
It cannot be too strongly insisted upon that those who are familiar with the life in well arranged colonies or institutions of a modern type have come to hold a new attitude towards this form of life. In their -opinion it is looked upon not so much as a means of segregation, though it has that effect, as a thing desirable in itself for the defective's own welfare and happiness.
It is not asserted that all the inmates of these homes have this
feeling, but it is very general and its existence can readily be understood when the life is conducted under enlightened auspices. Those

210 EUGENICS REVIEW.
who are not contented are not, as a rule, those who would be happy and well conducted if sterilized and discharged to their own homes and mode of life.
One of the most objectionable features of the proposal to enforce sterilization on all mental defectives is that in regard to those who are in institutions there is no sufficient justification for the procedure, propagation being almost out of the question, indeed the sex problem there does not as a rule present serious difficulties. Nothing would be more likely to throw discredit on a weapon, which may for certain pur-poses be most valuable, than its indiscriminate application where it is neither necessary nor justifiable. The knowledge that such a procedure was the necessary consequence of admission to an institution would enormously increase the reluctance which is, even now, felt by parents at first in consenting to institutional life for their children,, which on all counts is most to be desired and encouraged.
It would appear then, that the grounds on which the enforced sterilization of all mental defectives is advocated are illusory and would not be likely to satisfy Parliament. Fortunately Parliament has given its sanction to other methods of restricting the propagation of the mentally defective, which, if fully carried out, would be almost equally effective from a eugenic point of view and far better for thedefective himself and for the community in other aspects. It may be that there are some mental defectives in whose case voluntary Sterilization might be a suitable and justifiable measure, just as it may be for the bearers of physical transmissible disease or on other special medical grounds; but in any case the number to whom it could properly be applied would be relatively small, but neither this nor the steril-ization of habitual criminals can well be discussed in this paper. It is in harmony with this line of argument and within the limits here suggested that the policy outlined in the July number of the Review has been restricted. If Segregation is, as has been here argued, urg-ently required for its own sake and for the beneficial effects of the life
it provides for defectives themselves, and if, as has been shown, the necessary provision of accommodation is still totally inade-quate, there seems a real danger that the energy and determination! necessary for this object may be weakened and distracted by the present movement in favour of general compulsory sterilization of mental defectives, a plan which does not fully meet the requirements of the problem and which by a reaction against such indiscriminate application might lead to a state of affairs in which neither Segrega-tion nor Sterilization would be in effective operation for those cases. where there is real danger from propagation.

