174 EUGENICS REVIEW.

problems of inheritance therefore such work is nugatory is, we think, merely foolish. It would be as sensible to say that because a horse can travel neither so fast nor so far as an automobile, that therefore the horse
is useless for locomotion; there are in truth many paths for which a horse would be invaluable and a motor car mere useless lumber. This is the
state of affairs with respect to many problems of human inheritance, and nothing whatever is gained by these mutual recriminations of workers each using valuable tools. We are sure that further reflection will convince Drs. Davenport and Rosanoff of the truth of these remarks and that they will in time come to regard the energetic workers of the Galton Labora-
tory with feelings of unmixed gratitude. Gratitude both for their contributions to our stock of scientific methods of analysis, and for the entertainment afforded by their onslaughts upon others. Dr. Davenport should remember the Queen of Hearts. "' What fun,' said the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice. 'What is the fun ? ' said Alice. 'Why, she,' said the Gryphon. ' It's all her fancy, that: they never executes nobody, you
know.' M. GREENWOOD, JNR.

Pitt, ST. GEORGE LANE Fox. The Purpose of Education. London. Cambridge University Press; 19I3; price 2S. 6d.; pp. 83.
IT is worth vhile to search laboriously through a ton of cotton-wool if there is one diamond in the middle of it, or to wade through 83 pages of this book to find in it such a sentence as " That narrow outlook on life engendered by strong feelings associated with an inadequate, intellectual and moral equipment, leads to what is known as 'cock-sureness '-a distressing form of conceit impenetrable to pure reason." The rest of the
book will appeal to the average reader as confused, unconvincing, and occasionally unjust. This may be the fault of the author, or it may be due to the reader's (or reviewer's) inadequate intellectual and moral equipment, leading to what is known as "cock-sureness "-a distressing form of conceit impenetrable to pure reason.
W. HOPE-JONES.

Mark, H. THISELTON, D. Lit. The Unfolding of Personality as the Chief Aim in Edutcation. London. T. Fisher Unwin; price is. net;

pp. 224. IT is necessary for everyone for some extent, and for eugenists in par-

ticular, to have as clear ideas as possible as to the boundaries between " what I am because I was born so " and " what I am as the result of

circumstances." The trouble is that so many psychological works which

touch this difficult problem complicate it beyond even its own natural

complexity, as well as being dull infinitely beyond endurance. It is greatly to Dr. Mark's credit that he has produced a book which really

helps rather than hinders analysis, not by the short cut of pig-headed

dogmatism but by genuine reason, presented in as readable a form as one

has any right to expect, and with the very minimum (which is rather a

large quantity) of technical language.

This analysis is by no means the main theme of the book; but many

will find it the most interesting and valuable part of it, with the possible

exception of the discussion of " the cosmic memory." The whole book is

evidently written with the greatest care, and is singularly free from loose

and hasty mis-statements.

W. HOPE-JONES.

