THE EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
ON THE BIRTH-RATE.
By W. C. MARSHALL.
THE object of this paper is to urge the importance of the connection of economic conditions with the birth-rate and consequently with Eugenics-no new point, but one which has not received the consideration it deserves, especially in view of the opportunities it opens up of furthering Eugenic aims by political action.
It must be sufficiently obvious that a very large number of people look askance on any proposal to base legislation on Eugenic ideas, and among them are many students of heredity. This is not unnatural, for it is always those who know most of a subject who are most conscious of the limits of our knowledge, and we cannot be surprised if enquirers into the laws of heredity take the line that we must wait to act until we know more, and agree with Professor Punnett that " except in very few cases our knowledge of heredity in man is at present far too slight and uncertain to base legislation upon."
To me the prospect of the indefinite postponement of any practical benefits to be gained from Eugenics is very depressing. But I believe this point of view is wrong, or at any rate that there is a great deal to be said on the other side. Though little is known of the laws of heredity, and though each new discovery in this direction may be expected to open out new possibilities to the Eugenist, still the main fact that heredity exists is abundantly established, atnd on this alone it is surely justifiable to base some action.
The point I wish to make is that the indirect Eugenic action resulting from the influence of economic conditions is less open to objection than are the more direct methods. If you will consider for a moment the grounds given for the distrust of Eugenic proposals, I think you will find there are two: First, extreme reluctance to interfere with the liberty of thle individual-a perfectly right feeling if it is not carried too

EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS ON THE BIRTH-RATE. 115
far; second, the denial that we are in a position to say to any man or woman that he or she is, or is not, justified in marrying
and having children. The argument is that you cannot weigh one quality against
another. You may be able to say that the tendency to epilepsy
or consumption is inherited, but who will say to a Julius Caesar
that his other qualities do not outweigh his epilepsy, and who would not wish that Robert Louis Stevenson had left children to inherit his literary genius even at the risk of their also ininheriting his fatal tendency to tubercular disease? We do not even know, except in a few cases, whether a defect may be latent or not, and the mind revolts against con-
demning a man who comes of a tainted stock when he has not developed the taint, and when there is any reasonable doubt that he carries it. Each individual case is beset with difficulties, and the responsibility of coming to a decision is one which no one will lightly take.
We cannot expect at present that segregation will be adopted or the privilege of parenthood denied by legislation except in very clear cases, such as that of criminals, the insane, the feeble-minded, and possibly the unemployable.
Now, the point I wish to urge is that though the present state of our knowledge may not justify us in trying to draw a hard and fast line between the fit and the unfit, we are justified in saying that certain classes of the population are more desirable than others, and if we find that conditions under our control favour the undesirable and discourage the desirable, we are warranted in removing them.
The Eugenist recognises that selection is essential to the progressive improvement of the human race, but he seeks to substitute a selective birth-rate for the selective death-rate which has been the cruel instrument used by nature. Anything therefore which affects the birth-rate in a way which is, or may be made, selective, affects Eugenics.
It is my object to collect and summarise the evidence that
economic conditions have an influence on the birth-rate, and that this influence is selective in character, often in a direction which is far from desirable, and hence that as economic condi-

l I6
6
0-
c-o
0-
*x

EUGENICS REVIEW.

*_
a, 0).
:
._
-U,
0
X4 -
%0.4
~oto2
U.Ca-
., .E
OX '4
a ,cc
c4d 0_Z
_.
cn
o"
c)'
a,
H.

EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS ON THE BIRTH-RATE. 117

tions are under our control, we have in them a means for exer-

cising Eugenic action.

I will now ask you to consider the fluctuations of the birth-

rate in this country during the last century. I will be brief,

because the declining birth-rate has been very frequently dealt

with of late.

The upper line in the accompanying diagram shows the

birth-rate in England and Wales from i84-1910o. Unfortun-

ately we have no record of either birth or death-rate before 1838,

as the Registration Act did not come into operation till that

year.

We have, however, the census returns, from which we get

the following table showing the increase per cent. of the total

population which took place in England and Wales during

each decennial period:

Period I8oi-i i increase per cent. I4-00

1I-21 ,,

,, i8o6

21-31 ,,

,, I580

3I-4I
41-5I ,,

I4.21 7 ,, I265

6I-6I ,,

,,

-go1

6I-7I
7I-81 ,,

II 3.2I
I4.36

8I-9I ,, ,, II65

9I-I9OI ,,

,, I2I7

I9OI-I9II ,,

,, IO89

Thus in the period from i8oi-ii there was an increase of

14 per cent., and in the next two decades, I8I1-182I and I821-

I83I, the rates were i8 per cent. and nearly I6 per cent. respec-

tively. Since that time it has never been so high again.

The rate of increase of the population is of course dependent

not only on the birth-rate, but also on the death-rate, and on

emigration and immigration, but there is no reason to suppose

that the death-rate was low during this period, and we may

therefore reasonably infer that the birth-rate was higher then

than it has been since.

Starting with a presumably high birth-rate at the beginning

of the century, we have a drop at about the time our records

I I EUGENICS REVIEW.
begin, then for a period of 36 years we have fluctuations marked by a slight general tendency towards recovery.
About I876 or I877 a decided fall sets in, continued in an
increasing degree up to the present time. In I876 the birth-rate stood at 36 per i,ooo, and from that
time it has declined, with trifling exceptions in I89I and I895,
until it has reached, in 1910, 24'8 per i,ooo. Now, let us consider what were the changes during this
period in the laws of the land influencing the economic value
of children.
First, there was the abolition of the old Poor Law in I834.
This put an end to the system under which wages and relief
were estimated in relation to the size of the family. Under the old Poor Law the magistrates determined from
time to time the income necessary for a labourer, his wife, and each child. If the wages the head of the family earned fell short of this amount, he could come on the overseer for the difference. In this way the condition of the agricultural labourer came to be controlled by the Poor Law. Each child had a definite money value quite apart from any consideration of its quality or character. This value was abolished by the
change in the law. Passing to a period 30 years later, we come to a time
when child-labour had taken a very prominent place in factories and workshops, and though factory legislation had begun earlier in the century, it was not till the Workshop Act of I867 that any serious restraint was put on the employment of children. This Act ordained that no child under eight should be employed, and that those between the ages of eight and I3 should only be employed half-time. In I878 these age limits were raised to io and 14 respectively, and further complicated restrictions were put on the employment of child-labour.
It must also be remembered that in I876 school attendance
was made compulsory, and by the Act of i88o children had to pass a certain standard before they could go to work at all.
In I89I the age of child-employment was again raised, and
the employment of women after child-birth restricted. In I899

EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS ON THE BIRTH-RATE. 1 19
by an Education Act, and in i9oi by direct prohibition, it was made impossible to employ children under the age of 12.
Turning from the legislative restrictions put on childlabour, I will ask you to consider another economic influence at work in the middle of the nineteenth century. The years I845-I875 were marked by very great commercial expansion. I will quote two things in evidence of this.
First, it was the period during which the greater part of our railways were built. In I845 there were 2,400 miles of rail, in I875 i6,600 miles, an increase of 68o per cent. in 30 years. In the following 30 years, to I905, the increase was only 27 per cent., to 22,800 miles.
Secondly, the trade returns show a remarkable expansion. The dotted line on the diagram shows the total amount of trade, exports and imports added together, in pounds sterling per head of the population of the United Kingdom. In 1840 this was £6 6s. 8d., in i85o £6 IOS., in I875 £20, having been £21 4s. gd. two years previously, a figure which was not exceeded till the beginning of the twentieth century.
This great wave of prosperity, and the profound changes going on in the country, were bound to have an influence on the birth-rate, and you will see that this rose during the same period from about 32 to 36 per i,ooo.
We find then, that the repeal of the old Poor Law in I834, which abolished the bonus previously given for each child born, whether legitimate or illegitimate, was followed by a drop in the rate of increase of the population. But in the years I845 to I875 the commercial value of the child was to a great extent being restored by the spread of child employment in our workshops and factories, and the restrictions on this by the education and other Acts already mentioned did not come into play till the latter half of this period, nor take full effect till about I88o.
The inference I would draw is that legislation checked, and eventually helped to stop and reverse, what would have otherwise been a more marked expansion in the birth-rate due to great national prosperity.
The following years to the end of the century were still from time to time marked by legislation the object of which was

120 EUGENICS REVIEW.
to improve the condition of children, but which also had the undoubted effect of changing them from being a help to the finances of the family to being a burden on them, and we note the ever diminishing birth-rate up to the present time.
Prof. Karl Pearson" has carefully discussed the influence of restrictive legislation on the birth-rate for nine towns and districts, and thinks he can trace the effect of particular legislation on particular districts. Whether we accept this point as fully proved or not, I think we should agree with his general conclusions which he sums up in these words: " I wish to emphasize two practical points, the first is that legislation intended to increase racial fitness may end by penalizing parentage and motherhood. The second, that the economic value of the child will in the long run govern its production. All legislation which places parents in an economically worse position than the unmarried is radically unsound."
It is not contended, of course, that there were no other influences at work but the economic to produce this great change, for a great change it is, that two children are born today where three would have been born 35 years ago. It must not be forgotten that in I876 Mr. Bradlaugh and Mrs. Besant published their pamphlet preaching neo-Malthusianism, and that the prosecution that followed made it widely known that it was possible to differentiate between marriage and parentage, and it is important to note that this knowledge came to a population already feeling the increasing burden of parentage.
We have been considering the evidence that the decreasing birth-rate is to a large extent due to economic conditions.
I now wish to draw attention to another enquiry which shows that the decreasing birth-rate is of a differentiating or selective character: I refer to that made by Dr. David Heron.2 This embraces 24 Metropolitan boroughs and 35 registration districts, and Dr. Heron seeks to estimate in these the connec-
" The Problem of Practical Eugenics." 2The relation of the fertility of man to social status and on the changes in this relation that have taken place during the last 50 years-I85I to I9OI.

EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS ON THE BIRTH-RATE. 121
tion between the birth-rate and various other selected conditions.
I give his conclusions in his own words, but to appreciate the importance of this elaborate investigation the paper must be read.
Dr. Heron says: " In those districts where the professional classes are most numerous, and where many domestic servants are kept, there the married women have fewest children. In districts where there is overcrowding, where there is a superabundance of the lowest type of labour, where child employment is most prevalent, where infant mortality is greatest, where pauperism is general, and pauper lunatics are plentiful, where signs of bad environment like phthisis are prevalentthere the birth-rate is highest."
Dr. Heron further finds that in i9oi the difference between the birth-rates of those with a higher and those with a lower social status, was much greater than in I85I, and that whereas in I85I the greater part of the difference might be accounted for by the later age of marriage of those of higher status, in i9oi not one-half of the difference could be so accounted for.
There are various other writers who have considered this problem of the declining birth-rate, notably Dr. Newsholme, Dr. Stevenson, and Mr. Udney Yule. Mr. Lidbetter has also given the question valuable consideration in papers read to the Eugenic Education Society, but it would only confuse matters to quote further corroborative evidence.
There is, however, one other piece of evidence to which I must refer, namely, the voluntary census taken by the Fabian
Society.'
The object of this census was to obtain information as to the prevalence of marriages in which the number of children born was voluntarily limited, such marriages being described as " limited " marriages. Two hundred and fifty-three returns which could be used were received, and of these 212 were re-
turned as limited, and 4I as unlimited, but of these latter I3
I Fabian Tract, No. 13I.

I22 EUGENICS REVIEW.
were childless, reducing the number of fertile unlimited mar-
riages to 28 out of 253. Further, in I28 marriages the cause of limitation is stated,
and in 73 of these the poverty of the parents in relation to their
standard of comfort is given as a reason. This enquiry is, of course, on a very small scale, and little
importance can be attached to the precise numbers, but it is, I believe, the only direct evidence on the question of voluntary restriction, and as such is very valuable. It strongly corroborates the inference drawn from all examinations of statistics, namely, that the declining birth-rate is not mainly due to a change in the age of marriage, nor to a decrease in the number of marriages, nor to physical degeneracy due to urbanisation
or other cause, but to voluntary restriction. I have now put my case before you: Economic conditions
are undoubtedly an important, if not the important, factor in the declining birth-rate, and this decline is of a selective character
adverse to Eugenic ideals. But if damage to the race can be done, and has been done
by economic conditions affecting the birth-rate in an undesirable way; is it not natural to look to the modification of these conditions, which are under our own control, as the simplest and most effective way of righting the wrong? This I believe is the general conclusion of those who have considered the
problem. Prof. Pearson says: " There is, I believe, one way and
one way only of solving this problem. We must reverse the effect of the Factory Acts which have penalised parentage and handicapped motherhood. But the reversal must be done in a differential manner, sound parentage and healthy motherhood must be given a substantial advantage over not only childlessness, but over unsound parentage and feeble motherhood; the well-born child must again be made a valuable
economic asset. This is the central problem of all practical Eugenics-Eugenics as a doctrine of national welfare is a
branch of national economy." Again, Mr. Sidney Webb says: "What seems indispensable
and urgent is to alter the economic incidence of child-bearing."

EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS ON THE BIRTH-RATE. I23
When we come to the question, what should be done, we are faced with many difficulties. One thing, however, is certain, no one will desire to go back on the legislation which has gone so far towards freeing children from servitude, and the State must, under all circumstances, hold itself responsible for seeing that every child that is brought into the world is properly fed, properly clothed, properly housed, and properly educated.
The question is, how far can the onus of doing this be thrown in the first instance on the parents?
Mr. C. J. Hamilton, in a paper published in the Eugenics Review for I91I says: " Broadly speaking, it is in those classes in which an effective home-life exists that the tendency to a lower birth-rate is seen. Compel such a minimum standard of housing, and of family expenditure as will make a decent home-life the effective test of capacity for self-maintenance, and there will be a strong motive towards limitation of families, and an indication of those who are proper subjects for Eugenic control."
This is sound reasoning, but it presents an ideal which can only be approached in a very gradual way. Segregation of the unemployable may be extended beyond the present workhouse system, but to propose to extend it to all those who are unable to maintain, what would at present be considered, a comparatively high standard of comfort, is completely out of the question.
No doubt it is of great importance to maintain the idea of parental responsibility, but this must always rank as a secondary consideration to the provision of those things which are necessary for the proper upbringing of the children; and the State in the future, as in the past, will doubtless find that in the case of the needy the only way is that the State should provide them.
Mr. Hamilton's ideal must not be lost sight of, but I fear it does not lead to much which comes within the range of practical politics at the moment.
What I would urge is that it is the duty of Eugenists to watch all legislation which affects economic conditions, and oppose such as tends to discourage the more capable and de-

124 EUGENICS REVIEW.
serving portion of the population, and to throw on them the burden of supporting the less desirable members of society. Few people realize how far this is already the case.
All action taken by trades unions to raise wages, and all attempts to secure a minimum wage, are apt to be at the expense of the better workman. The employer can only pay the poor or indifferent workman more than his market value by paying
the better workman less. In the various building trades with which I have come in
contact as an architect, I find that employers are unanimously
of opinion that among skilled workers the variation in rates of wages does not at all represent the variation in the value of the work for which they are paid, and that quite often, of two men receiving the same wage, one will be worth twice as much
as the other. But though I believe that most economic questions have a
Eugenic side to them, there is no doubt that for direct influence on the birth-rate the important matter is to lessen the extent to which children are a burden on parents, especially on the more deserving parents.
The question will then be raised, what is the criterion of Eugenic worth? and to my reply, " largely economic success," I have no doubt exception will be taken. Prof. Achile Loria goes so far as to deny that there is any connection between the two.
That wealth is often the result of the exercise of ante-social qualities, and that success or failure may be due to accident, will be admitted. But I do not think that anyone who has had the ordinary experience of the world can doubt that, in the long run, it is the best man, whether it be in the professions, in trade, or in the ranks of labour, who gets the most constant and best paid employment.
When it is stated, then, that the falling off in the birth-rate has been most marked in those classes which are best paid for their work, most thrifty, and have the highest standard of comfort, it is also claimed that these are the most intelligent, the most skilled, the most industrious, the most moral, and generally the most worthy classes, and the researches of Dr. Heron give direct evidence that this is so.

EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS ON THE BIRTH-RATE. 125
I wish to make two practical suggestions as to lines which might be taken by legislation having a definite Eugenic object. For this purpose I would divide the community into two classes, those who pay direct taxation and those who do not, and consider separately what might be done for each class, with a view to relieving the parents among them from undue burdens.
The first thing that strikes one in connection with the
class paying direct taxation, is the anomaly that the income-tax collector considers husband and wife to be one person, while the collector of death duties says they are two.
When a woman loses her husband she has to pay estate and succession duties on whatever she inherits, but during his life his income and hers were lumped together for income tax. This is obviously unjust, and has been so acknowledged by leading politicians on both sides of the House. It constitutes a definite tax on marriage.
If two young people each with £i6o a year marry, previous to
marriage they were both exempt, after marriage they have to pay on £i60. And the same thing holds throughout the scale-two people
with £500 a year, each have an abatement of £150, i.e., £300
together; if they marry this is taken from them. So, again, a
man whose total income is under £2,0o0, gets an abatement of
5d. in the £ on what is called the earned portion of his income.
Suppose this is £1,500, the abatement amounts to £31 5s., and
if he marries a wife with £30 a year he will lose this abatement, and be a poorer man than he was before, in addition to having another person to support. There should not be much difficulty in getting this injustice removed, but I want to go much further than this.
Now that we have adopted graduated income-tax and death duties with a view to putting the burden on those best able to bear it, why should not children be taken into account in reckoning what a man is able to bear? No one can maintain that a man with a wife and six children dependent on him is
as well off with, say, Z£,oo a year, as a bachelor, or even a childless couple with the same income. Obviously children
should be taken into account. But at what rate?

126 EUGENICS REVIEW.
I would suggest that two children should be considered as the equivalent of one adult, and that the common income should be divided among the family on this supposition, with the proviso that no child should have more than £i6o. Exemption
or abatement to be given on each share. This would mean that a couple witlh two children and an
income of £600 would pay tax on two incomes of £2oo, the children being reckoned at £ioo apiece and exempt. That is, with abatements they would pay on £8o instead of on £480 as
at present. I wish to say, before I go further, that I have no idea of
advocating anything which will reduce the amount collected by direct taxation. What is cut off in one place must be added in another, and obviously the rate of income-tax would have to be raised, and possibly the abatements readjusted, to carry
out such a reform. Now, as to super-tax, a tax which I believe is acknowledged
to be excellent, even by those who have to pay it. I think it starts much too high, and that the reason for this
is that it was felt, at the time it was imposed, that it would be an unjustifiable burden to put on married people with large families unless they had correspondingly large incomes. But if you acknowledge that a man and his wife are two people, I see no reason why the super-tax should not start at £2,ooo a year for
single men and women, and Z4,ooo for the joint incomes of mar-
ried couples. I would even propose to make these latter an allowance of £2oo a year per child, so that a married couple with five children dependent on them would then, as now, be exempt from super-tax if their income did not exceed £5,ooo a year.
Then there are the death duties, and here again an unfair burden is put on large families by the estate duty being graduated with respect to the total estate, without consideration of the number of children to be provided for. The object of graduation is presumably to put a check on large fortunes accumulating in single hands, rather than to prevent a man from providing enough to keep his children from want in case of illness or accident, such a sum, say, as £5,ooo, bringing in an

EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS ON THE BIRTH-RATE. 127
income of £200 a year. Now, if anyone who inherits £s,ooo, as an only child inheriting the whole fortune of his parent, the estate duty is 3d. If he is a member of a family of five, inheriting equally, the estate duty is 6d., just double. This is unjust, and it is a material consideration to people who think it necessary to provide something for their children after their death.
Another way in which parents get hard treatment is through houses being to such a large extent the basis for rates. A man with a large family must have a large house, but this is no indication that he is in a position to contribute largely to the rates.
The rates are a heavy burden, and I wish some of the taxation now put on houses could be moved elsewhere-on to motor cars, for instance. A man who spends £3oo a year on running a car pays a paltry sum of £7 or £8 on direct taxation, not nearly enough to pay for the expense to which he puts the road
authorities, while a man who pays £.3oo a year for his house will probably have to pay over £ioo a year in rates, taxes, and
house duty. There is one more point I wish to mention, and that is the
cost of education. The State has taken on its shoulders the education of the people, the cost being thrown on the general rate and taxpayer.
Is it not fair for the married man to say, I am doing my share of this work if I educate my own children, and should therefore be exempt from paying for the education of others?
I am told that the rebate on income-tax which Mr. Lloyd George gave to parents with incomes under £500 for each child under I6 is extraordinarily popular. I am surprised at it. I should have thought that to acknowledge the claim and then offer such a miserable sum as 8s. a child would have been resented as an insult. I think we might very well ask as a first instalment that £3 per child should be paid to parents educating their own children. This would be less than the sum saved the nation by not sending them to the primary schools.
My point is that the incidence of taxation on parents is flagrantly unjust, and that we should demand that this injustice should be removed. I am asking for no tax on bachelors and

128 EUGENICS REVIEW.
spinsters, but merely that the burdens of the State should be equitably adjusted between them and the married portion of the community; and I feel confident that if this were done there would be a perceptible increase in the size of families of the professional and middle classes which are at present actually
dwindling in numbers. I now come to those who pay no direct taxation, and the
important question of how to lighten the burden of children on
the thirfty labourer and skilled artisan. I believe there is nothing that the better class artisan sets
more store by than securing for his children as good or a better start in the world than he had himself, and that it is chiefly his fear that he may not be able to do this, and place them in the ranks of skilled labour, which makes him limit the number of
his family. What I would advocate as a means of removing this anxiety
is a very large extension of free technical and secondary education, especially technical education leading up to skilled manual
employments. That this would be highly valued I cannot doubt, for I am
told quite a number of parents earning less than 30S. a week manage to pay for the secondary education of one child which
must cost something like 4s. a week. I have not found it easy to ascertain the exact number of
children who pass on from primary to secondary education, but as far as I can make out it is not more than one in twelve.
There can be no doubt that a much larger proportion of
children are capable of benefiting by further education; in fact,
one hears from teachers that a considerable number get into the highest standard at twelve or soon after, and are marking time
there for the rest of their school period. Prolonging the term of education has also the advantage
of tiding over the difficult period between the end of ordinary school life and regular employment when so many drift into
bad habits. This free technical and secondary teaching would be dis-
tinctly selective in character, for it would only be given to the better class children who were able to profit by it. It should

EFFECT OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS ON THE BIRTH-RATE. 129
be supplemented by scholarships, for there are considerable expenses in books, good clothes, maintenance, and specially in the case of country children for travelling, which should not be allowed to prevent the really intelligent child of parents who cannot afford these things from profiting by the opportunity.
I believe the skilled artisan would say to himself that he could count on his children being among those who benefitted, and that he could afford the delay in their becoming wageearners. At the same time I do not think the Socialist could cavil at a measure giving equal opportunity to all.
I advocate this wide extension of free technical and
secondary education, because: It would meet a much felt want and improve the efficiency
of the nation. It would diminish the number of children unsatisfactorily
employed in casual labour. It would prevent the waste arising from keeping a number
of children at schooling which they have outgrown. It would have a distinct selective value encouraging the
more deserving children. And it would make the skilled labourer of the better class
confident of being able to give his children a good start in the
world. It would be no new departure, but developing what is
already done on a small scale. I hope some consideration will be given to these two sug-
gestions, but the points I am anxious to press are: That economic conditions are bound to have an influence on the birthrate, that Eugenics can only act through influencing the birthrate, and that therefore economic conditions are of profound interest to the Eugenist; and further that indirect action through the influence of economic conditions is not open to the objections taken to the direct action through segregation, viz., that the present state of our knowledge does not warrant us in drawing a hard and fast line between the fit and the unfit.

