ENGLAND TO-DAY AND YESTERDAY*

By M. C. BUER, D.Sc.

Whether or not readers agree that " a high death-rate is always accompanied by a
high sickness and disablement rate," they cannot but be impressed by the solidity and reliability of Miss Buer's statistical work. We greatly need the facts she brings out.-Ed.

O NE of the chief difficulties of the occurred in the period following the Napo-

economic and social historian is that leonic Wars. In neither period was the fall

contemporary records naturally tend to deal with the unusual and the abnormal. The most difficult question to answer about any past age is, " How did the ordinary man live?"
Biography, memoirs, and fiction throw some light on the everyday lives of the educated few, but tell us little, and that little often of doubtful reliability, as to the inarticulate majority. It is from this point of view that social statistics are so valuable, since all of us, however humble and ordinary we may be, have our place in the census. In statistical returns the socially undistinguished, either by success or failure, are revealed in their battalions, bringing into perspective the feeble companies which attain the notoriety of the newspaper paragraph.
How poor a guide contemporary popular

necessarily the effect of war; in both it was probably associated with a decreased con-
sumption of alcohol and with a rising social standard. But the facts show that the
opinion that war experience would lead to crime in civil life was based on false psychology.
The useful corrective of statistical information is, of course, only available for very recent history. Interest in the subject of social and vital statistics began as early as the mid-seventeenth century; but early inquirers were terribly hampered by the extreme paucity of the available statistical material. There was no census in this country until i8oi, and no civil registration of births and deaths until I836. There was, however, fairly complete registration of baptisms in the Established Church, of marriages, the celebration of which, from I754 onwards, was not legal unless performed

opinion may be is illustrated by the general according to the rites of the Established

belief that crimes of violence have increased Church, and, lastly, of interments in burial

in this country since I9I3, for which sup- grounds attached to the Established Church.

posed increase a facile explanation is found In i8oi a return was made of the entries

in the cheapening of human life and values in the parish registers for every decennial

engendered by war experience. But cold year from I700 to I780, and for every year

statistical fact reveals that the annual aver- from I780 to i8oo. By assuming the bap-

age of crimes against the person was smaller tismal rate to be a constant it was then

(despite an increased population) in the possible to calculate the size of the popula-

years I9I9-23 than in the years I909-I3. A tion at every decennial year of the eigh-

similar fall in crimes against the person teenth century. Several different calcula-

tions were made with various modifications

* A Survey of the Social Structure of England and of this method with differing, but not widely

Wales as illustrated by Statistics, by A. M. CarrSaunders and D. Caradog-Jones. (Oxford University Press, I927, lOs.).

differing, results. The details will be found in the first chapter of Populatiron Problems

Poputlation Problems of the Age of Malthus, by G. Talbot Griffith, B.A. (Cambridge University Press,
I926.)
A History of Factory Legislation, by B. L.

of the Age of Malthus. The disadvantage of all the methods was
that they were based on the baptism rate,

Hutchins and H. Harrison (Mrs. F. H. Spencer), D.Sc. Third edition. (P. S. King & Son Ltd., 1926, gs.).

and therefore precluded any calculation of the birth-rate. Mr. Griffith, therefore, has

ENGLAND TO-DAY-AND YESTERDAY

boldly ventured upon another method. As- but this objection applies equally to all

suming that the births exceeded the baptisms calculations based upon the Parish Regis-

by I5 per cent. and the deaths the registered ters. More serious is the possibility that

burials by io per cent., he has calculated by the decennial years may not present the

deduction the population of the eighteenth average of the decade; in this connection it

century. Since the figures for baptisms must be remembered that in the eighteenth

and burials prior to I780 are only available century annual fluctuations in birth and

for the decennial years, he has been forced death-rates were very much larger than they

to take these years as typical of their are in modern times. Mr. Griffith himself

respective decades. There are two grave is well aware of these possibilities of error

possibilities of error in Mr. Griffith's calcu- and calls attention to them. Nevertheless,

lations. Firstly, his corrections for obtain- in spite of them, his calculations as to the

ing the number of births and deaths may size of the population of England and

not be sufficient.

Wales in the eighteenth century seem well

The registered births for the year in which civil registration was introduced (I836) show
an excess of I5 per cent. over the baptisms registered in the previous year-hence the percentage chosen by Mr. Griffith. But though civil registration was introduced in 1836, it was not compulsory and

worth the making. When, however, he proceeds to the calculation of birth and
death-rates, with their double possibility of error, setting them out to one (in the later
period to two) place of decimals, it appears likely that the ordinary reader will be given a very false sense of security.

no penalties attached to non-compliance un- If Mr. Griffith had omitted the decimal

til the Act of 1874. Farr estimated the places and added " plus or minus " to his

average deficiency in the registration of figures it would have given a truer present-

births between I836-76 at 5 per cent. Sir ment of their value-not, be it understood,

Arthur Newsholme considers that no impor- owing to any fault in the method of manipu-

tance can be attached to the apparent rise in lation, but owing to the nature of the

the birth-rate up to I876, since it was prob- material with which he has had to deal.

ably due to an increasingly efficient registra- But not only are the- rates set out in a

tion. Rickman estimated in I83I that at manner which gives a false idea of their

least I9 per cent., and probably more, exactitude, but Mr. Griffiths, while in one

should be added to the baptisms of that time place pointing out the large possibilities

to obtain the births.

of error, in other parts of his text comments

It would seem, therefore, that a I5 per cent. addition is unduly small; and, as Mr. Griffith himself points out, by his method of calculation a very small error in the original adjustment, by accumulation, would lead to
a large error in the final results. No doubt
it is this consideration that prevented the use of his method by earlier calculators,

on the figures as if they possessed a high degree of reliability and as if relatively 'small movements were significant. It is perhaps better to admit that, however much
the historian may desire exact vital statistics, we are not likely to obtain them for the period prior to 1780 by any ingenious juggling with published figures.

since it is an obvious one to adopt provided A careful survey of parish registers by

the correction from baptisms to births and well selected sample may yield something to

from interments to deaths can be made with the future researcher. At present we must

any degree of exactitude. It is probable be content with estimates of population,

that the correction of io per cent. to obtain which are admittedly open to a wide margin

the deaths is also too small; if so, the error of error. This, however, is not in itself from the point of view oT calculating the of much importance; but it does vitiate any population is to some degree neutralized. attempt to make exact calculations of birth

It is, of course, unlikely that a flat-rate and death-rates. By I780 we are on firmer

correction for the whole period is accurate, ground, though the margin of error is still

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

wide; and from this date onwards it is pos- the history of a nation. It is true, however,

sible to be in substantial agreement with that the low birth and death-rates of the

Mr. Griffith's figures, though not with the present day are new phenomena; but these

degree of exactitude which he appears to also are brought into clearer relief by com-

claim, but perhaps does not.

parison with the past.

Sometimes one is tempted to envy the future historian of the twentieth century,
who will not be reduced, as is the student of the eighteenth century, to attempting to make bricks without straw. The poor fellow will probably rather be inclined to lament the plethora of his material, and he will rejoice when he comes across a survey of social statistics giving him a good ground upon which to build a picture of the social structure of England and Wales circa I926. Contemporaries even more owe a debt of thanks to the authors for giving in such a clear and interesting form the main statistical facts of their own times.
The authors' comments, too, are en-
lightening and enlivening. And yet, perhaps, the result is not so informing as it ought to be. The reason is that the picture is mainly static: if the past is mentioned it is only the recent past, and there is no comparison with other countries. This is probably not the authors' fault: it is due to the absence of strictly comparable statistics and possibly also to exigencies of space and cost of production. However, in the figures of the growth of population, the authors do go back to i8oi and even, following Professor Bowley, venture into the future.

Dealing summarily with the vital statis-
tics of the last I50 years, it may be said
that prior to I870 the alterations in the birth-rate are relatively small and show an absence of long period tendencies in either direction. The apparent changes may, in fact, be quite illusory. In I870 the period with a falling rate commences. Circa I780
the birth-rate was about 36 per I,ooo; in i870-5 it was 35.5, but in i926 it was only i8.3. In the death-rate a period of fall
occurs between I780-i8I5, probably from about 28 per I,000 to 20, then follows a period with a slight rise up to I825 (22.5 per i,ooo). A static period follows until I870,
when a further period with a falling rate begins. The figure for I926 was I2.2.
It is interesting to note that the natural increase was approximately the same in I924 as in the second half of the eighteenth century, but that astonishingly different rates
yielded the same result in growth-in the first period 36 births and 28 deaths, in the latter i9 births and ii deaths (to the nearest
unit). Have we sufficient imagination to clothe these dry bones with living flesh and to visualize the saving in unavailing travail, in infant suffering, in physical and mental pain? If so, let us in future silence idle talk about the good old days with an argument that cannot be controverted.

Being strict statisticians they do not ven- There are many, however, who view

ture into the past further than the first modern birth and death-rates far from op-

census year. But this strictness causes the timistically. From two points of view there

table showing the growth of population be- is felt to be cause for anxiety. Firstly,

tween i8oi and 192I and the hypothetical there is the fact that the poorer sections of

lack of growth after I94I, to give a some- the community are contributing a propor-

what false impression. It leads the reader tionately greater number of recruits to the

to infer that rapid growth was normal until population. There is a great deal of

the present time, but that now a new and difference of opinion as to whether the

abnormal period is setting in. Had the poorest members of the community are an

estimated population of previous centuries inferior stock biologically, but it is certainly

been added, the growth between i8oi and true that the children of the poorest classes

I9OI would have been seen in truer perspec- are brought up in an inferior environment.

tive, and the return to stability would have This is particularly the case among mem-

appeared as neither new nor strange. After bers of large families. This inferiority of

all, a hundred years is a very short time in environment continues in spite of our

ENGLAND TO-DAY-AND YESTERDAY

23

numerous social services, and would remain superior health and efficiency of the working

even if these services were much further population, due to better nurture.

increased.

Since I900 the effect of the falling birth-

It is probable, however, that the differ- rate upon the age composition of the popula-

ential birth-rate among classes is a tempor- tion has been to some degree neutralized by

ary phenomenon. Figures presented last the fall in the infantile death-rate. The

year to the World Population Conference fall in the death-rate in the period I870-

at Geneva showed that in Stockholm the I900 did not include a fall in the infantile

upper-class birth-rate is now actually higher mortality. In this it differed from the fall

than that of the working-class. Figures during the period I780-I8I5, which appears

quoted in a recently published study of to have been mainly due to a saving of

Australia* show that in that country the infantile and child life. Before I780 the

difference in the birth-rate between different age composition may not have been

social classes is inappreciable. The work- markedly different from that of the present

ing-class birth-rate in England and Wales day except for the greater number of infants

has fallen rapidly in recent years. This fall and very young children, a large proportion

was at first mainly confined to certain of them doomed to an early death.

skilled trades, but it has now become much It was estimated that in north-western

more general.

Europe about I780 one half of the children

Many persons view the falling birth-rate born died before reaching the age of ten

with apprehension because of its effect upon years. This figure had been reduced to one-

the age composition of the population. A third by i8I5. It has been calculated that

prospect of more old people and fewer chil- in eighteenth-century London threequarters

dren in the population does not, indeed, at of those born died before reaching the age of

first sight seem very pleasing; many of us five years. Therefore the proportion of older

feel that there are too few children among children and young adults in the population

our acquaintance already. The lower birth- was very likely not much greater than at

rate will not, however, mean fewer children present. Farr considered that the youthful

among the relatively well off. It is unlikely age composition of the English people about

that the birth-rate among the upper and I830 was a new phenomenon.

middle-classes and the skilled working-class Possibly part of the push and enterprise

will be still further reduced. Indeed it of the nineteenth century was due to its pre-

quite conceivably might be slightly in- dominant youthfulness and to the fact that

creased by more liberal taxation allowances members of large middle-class families had

for children and by cheaper facilities for to make their own way in the world. It is,

higher education. A future further reduc- however, to cry for the moon to hope for

tion of the number of children in the popu- Victorian families in the future among the

lation would mean fewer underfed children better-off sections of the community, and it

reared amid bad housing conditions-a by is a strange mentality, obscured by old shib-

no means alarming outlook.

boleths, that can desire them to be continued

In the same way, more old people will not among the very poor. A very slowly in-

mean more elderly persons than at present creasing or a stationary population seems

among the better-off classes, but fewer highly probable in the near future, even a

workers prematurely worn out. And though diminishing one is a possibility. We can

the age composition in future years in itself only hope that quality will replace quan-

may be less favourable from the economic tity, and all our efforts should be directed

standpoint when there will be proportion- to that end.

ately fewer young adults, yet this factor There are those who will be sceptical as to

may be more than compensated by the the possibility of improving the quality of

the population owing to the lessening of the

* The Prosperity of Australia. F. C. Benham. vigour of natural selection. It is not pro-

24 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

posed to enter into the controversy between Those who are interested in the subject

heredity and environment; but the historical of this article will do well to study the two

facts, so far as they can be ascertained, do books more especially under review. Mr.

not support a pessimistic view. There are, Griffith's book is not very easy to read;

of course, no statistical data for a compari- he has much to learn in method of presenta-

son in regard to quality of population be- tion, and the writer of the review has not

tween the eighteenth and early nineteenth found it possible to agree with all his con-

centuries and the present day; but a know- clusions. But his book contains valuable

ledge of the earlier period leads to the con- material. For one thing he seems to have

viction that the present day has nothing to disposed of the hoary legend that the Speen-

fear in the comparison.

hamland system of family allowances led to a

A high death-rate is always accompanied higher birth-rate. His chapter on Ireland

by a high sickness and disablement rate. brings together facts which are not readily

Further, there is no evidence that the accessible elsewhere, and that on early

diseases which have been conquered, small- medical reform contains much fascinating

pox, typhus, typhoid, and cholera were material.

beneficially selective. Even if they were, Professor Carr-Saunders and Mr. Cara-

they left the survivors so weakened and in- dog Jones cover a much wider field than is

jured that any beneficially selective action indicated in this article. Their book is one

was more than counteracted. And, of to be read by all students of social sub-

course, even in the eighteenth century the jects. In spite of its subject matter it is

Poor Law and private charity were doing very easy to read, and the method of pre-

much to prevent the working of " natural sentment reveals the practised hand.

selection " and already the cry was being If some of the figures and facts in Social

raised that the unfit were being kept alive. Structure might lead us to pessimism we can

The fact is that to rely on " natural selec- re-read, as an antidote, the first chapters of

tion " amid civilized conditions is impos- Factory Legislation, which valuable stan-

sible. The sentiments of civilized man will dard work it is pleasant to see in a third

not allow starvation and disease to complete edition. If the study of the present day,

the work of selection, so that any reliance as revealed in Social Statistics, shows us the

on the principle results in a number of sur- long road still ahead in the journey of social

vivors injured by under-nutrition and progress, the History of Factory Legisla-

disease. Quality must be obtained by some tion and Population Problems in the Age of

less self-defeating method than high birth Malthus cheer us with the reminder of the

and death-rates.

arduous pilgrimage already achieved.

