MENTAL DEFECT AND PROSTITUTION.
By BENJAMIN MALZBERG.
PROSTITUT10N is usually explained as the resultant of either of two sets of forces. Those inclined to attribute social diseases to defects in the social constitution, ascribe prostitution to economic forces, notably to the low wage of the female worker. The natural antithesis of such a doctrine is the stressing of the individual factor, chiefly defects in the mental constitution. To the scientifically inclined, however, no such alternative presents itself, and it is suggested that prostitution, like other social evils, is the resultant of numerous forces, some physical, others social, and still others anthropological and psychological. This latter concept involves a complex analysisS an effort at which is repugnant to the average mind. It is much easier to accept easy generalisations under which disturbing facts may be conveniently catalogued without too great a scrutiny.
The average mind seems so, constituted that it grasps eagerly at apparently simple, plausible solutions, with little regard to the question as to whether or not the solution squares with the facts. Two of the above generalisations are evidence of this. Thus it is becoming an accepted belief that feeblemindedness is the prolific source of all crime and vice. This is based upon the alleged fact that a very large proportion of all offenders are feebleminded. Two sources of error, however, are involved in this concept. In the first place, it is very unlikely that more than IO per cent. of offenders seen in court are mentally defective; though the ratio increases in various penal institutions due to the factors of selection. The second error arises from a logical confusion, association being confounded with causation. This is the old error of post hoc Propter hoc. It does not at all follow that because a delinquent is also feebleminded
that, ipso facto, the delinquency resulted from the mental condi'tion. Even were the majority of prostitutes feebleminded, this would not necessarily
indicate that there is a relation of cause and effect between the two. The as-certainment of the exact relationship is a problem in the statistical calculus, the proper tool being the coefficient of partial correlation. It
is not possible, therefore, to describe the causal relationships, nor the
relative importance of all the factors, until the correlations, both single and multiple have been measured.
It is not the purpose of this study, however, to analyse these recondite relationships. We will limit ourselves to a study of the proportion of mental defectives among prostitutes, an accurate estimate of which is tlhe pirime essential in a discussion of the relation of feeblemindedness to prostitution. It has been variously estimated that the ratio of mentally defective prostitutes lies between 28 and 97 per cent. Such wide fluctuation, indicates either extreme variation in intelligence, according to time and place of examination, or else points to the fact that some of the groups may have been exceptionally atypical.
The statistical desideratum would be a large sample of prostitutes, selected at random, so as to constitute a true cross-section of their class. When this standard was applied to a group of felons, for example, interesting results were obtained. Thus, of convicted felons in the Court of

MENTAL DEFECT AND PROSTITUTION.

IOI

General Sessions in New York County, Io.I per cent. showed intellectual defects characteristic of feeblemindedness. Furthermore, by the process
of court commitment, the state prison, and the state reformatory, were heavily weighted with these defectives, so that the proportion of mental defectives among these prison groups was much greater than that in the undifferentiated groups seen in court. This higher percentage, therefore,
is due to the fact that normal delinquents tend to be treated in ways other than by incarceration. We may therefore, infer, by strict analogy, that high rates of mental defect among prostitutes, may result from factors of artificial selection.
At the outset, it should be recognised, that there is no one single type of prostitute; that in fact, she is part of a very heterogeneous group. At least three types may be differentiated. There is first the high-priced
and so-called exclusive prostitute, with whom we may affiliate the clandestine prostitute. This class is numerically the smallest of the three. The next class consists of the disorderly house inmate, and the third of the
street solicitor. It must appear, obvious, of course that these are not strict lines of demarcation. The street walker may for a time enter a
disorderly resort, and at times the inmate of the latter may resort to the street. Sometimes the higher-priced prostitute runs the gamut of the profession, plying her trade on the street, or entering the cheaper houses of prostitution. And finally, the clandestine prostitute sometimes adopts the overt signs of her profession. But on the whole, each type holds true. There is little truth in the picture of the prostitute who begins with silks
and satins and ends her career in a pauper's grave. There is much
evidence to indicate that the prostitute's life as such is limited to about five years, and that she thereafter retires to other pursuits. Each type of prostitute recruits new adherents not from one another, but from fresh
groups.
The logical procedure, therefore, would be to select a group of prostitutes, typical of these sub-types, and so weighted as to maintain their correct proportions. Unfortunately this has at no time been attempted.
It is not apparent how one could secure the necessary samiples who would
be willing to submit to examinations. With few exceptions, therefore, the prostitute has been examined upon arrest, or after conviction. It has been alleged that this method when applied to the delinquent class as a whole, results in false conclusions, inasmuch as the arrested criminal would probably be inferior in intelligence to the one avoiding detection. This objection is obviously justified in the case of the prostitute.
The street walker in plying her trade must avoid arrest. This may be accomplished either by outwitting the officer, or by bargaining with him. Either method presupposes a certain grade of intelligence. Those arrested would naturally be the least competent in their particular vocation. This relation between officer and prostitute at once begins to operate as a factor of selection. Those fearful of the risks of the street, will naturally gravitate towards the disorderly house. Here the prostitute's -efforts are at a minimum. She needs neither to seek her patron nor
bargain with him. All this is done for her by others. Obviously then the requirements upon intelligence are the least exacting. Thus through the
fact of selection the inmate of the disorderly house may be presumed to have the least intellectual ability of all the prostitutes.

102 EUGENICS REVIEW.

To avoid the undue weighting of inferiority, consequent upon the selective aspect of arrest, resort has been had to examination of the prostitute in her own haunts. Here, it is thought, the investigator will find a true sample, which he will be able to -examine under circumstances free from the disturbing influences of a new and strange environment. This would provide us with accurate results, provided, as we explained above, that each class were properly represented in the sample. Unfortu-
nately such a selection has never been made. Nowhere on record, for example, is there an analysis of the mental status of a group of randomly selected prostitutes. The only studies of prostitutes, other than court or institutional cases are -those of disorderly house inmates. This selection has been made so as to avoid the bias resulting from arrest. Thus writes the investigator for the Virginia State Board of Charities and Corrections:-" The chief objections raised " (to the study of women in custody) . . . . "is that . . . most of the women tested were in custody,
which might seem to indicate that as mental weakness was responsible for their failure to make a living in legitimate callings, so also it had lessened their chances of keeping clear of the law, and this might suggest that the vast majority of those who escaped must of necessity be keener intellectually, and therefore groups examined in custody would not be typical of the army of prostitutes plying their trade at large.
" Such an objection could not, however, be applied to conclusions based on an investigation of an entire district of prostitutes. . . . Through the courtesy of the chief of police, the investigator visited the houses of prostitution, and later conducted examinations at police headquarters, where the women were summoned from time to time as required."11
In view of our previous analysis, what shall we say of such a method that in attempting to avoid Charybdis throws itself upon Scylla, for the
artificial selection of court cases is but slight compared, to the natural
selection of types resulting from the form of prostitution its-elf? We must, therefore, conclude that in view of the absence of any proper
studies, it is at present impossible to make any generalisations as to the distribution of feeblemindedness among prostitutes. We are justified only in stating the evidence as it relates either to the disorderly house inmate, the court case, or the prison inmate.

Light has been cast upon the mentality of the disorderly house inmate by 'three investigations. The first was the Virginia study referred to above. An examination of 126 women resulted in a diagnosis of feeblemindedness in 86 cases a ratio of 71.6 per cent. Of these 86, only four were imbeciles, the remaining 82 being classified as moro;ns.2 A second study of 50 prostitutes in Albany by Dr. Clinton P. McCord, resulted in a diagnosis of feeblemindedness in 46 per cent. o'f the cases.3 The third study, a survey of 320 prostitutes in San Francisco, resulted in a diagnoisis of feeblemindedness in 114 cases, a ratio of 35.7 per cent.4 Of the remain-

1 Mental Defective in Virginia, 1915, pp. 65-6. 2 Ibid., p. 66.

3 Journal of American Institute of Criminal Law and CriminoZogy, Vol. vi., P. 388.

4 A Sociological, Neurological and Psychiatrical Study of a Group of

Prostitutes. April xqs8,

Dr. Jan Don pp. 647-666.

Ball

and

Dr.

Hayward

Thomas,

in

Journal

of

Insanity,

MENTAL DEFECT AND PROSTITUTION.

103

ing 206 however, not one was found normal, 64 being diagnosed as manicdepressive types, 123 as dementia praecox, and I9 as being of a hysterical
make-up. Some doubt, however, must be expressed as to the accuracy of diagnosis in the first and third investigations, the former -because the time devoted to each examination was not sufficient to permit of accurate
analysis and of the latter because the diagnosis apparently was based on nothing more than the conversational reports between the examiner and
subject. A distinctly psychological test (the Binet scale) was given in but a few cases. Furthermore if the border-line of normality in the Virginia study had been lowered one year, the percentage of defectives
would have been decreasea to 55. Dr. McCord's study seems to be the
most accurate, though it would have been more desirable to have a larger
group of individuals as a working basis.
In The Light for January, 1915, Judge Charles N. Goodnow of the
Chicago Morals Court reported upon the results of examinations of women waiting trial or sentence in that court. Among a group of 639, 62 per cent.
were reported feebleminded. In a second study of 126 women, 85.5 per
cent. were declared leebleminded. It is evident, however, that these extraordinary high ratios resulted from the fact that the women were not
chosen at random, but, rather, were selected for examination, because they exhibited certain peculiarities or aberrations to begin with. Consequently, the ratios simply prove that the preliminary diagnosis, probably by a layman, was accurarte to a very gxeat degree. That this supposition is
correct, is demonstrated by the fact that Dr. V. V. Anderson found that of ioo prostitutes examined in the Boston Municipal Court, only 30 per cent. were feebleminded.1 The Massachusetts Commission f6r the Investigation of the White Slave Traffic So-Called, found that 46 per cent. of the women in detention homes, awaiting trial, were feebleminded.2 These lower estimates are also confirmed by examinations of girls detained in the home of the New York Probation and Protective Association pending trial or sentence. For the year ending September, I9I8, 26.6 per cent.3 were found feebleminded, for the year ending September, I917, 27 per cent.4, and for the year ending September, I9I6, 33.5 per cent.5 were found feebleminded. As this organisation usually received the better
type of case from the court, it is very likely that the selective process thus invoked resulted in a lower rate of feeblemindedness among the inmates. If we make allowance for this, we will find that there is no
very great variation in the results for the Massachusetts and New York data. Among Michigan prostitutes detained in court, 35 per cent. were found feebleminded.6 Among 126 women arrested for prostitution at Newport News, 67 were found to have a mental age of io or under. Using this as a dividing line between normality and feeblemindedness, 53.7 per cent. were declared defective. This high rate was partly due, however,

1 journal of American Institute of Criminal Law and Criminology, March
1918, pp. 902-10.
2 Report of Mass. Comm., etc., p. 28.
3 Report of N.Y. Probation and Protective Association, r9I8, p. 27.
4 Ibid., 1917, p. 8. 5 Ibid., x9I6, p. 10. 6 Social Hygiene Monthly, October I9I8, p. 2.

104 EUGENICS REVIEW.
to the inclusion of a negro group, who constituted 37 per cent. of the total. Among the negroes 68 per cent. were found defective as compaired with 47 per cent. among the whites.'
Our last group consists of the reformatory inmates. It should be realised at the outset, however, that we here deal with a highly selected group. First offenders and those of normal mentality aire very likely to be placed upon probation. The recidivist, however, who is the crux of the problem, is committed to the penal institution. It is natural that this group should be weighted with defectives. It should also be recalled, that, especially in the case of young females, court action and commitment, are usually turned to only as a final resort. A judge naturally hesitates to place a stigma upon the normal girl, and seeks to give her every opportunity for reformation. In the case of the feebleminded girl, however, there is no such hesitancy. Of 104 sexually delinquent girls in the Illinois Training School at Geneva, 97 per cent. were found feebleminded.2 But Dr. Bridgman readily admitted that the selection described above accounted for this ratio. The Massachusetts Commission found thiat 54 per cent. of those in prison were feebleminded.3 Dr. Edith R. Spaulding, reports that of 243 prostitutes examined at the Massachusetts Reformatory for Women, 49 per cent. were feebleminded.4 Of I35 inmates of the Californian School for Girls in Ventura, Dr. Grace M. Fernald reports 36 per cent. feebleminded. And finally of the inmates of Bedford Reformatory, 29.8 per cent. were declared feebleminded.5
We may summarise the results as follows:-(a) Of the disordcerly house inmates about 50 per cent. are feebleminded; (b) of court cases about 30
per cent. are defective, and (c) of institutional cases about 5o per cent.
are feebleminded. This seems to point to the conclusion that the selection arising from penal commitment, results in the isolation of a group of prostitutes about equal in mentality to the inmates of a disordcerly resort. From the data adduced, however, we are not justified in drawing any generalisations as to the mentality of the prostitute, as the statistical requirements of fair sampling are not met with in any of the studies.
1 Mental Deficiency of Prostitutes, by Paul A. Merz, Journal of the America,'
Medical Association, May 3Ist, 19I9, pp. I597-99.
2 Mental Deficiency and Delinquency, Olga Bridgman, M.D., Journal of the
American Medical Association, August i6th, 1913, pp. 47I-2. 3 Report of Mass. Commission, p. 28. 4 Proceedings of National Conference of Charities and Correction, 1914,
p. 223.
5 Commercialised Prostitution in New York City, George J. Kneeland,
pp. 187-8.

