REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

63

torians have been completely absorbed in the struggles of kings and left us to rely on fragmentary arch2ological material for glimpses of the human flood of settlers that hellenized the East in the wake of Alexander's army. Under the circumstances it is no wonder that the scientific study of the eugenics of a single tribe of modern savages, like the Masai or the Zulus, should promise more enlightenment than the whole of ancient history. Such is the imperfection of the historic record.
The one great figure in ancient eugenics is really Plato, who alone can be said to have perceived the spiritual significance and potentialities of the crude methods of social selection which were practised in the Greek world. But Mr. Roper does not bring out his unique position. He succumbs instead to the Oxford convention that it is de rigueur to make out that Aristotle has said the last word on every subject of human interest, and even commits himself to the astounding statement that " the Politics not only set the final seal upon political science in Greece, it also marks the last word in eugenics " (p. 69). Even if we charitably supply what Mr. Roper may perhaps have meant, viz., "ancient " before " eugenics," the remark is not far short of absurd. For Aristotle shows no sign anywhere of appreciating the suggestiveness of the great work of the creative imagination which we know as the Republic of Plato. His own suggestions about infanticide, abortion, slavery, the rearing and education of children, etc., do not rise abovre the common-places any self-satisfied conservative professor might cull fronm the practice of the period. The fixing of the age of marriage at 37 for all men and at I8 for all women would appear to be a delicious auto-biographical universalization of his own marriage to Pythias, but it seems ludicrous to dignify his prejudiced platitudes with the title of a scheme of eugenics, and to ascribe its limitations to scientific caution, rather than to lack of imagination.
Mr. Roper's account of Plato's speculations also is open to exception in some respects. He ascribes to Plato's Utopia the extraordinary institution that in it all the offspring of the working classes were to be systematically put to death, and naturally infers that these classes would soon " have suffered total extinction " (p. 44). Plato has absurdities enough to answer for-such as the first step towards the realization of his ideal, viz., the total expulsion of all the adults from the future ideal city by order of a tyrant converted to philosophy-but this insanity has been manufactured for him by Mr. Roper, who has not observed that the passage in 460 C., to which apparently he refers, is not concerned with the births in the lower classes at all, but with the problem of inferior offspring in the " guardian " class. He evidently has not grasped that
Plato's proposals for comnmunism, abolition of the family and eugenics, were all intended to apply only to the upper classes, as Aristotle's censure of these proposals in the Politics, 1262 B. confirms. Altogether it cannot be said that Mr. Roper has exhausted his subject.
F. C. S. SCHILLER.
Douglas, A. R. Some Suggestions Respecting the Care of the FeebleMinded under the Mental Deficiency Bill, I913. London. Adlard; 1913; pp. 6. (Reprinted from the journal of Mental Science, July, 1913.)
THE Bill to which this article refers became an Act shortly after it was written, but what is said of the Bill is equally applicable to the Act, as such changes as were made in the later stages were not of a fundamental character, nor do they for the most part affect the arguments here presented.
The article sets out the views of the writer as to the general lines on which the provision of institutional care under the Act can but be organised and co-ordinated in the widest and most general aspect of the matter.

64 EUGENICS REVIEW.
As the medical superintendent of one of the most important existing voluntary institutions for defectives, he is particularly well qualified to form an opinion, and the views he has put forward deserve and are doubtless receiving attentive consideration.
He recounts the various types of institutions in which defectives are found at the present time with short comments, but omits to include in his list the institutions of the Metropolitan Asylums Board, which give London the distinction of having dealt more effectively with this problem than any other area in the country. He does, however, make special mention later in the article of the excellent work being done at the Darenth Industrial Colony under Dr. Rotherham, who has since been appointed a member of the Board of Control.
He also omits any special reference to the voluntary colonies at Sandlebridge and Hildenborough.
As regard special schools he holds that they fail in the all important particular of proper control when the child is not actually in school, a view with which one cannot but agree.
He lays great stress on the importance of classification in order to secure good results and looks to the definitions of the Act to help us in this direction. It must be observed that in their final form the definitions tend to raise the dividing line between the imbecile on the one hand and the feeble-minded on the other in such a way as to leave only the very highest grade of defectives in the latter class and to make the distinction between them rather shadowy.
It may be well to recall that by these definitions the imbecile is one who is " incapable of managing himself or his affairs," while the feebleminded is one who " needs care, supervision, and control for his own protection or the protection of others."
This approximation of the definition of the two groups happens to accord with the view of Dr. Douglas, that the " idiot" group should be separated from the others, and that the members of the feeble-minded and imbecile classes could with advantage be grouped together in either a separate department or a separate institution, at all events under the age of I6. Unfortunately the tendency in the past under the influence of legislation has been for the most part to group the idiots and the imbeciles together, but apart from this there is much to be said for Dr. Douglas' view, and it is well known that the voluntary institutions under the Idiots Act have included many feeble-minded cases in their numbers; indeed, it was intended that they should be so included when the Act was passed in i886.
He thinks it would be necessary to provide hospital accommodation with a fully trained nursing staff for 20 per cent. of the cases coming within the class of " idiots." This seems a very high estimate, and would undoubtedly be costly, but it cannot be denied that this class of case requires a large amount of individual attention.
Highly trained, certificated teachers are, as Dr. Douglas says, not necessary for the imbecile class, nor are the members of this class liable to a great amount of sickness.
He suggests that the most convenient way of handling the question would be to form " associated areas " by combinations of counties, to provide the necessary institutions, which should be assisted by and linked up with the five voluntary institutions already in existence.
He points to their experience of forty years, their complete equipment and resources, and their convenient geographical position for such a purpose, which would, he thinks, save the county authorities unnecessary expense. He suggests that their staffs should be drawn on for manning institutions hereafter to be built, that they should be used for the training of teachers and attendants, and also as a central institution or filtering

REVIEWS OF RECENT BOOKS.

65

ground for each associated area in which all defectives should spend some six to twelve months before being drafted to the other homes or colonies, in accordance with the opinion formed as to their aptitude.
In regard to this scheme, there is a good deal to be said against putting the lowest grades of defectives into entirely separate institutions from the middle and higher grades; in the first place, the work becomes extremely monotonous and depressing for those who are entirely confined to the lowest grades of case, and there is not the same opportunity for utilising the work of the more capable defectives in regard to the domestic requirements of the very helpless. Moreover, too much specialisation leads to a narrow outlook on the part of those in control and makes for a stereotyped rather than an elastic classification in which ready interchange should be possible; for these reasons there is much to be said in favour of separate departments rather than separate institutions for the different grades.
So far as one can gather, it is proposed to retain all classes of defective for from six to twelve months in the central filtering institutions; this seems rather a long probation if the objections to this system are as great as is suggested; it would also probably lead to an undue choking of the filter.
Dr. Douglas is of opinion that industrial colonies are more likely to provide what is wanted, and to be economically successful than farm colonies. No doubt Darenth forms an excellent example of the former, and one cannot at present point to a similarly successful example of the latter type at present in this country but it is rather early to judge; certain forms of farming may be made very remunerative, but it will probably be necessary to select carefully the cases for this work, as obviously the difficulties of supervision and control are greater.
R. LANGDON-DOWN.
Wormald, J. and S. A Guide to the Mental Deficienzcy Act, 19I3. Lon-
don. P. S. King and Son; 1913; price 5S. net; pp. I45. As Mr. Edmund Harvey, M.P., says in the preface to this book, the authors have special qualifications for their task. Mr. John Wormald, besides being a lawyer, has been for many years Chairman of Industrial Schools and the Special Schools, Boarding-out and Care Committees for the Mentally Defective in Leeds, and there is ample evidence in the work of intimate and practical acquaintance with many aspects of the problem of the mentally defective.
After an introduction there are sections dealing in turn with (i) the
operation of the Act, (2) the authorities under the Act, (3) the administration of the Act, (4) offences against the mentally defective, (5) finance and
statistics, (6) conclusions. This part of the book, which occupies 95 pages, is followed by the
Act itself in an appendix and an index to the first part of the work. The authors have not confined themselves to a bare legal commentary
on or explanation of the Act; they have dealt with this, but have also made many useful suggestions as to how the measure may be put to the best use with appropriate references to the Report of the Royal Commission, and to work that has already been done in this field both here and abroad.
There are some matters of opinion on which one might be disposed to take a different attitude from that of the authors, particularly in regard to the question of boarding-out for these cases, but as a rule the views expressed are in accord with practical experience.
In regard to the history of the recent movement for legislation, the authors have fallen into some confusion. The first Bill to come before Parliament was the Feeble-Minded Persons Control Bill of Mr. Gresham Stewart on behalf of the Eugenics Education Society and the National Association for the Care of the Feeble-Minded. This Bill was read a second time without a division, which was a surprising result indicating

