JEAN SUTTER
Institut National d'Etudes De'mographiques
Social and Genetic Influences
on Life and Death*
A Review
THE EUGENICS SOCIETY has revitalized eugenics in England by organizing three Symposia: Biological Aspects of Social Problems in 1964, Genetic and Environmental Factors in Human Ability in 1965 and Social and Genetic Influences on Life and Death in 1966. The last named is discussed here.
The Symposium is divided into three parts: I, Conception, Pregnancy and Birth; II, Some Major Causes of Illness (Somatic and Psychological); III, Causes and Effects of Ageing.
One of the most recently discovered fields in human biology is dealt with by P. E. Polani: "Occurrence and effect of human chromosome abnormalities". His very clear account of the subject combines scientific precision with remarkable intelligibility for the non-technical reader. Polani covers the subject completely and his setting out of the pathological aspect is excellent.
The state of our knowledge of sexual and mental abnormalities due to chromosome anomalies is also reviewed, with all the problems set by mongolism, spontaneous abortion and other syndromes. It is known that 04 per cent of the new born are damaged by chromosome anomalies. This fact justifies not only the concern of WHO with the problem on an international level, but that of eugenists who, as here, discuss the problem which, if new, none the less covers an important branch of pathology.
C. A. Clarke, in "Recent developments in medical genetics" examines this interesting problem: How to treat, by way of immunology, the foeto-maternal incompatibilities of which the rhesus situation is one? Using the new techniques of immunology, Clarke shows that haemolytic disease in the new born will soon be mastered, and thus will open a new chapter in the treatment of injurious hereditary characters.
With Raymond Illsley we come to a subject in which up to now there has been only too little research: There has been, in Aberdeen, a study of the relationship between complications of childbirth and the ultimate intellectual attainments of the children, measured by psychological tests.
If in such a field many points lend themselves to discussion, it must be admitted that an association exists between low intellectual performance and such factors as low weight at birth, prematurity (pre-eclampsia), antepartum haemorrhage and so on. Meanwhile nothing
* Lord Platt and A. S. Parkes (Eds.), Social and Genetic Influences on Life and Death. Eugenics Society Symposia, Volume 3. Edinburgh, 1967. Oliver and Boyd. Pp. ix+222. Price 63s.
176

SOCIAL AND GENETIC INFLUENCES ON LIFE AND DEATH
can be isolated: many underweight babies are very intelligent, caesarian children may sometimes be more so than those of normal births. Between birth and testing the child has moreover lived in his own environment, which may also change everything. The tests themselves are selective as to social class, etc.
The Aberdeen tests were on children born in the period between October 1950 and
September 1955. The inquiry started in December 1962. Of the 13,800 births, 11,280 were
identified. With the tests used, the best scores were in the higher social classes (I and II) and the
worst in the lower (IV and V). Within the same class the scores decrease with parity: the first born has a higher rating than the second, the second than the third, the third than the fourth and so on. The scores increase with the age of the mother (from 15 to 35 years). If age and number of pregnancies are correlated one sees (for example) that in the group 20-24 the children of pregnancy I had better scores than the others. The highest scores were those of the first born of 35-year-old mothers.
Illsley poses the problem of the mechanism of such a state of things. He seeks a possible link between what he has found in tests and what has been observed at the level of post neonatal morbidity and mortality. While there were parallel elements between the test findings and these mortalities, it seems risky to draw conclusions. This type of research needs encouragement and development.
Thomas McKeown deals with "Social and biological influences on foetal and infant deaths". He discusses these two influences on mortality and how they may be prevented. In a number of Figures he schematizes intra-uterine mortality (estimates) for a century. He gives an estimate of 150 abortions per 1,000 conceptions; before age 15, 200 deaths per 1,000 conceptions: of these 150 are abortions, 20 are stillbirths, 30 neonatal deaths. Fourfifths of early deaths are due to prenatal causes. He believes that half of them might have been prevented.
C. C. Spicer begins the section on the causes of somatic illness with a paper on "Recent trends in mortality". He starts by recalling recent mortality trends in the different agegroups: 0 to one year, 1-4, 5-14, 15-24, 25-34, 3544, 45-64 and 65 plus. He underlines the decline in the role of infectious disease in the general mortality, the preponderance of fatal accidents, particularly road accidents, in the younger age-groups.
"Social" causes certainly exist, and differential mortality, as between social classes deserves more careful study. Spicer also emphasizes that the cancers, cardio-vascular diseases and virus infections may also have a differential incidence.
J. N. Morris deals with " 'Coronary thrombosis' progress and prospects". In England, 30 per cent of deaths of men in middle age are due to IHD (ischaemic heart disease). Morris also shows that there are, according to country, considerable differences in frequency. In certain highly developed countries such as Sweden there was a rate of only 9 1 male deaths per 1,000 in 1961 as against 14-1 for the UK and 15-0 for the USA. Much recent epidemiological research has supplied many clues to the contributory factors. There is a relation between the blood cholesterol level and the incidence of IHD.
High diastolic blood pressure is also a good "forecaster". But the positive correlation between high cholesterol and high blood pressure is only 0-28; there is five times more risk for individuals who have high levels in both. Cigarette smokers are at far greater risk than smokers of cigars and pipes. There is also a genetic link. Psycho-sociological factors play a part: in the United States the habits of the TBM (tired business man) predispose to IHD, much more so than in the case of men with calmer personalities. That physical activity is a protection against IHD has been shown in most countries. Morris believes that preventive therapy is a possibility.
C. M. Fletcher deals with constitutional and environmental factors in the aetiology of
177

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
lung cancer. An excellent paper, summing up the problems very clearly, synthesizing the
arguments for air pollution in towns as against smoking as a causal factor and taking into account inquiries and research carried out all over the world. The arguments on a
possible constitutional liability to lung cancer are also well summed up. Truly an excellent exposition.
The section on psychological illness is opened by A. H. Leighton who sets out to answer the question "What part is played by social and cultural factors in psychiatric disorders?" Leighton has studied psychiatric morbidity in a county of an Atlantic province of Canada and in a Nigerian tribe in Africa. Stirling county (Canada) has 20,000 inhabitants, half English, half French Canadian, living in small villages; largest town: 3,000 inhabitants. The Yoruba population studied in western Nigeria amounted to about 80,000 of the 5,000,000 constituting the tribe, living in fifteen villages.
Psychiatric troubles were brought to light by the use of questionnaires, the net result being 326 interviews among the Yoruba and 1,010 in Stirling county.
Results are given in three age groups: under 39, 40-59 and 60 plus. Simultaneously a schedule of the physical health of the populations had been established. Leighton gives several general conclusions: between the Yoruba and the Canadians the psychiatric pattern is remarkable for similarities rather than differences. It seems, nevertheless, that the Yoruba have a lower prevalence rate than the Canadians. Sex plays an important part: in Canada more women are affected; in Africa, more men. Leighton puts forward explanations which, in spite of the precautions taken must, on his own statement, be accepted with reserve.
Kenneth Rawnsley deals with "Social influences on the prevalence of psychiatric disorder". He discusses two examples. First, an inquiry made in the United Kingdom by the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance over one year on the causes of incapacity for work. It is obvious that the number of psychotics and psycho-neurotics per 1,000 men varies greatly according to regions: from 5 2 in the south of the country to 12 1 in Wales. The same geographic distribution is found in all causes of incapacity: 229-3 in the south and 362^5, the greatest, in Wales. Rawnsley cites research confirming that in the many cases studied there is a correlation between psychiatric disturbance and the total of somatic illness.
Rawnsley then gives an account of investigations made on the 260 inhabitants of Tristan da Cunha when they were brought to London as a result of a volcanic eruption on their island. A comparison of the findings of a Norwegian expedition in 1937 with the results of observations made in 1960 show clearly that individuals treated in 1937 for neuropsychiatric disturbances were also, in 1960, the greatest sufferers from somatic disorders.
Erwin Stengel deals with "Genetic and social influences in the causation of suicide". He notes, rightly, that much more research has been undertaken on the social than on the genetic causes. Referring to twin studies and the recent investigations in different parts of the world, he shows how difficult it is to ascertain the truth in this field, where, as is well known, statistics must be interpreted with great caution. Stengel is not deceived, he knows perfectly well the obstacles which may be run against in the possible interpretations. Finally, these few pages are excellent even if the conclusions are somewhat negative. The literature of suicide is encumbered with gross errors and it is very satisfactory to see Stengel putting the reader on his guard against premature conclusions.
Neil Kessel, under an easy, humorous style, deals with alcoholism very seriously. His thinking goes deep and, if one is tempted to criticize him for a lack of figures, one must remember that his unravelling of the problem is thoroughly efficient. He is perfectly right to insist on the special kind of illness (if it is one) which alcoholism represents in our Western societies. He is right to insist on the addict's responsibility for the symptoms he presents, and to include alcoholism in the types of illness, which are constantly increasing, for which
178

SOCIAL AND GENETIC INFLUENCES ON LIFE AND DEATH
the patient is directly responsible and which pose grave problems to the modern medical ethic. Truly the problem goes beyond classical conceptions-as do the means available for its study. Eugenics is here the victim of social hypocrisy.
E. M. Backett opens the final section on the causes and effects of ageing with an excellent introduction. He points out that medicine has been slow to concern itself with the problems of ageing and of the health of the individuals whose lives medicine has saved. He emphasizes that, among multidisciplinary studies, the socialcauses ofdifferential mortality need to be better understood.
P. R. Cox deals with some economic and social consequences of old age. He demonstrates clearly that between 1971 and 2001 the population of England and Wales will continue to show a decrease in younger people and an increase in the number of the aged. Passing on to an examination of the consequences of ageing he states that in the 1950s there was a tendency to think the cost of old age should be quite bearable if the level of economic provision was reasonable. By the 1960s the experimental stage had been passed and many inquiries have been directed towards the question of retirement, and the reasons which induce people of 60 or 65 to continue working or to decide to retire.
There is, too, the beginning of a better understanding of the state of health and the degree of mobility of old people. All this tends to make one see the problems of old age from a new angle and, for example, to establish a pre-retirement movement aimed at helping elderly people to live happily outside the world of workers.
Martin Roth gives very serious consideration to the psychiatric aspects of old age. Some psychiatric troubles may be of long standing: manic-depression, paranoid syndromes, delirium, neurotic symptoms, etc.-but the progressive deterioration of memory and intellectual function are in a different category and, with senile dementia, are imperfectly understood.
The association of old age with arterial hypertension, arterio-sclerosis, etc., is well known. Paranoids and schizophrenics have the same expectation of life as in the general population, but for manic-depressives it is only seven-tenths. Psychiatric patients with vascular trouble also have a bad vital prognosis.
From the genetic point of view these studies are difficult, as aged schizophrenics have fewer cases among their relatives than do young sufferers. Among the factors which distinguish "psychiatric" old people from normal individuals of the same age are loneliness, limited mobility, previous psychiatric trouble, the illnesses of old age and often a melancholic or anxious personality. One also finds a close link between physical and mental disorders. Roth doubts the efficacy of the known forms of preventive therapy.
In dealing with "Ageing and mortality" R. D. Clarke is concerned with death in human populations from the actuarial point of view. His paper is an analysis of mortality tables with particular regard to the probability of death in each age group. The maximum life span is 104 years for men and 109 for women. With the doubling of the population every thirtyfive years Clarke foresees rising death rates throughout the world.
M. J. Hollingsworth in his "Genetic studies of longevity" rightly puts first the problem of the continuing life of cells and of individuals. He then explains the results of research into ageing in drosophila, from strictly inbred and from hybrid strains. There are important differences following the genetic bases of the strains and also if they are kept at a temperature of 20°C or 25°C. (Survival rate is much higher at 20°C) Hollingsworth then compares the distribution of deaths in a population of drosophila with that in England and Wales in 1959. There are evident relationships on this point between the two populations. The comparisons are made with the precautions necessary in two such different organisms. Following this, Hollingsworth considers the importance of heredity in the process of ageing in drosophila. Decline in vitality appears earlier in the consanguineous than in the hybrid lines but
179

THE EUGENICS REVIEW
not at a more rapid rate. The Y sex chromosomes are not important in drosophila for they carry few genes, while X constitutes one-fifth of the haploid genotype. The comparison of facts reveals that there are certainly genetic mechanisms influencing ageing in the human species.
Obviously, a series of papers of this kind cannot escape criticism. It must be emphasized that they are almost entirely concerned with problems peculiar to England or are looked at exclusively through Anglo-Saxon eyes. This is proved by the fact that the great majority of bibliographical references, if not all of them, cite publications in the English language. This might be considered a normal procedure since the volume emanates from the Eugenics Society. It is, however, regrettable that certain problems have not been envisaged on a world scale. The science of eugenics, which has so many obstacles to overcome, ought to take every opportunity of recruiting enthusiasts outside England.
Our criticisms might also be pressed further on some more technical points. Thus one might expect that Illsley's conclusions could have been different if he had taken into account research on the IQs of children of the same family. In the same way, McKeown might also have considered the findings obtained in studies of endogenous, as opposed to exogenous infantile mortality. One might also reproach Leighton for not quoting Culture and Mental Disorders by Eaton and Weil, which is a very important work in his field. R. D. Clarke might also have cited the works of Gumbel and de Vincent on mortality in old age. Hollingsworth's remarkable report would have been better if he had quoted examples of mortality rates for consanguineous human families.
These criticisms do not detract from the value of the book. Our thanks to the Eugenics Society for having organized this series of symposia and thus revitalized the study of the human problems inherent in our kind of civilization, which, if they are not resolved, are capable of menacing evolution itself.
180

