EPILEPSY: A REVIEW OF "FIELD WORK."
By SIR ROBERT ARMSTRONG-JONES, C.B.E., M.D., F.R.C.P.
THE State Board of Charities for the County of Neew York consists of Commissioners representing the nine divisions of the coiunty, who sit as a Board, having among their duties the highly xesponsible one of going into the root of things, viz., of investigating the origin and social condition of the poor seeking public aid. Their report states, as a result of enquiry, that the causes of dependence and poverty are many, but that none affect the public welfare more disastrously than the inhetritance of feeble-mindedness, insanity or disease which definitely injures the nervous system. Like our own Board of CGontrol (Lunacy Commissioners) an-d Prison Commissioners, the New York State Board of Charities visits and inspects; but it also has in addition the power of scientific investigation placed under its own control-.a duty which we hope " Reconstruction " may place upon the two bodies named. The State Board assert from their observations and knowledge that many of the inmates in almshouses, in the State institutions, in hospitals, prisouns and custodial asylums are so placed in consequence of neuropathic conditions, -due to some form of inherited mental deficiency or some acquired mental disease. Hence the publication of this most necessary investigation1 into the causes and source of poverty and dependence. There have been seven important treatises from this bureau; but the one under review is the 'summiary of what may be described as " fieldwork," carried out by one of the investigators of the Bureau of Analysis and Investigation which is attached to the Board of Charities, and this brochure xelates to epilepsy only. It was carried out by Miss F. G. Smith at the New York Craig Colony for I,5oo epileptics, and is 'the result of careful enquiry and research into the history of nine families, some members of whi-ch were under treatment in this institution. Miss Smith workeed in collaboration with the Resident Medical Superintendent, Dr. W. T. Shanahan, who placed all the case-book entries at her disposal and facilitated her enquiries in every way.
Not long since the President, Major Leonard Darwin., and some mem-
bers of the Executive Committee of our Eugenics Education Society weLre received as a depu-tation by the English Board of Control (Lunacy Commissioners), who themselves expressed a sympathetic desire to initiate
similar " field-wvork" ,as an experiment in a rural district under their
supervision iin this country; and it is earnestly hoped that this may be commenced in the nea,r future.
The report under consideration is divided into two chapters, whi,ch are most informing and instructive. Chapter I. deals with epilepsy in a full
1 Eugenics and Social Welfare Bulletin, No. VII., being an investigation of the histories of nine families of epileptics in one rural county, published by the New York State Board of Charities (Department of State and Alien Poor) from their Bureau of Analysis and Investigation and printed at the Capitol, Albany, New York, in 19I6.

EPILEPSY: A REVIEW OF "FIELD WORK."

71

and car-eful digest of all the published opinions of authorities and workers in all countries respecting its origin-predisposing and exciting as well as its pathology-so far as this is known, as also its progno.sis and treatment. In, regard to the inheritance of epilepsy there is, as may be expected, a great diversity of opinion as to the exact neumeicail propotion. of those whose families show a record of epilepsy and related diseases. Gowers is quoted as giving 40 per cent. oif such inheritance, whilst Kraepelin gives 75 per cent.; and this disparity coincides with our own experience, for
many observers include mental and nervous condition-s (as factors of
inheritance) which were not regarded by others as sufficiently important to complicate the conception of a hereditary transmission. The most common traits found in the families of epileptics, both in this country and in America, are epilepsy itself, insanity in its various foms, alcoholism, migraine and1 nervous and convulsive diseases. According to the enquiries by Miss Smith, in the New York State, alcoholism in the parent or grandparent figures in about one-third of all the cases, epilepsy itself in over one-fifth, and insanity an over one-tenth of all the recorded cases. The occurrence of convergent heredity through consanguinity has been noted by many authorities, the weak traits of a poor stock tending to become emphasised, and two neuropathic strains tend;ing to favour epilepsy. It has been asserted that traumatic epillepsy has been transtted in families. At any rate, it would be correct to state that a hereditary taint favours the manifestation or ten-dency to the convulsive neurosis.
Epilepsy is generally described as a paroxysmal neurosis affecting both consciousness an.d motox co-ordination. It is a manifestation of many derangements of the nervous system and is a syndrome of symptoms rather than a single disease. Its various stages are enumerated by Mi'ss Smith,
but the so-called status epilepticus i.s the great climax, t-he patient passing
from one seizure to another in this condition without recovering consciousness. The kinds of fits are those generalily accepted as the grand mal, petit mal, Jacksonian and psychic. As to its frequency about one in every 200 of the population, or in some places one in every 500, is affected; and it
has been estimated tha't theTe may be 175,000 epileptics in the United States, although an attempt at a census in New York City resulted in a registration of only 6,86o. The age of onset is generally before the 20th yea,r and in 74 to 85 per cent. of the cases; and of these one-half occur before the age of five years, the other half from I0 to I4 years. The classification
is a three-fold one, into early or inherited epilepsy, adolescent or develop-
mental, and late, which i's associated with alcohol, syphilis or arterio-
sclerosis. The disease is regarded as a syndrome of two variables, viz., heredity and some exciting factor, the former being the most potent and being referred to as the " constitutional neuropathic predisposition," or an inherited instability-a defective equilibrium resulting from ancestral weakness, connected, it may be, with alcohol and other toxins such as
syphilis, cancer, tuberculosis, rheumatism or gout, anmia and goitre.
Stress is laid u.pon these factors as ante-natal causes, and the view is properly taken that ante-natal conditions have a peculiar bearing upon the first six or eight weeks of intra-uterine life, whilst the results of birth traumata are also included, one-fourtth of the cases presenting some record of damger at birth. Although psychic influences sudh as emotional disturb-

72 EUGENICS REVIEW.
ances may p;recipitate convulsive attacks in the young, it is fully realised -that reflex causes also act, among the.se being eye, ear and nose troubles, dentition, intestinal disorders and parasites. Much is made in this report of parental alcoholism, for dipsomania greatly resembles epilepsy in that it is periodical and paroxysmal, there being a definite connect-ion believed by some to exist between epilepsy and delirium tremens. Tuberculosis is frequently observed in the post-mortem findings of epileptics, and apart from a lowered vitality in the latter disease it has been regarded as having
a, causative relation to the fits. Neither menstruation nor p:regnancy has
been proved to be in any way definitely associated with epilepsy, although the development -of an endogenous toxin in pueTperal ecla'mpsia may bring on convulsive attacks 'resembling epilepsy; but the type is regarded as functional. Much has been written about psychic seizures, and these are referred to in detail in relation to migraine, vertigo; and hysteria, the latter being regarded as not excluding epilepsy, although no mental deterioration follows hysteria. It is stated that the "-epileptic furor " seen in cases of epilepsy with insanity is not associated with any definite type of fit, but the fact -is noted that epilepsy is associated with one-third of all cases of defective -mental development in children. Eye-strain in children has been regaxrded by some as a possible cause of epilepsy, and although some eye anomalies are seen in a fifth of all cases and the visual aura is twice as common as any other, there does not appear to be sufficient ground to regard disturbances of -the visual app.aratus as a cause of epilepsy. Sleep rather than sleeplessness has been. attributed as a favouring condition of epilepsy. Both have common signs in, the loss of muscular power and of conssciousness, .anaemia of the brain being regarded as a, common factor. Fits have been noted by many observers to be more common in some cases at night, an hour or two after fallijng asleep and the same before awaking, when the physiological resistance of the bodily state may be considered at
a low ebb.
There are certain stigmata which have long been classified as those characteristic of the epileptic; and these are mainly associated with an incomplete evolution, for they are seen in persons who are reg.arded as suffe-ring from the formation and -the retention of toxic sub.stances from some congenital deficiency. There are noit infrequently in epileptics anomalies both of bodily conformation and of mental and moral developmnent and of habits. It has been suggested that epileptic fits are more
comm-on in wuinter than in summer, and rthat the sun's rays rather than the su;n'.s heat are important controlling factors.
As to its pathology, the paroxysmal nature suggests an irritative lesion; but osseous thickenings, sclerosis or hardening, and vascular dilata-
tion may all be present without convulsions; so that some other exciting factor is necessary; and this is to be sought for in 'heredity. Whenever a series of different factors are brought forward to explain a phenomenon, it may be tak'en foor granted that the exact cause is still unascertained, and this is the case with epilepsy. A toxic theory has been advanced, and this either in the blood sweat, urine or the gastric contents. It was believed by some that these secretions became hypertoxic during, immediately before
and after the seizures, but hypotoxic in the intervening periods. Uric acid, chlorine, phosphorus, ammonium carbamate, cholin, cyto-toxin, and punrn-

EPILEPSY: A REVIEW OF " FIELD WORK."

73

bodies have each been suggested as the exciting toxin. The ductless glands have been considered to be responsible, and as epilepsy occurs mainly during the period of activity of the thymus, this gland was associ-
ated as a causative factor; but so also has the thyroid, through the Ilack of thyroglobulin, because the thyroid' takes poisonous iodine compounds from the blood, combining them with albumen which assists in normal metabolism. The pituitary, adrenal, parathyroid and even the pineal gland h,ave been regarded as causative factors. Some authorities have suggested a thrombosis of the cortical capillaries as a cause, and th,at the real cause of epilepsy lies in some circulatory disturbances. Anamia and hyper.mia each has in turn been regarded by some as a cause, whillst others have looked upon epilepsy as due to an irritable zone, the " epileptic zone," the
result of some former trauma, this being excited into activity by a toxin
and so initiating the convu.lsive seizure. Needless to say, the Freudians have iregarded epilepsy as of sexual origin and of psycho-genetic etiology.
The treatment of epilepsy is fully consiidered in this little treatise, and undeTr four separate headings-(I) means to diminish the excitability of the nerve centres, (2) to eliminate reflex irriftation, (3) to exclude toxins, and (4) to increase the resistance of the nerve-cells to them. Treatment, general, surgical and remedial, is also considered. The latter is dealt with undder drug treatment, organo-therapy, .serum-therapy and hydrotherapy, adequate reasons being given in each instance. Even psychoanalysis finds a place in treatment as a means of preventing fits by maintaining a healthy moral and mental standard. Interesting comments ae made in the section devoted to prognosis. For instance, the grand mal type is said to be more influenced by the bromide treatment than the petit
mat, a " cure)) resulting when the fits have been kept under control for two years, or in the opinion of less optimistic healers for ten years. Infantile epilepsy is the least easy 'to control, whilst the fits that come on during puberty or adolescence-if not too frequent or severe-more readily yield to treatment. It is asserted that adult e,pilepsy coming on between 25 and 35 proved recalcitrant to remedial treatment. Those cases with a family history of mental or nervous diseases monst often became confirmed. The incurable cases were mosit frequently of the petit mal type. The
duration of the disease was about 20 years, and epilepsy is stated to shorten
life by about ten years on the average. Of cases in institutions only 2 p-er
cent. were described as cured, but in young persons, according to a very
sanguine expectation, the rate of recovery may be even 20 per cent. There is no doubt that 'epilepsy impairs mental integrity, for the epileptic is characterised by mental inertia, and he is a pfersoni of ill humour; uncertainty and taciturnity alternating with. excitement. There is a marked
tendency to egotism and to religiou.s fervour in his "mental make-up," but his religion is superficial only, and as a class epileptics are untruthful, illogical and characteristically impulsive and impetuous.
A very full bibliography, which comprehends 6i references, concludes the fiirst part of the work, viz., the first of the two chapters. This portion is introductory to the real work, which is described in the second chapter.
It is pointed out that this piece of " field-work " was undertaken for the purpose of studying the inheritance of epilepsy, with particular reference to its bearing upon social conditions and upon poverty. The work

74 EUGENICS REVIEW.
wa,s undertaken in a rur,al county so as to obtain with greater facility full
family histories, these being undisturbed by the inevitable intermixing of people such as would be the case in an industrial community. Further, the family histories in this di-strict need only be traced' at furthest to one hund-red years back, when the first ancestor arrived. In the cases investigated the families were unrelated, thus yielding exclusive, definite and reliabl,e records.
The histories of the nine families are clearly denoted in, separate charts. The ascendants and the. collaterals, normal and -abnormal, are all marked in symbolic form-the -males in squaxes and the females in ciircles. Various alphabetical distinctions -suggest departures from the normal, and colours are used to discriminate shades of mental failure, so that at a glance the full family history, even to the great-great-grandfather, is plainly and at once pictorially and graphically represented. A table summarises the results obtaineid; an,d to any one wishing to carry out social work of this kin.d, the investigations presented in this enquiry serve as a most helpful example of how to record pathological family histories. These inve-stigations mu-st serve as a basis for work to students engaged iin menta.l hospit-als, prisons and asylums for the insane. It is strikisng how often green, which represents insanity, figures in these charts; and the same applies to the red for epilepsy. The charts serve to prove that a morbid heredity is the most common predisposing cause of epilepsy, which is closely connected with many forms of mental and nervous instability. In these enquiries over 200 individuals are recorded and there occur mo, fewer than 63 cases of feeble-mindedness, evidenced by a failure of adaptability or by definite anti-social reactions shown in the large number of cases of divorce, of desertion and non-support. Criminality, alcoholism, suicide and insanity appear repeatedly; and the minor forms of instability are also present. Hysteria, migraine, chorea and paralysis were common, and further the general want of self-control and self-direction, which more than any other factors account for defective citizenghip. Analagous investigations in thi.s country would be most illuminating and helpful as to the causes of poverty, c.rime, insanity and failure of adaptation.
The conclusions drawn from this enquiry carried out by the New York State Board of Charities and published by their Bureau of Investigation are, that if good citizenship and ready adaptability are to -be encouraged it is essential that the stock from which honest and capable men and women are to be bred must be uncontaminated, vigorous and strong, and free from any neuropathic taint. We earnestly ho-pe that our Board of Control (Lunacy Commissioners) may see their way to making a smalil experiment on similar lines iin this country, and we commend this record of enquiry to the notice oif all students of social conditions. It is a most convincing piece o'f evidence of the value of a good heredi'ty.

