The Experimental Analysis of Sex-A Review,'
BY LANCELOT T. HOGBEN, M.A. (Cantab.), D.Sc. (Lond.), F.R.S. (Edin).
(Lecturer in Experimental Zoology, the University of Edinburgh).
No object of biological enquiry has provided a more popular playground for amateur speculations than sex. In no field have more inspiring advances been recorded through the researches of the past two decades. To the biologist the problem presents two main issues: the nature of the agencies which determine whetlher a particular fertilised egg will develop into onie or other type cf individual, and the way in which such agencies operate to achieve their result. Our knowledge of the first has been revolutionised by the enquiries epitomised with such brilliant lucidity by the late Professor Doncaster in his "Determination of Sex" (1915), the outcome of his own pioneer-labours on sexlinkage in the Currant-moth Abraxas. Since the publication of that admirable review considerable progress has been made with regard to the second issue, the Entwicklungsmechanik of Sex.
The modern conception cof sex determination takes its origin from Doncaster's work (1905) on the Currant-moth. Up till that time the fertilised egg had been regarded as ambivalent with respect to the future sex of the invididual into which it is destined to develop. Sex was regarded as the outcome of external forces incident to development, such as nutrition; and the maintenance of a fairly constant sex ratio throughout the animal kingdom as presumably due to an equal likelihood of the particular groupings of environmental conditions promoting
one or the other type of sex differentiation occurring in any particular instance. Though this view was difficult to harmonise with many known biological data, more especially such facts as the production of males from unfertilised eggs in Bees, the sex identity of single litters produced from one embryo (polyembryony), it was not till the phenomenon of sex-linked inheritance had been explored that a mechanism inherent in the germ cells was recognised as a significant factor in the maintenance of a more or less equal proportion of the sexes.
Sex-linked inheritance-the term covering the transmission of characteristics which individuals of one sex can only hand on to their offspring of the alternative sex-presents itself in two forms in the animal kingdom. One is is the original type discovered in Abraxas, the currant-moth, and known through the researches of Bateson and Punnett, Durham, Goodale, Pearl, Morgan, Davenport, Onslow, Harrison and others to occur generally among Birds, Moths, and Butterflies. In this type the female is incapable of transmitting certain characters to her daughters. In the second which occurs in Flies (Diptera), Mammals and certain other groups of animals there are
*1 am indebted by my friend and colleague Dr. F. A. E. Crew for permission to refer to unpublished researches carried out by him in the Animal Breeding Research
De&artment at Edinburgh.

THE EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF SEX.

$l7

found certain characteristics which the male can only transmit to his female offspring. Two familiar illustrations must here suffice.
In Abraxas there are two varieties distinguished by the colour
pattern of the wing, 'grossulariata' and 'lacticolor.' When a darkwinged (grossulariata) male is crossed with a pale winged (lacticolor)
female, the dark-winged character is dominant and appears in offspring of both sexes. But when the reverse cross is made, onily the males bear the grossulariata wing pattern, the females being of the lacticolor
variety. Similarly when a Light Sussex hen is mated to a Rhode
Island cock, the male offspring alone display the dominant white
ground colour of the Sussex plumage, the pullets being of the Rhode Island Red type. In such cases it would seem that the female always
produces two kinds of eggs: one which can bear the factors of the sexlinked characters, destined to become a male, and another which cannot
bear such factors, destined to become a female. Or to express the
same results in other words: the sex-linked factor is coupled with some factors for which if the individual is homnozygous it is a male, and if heterozygous-a female. The classical example of the alternate type is the inheritance of eye colour in the fruit fly Drosophila in which species more than a hundred sex-linked characters have been identified by Morgan and his colleagues. A red-eyed female crossed to a male of
the white mutant form gives only red-eyed offspring, while a red-eyed male mated to a white eyed female invariably produces white-eyed male and red-eyed female progeny. The male produces sperm half of which can bear the red eye factor and are destined to fertilise eggs which will develop into females, the other half incapable of transmitting the red eye factor and destined to fertilise eggs which become males. However we care to express these factors, whether in the language of Mendelian analysis or by any private nomenclature we choose to employ as an alternative, it is not possible to escape the conclusion that tlhere exists a mechanism tending to preserve the equal proportion of the sexes inherent in the germt cells, in virttue of the production by one or the other sex-female in Abraxas anid the Fowl, male in Drosophila and Man-of. two kinds of gametes.
The discovery of sex-linked inheritanice was soon reinforced by considerations from entirely different sources. By the middle of the latter half of the nineteenth century the work of Hertwig, Flemming, Strassburger, Boveri, van Beneden and others had led to important extensions of the cell theory paving the way for the rediscovery of Mendel 's laws and the modern conception of sex. The recognition that the essential fact of sexual reproduction is the union of the nuclei of two cells, the sperm and the ovum, of the constancy in number for every species of the chromosomes or nuclear components in cell division, and the maintenance of this constancy by the reduction of the chromosomes to half the species number in the production of the gametes had been achieved during the seventies and eighties. Already in the nineties
Henking had recorded apparent exceptions to the constancy of the chromosomes in the existence of species among certain insects with an odd number of chromosomes in one sex. By the beginning of the twentieth century when the studies of Strassburger and Sutton on the
size and shape of chromosomes first revealed an anatomical basis for

318 ERJGE4NICS RUVIAW.
Mendelian segregation, the significance of the discrepancy to which Henking had directed attention became established through the work of McClung, Montgomery, Wilson, Stevens and others, who shewed that in many animals one pair of chromosomes equally paired in one sex was represented in individuals of the alternate sex by a single member or a pair of unequal elements. Since the gametes receive one or other member of each chromosome pair it was clear that the distribution of a particular chromosome in the process of fertilisation is correlated with the future sex of the individuals resulting from the fertilising act. Altogether several hundreds of cases have been described among animals where the male germ cells have an odd element or unequal pair of chromosomes, so that the male (as in Drosophila) produces two kinds of sperms. For instance the cockroach possesses 34 chromosomes in the female and 33 in the male. The female produces eggs which contain 17 chromosomes, while the male produces sperms half of which contain
sixteen and half seventeen chromosomes. Clearly, if a sperm of the
former type fertilises an egg, the resulting zygote will have the chromo-
some number (33) characteristic of the male, while if the latter type fertilise an egg the resulting zygote will have the female constitution (34). In Moths there is now microscopic evidence from the work of
Seiler that the female forms two sorts of eggs, though the very small chromosomes and other more formidable technical difficulties at present prevent an understanding of the state of affairs in Birds. Thus microscopic evidence has greatly reinforced the conception of a mechanism inherent in the gametes promoting an equal production of individuals of either sex.
This device is usually referred to as the XX., XY. mechanism on
account of the use of the symbols XX. and XO. or XY. respectively for the equally paired 'sex chromosomes' of one sex and the odd element or unequal pair of the other sex. In the fruitfly Drosophila there are four pairs of chromosomes corresponding to the four groups of characters
whiclh display linkagc inter .se in their transmission. Of these one pair
equally mated in the female (XX.) are heteromorphic in the male (XY.) and since the male-forming sperms are of the Y, and the female-forming sperms of the X. type, it would be anticipated that some close connection between this chromosome pair and the sex-linked group of characters mu t obtain. The coincidence between the genetic and microscopic data has been illustrated still further by the phenomenon of 'non-disjunction' described by Bridges in connection with several sex-linked mutant characters of which our original instance of white
eye colour will serve for an examnple.
There appeared among the white-eyed mutant stock of Drosophila certain strains of which the females when crossed to normal red-eyed males gave a certain proportion ofred-eyed males and white-eyed females in addition to the usual red-eyed females and white-eyed males alone. When the white-eyed female offspring of such abnormal crossings were
mnated back to red-eyed males, they in their turn gave all four classes-red-eved males and females, white-eyed males and females. The
white-eyed females behaved like their mothers giving abnormal results
in all cases. Half of the red-eved females gave normnal and half abnormal results in crossing. Of the male progeny the red-eyed

THE EXPERIMENTAL ANALYS1S OF SEX.

319

individuals were normal, whereas only half the white-eyed individuals
were normal, the remainder begetting daughters whose progeny-was
exceptional. Bridges found that in the F1 abnormal white females the chromosome complex of the dividing cells shewed a Y element in addition to the XX. pair. This is explicable on the understanding
that at reduction of the egg in a certain proportion of cases the X element failed to disjoin so that the ripe egg contained either two X.
elements or none at all. If we represent the sperms of a red male as X, or Y two additional types of individuals will result from fertilisa-
tion by a Y. or X. sperm respectivelv: an XXY. or white female, and XO or red male. This accounts for the exceptional individuals in the
FI. and accords with the facts elicited. Next consider the results of backcrossinu these XXY abnormal F,. white females to a normal XY. male. According to whether the X. elements segregate with respect to
one another or the Y. chromosome, the F1 white females will lay four
types of eggs: XX., Y., XY., X. If these are fertilised by a Y. sperm which cannot bring in the red factor.we get four types: (a) XXY. white females wMch will obviouislv behave in the samc way thlus agreeing with breeding experience; (b) YY.--individuals with such constitutioni canInot exist: (c) XYY. white males which should produce XY. sperms so that in crossing with normal white females daughters of the XXY. type producing exceptional progeny wouild result; (d) XY. normal white males. When, on the other hand, the same four classes of eggs are fertilised by an X' sperm carrying the red factor four red types of offspring would rcsu lt, as follows: (a) XXX 'triploid' female which usually dies; (b) XY., normal red males; (c) XYX red femal' s with abnormal offspring: (d) normal red females. Thus the non-disjuinction of the X. chromosome in the formation of the
eggs of some of the females of the parental white-eyed stock accounts for the entire series of exceptional genietic l)heniomena which occur in these strains. The coincideince is all the more striking, because, as AIorgai comments, it is a'"case whlichi seemed at first to be in direct contradiction to the schenme of sex-linked inheritance based on the chroimosome hypothesis, that l)roved however in further examiniation to give a brilliant conrirmationi of that theo.ry. For not only can the hereditary results be accounted for, but the theory on which they were based was directedly confirmed by a microscopic study of the chromosomes
themselves. Recently 13ridges has shed further light on the genetical aspect of
sex-determination by the discovery of non-disjunction in chromosomes other than the sex-chromosomes, sometimes referred to in contrast to the latter as autosomes. In an experiment in which a brown mutant of Drosophila was crossed back to a parental stock, a culture was obtained in which the individuals were almost exclisivrely females or sex intermediates. These 'intersexes' displayred intermediate sex characters in the abdoiien, the sex-combs of the tarsal joint of the fore legs, and predominantly female genitallia. On the whole they fell into, two groups, one tending more to the female, the other to the m 1le condition. Genetical evidence led Bridges to conclude th it for one group of factors at least the female individuals of these cultures were triploid, i.e., inherited as double instead of a single component from their fathers.

820 EUGICNICS RUVIEW.
Microscopic examination of the germ cells revealed the fact that the second and third chromosomes were present in triplicate, while an additional fourth chromosome was present in some but lacking in others, there being thus two degrees of the triploid condition. The X.. chromosome was double in the intersexes but the females possessed three X. elements. Thus using the symbol A. for autosomes and X. for the sex-chromosomes, the genetical constitution of these intersexes and abnormal females were respectively 3A+2X and 3A+3X. as contrasted with the normal female constitution 2A+2X. Abnormal males were also found with the constitition 3A+X, as contrasted with the normal male constitutioni 2A+X. Therefore. if X.:A. =or> 1 the individual is a female, if X.: A.=- or <i it is a male, but when X.: A. lies between the 1 and i the intersexual condition is manifested. Since the X. chromosome bears the female determining factor, it would seem to follow that genetic factors for maleness areborne in the remaining chromosomes.
The production of4ntersexiuality by genetical factors is also seen in
Moths where it has been made the subject of a remarkable series of researches during the past eight years by Richard Goldschmidt. Thosewho have had experience of rearing insects have noticed that local races or closely allied species of moths when crossed yield offspring that shew characteristics of both sexes (inter-sexes). This phenomenon attracted Goldschmidt's attention and the experiments he has performed have led him to elaborate a hypothesis which while being highly speculative in part, is so suggestive of further enquiry and brings within one coherent scheme such a wide and diverse selection of sexual prcblems
that no experimental biologist can afford to overlook it. The subject is a difficult one, but the main ideas can be exrresst d in a fairly simt le form. For simplicity it will be necessary to give onlv a few illustra-
tions selected from a very extensive field of investigation.
If European specimens of the forest pest Lypnantria or the Gipsy
moth, are bred among themselves, the normal sex ratios occur. The same is true of bre-ding strains of the Japanese species of Lymantria. But if crosses are made between individuals of the European and Japanese species a very different result occurs. When a European female is mated with a Japanese male, the F1 offspring are either males or females shewing a number of modifications in the direction of maleness: i .e., all the would-be females are intersexes. When the recipro-cal cross is made between a .Japanese female and a European male the F, generation is composed of males and females in the usual proportions. However, if these F1 individuals are allowed to breed inter se,
there then appear among their offspring (F.) a certain proportion of
males shewing modifications in the direction of the female type of organisation, i.e., intersexual males.
In crossing different strains varving degrees of intersexuality among the offspring emerged in Goldschmidt's work. For convenience he speaks of different races of Lymantria as 'weak' or 'strong.' One 'strong' male mated with a female of a 'weak' strain may produce female offspring with but slight modifications towards the male condition. Another male from a 'stronger' race when crossed with the
same female will produce 50°% offspring which are intermediate between

TEIIC EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF SZX.

:821

the male and female type and 50% males. In some cases males can be obtained of sufficient 'strength' to transform the entire progeny to the
male type. But though they are all alike one half of these males are found by breeding experiments to be genetically females though bodily males, just as Crew (vide infra) found that his transformed male frogs were genetically females. Proceeding in this way, Goldschmidt soon found that he could predict and predict with precision the consequences of mating individuals from different local species or varieties of the Gipsy moth. If a strong race A gave moderate intersexuality with P. and a higher degree of sextransformation with Q., while B. gave but a moderate grade of intersexuality with Q. it could be prophesied with safety that B. would give only a very slight type of intersexuality with P.
To bring these phenomena under the scope of one coherent scheme Goldschmidt has been led to infer that there are two genetical forces at work: one set which, according to their greater or less efficiency tend to deflect differentiation in the direction of maleness, and being sex linked are present in the male in duplex (MM) but in the simplex condition in the female (Mm) through which they can be tran smitted to the male offspring only; the other set modify the action of the first in the direction of differentiation towards the female condition an(I inherited, it appears, solely through the female line the mother transmitting it to
her offspring of both sexes. We thus reFresent the male as M.M.F. forming one type of gamete M, and the female as MmF forming twoo
types of gamete M.F. and mF. Goldschmidt has elaborated a system of numerical symbols to denote the efficiency of the M and the F factors in different races of Lymantria, so that the actual degree of intersexuality produced in a given cross is predictable thereby. The accompanying scheme which is a simplified representation of the essential ideas shews how by assigning arbitrary numerical values to M and F we can account for the presence of intersexuial females in the F., and of a cross between two races giving intersexual males in the F2 of the reciprocal mating. The actual system which Goldschmidt has developed accounts for the results of matings based on a variety of crosses involving manv thousands of progeny.
Thus from the genetical point of view as well as from that of the systematic biologist the sexes are not to be regarded as clean cut alternatives and Goldschmidt has been able to carry his investigations into fields which suggest a solution of the apparent conflict between the concept of the XY. mechanism and the existence of sex reversal as a normal phenomenoni in nature. Of this a number of well authenticated instances are known such as the life-histories of Bonellia and Crepidula, as also "parasitic castration" such as occurs in Crabs attacked by Saceulina.
Bonellia is a worm found in the Mediterranean. It is of special interest in that it develops the most extreme form of sex dimorphism which is encountered in the animal kingdom. The female has a barrelshaped body with an elongated tapering proboscis bifurcating at its distal extremitv. Thte male is a minute organism whose internal organs are entirely degenerate with the exception of those concerned with reproduction; and it spends its life as a parasite in the execretory

822
Race A.

82IGRN1CS REVIWEW.
Race B.

MaLe
M3M3F4
4Gt~ M3

x Female
M3m F4
M3 4}
MMm F4

MaLe x Ferinute
M2M2F3 M2m F3
M F3

IM3M3F4
Mate (MI>F)

M3 "%F4

M2r tF3

INM2M F3

Female (M TF) Femate(M< F) Ma!e (M>FJ

M3m F3
Int5exual
Fem-FteMF

Mate~~~~~~~~~~~MQ(Q
(M>F)

'. 'L''' F' I. ' ' '5 'f

F. female

( n>F)e.

(M<F)

(M F)

DIAGRAM.
Scheme to illustrate the appearance of intersexual females in the
F, and intersexual males F2 of reciprocal cross of two races whose
sex factors differ in efficiency as denoted by arbitrary numerical symbol.

THE EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF SEX.

823

organs of the female. Now Baltzer (1914) has shewn that in Bonellia sex is mainly determined by an accident in position. The eggs hatch out in the usual way among marine worms as free swimming larvae. When metamorphosis occurs they sink to the bottom. If by-chance an individual settles on the proboscis of a mature female, it develops into a male. If it settles on the sea floor it becomes after a short indifferent
period a female. If larvae which have fastened themselves to the proboscis of a mature female are detached', forms which are intersexual, i.e., partake of the characteristics of both sexes are produced; the degree of intersexuality being dependent upon the length of time the larvae have been allowed to remain upon the proboscis. The efficacy of purely external stimuli to influence sex determination independently of the XX. XY. mechanism is again seen in the life history of the slipper limpet which has been introduced to our shores from America
and has become a plague to oyster fisheries in some districts. Crepidula lives gregaiously in chains. The free swimming young settle on
older individuals and grow up when they settle. Each animal passes through a male phase producing spermatozoa, a hermaphrodite phase producing bcth sperm and ova, and finally a female phase producing ova only. Gould (1919) found that the male phase only occurs in species of Crepidula (C. plana) when an individual settles in propinquity to a larger (female) individual: if isolated it passes directly into the female phase. A third example of the potency of environic factors in sex determination is afforded by the phenomenon of 'parasitic castration' in Crabs which has long been known and has been studied in some detail by the late Geoffrey Smith (1912) and others. Crabs and their allies are frequently parasitised by a group of parasties which are
degenerate relatives of the barnacles. One of the commonest, Sacculina, gives rise to a large gall in the abdomen of the crab and by its presence evokes a remarkable series of changes in its host. In both
sexes the reproductive organs are destroyed; but whereas no other
sexual changes follow the destruction of the ovary in the female,
parasitised males gradually approximate more and more to the female conditions: their pincers grow smaller, the abdomen broader, the
swimmerets larger and more feathery. Generally the host dies as the result of infection. But in a few cases the Sacculina succumbs first. In that case the animal recovers and regenerates its gonads: if originally females, a new ovary appears; if partially modified males they regener-
ate a new testis. But those animals which have assumed the external
features of the female upon recovery will regenerate a gonad in which
both ova and sperms are present. Thus it is clear that the presence of the parasite is efficacious in producing a measure of sex reversal. The
two types of sexuality are not clear cut alternatives. The genetical
factors for both sexes are inherent in each individual though one sex is
heterogametic for one type of factors. Whatever be the mechanism by which th'etwo types of factors operate the balance between them would
appear to be adjusted with such nicety that in certain cases it may be easilv reversed. A case of sex-reversal possibly analogous is at present
being studied by Crew. in a fowl Vrhich laid normal eggs but later
developed all the male secondary sexual characters and at death was
found to possess typical male internal genital organs, mature testes

824 EUGENICS RUVIIRW.
and in addition a large ovarian tumour, the female ducts having
disappeared. When Doncaster's 'Determination of Sex' appeared it seemed
difficult to reconcile the existence of sex reversal in nature with the XY. concept. The difficulty is more apparent than real since the manifestation of any genetical factor depends onl an appropriate external and internal environment and the interaction of both types of factors, the genetic and the environmental, has been demonstrated in the recent work of Crew (1921) which may well become a classic in the history of the sex problem. In Frogs there is reason to believe that the male is the heterozygous sex (Ff) as in Drosophila. There occur not infrequently among Frogs and Toads individuals shewing transition stages from one type of reproductive apparatus to that of the alternative sex. Crew was able to obtain individuals shewing the last stage of transition from the female to the male condition and found that-
on mating a transformed male with a normal female the entire pregeny, amounting to over seven. hundred, was exclusively female. Now if,
as is natural to suppose, the transformed male had the genetical constitution of the female sex (FF), it would produce spermatozoa all of which would carry the F factor. Mated with a normal female producing eggs of the same type (F) it could only produce offspring of the constitution (FF) ordinarily associated with the female sex.
From his studies on intersexuality in Moths Goldschmidt has suggested an hypothesis of the mechanism of sex determination which affords free scope for the interaction of genetical and extrinsic influences . While somewhat speculative it deserves sympathetic consideration as a working hypothesis for exploration of fresh data. Hermaphroditism (intersexuality) and sex reversal occujr in a variety of manifestations in Nature. There is the seasonal bisexuality or sex reversal of the slipper limpet and the lamprey, the permanent bisexualityofflatworms ,gasteropods, and many annelids, and finally the not unfrequent mutant type
,among birds and insects described under the term bilateral gynadromorphism, i.e., individuals with one set of gonads and sexual character on one side of the body, and the alternate characters on the other side. In Drosophila, at least, there is genetical evidence that this pheno-
menon is a derivative of the female condition associated with the elimination of one X. chromosome on the 'male' side of the body. The same explanation might be extended to birds, where the secondary sexual characters are controlled by the gonads, if a reservation is made to the effect that the XX. and XO. cells of the body have a 'differential' threshold value for the particular stimulus which the respective gonads supply. Goldschmidt's moth intersexes do not however comewithin any of the categories hitherto enumerated. Their special feature of interest is that they present a mosaic of sex characters, v
mosaic which at first seems to have been put together in a quite haphazard manner. But a closer scrutiny led Goldschmidt to the im-
portant conclusion that such is not the case. The sexual characteristic of any bcdily organ showing sex difference in Lymantria displays an intelligible relation to the time, at which it made its appearance in development. A relation exists between different parts of the mosaic
and that relation is a time function.

THE E2XPRIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF SEX.

825

In moths the difference between the sexes is very marked not mnerely in the sexual organs and copulatory devices but in the shape, ,size and colour of the bodv, the feathering of the antennae, the structure of the legs and a host of other details. Intersexuality is not seen in An equally intermediate condition of sex differentiation of the various features of organisation: the intersexual animal is a 'mosaic' of organs shewing different determination in regards to sexuality. Thus females with a low grade intersexuality show only the feelers modified, these organs being of the male (feathered) tpye. A higher grade of trans;formation would be exemplified by a female in which the colour of the wings as well as the feathering of the antennae is of the male variety. A still more advanced grade would be illustrated by an individual having male antennae, wings and copulatory organs, but female gonads (ovaries). An even more advanced stage is seen when the size of the abdomen and the hair of that region take on the male characters. Only when all these changes have been accomplished do we find individuals in which the primary distinction-the transformation of an ovary to a testis has been accomplished, so that sex reversal is complete.
"If we now," states Goldschmidt, "trv to formulate a rulewhich governs this strange seriation . . . we find the most important fact that this series is the inverse of the order of differentiation of the organs in development. The last organs to differentiate in the pupa and the first to be intersexual are the branching of the antennae and the colouration of the wings. The first imaginal organ differentiated and the last in the series to be changed towards the other sex is the sex gland. And if we apply this law even to the parts of a single organ like the copulatory organ we find it also to apply. . . Goldschmidt infers that the sexual character of any particular organ ,depends upon whether one or the other type of sex determining reaction is effectively in the ascendant at the time when the organ arises in development. He thus interprets the mosaic character of his intersexes by the assumption that the amount of sex determining substances produced in virtue of the presence -of the corresponding sex factors is not constant throughout life: and that at some period one type is in excess while at a late date the other type is in excess. In the male there are two M factors and the male determining reactions are effectively ascendant till after the period of development is completed. In the female there is one M factor and the male determining reactions are effectively in the ascendant only at some point later than that at which development is normally completed. This is illustrated in a graphical manner by the accompanying purely hypothetical-curves, which also shew how intersexuality (M, M2, M ) and complete sex reversal (M) take place when 'strong' M factors are super-added to a 'weak' F factor. In the extreme case a single M factor of a high 'strength' is sufficient to produce an excess of male determining substance throughout the entire period of sexual differentiation. This hypothesis besides giving an account of the intricate and extraordinary sexual phenomena in Lymantria is able to assist us in bringing-, into line the cases in which genetic on the one hand and environic factors on the other appear to be significant in the determination of the sex of the individual. Goldschmidt 's hypothesis postulates

826 ItUGUNICS UVIIRW.
some point in the life of the individual at which the curves for the pro-
duction of male determining and female determining substances inter-
sect. This point in general lies beyond the stage at which differentia-: tion occurs. Such being the case, we should anticipate the possibility of a partial or complete reversal of sex if by environic influences thegrowth rate could be changed so that the point of intersection occurred during Gr before the period of differentiation. Goldschmidt has actually so far verified this inference as to produce in pure strains of Lymantria intersexes through rearing the embryos at a very low temperature.
Goldschmidt 's hypothesis proviides a satisfactory account of
certain types of intersexuality, natural and experimental, among,
E~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Qi

co
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Cr

Tme at dpvelopment
E'tO. 1.

(Repbryodkuicneddpefrrmoimssi"oNna).ture,"

Vertebrates, if in addition the further assumption be added to indicate that in these animals the sex hormone is localised early in the gonad.. Two examples from familiar domestic animals may here be cited, namely the so-called 'free-martin' of cattle twins, and the comparatively frequent occurrence of 'hermaphrodites' in goats and pigs.
In cattle twins may occur which are both males or both females, but if bisexed, one is always a normal male and the other invariably a sterile individual, known to the stock-breeder as a 'free-martin' and exhibiting all grades of transition from maleness to femaleness (Will ier, 1921). Such twins have been shewn by Lillie to be produced from separate ova, as inferred by the invariable accompaniment of two corpora lutea; Lillie has called attention to the fact that M he-eas the
foetal envelopes cohere as in other ruminants, in the specIal case of
cattle twins the allantoic blood vessels also unite, so that there is a

THE EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF SEX.

827

common foetal circulation: furthermore the testis in the male is differentiated at an earlier stage than the ovary, so that on the hypothesis of a male-differentiating secretion of the testis, the zygotically female co-twin would be exposed to its action before the ovarian mechanism came into operation. This is entirely in agreement with the results of Minoura's (1921) experiments on grafting pieces of gonad of the alternate sex on to the embryonic membranes of the hen 's egg at about the middle of the normal period of incubation, with the production, it is claimed, of individuals shewing somewhat intersexual characteristics, especially in the persistence of both types of sex ducts.
More recently a study of intersexuality in various domestic animals (pigs, oxen, sheep) especially in goats by Crew fas suggested an explanation for the peculiar type of pseudo-hermaphroditism which is specially characteristic of mammals and probably comprises most of the recorded cases in the human species. Crew finds that in all the animals he has examined testes are present but the internal and external genital
apparatus shew a variety of grades between wholly bisexual ducts and female genitalia on the one hand, and a condition externally little removed from that of the typical male on the other. -Internally, both oviducts and vasa defferentia are present, but these may be assoCiated externally with a typical clitoris, a clitoris of distinctly peniform appearance of rather large dimensions, or a penis imperfectly canaliculised; and while associated with the more typically female form of the phallus the vaginal orifice is conspicuous, with the more typically male form it may be completely occluded, though the fully developed internal ducts of the female sex are present. Crew suggests in extension of the hypothesis of internal secretion that in the exhibition of the sex hormone in Mammals there are two stages between which the maturation of the germ cells is normally intercalated, and that these pseudohermaphrodites which may be regarded by the stockbreeder as females until they develop at puberty the malt secondary sexual characteristics are in reality examples of a delayed sex differentiation, due to the absence of sufficient testicular secretion to inhibit the development of the Mullerian ducts.
The theory that internal secretion furnishes the mechanism of sex differentiation has been inspired bv physiological researches extended
over more than two centuries in connection with the special problem of those sexual characters which in Vertebrates develop at the time the gonads assume functional activity. While the effects of gonadectomy
in Mammals and Birds have been known for manv years, there has of late been considerable progress in this connection and in concluding this review some attention is due to this aspect of sex reversal.
The work of Steinach, Lipschutz, Sand, Moore and others upon Mammals has definitely associated the effects bf castration and implantation of gonad tissue with the 'interstitial' or epithelial elements of the testis and ovary, and the implantation of gonads of the alternative sex into gonadectomised individuals has been successfully accomplished with consequences which entail a practically complete reversal of the ncormal secondary sexual structures and behaviour. In Birds where the development of male characters follows gonadectomy, it would appear that the study is more involved in the female,

328 ERUGE4NICS R}£VIEW.
and the genetical factors are not as yet clearly analysed. The secondary sex characters of the fowl include the larger head furnishings and spurs of the male, the 'cocky' and 'henny' tvpe of neck, hackle and saddle and tail feathers, and the brighter plumage of the male in certain breeds (e.g., Game varieties, Silver Dorkings and Salmon Faverolles). In certain breeds, however, there are strains of henny
feathered males and castration of these males results in cocky feathering
in either sex. In Dorkings and Houdans the spur is present in both sexes. While the single comb which is so much larger in the male of some breeds (e.g. Rhode Island Red or Light Sussex) is distinguished from that of the female mainly by its turgidity in others (e.g., Minorcas, Leghorns, and Anconas). There is thus urgent need for genetical
analysis and for a comparative study of the effects of castration in different varieties. This might shed light on the conflicting testimony of recent workers such as Gocdale and Zaradowsky. On the phvsiological side a remarkable body of as yet unpublished evidence has been obtained at the Animal Breeding Research Department by Crew, who has collected from poultry keepers some fifty instances of
'sex-reversal' and has been able to watch the slow transition of the female to the male secondary characters during the course of ovarian disease, observing in this way facts which cannot be elucidated by the sudden removal of the gonad by experimental treatment. Working with Crew's material Miss H. B. Fell finds that most cases of this kind at least shew incipient formation of seminiferous tubules. It appears that whilst any ovarian tissue remains the plumage ecntinues to be of the 'henny' type. The hen, which usually is of a highly fecund type in such cases of ovarian disease, ceases to lay and moults. It is then noticed that the conLb is beeoming larger and (or) firmly erect. The head furnishings assume the male appearance. The spurs in some cases grow steadily, in others thev do not. The birds then become sexually indifferent. On examination it is found that the ovary is in the process of atrophy, removal by tumour growth, or the seat of an extensive haemorrhage. The ovarian tissue is gradually removed and with this the hen becomes more and more cocky in aspect and conduct. Should she live long enough ovarian tissue com-
pletely disappears, and at the next moult which will be very prolonged and irregular the new plumage will be that of the male of the breed to
which she belongs. The hen now crows lustily and carries herself like ,a cock. Her spurs become full grown. If, however, she belongs to such a breed as the Barred Plymouth Rock in which the barring is sexually differentiated, the feathers become cocky in structure, but retain the barring of the female type. Experimental ovariotomy, on the other hand, (Goodale, Pezard) does not result in the assumption of the male type of comb, although the plumage changes to the male type. This operation necessarily involves profound vaso-motor changes. And since ovarian disease is associated with increased vascularitv of the ovary, there is a profound physiological difference between the two cases, suggesting that the mechanism activating the differentiation of the plumage on the one hand and the head furnishings (and possibly spurs) on the other is not the same. Indeed, a possibility emerging from Crew's work is that the condition of the head furnishings is

THE EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF SERX.

829

Telated to the vascularity of the gonad, a possibility fully consonant with the vaso-motor changes of the comb and wattles during the moulting season and in the broody condition. This suggestion strikes a
note of warning. It is indeed imperative to recognise that the hypo-
thesis of internal secretion whether in relation to primary or secondary
sexual differences is at present on its trial, for no investigation has conclusively produced by administration of the extracts made from the gonads of anv animal structural changes complementary to the disturbances produced by gonadectomy, or comparable in any way to the effects of transplantation of ovarian and testicular tissue. Until this
-has been accomplished it can only be legitimately concluded that the gonads influence the metabolic processes involved int sexual differentia-
tion-primarv or secondary-whether this influence is of an endocrine
nature no crucial data at present exist to decide. At best we can say it
is a likely hypothesis and no one can seriously denv that at present it *fulfils one of the most important uses of a scientific hypothesis, inas-
much as it is a potent instrument for the discovery of new truth. In conclusion it may be well to sum up the factors which in the
light of modern experimental enquiry may intervene to override the maintenance of a one-to-one sex ratio by the normal operation of repeated homozygous and heterozygous matings provided by the XY. mechanism. These are (1) Recessive sex-linked lethal or sub-lethal factors which when present in the heterogametic sex must inevitably prevent its survival or maturity ;* (2) In cases where the female is the
.heterozygous sex environic factors may influence the chance of the X. or Y. chromosome remaining in the egg or passing out to the polar body (as shewn by Seiler in moths). (3) External conditions resulting in metabolic disturbances which inhibit the operation of one or other type of sex factor, as shewn in the work of Goldschmidt on Lymantria ,and possibly that of Baltzer on Bonellia. (4) Non-disjunction of the X. chromosome in frogs. To these must be added two further possibilities, namely (i) differential viability between the male producing .and female producing gametes, a not unlikely factor in view of certain evidence (e.g., the work of Danforth) indicating that the variability of -the gamete depends to some extent upon their genetic constitution; .(ii) differential activity of the male and female producing sperm in response to egg secretion as suggested by Zeleny 's statistics relating to sperm dimorphism. The last suggestion is possibly applicable to the
experiments of Hertwig who found that the sex ratio might be pro.foundly disturbed by delaying the fertilisation of the egg.

*See Haldane, Jour. Genet. 1922.

