THE PSYCHOLOGY OF PARENTHOOD
By DR. C. W. SALEEBY, F.R.S.E.
THE deeds of man proceed from certain radical elements of his nature, some evidently noble, others, when looked at askew, apparently ignoble. These elements are classed as instinctive. We are less intelligent than we think. Reason may occupy the throne, but the foundations upon which that throne is based are not of her making. To change the image, reason is the pilot, not the gale or the engine. She does not determine the goal, but only the course to that goal. We are what our nature makes us: our likes and our dislikes determine our acts, and we are guided to our self-determined ends by means of our intelligence. More often, indeed, we use our intelligence merely to justify to ourselves the likes and dislikes, the action and the inaction, which our instinctive tendencies have determined.
Many of our natural instincts, impulses and emotions bear only remotely upon the eugenic ideal: as, for instance, the instinct of flight and the emotion of fear, the instinct of curiosity and the emotion of wonder, the instinct of pugnacity and the emotion of anger. Certain others, however, are not merely radical and permanent parts of our nature, but determine human existence, the greater part of its failures and successes, its folly and wisdom, its history and its destiny. Two of these-the parental and racial instincts-I desire to consider in the present paper; and also, very briefly, a supposed third, the filial instinct. I am inclined to question whether such a specific entity as the filial instinct exists at all; it is rather, I believe, a product, by transmutation, of the parental instinct, which, in its various forms and potencies and through the tender emotion which is its counterpart in the affective realm of our natures, is the noblest, finest and most promising ingredient of our constitution.

38 C. W. Sateeby:
Instinct and Emotion.-We must be sure, in the first place, that we have a sound idea of what we mean by the word " instinct." It is absurd, for instance, to speak of " acquiring a political instinct "-or any other. That is the most erroneous possible use of the word. An instinct is eminently something which cannot be " acquired "; it is native if anything is native; as native as the nose or the backbone. Instincts may be developed or repressed: it is the great mark of man that in him they may even be transmuted-but acquired never.
When we come to examine the laws of activity we find that, on the application of certain kinds of stimulus, there are certain very definite responses, and these we call instinctive. If the arm or the leg of a sleeper be stroked or touched, or a cold breath of air blows thereon, it will be withdrawn, and such withdrawal is what we call a reflex action. Now, an instinctive action, as Herbert Spencer saw long ago, is a " complex reflex action." It differs from a simple reflex, a mere twitch, such as winking, but it is a complicated, and possibly prolonged, action, which is, at bottom, of the nature of a reflex. One may instance the instinct of flight, which is correlated with fear. In crossing the street we hear " toot, toot," and we run. We do not ratiocinate, we run. All the primary instincts of mankind act similarly. Take, for contrast, the instinct of curiosity. Consider a child watching a mechanical toy: the impulse of this instinct of curiosity is such that he goes to the thing and examines it. By means of the transmutation, which it is the prerogative of man to effect, such an instinct works out into a lifetime devoted to the study of Nature. There is an unbroken sequence from the interest in the unknown which we see in a kitten or a child up to that which triumphs in a Newton or a Darwin.
Thus we begin to learn that human nature is largely a collection of instincts, more or less correlated; and that at bottom we act on our instincts-in accordance with certain innate predilections, likings and dislikings, with which we were born, and which we have inherited from our ancestors. Indissolubly associated therewith is what we call emotion. For instance, in the exercise of the instinct of curiosity we feel a certain emotion, which we call wonder. There is an ignoble wonder and there is a noble

PIYCHOLOGY OF PAkVNtt0o6D
wonder: but whether it be an astronomer watching the stars, or the crowd at a cinematograph show, there exists association between the emotion of wonder and the instinct of curiosity. Dr. McDougall, of Oxford, elaborated some few years ago, and has now established,' an extremely important theory of the relation between instinct and emotion. He has shown that our emotions are correlated with our instincts; that the emotion is the inward or subjective side of the working of the instinct. Thus an instinct is more than a " complex reflex action"; it is more than merely that, on hearing something or seeing something, certain muscles are thrown into action, because along with the action there is emotion, and this is a natural and necessary correlation. We should do well to carry about with us, as part of our mental furniture, this idea of the correlation between instinct and emotion.
Now, if it be true that man is not primarily a rational animal, if he be rather, au fond, a bundle, an assemblage, an organism of instincts, it behoves us to recognise in ourselves and in others the primary instincts, because from them flows all that goes to make up human nature, whether it be good or evil. Amongst these, certainly, is the parental instinct.
The Parental Instinct.-Let us first consider its development in the individual, for this bears on the question when to begin eugenic education. We find it very early indeed. It is commonly asserted that the doll instinct is the precursor, the infantile and childish form, of the parental instinct. Some psychologists assure us that this is wrong, that a small child will be just as content to play with anything else as with a doll, that the child gets fond of its possession, and that what we are really witnessing is the instinct of acquisitiveness. The rest may reason and welcome, but we who are fathers know. You have only to watch a child to learn that it very soon differentiates its doll, or rather, the shapeless mass it calls its doll, from other things. Try with your own children and see if you can get them to like anything else as well as they like a doll. They will not. There are few settled questions, but if there is anything on earth of which a man may be sure it is that the parental instinct and its asso-
Social Psychology, by W. McDougall, M.A., M.B. (Methuen, igo8.)

40 C. W. Saleeby:
ciated emotion may be unmistakably displayed as the masterpassion in a child who is not yet two years old. In a case where the possibility of imitation was excluded I have seen a little girl adore a small baby, stroke its hands, whisper quasi-maternal sweet nothings to it-" mother it," in short-as plainly as I have seen the sun at noon: and I have no reason to suppose, though that little girl was my own, that this phenomenon was unique!
Various interesting questions arise. For instance, can we discern in early childhood a difference between the two sexes ? Psychology inclines to the view that small children are of neither sex. Of course, if we encourage-not to say create-differences, we may mislead ourselves. But in the adult, at any rate, we discern a marked difference between the sexes, for the parental instinct is much less potent in men than in women. Dr. McDougall supposes that men have acquired the paternal instinct by inheritance from women-from their mothers. We know that characters native in one sex may be transmitted to the other: indeed, there are some cases where they are transmitted only to the other. But it may also be fairly argued that a society in which there was some development of the paternal instinct, in which the father's love and care came to help the mother'swhich I take to be the essence of marriage-would have superior survival value, and would triumph in the inter-societary struggle for existence. Thus the paternal instinct would grow stronger and stronger with time.
Some writers, by the way, have denied that the paternal instinct exists at all. What looks like it, they say, is mere imitation. Such a contention is hardly worth refuting. The paternal instinct may be seen amongst some fishes, many birds, many mammals; amongst the most fierce of existing men, such as the headhunters of Borneo, and amongst the highest types of the highest races to-day. Doubtless there are many men in whom it is weak or absent-men who think of children as brats. On the assumption, warranted by everything we know of instincts, that they are markedly hereditary, I do not hesitate to affirm that upon such men, whether " able " or not, the supreme responsibility of parenthood ought not, in the general interest, to fall.
Other Kindred Instincts.-The parental instinct is connected

PSYCHOLOGY OF PARENTHOOD

41

subtly with the racial instinct; and it is undisputed that, except in utterly degraded persons, the object of the feelings which are associated with the racial instinct becomes the object of the feelings which are associated with the parental instinct. The object of the emotion of sex becomes also the object of tender emotion. Thus " love," in its lower sense, becomes exalted by Love in the noble sense.
There is also in us an instinct of pugnacity, which especially appears when the working of any other instinct is thwarted. We know that the parental instinct when thwarted-as in the tigress robbed of her whelps-shows itself in pugnacity-even in the female, which commonly has no pugnacity; and in the emotion of anger. It is a reasonable supposition that the fine anger, the passion for justice, the passion against, say, slavery, or cruelty to children-that these indignations which move the world are at bottom traceable to the workings of the thwarted parental instinct. When we have tender emotion towards a child, or towards an animal, whatever it be, this is really the subjective side of the working of the parental instinct. Now, tender emotion is what has made and makes everything that is good in the individual, and in human society. It is the basis of all morality -all morality that is real morality,-everything that permits us to hold up our heads at all, or to hope for the future of the race. That is why the study of the parental instinct, its correlate or source, is as important and serious as any that can be imagined.
This instinct and its emotion are amongst the most highly variable, I believe, of human characters. One man, even one woman, is much more sympathetic than another. These differences are unquestionably native and transmissible. The Mendelians have lately shown, by some observations not yet published, that there is in the hen a definite brooding instinct. Some hens will sit upon their eggs, others will not. This brooding instinct is a Mendelian unit, of the kind called a dominant, and is transmitted to the chickens according to the Mendelian ratio. To my mind these are immensely suggestive observations. Amongst ourselves there are persons in whom the parental instinct and the tender emotion are so slight as practically to be non-existent. And as in the hen it is possible to be female and

C. WV. Sateeby:
have no brooding instinct, so, perhaps, it is possible that a woman may be naturally without the parental instinct. It is certain that, in many cases, the instinct may be so weakly that wrong methods of education may practically extirpate it.
The Transmutation of Instinct.-The last thing I mean by the transmutation of instinct is that by any political alchemy it is possible-to quote Herbert Spencer's celebrated aphorism,-to get golden conduct out of leaden instincts. But it is the mark of man, the intelligent being, that in him the instincts are plastic, and even capable of amazing transmutations. In the lower animals there is instinct, but that instinct is an almost completely fixed, rigid, final thing. In ourselves, there is a limitless capacity for the development, the humanisation of instinct along many lines, as when the primitive infantile curiosity works out into the speculations of a thinker. In other words, we are educable, the lower animals are not, or only within very narrow limits.
Yet in one respect the lower animals have the advantage over us. Their instincts are often perfect. You cannot teach the cat anything about how to look after a kitten; but instincts amongst ourselves, for instance, though not less numerous or potent, are not perfected, not sharp-cut. In the cat there is no need for education, in woman there is eminent need for it. Indeed it is the lack of education that is largely responsible for our large infant mortality. Not that woman is inferior to the cat, but that, being not instinctive but intelligent, she requires education in motherhood.
Human instincts in general are capable of modification; sometimes they may take bizarre forms, and so we find that there are people, without children of their own, more commonly women, who will have twenty cats in the house and look after them, or who will devote their whole lives to the cause of the rat or the rabbit, or whatever it may be, while the children of men are dying around them. These things are indications of the parental instinct centred on unworthy objects. It is a common thing to laugh at these aberrations: thoughtlessly, as it seems to some of us. While orphans are to be found, we should do better if we tried to bring together the woman who needs to " mother" and the child who needs to be " mothered."

PSYCHOLOGY OF PARENTHOOD

43

It is quite evident that the parental instinct is a thing pre-
eminently indispensable for mankind, because man is born the
most helpless and remains longest the most helpless of all living things, the most in need of parental care. It is interesting to find that its development increases as we approach man. The parental instinct is stronger in the higher apes than in any lower form of life. It is stronger still in ourselves. The increase of the allied emotion of tenderness is strictly correlated with this increase of helplessness in point both of intensity and duration, as life ascends along the main line. Such, at any rate, is the generalisation to which I am willing to commit myself.
The Parental Instinct and Eugenics.-All this, it will be said,
may be true, but if we cannot make or acquire the parental instinct, has the knowledge of it any relation to practice ? I answer, it is eminently practical. For this priceless possession, this parental instinct and tenderness, is inheritable. We know by observation amongst ourselves that hardness and tenderness are to be found running through families, are things which are transmissible. Let us, then, make parenthood the most responsible, the most deliberate, the most self-conscious thing in life, so that there should be children born to those who love children, and only to those who love children, to those who have the
parental instinct strongly developed, and who will, on the average, transmit a high measure of it to their offspring. In a generation bred on these principles, a generation consisting only of babies who were loved before they were born, there would be a proportion of sympathy, of tender feeling, and of all those great, abstract, world-creating passions which are evolved from the tender emotion, such as no age hitherto has seen. The parental instinct, often ignored altogether by philosophers and psychologists, is the germ of everything that is good in human nature, of everything that makes it worth while for us to go on living at all. Thus our duty is to increase it to the utmost of our power.
The Racial Instinct.-Many thoughtful observers are coming to believe that one of the greatest advances of the near future will be the recognition that education must more directly include preparation for the supreme civic duty of parenthood. This presupposes some suitable instruction regarding those functions of

44 C. W. Sateeby :
the body which exist primarily for parenthood; though the fact is conventionally ignored. The exercise of these functions primarily depends on the instinct which, as I would suggest, it is not only convenient but illuminating to call racial: and this racial instinct should be represented to the possessor, not as something the satisfaction of which is an end of itself-but as weighted with a great responsibility to the race. Our young people must be trained to see that it is for man the self-conscious, made with " such large discourse, looking before and after," to estimate and deal with his instincts in terms of their purpose, as no creature but man can do. They must learn, and we must teach them, to recognise in the racial instinct no end, but means existing for the highest of ends-the continuance and ultimate
elevation of the life of mankind. One object of the Eugenics Education Society is to secure
by the co-operation of parents that so soon as the knowledge of new powers is acquired by young people, these shall be directly linked with the idea of responsibility and duty of a high order. Experience shows that too often information is sought from most undesirable sources, which ignore or despise the one truth that alone can ennoble the whole subject,-that these instincts and functions are a sacred trust for the life that is to come after us. To the eugenic education of girls, only a false and disastrous prudery, not to be confused with modesty, offers any great obstacles. The idea of motherhood is essentially natural to the normal girl and the civilisation in which the girls ceased to regard motherhood as an ideal would be assuredly doomed. The higher education of girls can only be lower, not higher, if it does not serve the future Mother, both by teaching her how to care for and guard her body, which is the temple of her future life on earth, and how afterwards to impart the same teaching to her
children. The "Filial Instinct."-Ever careful of the race, of which
the individual would seem in her eyes to be little more than an organ, Nature determines the strength and direction of our instincts, and of the feelings associated with them, in due proportion to their survival-value. The "filial instinct" we should thus expect to find but feeble, in comparison with some

PSYCHOLOGY OF PARENTHOOD

45

others, for it is retrospective in the main, thus constituting an apparent exception to Nature's forward gaze. That dedication of present to future life which we find displayed throughout the whole organic world makes comprehensible the very late and feeble development of this so-called instinct and its accompanying emotion. Herbert Spencer long ago pointed out that one of the most conspicuous needs of society to-day, and one of the most to be desired advances in the future, was a great increase of filial emotion, leading to due care for aged parents, care such as, at its best, can scarcely be more than a pale shadow of that which, under the influence of the parental instinct, they bestowed upon their helpless children. I assent with all my heart to the Spencerian dictum: as I deplore that lack of respect for the elderly which is one of the least pleasing products of modern " education ": and it seems to me that the capital contention for which this paper is a plea bears directly upon the question. I have no doubt that the so-called " filial instinct," a distinctively human trait, and none too common or powerful even amongst the highest races of men, is a product of the parental instinct, an instance of that evolution and transmutation of instinct which is our great characteristic. We care for our aged and helpless parents-and thus for the elderly in general-under the influence of that same tender emotion which urges us to care for our helpless children and childhood in general. I cannot doubt that, in general, the parents who love their children are the likeliest to have children who will love them: not only because of the lovecreating power of love, but also because the parental and filial instincts are really one, and the children of those in whom the one is strong will be more likely to display the latter, since like tends to beget like.
Thus whilst we may approve or disapprove of Old Age Pensions and similar schemes, or may urge, perhaps, that the expenditure of money upon childhood would produce greater results per unit of expenditure, I should urge the essentially eugenic argument that the key to all social and moral problems is human nature; that, in the matter under discussion, the true course is to enhance the parental instinct, of which the filial instinct is simply a retrospective form; and that our principle

46 C. W. Saleeby:
therefore must be identical with that to which we were led by other lines,-the making of parenthood the most responsible, deliberate, provident thing in life: so that, as I have already said, children shall be born only to those who desire and love them, to those in whom the parental instinct and the tender emotion predominate and in whose children we may justly expect to find the same predominance repeated.
It may be suggested that all the above is but remotely eugenic: certainly I should have thought so when I began eugenic work. But our aim of bettering human nature must be achieved by human nature, and we must make ourselves acquainted with the facts of our instrument. That is why I have here departed somewhat from the ordinary track of eugenic discussion.
One last word: There is in our midst a political party-and that perhaps the nearest to the thinking party of the future and one's dreams-which aids and abets the many contemporary tendencies towards the abolition of parental responsibility. The State is to clothe and feed and educate; the mother, perhaps, is to remain responsible, but the father no longer. It is to me inconceivable that progress can be on these lines: that we shall advance by divesting of responsibility that which, as I hold, should be the most responsible of all acts. Our human lawgivers must reckon with Nature's decrees. In demanding that the responsibility of parenthood which she exacts of our humbler allies shall be made transcendent in man, the highest responsibility of his life, we may command Nature by the only possible method, namely, by obeying her. This is the open road, from which the feet of Eugenics must not stray.
Knowledge, wisdom, truth, can be used or abused. Fact is neither good nor evil; dynamite may entomb or untomb. All wisdom, of whatever order, is ultimately justified of her children: and the human capacity to humanise parenthood by making it provident and designed will yet be justified in the children of the generations that are to be.

