THE MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE.'
By DR. T. SIMON.
Translated from the French by DR. W. C. SULLIVAN.
IN the ordinary course how do we gauge anyone's intelligence? We receive a first impression of- the individual's general
demeanour, of the aspect of his physiognomy, of the vivacity of
his look, of the mobility of his features. We take in all these elements at a glance. We feel them as a single general impression. Then, when we wish to find a more solid basis for our opinion, we are no longer content with this external view; we seek to reach what lies behind the facade; and to do this, we get into conversation. To make a person talk is the best way that has yet been found for ascertaining what he has in his mind. In conversation, the sound of our interlocutor's voice, the flexibility of its intonation, the fineness of its shades, are all elements that tend to confirm or weaken the opinion we may first have formed. And then the degree of attention that he gives us, for we are always sure that our remarks are worth listening to; his quickness to grasp our meaning, saving us from any need to present, under simpler forms, the idea we wish to convey or to illustrate it by concrete examples; his replies, which anticipate what we were going to say, or which sum up a complex question in a few vivid words-by such various details as these we are able in the course of conversation, to estimate the intelligence of the speaker.
But it is obvious how entirely subjective such a mode of procedure must be, to what an extent it is based on fugitive impressions. As a matter of fact, what usually happens is that we form in this way at the start a very positive and decided opinion; we say, this is a man of average intelligence, or this is a man of superior intelligence, and then, at the first objection
1 Delivered at a meeting of the Eugenics Education Society held by kind permission of the Royal Society, at Burlington House, April i8th, I914.

29:2 EUGENICS REVIEW.
that is raised, we modify our judgment, and as we pursue our examination further, we discover proofs of stupidity in the man whom we judged highly intelligent because he seemed to agree with all our opinions, or we find indications of quickness of wit in one whom we had set down as hopelessly dull.
Nor is this the only defect of the ordinary method: the opinion based on it is strictly personal to the individual who formulates it; it requires in him that aptitude which we characterise as the art of understanding men, and which consists doubtless in knowing how to give its proper value to each of the several elements which we have touched on. Further, if we can estimate the intelligence of an adult after this fashionbecause we have a schematic conception of what an adult is and how he ought to acquit himself in an ordinary conversationwe have nothing of the sort in the case of a child, we have no fixed points to guide us in judging of intelligence during that period of continual evolution.
Without, therefore, questioning in the least the value of a clinical examination, one principal merit of which is its admirable flexibility, it has been impossible not to feel the need of substituting a purer method for the ordinary method which we have just criticised. From the theoretical point of view, the question had long been urgent. It was becoming no less so from a practical point of view in France at the time when Binet specially directed his activity to its solution, for in I9o6 the Ministry of Public Instruction had just appointed a commission to inquire into the measures proper to be taken in the education of abnormal children-of those children who are designated in England by the term " feeble-minded "-and as a first step it was necessary to be able to recognise them.
It was to such preoccupations as these that the metric scale
of intelligence owed its origin. Consonant with that origin, it is applicable above all, and almost exclusively to children and to defectives, but it embodies at the same time a general principle of method which admits of further development -in measuring intelligence.
A glance at the accompanying table will show you the brief enumeration of the tests which we use, 62 in number, these tests

THE MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE.

293

being for the most part arranged in groups of 5, each group
under the rubric of a given age.
3 months.-Follow with eyes the movement of an object.
9 months.-(i.) Attend to sounds; (ii.) grasp an object on contact; (iii.) grasp an object on seeing it.
I year.-Recognise food.
i8 months.-Say "mama" spontaneously.
2 years.-(i.) Walk; (ii.) obey one simple direction.
3 years.-(i) Point out nose, eye, mouth; (ii.) repeat two digits; (iii.) enumerate the objects in an engraving; (iv.) tell surname; (v.) repeat a sentence with six syllables.
4 years.-(i.) Tell whether a little boy or a little girl; (ii.) name key, knife, penny; (iii.) repeat three numerals; (iv.) point out the longer of two lines.
5 years.-(i.) Find which is the heavier of two boxes; (ii.) copy a
square; (iii.) repeat a phrase with ten syllables; (iv.) count four pennies; (v.) reconstruct a card cut out diagonally into two pieces.
6 years.-(i) Distinguish morning and evening; (ii.) define common objects-fork, chair, table, horse, mother-by use; (iii.) copy a rhomb; (iv.) count 13 pennies; (v.) compare a number of drawings of faces from an esthetic point of view.
7 years.-(i.) Point out right hand and left ear; (ii.) describe an engraving; (iii.) do three simple errands; (iv.) give sum of three pennies and three halfpennies; (v.) name four colours-red, blue, green, yellow.
8 years.-(i.) Make mental comparison between fly and butterfly, wood and glass, paper and cardboard; (ii.) count from 20 to 0; (iii.) point out features missing in incomplete figures; (iv,) give the date; (v.) repeat five numerals.
9 years.-(i.) Take 2d. out of a shilling and give the change; (ii.) define common objects (see above) otherwise than by use; (iii.) recognise all the current coins; (iv.) name the months; (v.) answer five easy questions.
io years.-(i.) Arrange six boxes (3, 6, 9, I2, IS, and i8 grammes)
according to weight; (ii.) copy two simple geometrical designs from memory; (iii.) criticise absurd statements; (iv.) answer five difficult questions; (v.) bring thriee given words into two phrases.
12 years.-(i.) Resist a suggestion; (ii.) bring three given words into one sentence; (iii.) say more than 6o words in three minutes; (iv.) define abstract words; (v.) re-arrange a simple sentence, the words of which have been put out of their order.
15 years.-(i.) Repeat seven numerals; (ii.) find three rhymes for a
given word; (iii.) repeat a sentence of 26 syllables; (iv.) interpret an engraving; (v.) explain an unfinished account of a common episode.
Adults.-(i.) Paper-cutting test; (ii.) mental construction of figure formed by transposing pieces of bisected rectangle; (iii.) distinguish between abstract words of similar sound or similar meaning; (iv.) indicate three differences between a king and the president of a republic; (v.) give precis of a selected passage of prose.

294 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Each of the tests is in the form of a question or of a simple little operation varying in difficulty. They require practically no apparatus, or at all events so little and of so simple a sort that anyone can make its most complicated elements in a few moments, and when prepared it is as easy to carry about as a stethescope. Further, all the tests are so quickly got through that probably the longest of them is that which consists in asking the subject to repeat as many words as he can in three minutes, and the determination of the subject's mental age does not take more than 20 minutes, and may be arrived at in an even shorter time.
(Three tests-putting together divided card, the paper cutting test, and description of pictures-were then demonstrated by the lecturer.)
So much by way of example, but the essential point, and that on which I wish especially to insist, because it is the very principle of the method and its original feature, is the seriation of our tests. There is a hierarchy in this arrangement. And it is not a hierarchy established by a prioni considerations. It is based on facts. Here is the way it was arrived at. We proceeded by several stages. The first stage consisted in trying a number of the tests. Taking a series of weak-minded subjects, chosen more or less at random, we picked out amongst them the most pronounced cases, those where there could be no doubt as to the defect of intelligence and it was with these subjectsidiots, imbeciles, and low grade morons-that we tried such tests, for exampIe, as offering an object and observing in what way it was grasped, or showing a picture and asking a description of it. It turned out that tests which, in our opinion, should have presented no difficulty were missed, while others, which seemed to us to be equivalent, were successfully got over. Gradually all that fell into order; and we accepted as easy the tests solved by those subjects whom we recognised clinically as the most defective; while we ranked as difficult, as requiring more intelligence, more intellectual resources, the tests which were performed only by the subjects of manifestly higher development. During this first phase, accordingly, our tests were grouped in terms of intelligence and in conformity with

THE MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE.

295

clinical indications. Second stage: it is an idea which must suggest itself to any observer of states of intellectual nondevelopment that they may be compared to the different phases of childhood. You will find, for instance, in Esquirol such
expressions as this; after he has described a case of imbecility, he will add: " this young imbecile resembles in every respect an infant of 5 years of age." This, however, in the pages of the alienists is only a mere phrase, a comparison which is little more than literary. We, on the contrary, had got hold of a series of exact tests on which to base our estimate of an arrest of intelligence; our recollection of our first results and some additional
experiments showed us, between the replies of our asylum patients and the replies of children, strange analogies amounting often to an absolute identity. It was the obvious course to ascertain whether the grades which we had found in feebleness of mind really corresponded to grades of age in normal children. Our first investigations were rather timid, for we limited ourselves to the ages of 3, 6, and 9 years. They were sufficient, however, to prove to us that the seriation of tests which we had
based on differences of intelligence held good when We applied these tests to children of different ages. We were accordingly led to formulate the following postulate-intelligence is a
function of the child's age; and we then entered into a third
period in which we applied ourselves to following the development of an infant mentality year by year. We multiplied the number of tests. We tried them methodically in the schools on children of 6, 7, 8, and 9 years, and so on. And in this way, by long afternoons of observation, by patient labour, often irksome because monotonous, but always fruitful, we reached the seriation which we now utilise.
Here, then, is the meaning of the grouping by age which you see in our table. It means that, if, for instance, we take a number of children of 5 years old in a Paris elementary school and make them copy a square, count four objects and so on, these children will perform these operations successfully and they will also do all the tests allotted to the ages below 5 years, while, on the other hand, they will be incapable of dealing with

296 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the tests in the higher groups; e.g., they are quite well able to count four pennies but they cannot count 13.
And now you will understand why I said a moment ago that what was essential in the method is the seriation of the tests. It is because that seriation gives us at once the value of the subject's responses to the tests. Suppose-and I am quoting to you an actual instance-that we are examining a worthy man of some 50 years of age, and that, in the usual course, we ask him his name and he gives it correctly, and we then ask him his age, and he answers in all good faith, " I'm 12 years old." Of course, we know at once that we are dealing with a defective. But, thanks to our scale, we know something more; we can have a strong presumption that his intellectual level is between 3 years and 6 vears, for 3 years is the age when the surname is correctly given, and 6 years is the age when a child knows how old he is.
In the case of all our first tests, for ages from 3 to 12 years, our investigations were made in infant and elementary schools. Two other parts of our scale remain; one, having to do with the lower degrees, from 3 months to 2 years; the other, on the contrary, with the upper region of the scale, that is to say, with the tests for 15 years of age and for adults. With regard to the lower degrees, they have only been studied by us in creches, and the results are therefore subject to qualification, and may not apply to children brought up under other conditions. As for the tests which we give as corresponding to the adult intelligence, they have been arrived at from experiments made on members of associations of former pupils of the elementary schools. All we have to note specially about the results we have obtained with these subjects is, then, that they refer to ages subsequent to school years.
This, then, is our method, and it is after the manner I have described that it has been devised. It is above all a result and an epitome of observed facts. If we have assigned certain tests to the age of 9 years it is because we have found that they are successfully passed by children of that age, while they were not passed by children of 8 years, and so on.

THE MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE.

297

II .
Now, what is it exactly that we measure?
(i) We measure intelligence as a whole; and this is what I mean; if we could study closely each of these tests, one after the other, we should find first that they all require attention and good will, and also a certain amount of comprehension, but in different degrees; it does not need much sustained effort to
perceive the difference between two weights of 3 and I5 gramnmes; it demands closer application to arrange five weights
in order when of the respective values of 3, 6, 9, 12 and I5 grammes; for the subject to point to his nose is certainly easier than to take 2d. from a shilling and give the change. On the
other hand, the passing of certain tests-repeating digits or phrases-depends above all on immediate memory; other tests, such as the naming of colours or enumerating the months, seem to depend on positive knowledge; while success in others again is the result of the subject's power of judgment, as, for instance, in detecting an absurdity. Or it may be the inventive capacity that we bring into play, as when we require the subject to get three words into a phrase; or it may be the power of visual representation, as in the paper-cutting test. Or else it is all these faculties, more or less, that are utilised, for we must recognise that their isolation is artificial and a figment of theory, and that in reality every mental operation, even if it be but the simplest sensation, requires the activity of the mind as a whole.
The lowest tests on the scale are tests of muscular coordination in response to sensory stimuli. Then there are tests requiring the use of words, and others, such as copying a square or a rhomb, which give proof of motor skill, and so on. We do not analyse; we grasp intelligence by its total result, without attempting to separate its constituents; and we measure it, in some sort quantitatively, pretty much as we say, when we speak of electricity, " this is a current of ioo volts."
To analyse what is attributable in the results to attention, what to memory, and so forth; to determine the part of his several faculties in accounting for the degree of a child's intellectual development-that would be a totally different task, the object of a different investigation, and of an investigation,

298 EUGENICS REVIEW.
doubtless, of no less importance, but hardly, I think, one that we are yet near being able to undertake with profit.
(2) The second point we have to deal with concerns the chief objection urged against us on grounds of theory. As we judge by results, it is at once said, " You do not measure intelligence, you measure acquired capacity (l'acquis); you measure a state of intellectual development, an intellectual. level, if you will, but that is not the intelligence. You have, it is true, eliminated from your tests exercises of reading and writing, you may make one of your examinations without noticing whether the child you are examining knows how to read; you have not fallen into the obvious error of asking the date of Napoleon's death or the names of the chief towns of Asia, because the absence of these notions is clearly a proof only of ignorance; you have been careful to avoid also questions dealing with local matters, such as tariff regulations or the name of the reigning sovereign, for the capacity to answer such questions is due to curiosity, and to a curiosity that certain peasants lack, who, nevertheless, within the narrow circle of their immediate interests show no want of intelligence. Yes, you have taken all these precautions, but for all that your efforts remain vain. You measure results; and in these results the action of circumstances always intervenes; you put problems, but their solution always depends on what the family environment has taught the children. Here is the proof that this objection is sound: if you try your tests in a different social milieu, on a better class of the population, if, as M. Decroly and Mlle. Degand have done, you examine children of wealthy parents, these children will appear more intelligent, judged by your scale, they are in advance of their age, they show themselves more developed than the children of working-class parents. And after all, when we use tests such as the enumeration of the months, or taking change out of a shilling, are we not really estimating the effects of special sorts of training? "
The objection is a formidable one, and I think that I have presented it without diminishing its force. It is so plausible that we have ourselves sometimes been disturbed by it. First of all, let us recognise that it is quite true that we measure

THE MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE.

299

results only and that the degrees of intellectual development which we gauge are the resultants of multiple factors. When we use our scale in the psychological examination of a child, we are doing, from the psychic point of view, something analogous to what we do, from an organic point of view, when we use a tape measure. When we read off with our tape a measure of height, the figure results in part from a personal factor, a force of growth with which the individual came into existence, and in part from influences of environment, from the conditions of nutrition, temperature and the like to which he has been subjected. The measuring tape does not distinguish these elements. Stature is the resultant of these different forces, and it varies, like intellectual development, in different social milieux. Nevertheless, stature is an important measure, which we should not like to dispense with in estimating the physical state and the vigour of a child. Similarly, when our scale indicates to
us the stage that a child has reached, when with its help we measure what his intellectual faculties enable him to do, this development which we measure is the result, on the one hand of a personal element, an innate cerebral constitution which enables our nervous system to make certain acquisitions and to profit by them, and on the other hand it depends on the influence of the environment, on the stimuli that we receive from our surroundings. All that is true. But none the less would it be incorrect to say that what we measure is simply this action of the milieu, for that action would be of no effect without an intelligence to work on; we measure the whole as an indissoluble totality, as, in fact, the personal element and the environmental factors do in all likelihood present themselves in reality; for we may conceive the intelligence, not as something complete, not as a power endowed at the start with its full force, but as a function which is in process of perfecting itself, incessantly modified and as it were re-made by excitations from without.
During the whole period of childhood the intelligence is in the
making. And further, it is, in fact, the intelligence that we measure,
if the conditions of the environment where we measure its
development are sufficiently uniform in character. Suppose

300 EUGENICS REVIEW.
that twenty years ago we planted two acorns in the same ground: to-day we measure the trees into which they have grown, and we find their trunks of the same thickness; we say then these young oaks are of the same vigour. If, on the contrary, one of them had a stem of but half the diameter of the other, we should call it weakly, thus inferring from our observation the degree of its vital force, a factor in itself inaccessible. Our whole problem is of the same order, and we may formulate it thus: have we the right to infer from the degree of intellectual development which we find in a child, the value of that somewhat metaphysical entity which we designate by the term intelligence ? This is not a question of theory but of fAct, and it is for the facts to answer it.
Let us, then, take the witness of the facts. When we published our first researches and our results in I9o8 and I9II, they had as their basis only a relatively limited number of observations, extending to some hundreds of children, and children who might seem to have been selected under rather special conditions, inasmuch as they were all pupils in elementary schools ird Paris. When we proposed to estimate the intellectual development and the intelligence of other children by reference to this standard, it was possible to ask wh-ether our measures were not of very relative significance. It was a measurement, no doubt, but a measurement by a standard whose value was open to question. Since then our method of measurement has been applied in England, in America, in Belgium and Holland, and in other countries. More than 5,000 children have been tried by our tests. And in a general way the results have been confirmatory, especially as regards the ages from 4 to io years. So that we are authorised to-day to maintain that the intellectual development which our scale shows is really representative of the average child of the white race. In other words, this international confirmation shows us that our tests imply a fairly general environment, that they are valid in the ordinary conditions under which any child in these countries has to grow up, and that they do not presuppose any special cultural influence. And if this be so, when we find differences of development between two children, it is clearly to differences of

THE MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE.

301

intelligence that we must attribute them. At all events this holds good of certain differences. For, on the other hand, if we examine measurements taken in certain special circumstances, such as those referred to above, measurements, for instance, of the children of wealthy parents, we find that these children show an advance of one or at most of two years. This, then, is what represents the influence of environment. So that when, in measuring the intellectual level of a child, we find a departure from the average shown by our scale, if that variation falls within the limits we have just indicated, we may inquire whether there are special conditions capable of causing it; but if these conditions are not present or if the variation is too considerable, we may infer, with a variation in the upward direction, the existence of an exceptional vigour of intelligence, while with a variation in the downward direction we shall be inclined even more positively to conclude that the intelligence is defective. Thus we arrive logically at the practical rule that we regard as backward in intelligence any child whose intellectual development is found to be two years below that of his age as shown on our scale.
With regard to the two ends of the scale-infants and adults-our certitude in adopting a schematic average of intelligence is much less. In the case of the infants, we obtained our material, as I have already pointed out, from an unfavourable environment: the children sent to creches cannot represent an average social condition, and that, not only on account of the detrimental influences to which the children have been exposed, but also because these children, by reason of bad heredity, are probably innately inferior. This portion of our scale may, therefore, need revision. We might guess this on a priori grounds, and the experiments which have been made, here and there, confirm this view; the tests are too easy; in other words what we have assigned to two or even to three years ought to be put. back to lower ages.
On the contrary, our tests for I2 and I5 years and for adults are, in general, too difficult. This depends on the fact, mentioned above, that this part of our scale was framed from trials made with what might be regarded as selected material.

302 EUGENICS REVIEW.
It would be necessary to work with random samples of subjects of these ages. This is a research still to be made, and it will not be an easy one, for after school life the individuals are scattered, and they are no longer willing to lend themselves to such inquiries; adults do not like to have their intelligence measured too closely. Besides, at that period the intelligence is developed, so that we no longer have the help of differences of age to estimate the value of the differences we detect. And lastly, professional activities tend to produce a possibly excessive specialisation of intellectual work, and that fact renders comparisons difficult. Nevertheless, this is doubtless only a question of adaptation. And we believe that by pursuing research by the method which we have used, by devising for these ages new and more appropriate tests, we shall gradually overcome these obstacles, so that we shall be able to measure an adult's intelligence with the same precision as we now measure the intelligence of a child.
III.
We are, then, in a position to compare the intelligence of a given subject with that of an ideal average child. Of what use can that comparison be to us? Let us first consider its application to the examination of abnormal children. Following on the appointment of the commission to which I have referred, a certain number of classes were organised in Paris for children who could not keep up with the ordinary teaching. But what children were to be admitted into these classes? How was the selection to be made? Of course, it is easy to find children whose educational progress is behind that of their comrades. Say a child of this sort comes before us, he is IO years old and we find him in the lowest class of the elementary school, in school work he is barely on a level with the ordinary child of 6 or 7. What is the cause of this backwardness? Perhaps it is to be attributed to irregular attendance? And in fact we do find that illness has prevented the child from sticking to his studies. But is this cause sufficient to explain the degree of backwardness? may there not also be a question of want of attention, lack of effort, idleness? Or is it due to want of

THE MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE.

303

brains? The examination of his cranium, the detection of his bumps or of his stigmata-these means do not allow us to solve this problem. Now try this child with our tests, he is io years
old; we begin, therefore, with the tests of that age, and he fails in them. We pass to the tests of 9 years, and he is again unsuccessful. He only does some of the tests of 8 years, and all the tests below that age. In short, though he is io years old,
he has barely the intellectual development of a child of 7i years.
Our opinion is now fixed, he may be lazy, but besides that his intelligence is certainly more feeble than that of a normal child. It is more feeble, and yet not very much more feeble. It is
that of 7i years, and the child's age allows us to hope that it
may still develop. These are favourable conditions for trying to teach him under special discipline. We enter him accordingly for a special school. Had we found his level that of 3 years only, we should not have accepted him; we should have regarded him as beyond the reach of this educational method. But on the other hand, it might have happened that this child, reported from his school as backward in his studies and as
mentally abnormal, is found on our examination to possess the
intelligence of his age. In that case we should have to do with a simple " slacker," and we should require to have recourse to other methods than those of a special school. As its first service, then, our method is going to help us for the very object for which it was devised, namely as an instrument for selecting subjects for the special schools. It will enable us to form homogeneous classes. And above all, it will enable us-and I know no other method that can do this-to exclude from these schools subjects who are sent to them for insufficient reasons.
Now let us go to our asylums. There we find congenitally defective patients whose poverty of intelligence is such that they cannot shift for themselves if they are out in the world. Attempts have been made to distinguish several degrees amongst these subjects, but it has always been by means of notions of degree so vague that it is almost impossible for the different authors who have written on the question to understand one another or to know whether they are describing similar cases. We are told, for instance, that in imbeciles the

304 EUGENICS REVIEW.
judgment is less acute, or the attention less sustained, or the vocabulary more limited than in the feeble-minded, while on the other hand all these faculties are more developed than in idiots; but as to describing how we are to estimate this keenness of judgment, this fixity of attention, this extent of vocabularythat always seems to be postponed. But apply to these subjects our method, and we have at once the necessary data for a definite, if conventional, division of these several categories. Here are the definitions which we have been led to propose:-
We mean by the term " idiot " an individual whose intellectual development is that of 2 years or under.
We mean by the term " imbecile " an individual whose intellectual development corresponds to that of a child between the ages of 3 and 7. years.
And finally, by the term " feeble-minded " (de'bile) we mean an individual whose intellectual level, while superior to that of a child of 7 years, is nevertheless below the average development of an adult. This latter degree of development, as I have said, is still inadequately determined. Provisionally it might be proposed to fix at 9 years the upper level of mental debility We shall see the reasons for this selection in a moment. Now why should we take these points, at 2, 7 and 9 years, to form the divisions in a classification of mental defectives? The reason is that to each of these degrees there corresponds an important stage in mental life; the idiot, like the child under 2 years, may in a sense understand some words, but he cannot use any; it is as though language requires for its evolution an intelligence of more than 2 years. The imbecile has the power of speech, whatever imperfections he may show in its use, but
written language is beyond his reach; and it is not till-7 years
of age that the child, after very much the same way in all civilised countries, begins to assimilate reading and writing sufficiently to make a rudimentary use of them.
And it is not only by these deficiencies, by this incapacity first to communicate with his fellows by speech and then to transmit to them his thoughts by writing, that our idiots and imbeciles may be characterised: to each of these degrees of

THE MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE.

305

defect there corresponds also a difference in the possibility of social utilisation. Every being who does not reach an intellectual development of more than 2 years remains, so far as regards his powers of looking after himself, in the same condition ag a child of that age; he may be able to grasp an object, to obey a simple gesture such as a motion to sit down, but he will ordinarily be unable to feed himself. On the other hand, imbeciles of the mental level of 2 to 4 years know how to make their way about in the house where they live; they are capable of learning to wash their hands, they can make an effort to dress themselves, they are able to pull a barrow or carry a weight; imbeciles from 4 to 7 years in intelligence can learn to sweep, to make a bed, to black boots; and feeble-minded subjects, above 7 years in intelligence, can be taught to sew and can be made useful in laundry and garden work. Comning to the
upper limit of intelligence in mental debility, we have reason to think that a development equivalent to the normal average at 9 years of age is the minimum below which the individual is incapable of getting along without tutelage in the conditions of modern life. A certain number of facts suggest this view and are mutually confirmatory. Nine years is the intellectual level found in the lowest class of domestic servants, in those who are just on the border of a possible existence in economic independence; it is, on the other hand, the highest level met with in general paralytics who come under asylum care on account of their dementia; so long as a general paralytic, setting aside any
question of active delirious symptoms, has not fallen below the
intellectual level of 9 years, he can keep at liberty; once he has reached that level, he ceases to be able to live in society. And lastly, when we examine in our asylums cases of congenital defect, brought under care for the sole reason that their intelligence would not admit of their adapting themselves sufficiently to the complex conditions of life, we find that amongst the most highly developed the level of intelligence does not exceed that of normal children of 9 years of age.
It goes without saying that in these questions of social life, intelligence is not the only factor, character has also its part. None the less, it is the case that in the care and control of the

306 EUGENICS REVIEW.
defective, in judging as to their institutional treatment, the exact measurement of their intelligence is at present our surest guidef
To give a last example of the application of our method, this time in the domain of forensic medicine. A moment ago I referred to the case of a child brought under our notice for backwardness in his school work, now let us take another who is a source of trouble on account of his instability; he has even committed thefts and acts of violence, and such ominous terms as instinctive perversion and mental debility are being used to describe his state; I have myself written this diagnosis of mental debility in similar cases. Later on, armed with our method, I have re-examined these children, and I have found that, as a matter of fact, a large number of them had quite the intelligence of their age. It was not, then, a weakness of intelligence that was the explanation of their bad conduct, and you will grasp at once the importance of being set right as to this point, since on its knowledge will depend the direction of our reformatory efforts.
And the same thing holds true in a general manner for all criminal conduct, influences of environment, disorders of character, defects of judgment-how are we to disentangle the responsible factor? By patient investigations, with the help of our method, Dr. Sullivan has shown that the number of the feeble-minded amongst female criminals is much smaller than was thought. And when, on the other hand, there really does exist a condition of mental debility in an offender, how much more forcible will be your medico-legal report on the case when it is based on an examination susceptible of independent control, and is not merely the expression of a personal view open to denial and discussion.
Such are the services that may be rendered at present by an accurate measurement of intelligence. There are others that we can foresee. It is not merely in the case of abnormal children that a study of the intellectual development should allow of a fit adaptation of the educational programme. The whole of pedagogy must profit by a minute determination of the stages of progress. And so again, it is not only with the degrees of idiocyr and imbecility that we should find corre-

THE MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE.

307

sponding differences in social aptitudes; it seems probable that one might also establish a hierarchy of occupations according to the quantity of intelligence which each one requires in the individual who practices it, and it would perhaps be better to begin by such a study as a guide in directing adolescents in the choice of a career instead of losing our way at the start in the effort to ascertain the presence of special aptitudes.
Again, one would like to know at what epoch an intelligence finishes its growth; one would like to know whether this growth occurs by regular progression or whether it may not advance by discontinuous ascent with critical ages and periods of special importance; one would like to know to what extent a precocious development may be the precursor of a real superiority in later life, or whether it is not merely the mark of an over-quick maturity. All these points will, no doubt, be cleared up gradually; they require the examination of many children, and that the same children be followed in their development year by year. It is to be feared that the amount of research that these problems must necessitate will delay their solution for a long time still. But remote as that solution may be, and despite the imperfections of the instrument that we bring to assist in reaching it, we may at all events set down to the credit of our method that already it has given precision to the data of the problems, and we may in advance pay homage for the results that we hope from it, to the memory of that great psychologist and indefatigable worker-Alfred Binet.

