THE POPULATION REPORT
A STATEMENT FROM THE HIERARCHY *
The following statement was issued by the Hierarchy of England and Wales at their meeting in Low Week at Archbishop's House, Westminster

IC HE Report of the Royal Commission on Population raises issues of such gravity to Catholics, and indeed to
all Christians, that we feel bound to comment upon certain of their recommendations, especially as the Report is shortly to be
considered by Parliament. " The Report is the product of long and
patient investigation of an extremely complex problem, and high tribute must be paid to its authors both for their labours and for the skilful marshalling of their arguments
and conclusions. We cordially welcome references in the Report to the virtues of family life, and support many of the amenities in relation to family allowances, family services, etc., proposed for easing the lot of married couples, in particular of those whom the burden of life discourages unduly from child-bearing. Unhappily, however, such a tribute must be qualified by certain grave
criticisms-notably that nowhere in the Report is there any recognition of the need to take into account the spiritual nature of man or the Christian conception of marriage.
" The major proposals of the Commission
are based exclusively on secular considera-
tions. The Commission have rightly recognized that married couples stand in need of
help and advice in adjusting their physical
desires to their social and economic circumstances: but they seem to have overlooked
the fundamental truth that married persons
who turn to God in their difficulties will
receive guidance and strength to restrain
their desires to the extent appropriate to the
moment and their own circumstances. The
failure to recognize that this is so, and that millions believe it to be so, disturbs the
balance of the Report and invalidates cer-
tain of its conclusions.
" The Commission, with their purely
secular approach to the problem, recommend
a plan by which the population should be

increased by about 6 per cent and thereafter maintained at that level. To attain this result they propose financial and other incentives and aids to encourage the parents of the smaller families to have more children. This is, in principle, praiseworthy but the Commission also recommend that all married couples should be offered instruction in artificial contraception. They appear to assume, on grounds which to us seem insufficient, that such instruction will not prevent a due increase in the smaller families, and to ignore the strong likelihood that when artificial contraception has become a Stateapproved method the smaller families may become smaller still.
" The principal object of offering instruction in artificial contraception is, however, to limit the fecundity of the larger families. This result would doubtless follow but it may well be that the limitation would be so extensive that it would lead to a serious fall
in the population. " The success of the plan recommended
depends therefore on two expected developments-that the small families will become somewhat larger, that the larger families will become somewhat smaller, but not too small. But what would happen if the small families become smaller and the large families become small families ?
" The plan can also be criticized on the ground that it involves an assault on the large family, an assault which the Commission appear to justify on the ground that the smaller family tends to produce a more intelligent type. This conclusion is reached on evidence which seems to us inadequate, but even if that conclusion could be accepted with certainty, the further question remains -is intelligence the only, or the principal,
* The report of this statement has been reproduced from The Tablet of April I4th, 1951, by kind permission of the editor.

94

THE POPULATION REPORT: A STATEMENT FROM THE HIERARCHY 95

quality that we should like to see in the condemned. Under it the State, in effect,

children of the future ?

arrogates to itself the function and the right

" It seems to us that the Commission have to determine how many children-beings

attached too much weight to the evidence of with immortal souls-are to be born in these

' intelligence tests,' for even if those are islands. It is true of course that there is no

trustworthy in their own limited field they suggestion in the Report of any form of

do not reveal character or the whole per- coercion on married couples, but who can

sonality. Intelligence and high character do doubt that, if the State is conceded such

not necessarily run in harness, and we are wide functions as the Report envisages, the

emphatically of the view that the Commis- door is opened to a steady increase of the

sion have applied the wrong yardstick, and- State's claims and pretensions in this sphere,

that any attack on the large family, based on even perhaps to the point of penalizing those

the presumed inferior intelligence of its parents whose practice does not conform

members, is misconceived and unjustified. with current State policy.

If intelligence and character can both be " Under the Commission's proposals the

achieved so much the better; but of the two family is in effect to be used as a pawn in

character is the more important and he population planning, for whatever measure

would be a bold man who would deny that a of solicitude there may be in encouraging

large family is a fine school for the training some parents to have more children and

of character.

others less, the real motive is not to benefit

" Since the teaching of artificial contracep- existing families but to determine the size of

tion through the medium of the National families in future generations. Even if we

Health Service is an integral feature of the could read the future, even if we could know

plan proposed, we must condemn the plan with certainty that a population of such and

on that ground alone. We must proclaim such a figure would be best for Britain in say

again that artificial contraception is intrinsic- fifty years' time, such an invasion of human

ally evil, contrary to the law of God and a rights, such an intrusion into the sacred

mutilation of the purpose and process of the intimacy of the family circle, would not be

sexual act. That the practice is already justified. It is even less justified when we

widespread, that it is accepted by a large reflect that the hypothesis upon which the

part of public opinion, in no way invalidates Report is based may prove to be wrong and

the truth of the above statement or diminishes that unforeseeable events may render the

our duty to publish it. That duty is empha- population needs of a future Britain quite

sized by the manifest risk of injustice to, and different from those envisaged in the Report.

prejudice to the professional careers of, " For married couples to limit their

Catholic doctors who are obliged in con- families, even by innocent means, in defer-

science to refuse to give the instruction in ence to a State-made scheme actuated by

artificial contraception which the Com- economic motives, would itself be an abdica-

mission propose for inclusion among the tion of their human rights and a surrender to

duties of medical practitioners under the materialistic standards: and when the means

National Health Service.

of limitation advocated and employed in the

" Though the worst feature of the plan scheme are not innocent but sinful there is

proposed is instruction in artificial con- no course open to us but to condemn the

traception, we believe the whole concept to scheme outright and to direct the Catholics

be founded on false and pagan principles. It of this country that it is their duty to do all

is an example of that ' excess of State in their power by lawful means to prevent the

action ' which the Holy Father has recently implementation of these proposals."

Eugenics Review, Vol XLIII, No. 2

