\J i {;be Eugenic _Ebucatfon Zoctety.

,(i\,9,\ Q

vreWiXent: MAJOR LEONARD DARWIN.

V SIR JAMES BARR, President, LiWveicrpeoaoVlreBreatnbceh.nte:

DR. BENHAM, President, New Zealand Society.

SIR JAMES CRICHTON-BROWNE, Ex-President, I9o8 to igog.

RIGHT REV. C. F. D'ARcY, Bishop of Down, President, Belfast Branch.

PROF. STARR JORDAN, President, Eugenic Section, American Genetic Association.

MR. W. C. MARSHALL, President, Ilaslemere Branch. RIGHT IION. LORD MOULTON, F.R.S., President, Birmingham Society for the Study of Heredity. M. EDMOND PERRIER, President, Soci&te Fran9aise d'Eug6nique.

DR. A. PLOETZ, President, International Society for Race Hygiene.

PROF. E. B. POULTON, F. R. S., President, Oxford Branch.

PROF. SERGI, President, Comitato Italiano per gli Studi de Eugenica.

PROF. SEWARD, F.R.S., President, Cambridge Eugenics Society.

RIGHT REV. J. E. C. WELLDON, Dean of Manchester, President, Manchester Branch.

Hon. Secretary: MRS. A. C. GoTTo.

Hon. Treasurer: MR. VON FLEISCHL.

-Members of Couictil:

MR. CROFTON BLACK.

MR. W. C. MARSHALL.

SIR E. BRABROOK, C.B.

LADY OWEN-MACKENZIE.

MRs. THEODORk CHAMBERS.

MR. ROBERT MOND.

HON. SIR JOHN COCKBURN, K.C.M.G,

DR. F. W. MorT, F.R.S.

MR. R. NEWTON-CRANE.

MR. G. P. MUDGEL

MR. A. E. CRAWLEY.

MRs. G. POOLEY.

SIR H. CUNNINGHAM, K.C.I.E.

MR. W. REA, M.P.

DR. LANGDON DOWN.

DR. A. REID.

MR. HAVELOCK ELLIS.

MR. JOHN RUSSELL.

PROF. J. FINDLAY.

DR. ETTIE SAYER.

MR. E G. WHELER GALTON.

MR. F. C. S. SCHILLER, D.Sc.

MR. M. GREENWOOD, JUN., F.R.C.S.

PROF. A. SCHUSTER, F.R.S.

DR. W. HADLEY.

MR. EDGAR SCHUSTER, D.Sc.

ADMIRAL HENDERSON.'

DR. C. G. SELIGMANN.

MAJOR HILLS, F.R.S.

PROF. J. A. THOMSON.

THE VERY REV. W. R. INGE, DEAN OF

DR. A. F. TitEDGOLD.

ST. PAUL'S.

MRS. ALEC TWCIDIE.

MISS KIRBY.

MR. W. C. D. WHETHAM, F.R.S.

MR. ERNEST LANE, P.R.C.S.

DR. t)OUGLAS WHITE.

DR. A. GORDON WILSON.

ZSfrmin.bam:

MR. HUMPHREY HUMPHREYS.

MRS. JORDAN-LLOYD.

MR. J. P. MILLS.

- verpool:

MR. R. T. BODEY. MR. R. D. LAURIE. DR. W. B. WARRINGTOtc.

lbastemere:

Ilancbester:

Seltaet:

Mr. W. C. MARSHALL.

DR. MUMFORD.

PROF. J. A. LINDSAY.

MRew Zealan :

elforb :

ADMIRAL HENDERSON. THE IION. T. A. MACKENZIE.

DR. E. SCHUSTER.

1Re0earcb Committee: -

ucatton Committee:

DR. E. SCHUSTER, Chairman.

MR. J. RUSSELL, Chairman.

MR. A. M. CARR-SAUNDERS, Stcretary.

MRS. T. CHAMBERS, Secretary.

DR. GREEENWOOD.

MISS BONWICK.

MR. LIDBETTER. DR. TREDGOLD.

MR. HOPE-JONES. MR. NICHOLS.

MISS TRENCH,

Vublicatfon Committee:
This Committee consists of the Executive Officers of the Society, Chairmen and Secretaries of Sub-Committees and the Branch representatives.
N.B.-Other Committees are appointed from time to time for special purposes.
l~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

"Eugenics is the study of agences under social control that may improve or impair

the r,aal qualities offture generations either physically or mentally."

OBJECTS.

I.-Persistently to set forth the National Importance of Eugenics in order to modify public opinion, and create L sense.of respone sibility in the respect of bringing all matters pertaining to human parenthood under the domination of Eugenic idcaLt.
I1.-To spread a knowledge of the Laws of heredity so far as they are surelyr known, and so far as that knowledge may affect the
improvement of the race.

III.-To further Eugenic Teachers, at home, in the schools, and elsewhere.

AMSeSmObCeelrIsohMOMUDOr_S-MIp

SUBSCRIPTION. _ - --

FvOOne;nGuiinea

pppeerr

Annum.
Anum.

PRIVILEGES.

Attendance at Lectures, Discussions, and General Meetings, Use,of Library.

Members only receive THE EUGENICS REVIEW free.

Forms of Application for Membership and AssociateMAembership 'nd full partculars of the Society

can be obtained of the Hon. Secretary.

OFFICES: K1EgswaY Hous,Kig

W.aCW =-

OFFICE OURBS1 10.0 m. tO 5 p , 8aturidOma . o 1 p.m.

THE
EUGENICS REVIEW
Vole VL
APRIL, 1914-JANUARY, 1915.
PUBLISHED QUARTERLY BY THE EUGENICS EDUCATION SOCIETY,
KINGSWAY HOUSE, W.C.

CONTENTS.

ARTICLES.

PAGE

ANON., Eugenics and the War [Professional Classes War Relief

Council] . . . .

. . 195

BURT, C., The Measurement of Intelligence by the Binet Tests.

Part I. . . . . . . . . 36

Part II. . . . . . . . . 140

CHAMBERS, T. G., Eugenics and the War. . . . . 271

COBB, J. A., The Problem of the Sex-Ratio . . . .57

- ARWIN, MAJOR L., The Habitual Criminal . . . . 204

ARWIN, SIR F., Francis Galton . . . . . .

IAMILTON, A. E., American Eugenics . . . . . 308

.KEATINGE, M. W., Education and Eugenics . . . . 97

kNETTLESHIP, E., Consanguineous Marriages . . . . 130

SIMON, DR. T., The Measurement of Intelligence (Translated from

the French by Dr. W. C. Sullivan) . . . . 291

SMITH, G., A Contribution to the Biology of Sex . . . I8

SPEARMAN, C., The Heredity of Abilities . . . . . 219

YEARSLEY, M., F.R.C.S., The Problem of Deafness and its Prevention Ii6

CORRESPONDENCE.

Eugenic Aspect, The, of the Employment of Married Women:

/ A Reply. R. A. FISHER & C. S. STOCK

313

J6Eugenic Marriage Bills in the Scandinavian Countries. V. NAESER 239

Measurement, The, of Intelligence. C. SPEARMAN

312

Primogeniture and Abnormality: A Possible Fallacy. W. C. RIVERS 58

Galton Anniversary

345

LIBRARY, ADDITIONS TO

I 92, 268

NOTES AND COMMENTS.

Eugenic Aspect, The, of the Employment of Married Women

'Feeble-Minded, The, in Australasia . . . .

Galton Day . . . .

...

;Inebriates' Bill, The, of 1914 . . . . .

Mental Deficiency Act, The . . . . .

Scientific Study, The, of Man . .

..

OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS

.
. I56
. 51 . 53 . 52 . 153
73, 252

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
English Foreign
American Continental

77, 175, 255, 327

8794,,

I18749,

225577,,

332 332

79, 179, 260 338

iv

CO1mNTENTS

PAGE

PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY (Quarterly Chronicle) 89I,88, 264, 342

PROGRAMME, AUTUMN, 1914, ALTERATION OF .

. 239

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED . . .

94,I93, 269, 345

REVIEWS.
Francaise Children.AABBCCCDDDDDGDEDGGGFFEGGHDLHHLMLMMMLUAHEINALAOERIOAAARRRAAAALAAELRCAAADBLAIERSOUVRELLEUDLYRLAULmRODOCRLERRRDLKSCNUEOGTETSGLZIGDLRGTzPEYEIACIEIEKSLHEEWNFSLOLDNLIOGHAOOOESHEDRNTNBYCEEEN,u,TAENTAAAPCLUNIHoWLG,,,,,TWTHOERRYgLYWT,LLOSSHOIESTAD,,mO,,,,WS,eO,IH,EN,O,ARN,,OY,TCBGNSDna,J,.,S,N,T.O.,N.L.,S,RiKSIJMnM,,M,ED,,LDAALJC.LIcoMpS.FIiBaIRoIGiT.C.C..AE.RA,.CQ.Bn,iN,smhnin.RerEbn,.eT.HnTm.,.,S.eTH..,W.RrdL.aCrCA,e,oeuTo.LR.,ImghS.uEhro..tTt0Y.SHu.brL.RMtHrFAbR,EPBBtV.osPeGA,iuuh.emCLD,hEt.h.ElaiElc.FTOa.Rr,W.dht.HorAr-BI.,.OT,.emP,erG,,e.Lc,..eeerh,.uThNn..RSSoMaML,GD,AM.wS.,r-,TTP,sRi,FaWm.caQ,eEI,b.,lNPHLatCD.T,iMDEatP.elBhahLtn.aoU,RTPoiC,la,eHDi.cDa?lrkii&hSheefmlaT.eWtR.reOfab.tSYFerB.SciiIvggn..ms.ia,ie,eisAviBeIheTL.WeWcelnimawoeoeeomdtE,tD,AFlnndSeNpoeFme..iceedoho:Ts,mrm.ehmu.o.CcTlcfaTHrgonwe,,isimlhnTere,cR,idaiMirPEenhPeohEinermpieAoytoUrAhDee,pngkJloearaimonroTlTgadta.&eda.ncgmMeeleTfeharSdryo,mcMnofeeslhhriiyeesccktoootPRhalS(isatnhduet.totyUDvnseecthlchtLDSsbs.MrutOiCneiinnaGfnhh.beenigheiIhoiIoiiyrnogoyiAcoSIoMdiendsHryclafaSfeuRnfvsoGc.lFfgtaRolnAretoACiaseoc,lianomeefnWo.ihidearhPRhnolo,rlNfaitmSstRnianhnrlRadnoEDCusmefeUeosghEtniODehesmqcld.ledauegroleEmtriToSooyuytnicatxWFurdee,oe.M.g-in,Svrnl.imCfCHlscroh.sie.gneaFiglreoPyBEmonodi..,heoydBaec(rndeLilcflnL,.chihvlnabegFH.RoPmaaToatieciniitrtaaysouryaReMeoaPsmrtosrfnoPcalsTctIeHsRtnnoroelmlreaoetsaemlisitll:nrshhf.iriPeSCiddi(p,rPoniasonotut-o.yRo.ei.oeqP.pagr.taan.rgtneNslaW.r.RPtrSeoAbngonoou.igtalloridl,Caeyn.NeaefosHtelpirpaolegecIeydnasEslBtrHdoL.p.uw.e.ouemenlaynmStudv.se.SorencAdClletmteaocttyofo:uoytHctaDuyNoDf:osdth&tunlfnPnDsGettthDofoAeo.Wtaidute.aiRf..diotith..t.A.s.bShlaohYtyrwl.fAiboSeni.eA.eL.cSop.eocViyennsilicCnbpngufimshte.thd.Eoi.oroodSi,tigsfoKS:ecyuaoCRfcGnonNeodenttrtotarsdo.hcaanJTatPrP;htnRsiopaaliylFHIlctho.aeaa.e.Of.tsena.sii..iEyBte..f.lWha.rn.iRtoP)lsf..teaAgoV..Ca.it.cidnchHtt,anT.ydostLBtnhhasnh.iieh..CEriu:irthEtincsdeeasttltIMMSeammYalIRmTLrilthrnit.i&lrAa,Aide,boCasetljiahetI.od....bntfrD.nhIn.blIu.w.em&o.f.e.i...So)oeeo.diEa..roeE9a..r.e.rrtfnroerRlinrotnR1Erim..eIt.u.)fylfeoNgTaeegIun3ghcxd,ucolt.rspeaniltAysaeatiourtog.niti7n*nie..msrs.b..it.sr.hev.o...ts.,..ds..yh..oy-.m.-eh.estr...*...h..076IIIII-23763I72,633627303432322212293132.1I1561465I274412544677114527773776609I5918388080562070274724

CONTENTS. - -

v

REVIEWS (continued).

PAGE

MICHELS, R., Sexual Ethics: A Study of Borderland Questions . 251

MONTESSORI, MARIA, Pedagogical Anthropology (Translated by

T. Cooper) . . .

. . . 66

MoTT, DR. F W., Nature and Nurture in Mental Development . 323

OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS . . . . . . 73, 252

Births, Deaths, and Marriages in England and Wales (1912), 7sth Annual Report of the Registrar-General, 1914 . . 253

Board of Education. Annual Report for I912 of Chief Medical

Officer, 1913 . . . . . . . 76

Census of England and Wales, I9II. Vol. XI., Infirmities, Per-

sons returned as Totally Blind, Totally Deaf, Deaf and

Dumb, Lunatic, Imbecile, and Feeble-Minded . . 75

Census of Scotland, I9II. Vol. III., I9I3 (on Marriage Fertility,

& on Infirmities) . . . . . . 76 English Convict, The: A Statistical Study, by C. Goring, Deputy
Medical Officer, H.M. Prison, Parkhurst . . . 73

Report of the Inspector under the Inebriates' Acts, 1879 to I900, for the year Igio. 1914. . . . . . 75
Sixty-seventh Report of the Commissioners in Lunacy, I9I3 . 75

Statistique Internationale du Mouvement de la Population. Vol.

II., I9OI-IO - . . . . . . 252

PARKINSON, RT. REV. MONSIGNOR H., D. D., PH. D., A Primer of

Social Science .

. . . . . 71

PEARL, R., A Contribution towards an Analysis of the Problem of

Inbreeding . . . . .

. 246

Genetics and Inbreeding . . . . . . 246 PEARL, R., & H. M. PARSHLEY, Data on Sex-Determination in Cattle 246 PEARSON, K., The Life, Letters, and Labours of Francis Galton, Vol. I. 240 PEARSON, KARL, & G. A. JAEDERHOLM, Mendelism and the Problem of
Mental Defect. II. On the Continuity of Mental Defect . 324

PERIODICAL LITERATURE . . . . . 77, I75, 255, 327

EnglishArchives of Neurology and Psychiatry, Vol. VI., 1914 Bedrock, Vol. II., 1914 Vol. III., April, 1914 Charity Organisation Review, November, 1914 Child Study, October & November, 1914 Englishwoman, August, 1914 Hibbert Journal, January & April, 1914 .
May, 1914 Insurance Observer, January 31st, & February 6th, 1914 Journal of Biological Chemistry, March, 1914 ournal of Genetics,
April & June, 1914 October, I91I 4 Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, December, I9I3, January & February, 1914 June, 1914 Journal of State Medicine, April, 1914 August, 1914 Man, November, I914 . ,. Monist, The, October, 1914 Nature, April, 1914 Parents' Review, December, 1914 Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science, February, 1914

* 255
175
176 . 328 . 329 . 255
177 178
78
175, 255
26I . 328
77 . 327
177 255 . 320 * 337 178 . 329 175

Vi CONTENTS.

REVIEWS (continued).

PAGE

PERIODICAL LITERATURE (continued). English (continued).

Science Progress, January, 1914 . . . . . 78 Scientific Proceedings of the Royal Dublin Society, June, 1914 . 255 Sociological Review, April, 1914 . . . . * 178 United Empire Magazine,

May, 1914

. . . . . . . 179

August, I914 . . . . . . . 255

ForeignAmerican.

American Anthropolcvgist, The, October-December, 1913 .
Bulletin of the American Academy of Medicine,

.257

December, 1913 . . . . .

. 87

February & April, 1914 . . . . . . 187

June & August, I914 . . . . . . 257

Chicago Medical Recorder, The,

November, 19I3 . . . . .

86

October, I914 . . . . . . . 336

November, 1914 . .

..

. 335

Journal, The, of Heredity,

January, 1914 . . . .

February, 1914 . . . .

March & April, 1914 . . .

June & July, 1914 . . .

August, 1914 . . . .

November, 1914 . .

.

Popular Science Monthly,

January, 1914 .

..

February, 1914 . . . .

April, 1914 . . . .

June, July, August, & September, 1914

November, 1914 . . . .

Social Diseases,Vol. IV., No. 4 .

Training School Bulletin, The,

December, 1913 . . . .

April, 1914 . . . .

. .
. . . . .
.

88 . 184
. .I85
. * 258 * 259
. 336
. 84
. . 85
. i84 . 259
, 332 333 . . 88
. . 86 . . x86

May, 1914

. . . . . . . 258

October, 1914 . . . . . . . 337

Continental.

Archiv fur Frauenkunde und Eugenik, March & May, 1914 .262

Archiv fur Rassen- und Gesellschafts-Biologie,

May-June, 1913

. . . . . . 79

July-August, 1913 . . . . . . 80

September-October, 1913 . . . . . I79

June, I914 . . . . . .

339

July, 1914

....

. . 340

Archivio per l'Antropologia e la Etnologia, No. 3, Vol. XLVIII. 184

Bulletin de la Statistique Generale de la France,

January, 1914 . . . . . . . 84

April, 1914 . . . . . . . 182
Enfance, L', Anormale, January, 1914 . . . . 183 Eug6nique,
December, 1913, & January, 1914 . . . . 83 February, 1914 . . . . . . . 84 March & April, 1914 . . . . . . I82

May, 1914 . . . . . . . 260
Maanedsskrift for Sundhedspleje, 1913 . . . . 83

CONTENTS.

vii

REVIEWS (continued).

PAGE

PERIODICAL LITERATURE (continued).

Foreign (continued).

Continental (continued.)

Neue Generation, Die, May & June, 1914 .

. . 263

Revue de Pedotechnie, October & November, I9I3

.I83

Revue, La, Psychologique, December, 1913 . .

. 263

Rivista di Antropologia, Vol. XVIII., 1913 . . . . 83

Rivista Italiana di Sociologia, March-April, 1914 . . . 339

Zeitschrift fur Induktive Abstammungs- und Vererbungslehre,

November, 1913, & January, 1913 . . . .82

March, 1914 . . . . . . .8I

April, 1914 . . . . .

. I82

PITT, ST. G. LANE Fox, The Purpose of Education . . . 174

PYCRAFT, W. P., The Courtship of Animals . . . . 172

REISSHEIMER, H., Evolution by Co-operation: A Study in Bionomics I64

ROPER, A. G., Ancient Eugenics: The Arnold Prize Essay for 1913 . 62

SANDEMAN, G., Social Renewal 7. . . .

. 17

SCHOFIELD, DR. A. T., & DR. P. VAUGHAN-JACKSON, What a Boy

Should Know . . . . . . . i66

TORELLE, ELLEN, Plant and Animal Children: How they Grow . 325

TREDGOLD, DR. A. F., Mental Deficiency (Amentia), 2nd Edition . I68

WEBB, HELEN, Life and its Beginnings . . . . . 170

WESTERMARCK, E., Marriage Ceremonies in Morocco . . . i64

WORMALD, J. & S., A Guide to the Mental Deficiency Act, 1913 .65

NOTES AND COMMENTS.
Galton Day.-On Monday, February i6th, took place the first celebration by the Society of the anniversary of the birth of Sir Francis Galton. The celebration was inaugurated by a dinner at the Hotel Cecil, attended by 140 persons, members of
the Society and their friends. The guests of the Society included Lord Sydenham, Sir Archibald Geikie, Sir Francis Darwin, and Professor Bateson. Among the congratulatory telegrams received was one from Dr. Ploetz on behalf of the "Gesellschaft fur Rassenhygiene." Immediately after the dinner the company repaired to the lecture room, where a considerable audience had already assembled. Here the proceedings
were opened by Major Leonard Darwin, who, in introducing
the lecturer, explained the object of the gathering in the following words: " In the first place we desire to satisfy the very natural wish which is felt for some outward expression of our firm belief that posterity will owe a great debt of gratitude to the man who first made it possible to start a definite campaign in favour of racial advancement; and, in the second place, we hope by means of these gatherings to make more widely known the necessity for eugenic reform. We trust, therefore, that this may prove to be the first of a long series of such anniversary meetings; meetings at which addresses will be delivered on subjects connected with eugenics, thus ensuring that the meaning which Galton attached to that word shall never be lost sight of. It may perhaps be said that there is a danger in establishing an annual gathering in honour of any scientific thinker, namely, the danger that we may thus tend to cause his conclusions to be accepted as scientific dogmas outside the region of controversy. This harmful result from the celebration of a Galton day is, however, very unlikely to be felt; because all the writings of that keen thinker tend to show that he held that our scientific faith must include a belief, not only in the evolution in the past of living things, but also in the continued evolution in the future of scientific theory. The aim of eugenics according to its founder is to increase the

52 EUGENICS REVIEW.
probability of the men of the future being hereditarily endowed with noble qualities; and Galton not only taught us how that aim might be accomplished, but he also showed us in his own person what those noble qualities were." Sir Francis Darwin then delivered his address which we publish in full on page i. The proceedings terminated with a vote of thanks to the lecturer, proposed by the Dean of St. Paul's and seconded by Mrs. Scharlieb, and a vote of thanks to the chairman, proposed by Major Hills and seconded by Mr. Whetham.
The Mental Deficiency Act, which comes into force on April Ist, may be regarded as a very useful instalment of legislation. It is, perhaps, the only piece of English social law extant, in which the influence of heredity has been treated as a practical factor in determining its provisions.
The Act does not go as far as some of its promoters may have wished, yet most good things grow slowly, and legislators were well advised, in this instance, in adopting cautious measures, where so much is debatable, so much untried, or still in experimental stages. Much of its general utility even now depends upon two factors, the passing of the Elementary Education (Defective and Epileptic Children) Bill, introduced by Mr. Joseph Pease this Session, and the increase of the Treasury grant. Without the clauses making it compulsory to establish special schools, children above school age needing institutional care or guardianship will be left to drift into danger, save in the unlikely event of the parents of the very worst cases notifying the local authority of the necessity for the certification and segregation of their defective children. With-
out an increased Treasury grant, the clause in the Act (30 [il),
which makes it non-obligatory for a local authority to provide either institutions, or guardianship, for persons within their area, whom they ascertain to be mentally defective, if the money provided by Parliament is less than half the net amount of the cost, will affect more areas than is realised, as the Treasury grant is at present only £150,000. It is permissive, however, for any local authority to act without the grant, a fact which shlould be borne in mind by those anxious to promote the movement. So far the most active authorities are the Poor Law

NOTES AND COMMENTS.

53

Guardians. Almost every union in the country is discussing the possibilities of institutional treatment.
In addition to the existing colonies connected with the London and Birmingham Boards of Guardians, twenty-four unions in the North of England have already bought land for this purpose; others have their plans almost completed. Many county councils, on the other hand, have not even constituted their " committees for the care of defectives," yet there appears
already, as at Wolverhampton, some little danger of disagreement between these rival authorities as to their relative spheres
of action. This spirit is to be deprecated, as there seems more than enough for all to do in carrying out the provisions of the Act. The formation of the Local Committees, the maintenance in institutions or provision of guardianship for defectives, whether under Poor Law or otherwise, the establishment ,of special schools, and the co-ordination of voluntary effort will require the devotion and interest of every agency available for the aid of defectives for some time to come.
A. H. P. KIRBY. The Inebriate's Bill, of 1914, should be read in conjunction with the last published report of the inspector under the Inebriates Acts. This partakes more of the nature of a general
than of an annual report. After defining carefully what he means by an inebriate, Dr. Branthwaite makes a rough estimate of the prevalence of inebriety. " There are about 48,ooo inebriates of all classes in England and Wales at the present
time (about I-42 per i,ooo of the population), of which number
about i6,ooo are persons in private life-whose habits have not led to conviction in police courts-and 32,000 known to have criminal or disorderly tendency."
With regard to the treatment of the non-criminal inebriate he makes the following recommendations: (i) Legislation should allow " an inebriate to enter into a legal pledge to abstain, to surrender himself to the control of some friend whom he can trust; such friend being in the position of guardian, with power to prevent the patient from obtaining drink during time of stress, when good intention would otherwise succumb to abnormal desire." (2) " If these mild

54 EUGENICS REVIEW.
measures fail, . . . then the inebriate should be encouraged to enter an institution for more effective control and super-
vision." (3) As experience shows that only an insignificant
proportion of inebriates will submit voluntarily to institutional control, it is desirable that powers should be available for the application of restraint, under proper safeguards, " during the early days of an inebriate's history." "When inebriety is clearly defined, recovery can never be guaranteed; but it is probable if restraint be applied during early days, and improbable later." " For a long time past our national respect for the liberty of the subject has seemed to contra-indicate the compulsory application of restraint to persons who are inebriates without being disorderly or criminal. But, however justifiable the delay so that experience may prove necessity, the time has come when there can be no further doubt as to the desirability of making proper provision. Nearly 35 years' experience of legislation for inebriates has amply proved that the existence of compulsory power is unavoidable, and has made it clear that further progress is impossible so long as things remain as they are."
This is strong language for an official report, and Dr. Branthwaite's views concerning the treatment of criminal and disorderly inebriates are expressed with equal force and directness. "The necessity for compulsory restraint in such cases has been accepted and acted on, for many years past. All that is necessary now in regard to this phrase of the subject is to emphasize the need for the removal of difficulties that now prevent the early and more efficient exercise of restraint for purposes of reformation, as distinct from restraint for the purpose of punishment." " All efforts at amendment of the law should be directed towards rendering the imprisonment of inebriates, as a preliminary to their treatment in reformatories, a thing of the past, so far at least as this is possible." " It is clear that repeated short penal sentences have no deterrent influence over the inebriate." " It is difficult to describe the proceeding "-a few weeks' imprisonment, spasmodically applied to habitual drunkards-" as other than inhuman, useless, and an absolute waste of public money."

NOTES AND COMMENTS.
After coming to these conclusions Dr. Branthwaite proceeds to summarize the findings of the three committees of enquiry concerning the best methods of dealing with habitual drunkards. These were the Select Committee of I872, the Departmental Committee of I892, and the Departmental Committee of I9o8. The reports of all three committees are in practical agreement not only with regard to essentials, but also with regard to details, but legislation based on their findings, namely, the Habitual Drunkards Act of I879 and the Inebriates Act of 1898, has fallen far short of carrying out their recommendations, and thus a further amending Act is urgently needed. Dr. Branthwaite appears to hold a sanguine view as to the probable reforming effect of reformatories, provided that the inebriate finds shelter there early enough in his career, and it is natural that in advocating amendments of the existing law he should not in any way belittle the possible good to be expected from them. But the prevalence of feeble-mindedness among the inmates of reformatories makes it very doubtful whether short detention even at the most hopeful time would have any lasting result in the majority of them. In the present report no direct statement is made about the rate of occurrence of mental defect, but from other reports it appears to be present in more than half the persons admitted. As among those who were sent to reformatories during 1912 53 out of 305 could neither read nor write, and I49 could only do so imperfectly, it seems probable that little change has occurred in this respect in recent years. It may thus be found that the proper function of the reformatory is to provide a more or less permanent place of shelter for the inebriate.
The Bill of I914 gives practical effect to Dr. Branthwaite's recommendations which are themselves in accord with those of the last Departmental Committee. What its fate will be this session is still doubtful as its second reading appears to have been indefinitely postponed. It is to be hoped that in spite of the great amount of Parliamentary time likely to be occupied with more contentious measures it may not be completely abandoned.

56 EUGENICS REVIEW.
Eugenics and Education-We note with satisfaction that the efforts of the Eugenics Education Society to further the view that the idea of racial responsibility should be among the usual lessons learnt at school has not been without result. In various parts of the country there are indications that the importance of this question is recognised and that a considerable body of opinion in the teaching profession is agreed on what preliminary steps should be taken. At the North of England Education Conference, held at Bradford at the beginning of January, two papers were read by well-known eugenists. Dr. D'Ewart, Hon. Secretary of the Manchester Branch of the Society, took " Eugenics and Sex Training " as his subject, and Miss Norah March, also a member of the Society, dealt with " Sex Education and Eugenic Training in the School." Regret is often expressed by those eugenists not in touch with the education problems of the elementary schools that eugenics should so constantly be approached as if it were almost synonymous with sex hygiene, but to those who have given close consideration to the matter the conclusion seems unavoidable that although the two subjects are theoretically distinct they cannot be practically sundered. A sound eugenic ideal and a sense of individual responsibility cannot be imparted except on the basis of an elementary knowledge of the physiological laws of reproduction and development. Miss March in her paper outlines the possible methods of approaching the subject, in a way which will be of great assistance to the teacher. She clearly states that " the ultimate aim of sex-education will be attained when one considers its application in education for parenthood." It is recognised that a large part of such education is rightly the privilege of the parent, but in many cases the parents feel unable to give it themselves and welcome the assistance of the teacher. Miss March indicates how the various subjects of the ordinary school curriculum, " literature, history, human geography, and Bible knowledge," may each be utilized in implanting the eugenic ideal, and goes on to say "It is undesirable that there should be any special course of lessons in moral training, such teaching should find its way unobtrusively, yet very definitely, into the ordinary subjects."

NOTES AND COMMENTS.

57

Before any teaching, direct or indirect, can be given in the school, it is essential that the teachers should learn something of the subject themselves. An attempt to provide for them opportunities for so doing was recently made in the special course of lectures for teachers, organized by the Society and given by Professor J. A. Thomson and Dr. Greenwood. We learn with pleasure that the University Extension Board for London will
probably include lectures on eugenics in its autumn programme. Cambridge University has also recognized the importance of the subject by authorizing a course of local lectures to be delivered at Leicester by Dr. Marett Tims. Dr. Marett Tims takes for his subject " Man's place in Nature: Biology and Eugenics," and after an examination of the syllabus we have no hesitation
in saying that the subject is dealt with by him in such a way that anyone taking full advantage of his lectures will acquire a sound and comprehensive, though necessarily elementary, knowledge of the subject. The consideration of man's place in nature, involving as it must the idea of evolution and some knowledge of structure and function and of the nature of social life, is, perhaps, the fittest introduction to eugenics that could be devised, yet hitherto the subject has seldom if ever been approached in this way.
Before closing this brief review of "Eugenics and
Education" we take the opportunity of emphasizing the vital importance of obtaining the consent of the parents to any proposal that their children should be taught such subjects as eugenics and sex-hygiene. Without this consent and co-operation, however good the intention of the teacher, disastrous results may follow an attempt to introduce these subjects. This has been shown particularly by the case of Miss Oldham. On the other hand, in those cases in which the parents have had the teacher's aims and methods explained to them, permission has been given by the indifferent and cordial co-operation by the intelligent parents.

OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS.
THE ENGLISH CONVICT: A STATISTICAL STUDY BY CHARLES GORING, M. D.., B.Sc. Lond., Deputy Medical Officer, H.M. Prison, Parkhurst.
pp. 440; 49 fig.; 285 tables; index. This masterly report contains a minute statistical analysis of the criminal. The layman must not allow its publication by the Government or its scientific treatment to deter him from studying it. Although by the very nature of the work there is much in the way of figures and tables and calculations that the ordinary man will not follow with ease, yet the main body contains a mass of information and suggestive fact that from its lucid presentation will absorb the attention of the philanthropist, the social reformer, or of that large section interested in human nature, while it will prove of especial importance to the eugenist. The breaking up of the chapters into sections and an index makes its assimilation much simpler. The original idea was a statistical enquiry into the truth of the theory of a criminal type, and of the view of Lombroso's school of thought, that the physique of the criminal predestined him to a life of crime. But when the enormous mass of material came to hand, it was felt that this could be profitably extended to a much fuller enquiry. The material lay in those who were sentenced to the prisons at Dartmoor, Parkhurst, Borstal and Portland after Ist June, 1902, until the number of 3,ooo had been reached. The statistical reduction of the data was carried out at the Biometric Laboratory of the University of London. The report opens with an introduction dealing first with the superstitions of criminality, in which Lombroso's theories are dealt with at some length, pointing out the unreliable and unscientific data admitted by him; secondly, discussing the objects and means of the enquiry. Only by a statistical method can a scientific basis be laid. The real question to be discussed is whether the criminal is a morbid abnormality differing
qualitatively in his physical and mental make up from the ordinary man,
or whether he has certain qualities shared by all, in a larger or lesser degree.
Part I. inquires into the alleged existence of a physical criminal type. There is a brief explanation on the statistical methods employed. After an examination dealing with 37 physical characteristics such as head lengths, cephalic index, chin projection, eyesight, shape of the nose, asymmetry of the face, of criminals divided up according to the nature of their crimes-malicious damage to property, stealing and burglary, sexual offences, and so forth. Dr. Goring concludes that "if there is any real association between physical character and crime, this is so microscopic in amount as not to be revealed. . . ." He compares the criminals not only with each other, but also with Oxford and Cambridge undergraduates and others. " No evidence has emerged confirming the existence of a criminal type such as Lombroso and his disciple have described."
Part II., chapter I., deals with the physique of the criminal. He is found to have a lesser stature and strength and diminished weight. Although those convicted of violence to the person have an average degree of strength and constitutional soundness considerably above not only the criminal but also the general public. But the facts do not allow of further deduction. The age incidence of the first crime centres round three points, the most important one being 20-25, then a more protracted
and less emphatic middle age period of 35-45 and a transient period of 55-65-
In chapter II., the health of the criminal is discussed, he is seen to be, if anything, slightly better off than law-abiding people. Disease, except

-4X EUGENICS REVIEW.
those associated with alcoholism and venereal conditions, is not related to crime, and except for epilepsy and insanity, morbid conditions per se are no part of the force of circumstances by which criminals are made.
Chapter III. discusses the mental differentiation of criminals. Temperament, wvhether phlegmatic, discontented, suspicious, or egotistic, has no connection with crime; temper likewise, except that hot-headed
criminals tend to commit violent offences. Now comes what to the
eugenist is the most important part of an important document. The chief factor in the causation of crime is mental defect, the coefficient of correlation being '64. Mental defect supplies the link between crime and alcohol ('39), epilepsy ('26), and sex offences (31I). Mental defect is variously estimated among criminals as from io per cent. to 20 per cent., the latter probably being the more correct, while in the general population it is only '45 per cent. The crime most associated with it is stackfiring (52-9 of those convicted being mentally defective), then wilful damage (22-2), arson (I6-7), and so forth down to fraud (o'o). Fraud is
found to stand apart from other kinds of crime. Between the criminal's
defective intelligence and defective physique there is found to be no con-
nection.
In chapter IV., " The Influence of the Force of Circumstances on the Genesis of Crime," Dr. Goring examines the nationality, education, both formal and effective, employment, alcoholism, the influence of family life in its different aspects, the standard of living of the parents, the age of the subject at the death of the mother, the order of the subject in his family, and the number in the family, as well as the relation of first to subsequent convictions. He finds that an adverse environment is related much more intimately to the intelligence of convicts than to the degree of their recidivism or to the nature of the crimes they commit.
Chapter V. enquires into the fertility of the criminal. Although up to 40 the number in the family is the same as in the law-abiding classes, after that it ceases. Dr. Goring brings forward an interesting physchological theory to account for this curious fact. It is not that the criminal has become sterile, but that the long-suffering wives have become so tired of their husbands' misdeeds that they desert them. Although the criminal comes from the most prolific stocks the average number in the criminal's family is less than half that of the general population.
Chapter VI., on the heredity of the criminal, will prove of especial interest to the eugenist. Here there is a two-fold aim-(J) " to determine the correlation between parents and offspring and between contemporary members of the same family with regard to their convictions for crime" (2) " to estimate from these facts related to other evidence how far any resemblance in crime depends upon the influence of family contagion." The percentage of criminal offspring increases according as neither
parent, one parent, or both parents have been convicted. The correlation between parents and sons is about *6o, the resemblance between fathers
and sons being slightly greater. The fraternal correlation is about '45. Here, as elsewhere, fraud seems to stand apart from other crimes, there being a very small correlation. The greatest resemblance lies in those
classes where there is a taint of habitual or professional criminality-
stealing and burglary. The influence of contagion he places very low. The fact that while
only one out of eight criminal men have a criminal wife, every other
criminal woman has a criminal husband he accounts for by selective
mating. As the average age of marriage is 25 and the modal age of first crime is I9, most criminals have entered on their career before marriage. The women find it harder to gain a law-abiding partner for
life than the men.
There is a chapter of general conclusions.

OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS.

75

The report brings out, as Sir E. Ruggles-Brice points out in a preface, the fact that the Borstal Institution is the best wvay of dealing with crime in the individual, although in its connection with mental defect the eugenist will see a deeper line of action.
H. R. S.
SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONERS IN LUNACY. 1913. Part I.
Eyre and Spottiswoode. pp. 125.
This report shows that on January Ist, 19I3, the number of the notified insane under care in England and Wales was 138,377, or a proportion of I to 267, or 37-48 per io,ooo of the estimated population. Ten years previously the ratio was 34-23, so that during this period it has increased by 9'49 per cent.-in other words the proportion of insane to the population has risen from I in 292 in the year 1903 to I in 267 in the year 1913. This increase, in view of all the attentio)n which has been paid to the public health during the past thirty or forty years, cannot be regarded as other than disquieting. Compared with earlier figures, say those ot I859-69, the increase in the ratio of insanity is very much greater, but there is a fallacy in this comparison owing to the facts that certification is now very much commoner than 5o years ago, whilst improved care has lengthened the life of the insane and so caused an "accumulation"' and increase in the official figures. It is doubtful, however, if there has been any appreciable change in these respects during the past ten years, and the figures quoted would seem to indicate a real increase in the ratio of insanity. In this connexion it may be noted that in the case of London, whose population was practically the same in igii as in I9OI, the pauper insane during this period have increased by 25 per cent. The Commissioners give some very interesting figures and charts showing the incidence of insanity in the different counties. This varies very much, for reasons which are by no means clear, and it is probable that careful inquiries directed to ascertain these reasons would throw much valuable light upon the whole question of the genesis of mental disease. So far as remedial treatment is concerned, the recovery rates recorded each year do not encourage much hope for further advance, and it will be very gratifying to advocates of eugenics to find that the Commissioners say: "It would seem to be needful to turn from the therapeutic side to the preventive, if insanity is to be effectively controlled. . . . The recognition of the share taken in the causation of insanity by heredity, alcoholism and syphilis suggests that an appreciable diminution in its amount might follow on a reasonable application of the principles of eugenics and of social reform." Truly the eugenic movement is advancing when such words emanate from a Government department.
A. F. TREDGOLD.
rHE REPORT OF THE INSPECTOR UNDER THE INEBRIATES ACTS, I879 to 1900, for the year I912. 1914. [Cd. 7281.] Price 3d. Pp. 30.
An account of this report, with comments thereon, appears under the heading " The Inebriates Bill " on p. 53.
CENSUS OF ENGLAND AND WALES, I91I. Vol. XI. Infirmities. Persons returned as Totally Blind, Totally Deaf, Deaf and Dumb, Lunatic
Imbecile and Feeble-minded. 1913. [Cd. 7020.] Price gd. Pp. xv., 78. These returns are slightly more detailed than those of I9OI, in that
persons who are totally deaf are distinguished from those who are both deaf and dumb. They suffer indeed not from lack of detail, but from lack of accuracy, as is admitted with much frankness by the framers of the report, who on that ground "have not felt justified in entering upon an elaborate analysis of the figures." The usefulness of the report is further reduced by reason of the fact that the nature and amount of the inaccuracy is different from census to census, so that the figures for I9lt cannot be fairly compared with those of i9oi, and thus allowv of any conclusion to

76 EUGENICS REVIEW.

be drawn as to the proportional increase or decrease of the infirmities
dealt with.

The following table shows the number of persons per million of each
sex who suffer from the defects enumerated

Male.

Female.

Blind ...

...

... ...

76o ...

702

Deaf (other than Deaf-Mutes) ... 6Io ... 86o

Deaf-Mutes ...

... 468 ... 373

Insane (including Lunatics, Imbe-

ciles, and Feeble-minded Persons) 4370 ... 4604

The insane, male and female together, form 4,491 per million of the

population, made up of 2,957 lunatics, 704 imbeciles, and 830 feeble-

minded persons.

CENSUS OF SCOTLAND, 1911. Vol. III. 1913. [Cd. 7I63.] Price 2S. iid. Pp. lVi., 290.
The most interesting and valuable of the records contained in this volume are those which deal with the fertility of marriage. This subject is so important that we will postpone its consideration
till the Scottish returns can be examined in combination with those ob-
tained from England and Ireland. Next to this in eugenic importance come the figures giving the numbers of the infirm. These are subject to much the same sources of error as the English, and it is to be regretted that they are not summarised in a strictly comparable form. The following table shows the numbers per million of the population of those suffering from the infirmities enumerated:-

Blind

...

...

...

697

Deaf

...

...

...

845

Dumb

...

...

...

Deaf and Dumb ... ... ...

56o
498

Lunatic ...

...

...

...

Imbecile or Feeble-minded ...

3302
i662

The deaf and dumb are included both among the deaf and among the
dumb, so the proportion of those who are deaf without being dumb is 347, and of those who are dumb without being deaf is 62.

BOARD OF EDUCATION. Annual Report for 1912 of the Chief Medical
Officer. 1913. [Cd. 7184.] Price 2S. 6d. Pp. 4I4.
This report summarises the results obtained in 1912 from the medical
inspection of school children, the provision of which is a Statutory duty of each local Education Authority. The opportunity for the systematic observation of large numbers of children afforded in this way to individual
school medical officers would appear to an outsider to provide a wonderful field for research into the nature and origin of diseases and defects. That
this opportunity is made some use of is shown by the report, which includes reference to many special inquiries. For example, on the relation between heart disease and rheumatism, and on the fluctuations in body
temperature among normal children.

The theory that heredity plays any part in the causation of disease is evidently repugnant to some official minds. Thus we find the curious dictum that " Epilepsy is looked upon by some as an inherited disease " used to introduce the following statement (p. Ii i) :- Careful inquiry is made as to the occurrence of heredity by Dr. Hume Griffith in respect of children admitted into the Lingfield Colony, of which he is medical superintendent,
and the records of 95 children are shown in the following table :-No
information obtainable, I5; no family history obtained of epilepsy or insanity, 40; history of epilepsy in near relatives, 27; history of insanity in near relatives, 8; history of death from convulsions in infancy among members of same family, 5. Deducting the 15 cases in which no family history was obtainable, these figures show a family history of epilepsy in 33-7 per cent.; of insanity, io per cent.; of epilepsy, convulsions or in-

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

77

sanity in 50 per cent." The statement is not a very good example of how to apply statistical methods, but possibly Dr. Hume Griffith's data are more adequately recorded elsewhere, although there is no reference to any other channel of publication in the present report.
A more pressing question perhaps, from the eugenic point of view, is the part played by heredity in tuberculosis, but although some at any rate of the school medical officers use the presence or absence of family history of tubercle as a guide in diagnosis, it does not appear to have occurred to any of them to investigate this problem. It is to be hoped that some
may do so in the future.

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.
ENGLISH.
JOURNAL OF THE ROYAL STATISTICAL SOCIETY, December, 1913, January
and February, 1914. The December issue of this journal contains two papers of value to eugenists. Miss Hutchins, in an interesting note on the effect of infantile mortality on the proportion of the sexes, points out that since in districts of high mortality the latter mainly affects the earlier ages of life, the consequence is that the proportion of females living at adult ages tends to be higher than in the Registrar-General's healthy districts. Mrs. Frances Wood's study of the " Course of Real Wages in London, 1900-12 " is a valuable contiibution to social statistics, and should be read by all who have occasion to consider the problem of working class prosperity at the present time as contrasted with the conditions prevailing
some years ago.
In the January number, Messrs. Greenwood and Yule publish a critical analysis of the evidence supposed to show that diseased stocks are peculiarly fertile, and that earlier born children are more liable to be diseased. Their results should be compared with the similar conclusions reached by Mr. J. A. Cobb in a letter appearing in the last number of
this REVIEW.
In the February part, the most important paper is " The Fertility of Marriage in Scotland: A Census Study," by Dr. J. Craufurd Dunlop, Superintendent of the Statistical Department of the Office of the Registrar-
General for Scotland. This paper is in effect a summary of the results ob-
tained by the census authorities and now published (Vol. III. of the Report of the Twelfth Decennial Census of Scotland. Cd. 7I63). Attention may be directed to the marked differences in fertility which characterise the different social classes of Scotland. Taking marriages which had lasted at least I5 years, and in which the wives were more than 22, but less than 27, at the time of marriage, the results are arranged in different groups. Professional and allied occupations were found without exception to be of low fertility, while most of the labouring class occupations exhibited a high rate of fertility. To take a few instances, crofters and coal, shale and ironstone miners yielded mean families of 7-04 and 7'0I children respectively. The figures for agricultural labourers and general labourers were 6-42 and 6'29. At the other end of the scale, we find such groups as physicians and surgeons, with a mean of 3-9I, advocates and solicitors with a mean of 3-92, and ministers and clergymen with a mean of 4-33-
In the discussion on Dr. Dunlop's paper certain difficulties of interpretation are noticed.
Another article in this number of interest to eugenists who employ statistical methods is " A Study of Index Correlations," by Mrs. Frances Wood and Messrs. Brown and Greenwood, which treats of some practical difficulties in the interpretation of correlation coefficients.

EUGENICS REVIEW.
INSURANCE OBSERVER, January 3Ist and February 6th, I914. Rating of Lives for Family History of Tuberculosis. Mr. C. A. Elliott, F. I.A. In the first place the experience of the Prudential Assurance Company, recently analysed by Messrs. Rusher and Kenchington, is considered. In these data no distinction appears to have been made between persons with tuberculous parents, grandparents, brothers, sisters, uncles, or aunts. The mortality of such lives as compared with normal experience showed that a life of the former class aged 33 was equivalent to a select life aged 34 8, one aged 45 equal to a select life aged 45 7, and one aged 57 to a select life aged 56'3. Carrying the analysis further, Mr. Elliott concludes that the following method would be an equitable one in the cases of proponents otherwise healthy, but with a family history of tuberculosis:-Proponent under 25, add 7 years; proponent 25-30, add five years; proponent 31-50, add 3 years; proponent 51 or over, take select. These results have a certain eugenic importance as showing that the experience of life assurance societies does not bear out the popular view that family history is without importance in connection with tubercular diseases.
SCIENCE PROGRESS, Jan., 1914. Recent Advances in our Knowledge of Syphilis. E. H. Ross, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P. Pp. 535-546. This short paper covers a wide field. The date of the first appearance of the disease is discussed. Next the history of the discovery of the parasite which causes it is dealt with. Credit for the discovery is usually given to Schaudinn, but Dr. Ross maintains that in reality it is due to Siegel. A description of the life history of the parasite in guinea pig syphilis follows. From this it appears that a process of conjugation occurs, the spirochaete being the male conjugant. The zygote formed by conjugation develops within one of the lymphocytes of the host and there produces fresh forms by budding. The elements budded off enter into fresh lymphocytes, where they may give rise again to spirochaetes or to the female form with which the spirochaete unites. Structures resembling closely the various forms which are produced in guinea pig syphilis have been found also in human syphilis, thus it seems probable that the human parasite has a very similar life history. Recently an epidemic of " rabbit-pox " has been observed among wild rabbits and hares in Norfolk, and this has been investigated by the author, who finds that it is produced by a parasite practically identical with that of the guinea pig. He concludes his paper by suggesting that it may be possible for human beings to obtain protection from the disease by inoculation with rabbit syphilis, just as they are protected against small-pox by inoculation with cow-pox.
The Influence of Nutrition and the Infl?uence of Education in Mental Development. F. W. Mott, M.D., F.R.S. Pp. 460-48I. This is the third Chadwick Trust lecture delivered by the author, of which the first two were published in the October number of Science Progress. In the present lecture he reviews the conditions necessary for normal mental development and describes the stimuli which bring various kinds of mental activity into play. The practical bearing of the points discussed on the rearing and education of children is indicated.
Eugenics and War. Pp. 591-593. This is an editorial note principally
concerned with Chancellor Jordan's lecture on " Eugenics and War " which was published in the October number of the EUGENICS REVIEW. The writer urges that the historical instances adduced by Chancellor Jordan to support the view that the effects of war are dysgenic are not very convincing. He also maintains that instances as good may be brought forward on the opposite side. " For example, one of the most virile periods of English history was that which followed immediately upon the dreadful Wars of the Roses. The greatest development of Prussia followed shortly after the wars of Frederick the Great." The complexity of the whole subject is insisted on and Chancellor Jordan is blamed for not taking it sufficiently into account. The writer also suggests that " universal military training

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

79

may possibly have such a good effect as will swamp the occasional loss of good men in the comparatively rare moments of war."

FOREIGN.
ARCHIV FUR RASSEN- UND GESELLSCHAFTS-BIOLOGIE X., 3; May-June,
1913 (published December gth, 1913).
Max Hilzheimer: Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Formbilduing bei unsereni Haustieren, insbesontdere in bezug auf den Schadel (p. 273-289). A reply to an article by Berthold Klatt, who, in Hilzheimer's opinion, is disposed to exaggerate the physiological aspect of the question as to the development of species of domestic animals and to neglect the morphological. Hilzheimer comes to the conclusion that at any rate in regard to dogs and swine, it is not the form of the skull as such that is transmitted, but the capacity to develop a certain form of skull under certain definite conditions of the environment. Fundamentally, " an animal is the product of inherited characters and the effects of the environment." Not only domestic species, but also some of the sub-species of wild animals are nothing else than forms that have adapted themselves to their environment. If they are placed in other surroundings their distinctive characters will either be lost or modified in a few generations, perhaps even in the first generation. "Although the statement that an animal is exclusively the product of its native soil must not be accepted literally, nevertheless those people who believe that the descendants of a fixed variety must invariably resemble their parents would probably be somewhat astonished at the results if they were to try, for example, to breed a few generations of Percheron horses on the Steppes of Russia, or English bulldogs on the Continent. "
Franz Boas: Die Analyse anthropometrischer Serien, nebst Bemerkungen uber die Deutung der Instabilitat menschlicker Typen (p. 290-302). Prof. Boas criticises, among other things, the present method of dividing anthropometric series into a small number of arbitrarily deliminated groups and of drawing conclusions from them by taking the relative percentage of individuals in each. The article is also in part an answer to criticisms of the author's Changes in Bodily Form of Immigrants in the United States, by Sergi, Toldt, Fehlinger and others, who either deny the physiological changes described by Boas or attempt to explain them away as wholly a result of selection or of the correlation between cerebral index and the size of the body (Auerbach, Schiff). Some anthropologists insist upon believing that the cerebral index must be absolutely stable, and therefore prefer to consider the observed phenomena as resulting from an alteration in the composition of the population in question and not as an outcome of actual physiological changes. Sergi holds that rapid alterations in the germinal substance are impossible, and Boas asks if this opinion is not due to an unnecessary narrowing-down of the term plasticity. When the growth of the body is altered by the action of the environment, no one hesitates to presuppose an inherited stature that is strongly influenced by external conditions. Improved nutrition and the elimination of diseases of childhood have in all probability something to do with it. Moreover, children are not born with full-grown heads, and there is a long period of pre-natal development during which external influences have ample time to assert themselves. Boas does not attempt to state what these influences are, but it seems to him much more probable that the cerebral index is altered by the influence of the environment than by selection, which apparently has no connection with the question at all. Not long ago he was able to show that in the case of American Jews the resemblance between parents and children is less in such characters as require a longer period of growth than in such as develop in a shorter time. This must be considered to be another expression of the influence of the environment.

80 EUGENICS REVIEW.
And although Boas does not venture to make universal application of this observation, he thinks it quite probable that it may turn out to be a general rule.
W. Weinberg: Uber neuere psychiatrische Vererbungsstatistik (p. 303-312). A discussion of some recent studies from Dr. Davenport's Eugenics Record Office, in which it is attempted to apply Mendelian
formulae to the inheritance of nervous and mental weaknesses. Rosanoff and Orr (Bulletin No. 5) consider the transmitted tendency to insanity and neuroses of all sorts to be due to the presence of a simple recessive factor, and according to their statistics this would appear quite probable. Weinberg, however, points out that the children under consideration were not arranged according to their ages, and that since the neuropathic constitution frequently does not become manifest until maturity has been reached, the numbers given in the Bulletin must be much lower than those required by the Mendelian theory. Consequently he believes that if all the children were kept long enough under observation the numbers would considerably exceed the Mendelian expectations. Weinberg does not think that the material used is representative in the statistical sense. He mentions further the difficulty of obtaining certain knowledge whether in some cases a neurosis is purely a transmitted character or acquired. It is also obvious that sometimes a neuropathic tendency may remain latent and unrecognised in either the parents or the children, and the possibility must be considered of mutations in the germ-plasm of the parents caused by one or another toxic influence, which finds no equivalent somatic expression. Nor does the failure to obtain Mendelian proportions in a statistical study speak unconditionally either for or against a Mendelian rule when the investigation is concerned with characters whose appearance is dependent upon exogenous inciting factors.
In contrast to Rosanoff and Orr, Davenport and Weeks (A First Study in Inheritance in Epilepsy, Bulletin No. 4) start with the assumption that neuropaths are heterozygotic (simplex). In regard to Heron's criticisms of the work of the Eugenics Record Office (noticed on p. 365-367 of the lanuary number of this REVIEW), Weinberg does not express a very favourable opinion; but he naturally insists on the importance of making use only of trustworthy and sufficiently complete material.
Stephen Kekule von Stradonitz: Das heutige Kaiserhaus Russlands germanischen oder slawischen Stammes? (p. 3I3-325). An interesting paper in which is shown by quotations from the memoirs of Catharine II., that the father of the Emperor Paul II. and consequently the male ancestor of the present ruling house was not the German Karl Peter Ulrich, Herzog of Holstein-Gottorp, afterwards Peter III., but the Russian Sergei Vasilievitch Saltykoff.
Dr. Klatt replies to Dr. Hilzheimer, and Dr. Lenz and Sanitatsrat Weinberg continue their controversy over the inheritance of haemophilia in the Discussionen und Erklarungen.
ARCHIV FUR RASSEN- UND GESELLSCHAFTS BIOI,OGIE, X., 4; JulyAugust, I913 (published January 3oth, 1914).
W. Weinberg: Auslesewirkungen bei biologisch statistischen Problemen, I. (p. 417-45I). From a projected treatise on methods of investigating problems in heredity. Both clinical and statistical methods are useful, but the former do not yield results that can as a rule be accepted as final. Genealogical tables are deceptive for the reason that often what appears to be in them a rule is perhaps only an exception. In doing statistical work one must learn to place an equal value on all facts, whether they are of a positive or a negative sort. A description and elucidation of the author's Geschwister and Probanden methods follows: In studying the genetic qualities of parents, we should not use as material
such of their children as are known to have inherited the characters under
investigation, for the reason that since they are known to possess these

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

Si

characters, their inclusion must tend to prejudice the result by exaggerating the number of cases in which the characters in question occur. On the other hand, by making use of a sufficient number of the brothers and sisters of such children, it is probable that we can obtain more correct results. On p. 420 Dr. Weinberg makes the statement that "when we find a character, which we hold to be transmissible, in a child and not in his parents, if we have no reason to believe that external influences alone have caused it to be latent in the parents, we conclude that the character has a purely innate capacity for remaining latent, and therefore assume that it must be a simple recessive factor. We should, however, remember that in reality the conditions are more complicated, that the visible appearance of a character must depend upon the coincidence of several endogenous factors." It would perhaps have been well to mention, for the sake of avoiding misunderstanding, the possibility that some transmissible characters which appear in children and not in their parents, among them perhaps the most significant of all from the point of view of social pathology, may be a result of mutations or miodifications of the germ-plasm caused by external, or by a combination of external and internal, influences.
Constantino Bresciani-Turroni (Palermo): Uber die Korrelation swischen Korpergrosse und Kopfzndex (p. 452-469). The conclusion reached in this paper is that, in so far at least as the investigations described have extended, the correlation between size of body and cerebral index is very small, if indeed it exist at all.
J. Strebel (Zurich): Korrelation der Vererbung von Augenleiden
(Ektopia lentium cong., Ektopia pupillae, Myopie) und Herzfehlern in der
Nachkommenschaft Schleuss-Winkler (p. 470-478). Ectopia lentis congenita is a dominant character, as Bateson supposed, and there are some indications of its belonging to a sex-modified type of inherited defect. From the accompanying genealogical table and the cases described, it is evident that the factor of inheritance must also be considered in the case of so-called non-congenital defects of the heart. The study of genuine correlations throws important light on the diagnosis and etiology of otherwise obscure complexes of symptoms.
Walter Claassen: Die Ausbreitung der Geschlechtskrankheiten in Berlin, 1892 bis 19IO (p. 479-483). Using the most recent Statistische
lahrbuch and its returns covering the number of cases treated by the
Gewerkskrankenverein to which 22 per cent. of the working men of Berlin belong, Dr. Claassen comes to the conclusion that from 22-5 to 34 per cent., at the most, perhaps one-half of the male workers of Berlin are syphilitic or have been so at one time during their lives. Although these figures are very different from F. Lenz's go per cent. (comp. his paper in No. i of the Arckiv for I913), whose results were based upon the number of cases of general paralysis treated in Berlin asylums, nevertheless, as Claassen says, " this fact is in itself so terrible that it would scarcely seem necessary to exaggerate it." The same statistical material shows the possibility that since I892-94 the incidence of venereal diseases (mainly syphilis) among men has increased by more than two-thirds, since I896-I9oo by one-third, and threefold among women since I896-Igoo. In the Discussionen und Erklarungen (p. 503-6) Lenz endeavours to show that his 90 per cent. result is justified by the material used by Claassen.
Paul Kaznelson (Prag): Uber einige "Rassenmerkmale" des judischen Volkes (p. 484-502). An interesting paper on certain peculiarities in the somatic characters of the Jews, whose explanation is to be sought in the history (racial composition) of the Jewish people (Physiognomy, blonde types), also physiological and pathological characters (sexual and intellectual precocity), relative immunity to phthisis, insanity and diabetes.
HENRY BERGEN.

82 EUGENICS REVIEW.

ZEITSCHRIFT FUR INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE.
Band 2. HeftI and 2. Nov., 1913. Vererbungsgeschichtliche Einzel-

fragen. III. V. Haecker. Pp. I-9. Professor Haecker continues his dis-

cussion of the outstanding problems of heredity and evolution. In this

article he deals with the inheritance of acquired characters. He distin-

guishes four principal forms which the so-called evidence of this mode of

inheritance takes. First there are the cases of the inheritance of an

induced pathological character as in the famous experiments of Brown-

Sequard- secondly, cases of inheritance of aberrant rather than of patho-

logical characters as in the experiments of Blaringhem; thirdly, there are

the cases of change in some highly specialised adaptive character such as

instinct induced by a change in the environment of which examples may be

seen among domestic animals; fourthly, cases of the inheritance of some

new character directly induced by the environment as in the experiments

of Kammerer. Professor Haecker suggests that an explanation may be

found in what he calls the Pluripotenzhypothese; by this he means that

we may think of the organism as containing many potentialities, some

alone occurs

ofotwhhericphotmeantteirailiatliiesse;mawyhemna,tehroiwaleivseer,anadchmaanygecoinntitnhueeetnovidroonsmo enitn

the offspring, although no longer subject to the same environment.

ColourInheritance in the Horse. E. N. Wentworth. Pp. 10-17. This

article deals with recent experiments and observations upon horse breed-

ing. The author is searching for "factors" that will account for the

observations. It is obvious that the facts known offer very great diffi-

culties to any explanation by means of factors, and do not admit of the

relatively simple explanation of colour inheritance in mice and other

animals.

Die Variations Kurve in der Biologie. F. Auerbach. This is a long

technical paper of considerable interest to those who are acquainted with

modern statistical methods.

tive

Artbilding bei der Copepodengattung Fernwirkung einer Milieuverandung.

Limnocalanus S. E. Kman.

dPupr.ch40-a1k0k4.umuTlhae-

author has made certain observations of great interest upon two species of

Limnocalanus. These observations are summarised at the beginning of

the present paper; they have been published in detail elsewhere. It

appears that Limnocalanus grimaldii in late glacial times inhabited the sea

off the Scandinavian coast. Since glacial times the land has been raised,

and in consequence from time to time lakes have been formed containing

Limnocalanus grimaldii. These lakes have gradually become fresh, and in those lakes that have been longest separated from the sea we find a

form Limnocalanus macrurus that is quite distinct from Limnocalanus

grimaldii. A careful examination of a series of these lakes, however,

shows a number of intervening forms that exhibit every grade between the two species, and according to the author the extent to which the fresh

water forms differ from the marine form depends upon the length of time

that the former have been isolated. It has further been found that these various forms are inherited and not directly due to the environment.

Upon the basis of these facts the author founds a lengthy discussion of

some sixty pages. It is of considerable interest, but the conclusion alone

can be noted here. He rejects selection as an explanation and is inclined

to believe in the cumulative influence of the environment; this influence

shows itself so slowly that it cannot be observed in ordinary experimental

work.

ZEITSCHR1FT FUR INDUKTIVE ABSTAMMUNGS- UND VERERBUNGSLEHRE.

Bd. xi. tionI. A.

Heft 3. January, L. Hagerdoorn and

1914. A. C.

Studies on Hagerdoorn.

Variation and
Pp. I45-183.

SelecThis

paper takes the form of a series of comments upon several

problems connected with variation, inheritance, and selection. It

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

83

is suggested that the term " unit-difference" is to be preferred to " unit-character," and that the phenomenon of " dominance " is of very secondary importance. It is maintained that recent work has shown that both continuous and discontinuous variation may be due either to genetic or non-genetic factors; from this it follows that both forms of variation may at some time be inheritable and at another time non-inheritable. The authors then enter into a long criticism of Castle's experiments. Castle concluded from these experiments that " unit-characters " could be modified by selection; it is argued here that this conclusion was not justified. There follows some criticism of statistical methods in the study of inheritance and some interesting comments upon the increasing number of instances in which it is held that a series of genetic factors influence development in the same direction.
Notiz tuber den Begriff der Kryptomerie. E. V. Tschermak. Pp. I83-
igs. The author used the term " Kyptomerie " some years ago to indicate
the phenomenon of the appearance of completely new characters-that is to say, of characters that do not arise by the recombination of factors in crossing. He suggests in this note that this may be due to the origin of a lasting association between characters already present, or to the breaking down of such an association. This differs from the result of ordinary crossing when factors may be differently combined; for it is supposed that there is a change in the influence of one factor upon another.
V'ersuche uber Selektion und Vererbung bei vegetativer Vermehrung von Albium salivum. P. Vogler. Pp. 192-199. Experiments were undertaken to answer two questions. Can distinct strains be isolated by selection from a population increasing by vegetative reproduction ? Is selection
of small variations within a strain effective? The answer to the first question is yes, to the latter no.
MIAANEDSSKRIFT FOR SUNDHEDSPLEJE, 1913. The Investigation of the Inheritance of Deaf-mutism for Eugenic Purposes. Dr. S6ren Hansen. Pp. 97-IO6. The Danish Anthropological Committee has now begun a thorough investigation of the inheritance of deaf-mutism on the basis of records from the deaf-mute institutions, supplemented by additional information furnished by doctors and clergymen throughout the country. A number of pedigrees have already been traced and specimens of these are given in this paper.
EUGfiNIQUE, December, I913. L'Alcool et L'Eugenique, Alcoolisme et Divorce. Dr. P. L. Ladame. Pp. 177-19I. In Geneva during the decade I9OI-I9IO there were 1,812 decrees of divorce, and 676 of these were on the ground of the drunkenness of one of the spouses. This number must be regarded as a minimum estimate of the number of divorces due to alcoholism. To it must be added many of those cases in which the ground was cruelty or violence, since the effect of alcohol on more or less pathological and degenerate brains must often be the cause of cruelty and violence. Yet it must not be argued that the suppression of alcohol would stop nine-tenths of the divorce cases. The case is by no means as simple as this since mental defect is often the cause of alcoholism.
EUGANIQUE, Jan., I914. Les Progres de L'Euge'nique. Dr. C. W. Saleeby. Pp. I-I5. A lecture delivered before the French Eugenics Society on January 7th. Dr. Saleeby describes the bearing of mendelian research on eugenics, passes some strictures on biometry, and claims that the Lamarckian theory of evolution provides a sound basis for a eugenic policy. His pronouncements, particularly on the subject of biometry, drew some searching criticisms from M. March, whose remarks appear in the report of the discussion which followed Dr. Saleeby's paper. They are well worth reading.

84 EUGENICS REVIEW.
EUGANIQUE, Feb., I914. Le Retoiur auc type dans les Me'tissages humains. Dr. J. Laumonier. Pp. 33-49. Two pedigrees of families derived from different racial crosses are described. In the first a blond Hanoverian prisoner of war married in i8o6 a dark, grey-eyed native of Anjou, with the result that Hanoverian characteristics appeared in some, but not half of their children, and in two succeeding generations were completely blotted out. In the second a Frenchman, resident in China, married, in I820, a Chinese. The majority of their children were Chinese in appearance. One daughter, however, had predominantly French characteristics. She remained in China, married a Chinaman, and had children who were all predominantly Chinese. Another daughter, of Chinese
appearance, lived in France and married a Frenchman, her children and grandchildren have practically no Chinese characteristics. From cases such as these Dr. Laumonier formulates the following " law": -" The products of mixed marriages bear a closer resemblance to the parent, of either sex, who belongs to the country in which they live than to the other." He regards this " law " as explaining such facts as the tendency for the blond type to disappear, which has been noted in France, Switzer-
land, South Germany, and England, but it is obvious that the evidence now brought forward is insufficient to establish its truth.
BULLETIN DE LA STATISTIQUE GENARALi DE LA FRANCE. Tome III.., Fasc. II. Jan., 19I4. Of especial interest in this number are (i) the
report on the working of the old-age pension scheme in France (p. I5I). (2) The results of the examination of the i9iI batch of recruits (p. I55) in
the French Army. The most important fact which emerges from this is that in those districts in which the average size of the family is large the degree of education seems relatively low and vice versd. (3) An elaborate and detailed statistical study by de Ville-Chabrolle, entitled Le Travail des Femmes en divers Pays, principalement danis L'Industrie, le Commerce et les professions liberales." Pp. 170-223. This article contains a perfect mine of information concerning the numbers of women engaged in various occupations in different countries, the percentages which can be deduced from these numbers, and the changes which the numbers and percentages have undergone in the last thirty years.
RIVISTA DI ANTROPOLOGIA. Vol. xviii. 1913. This substantial volume opens with an article by Prof. Alfredo Niceforo. Su alcuni indici della distribz,zione dell'intelligenza e delle attitudini tra gli onomini already noticed in the July number of this REVIEW. Prof. Giovanni Marro presents a detailed study of the skeletons of ancient Egyptians found in the necropolis at Assuit dating from 2500-3000 B.C. This is followed by a well illustrated essay in which Giuseppe Sergi attempts to place the Tasmanian race in the light of recent anthropological investigations chiefly by
English and German writers of whose works he adds a bibliography. Dr. Calza next discusses a particular malformation of the skull known as bathrocephalia in normal persons and in criminals. The measurement of intelligence in relation to biological and social factors is dealt with by Dr. Saffiotti in a somewhat severely statistical manner, and there are a few shorter papers besides on kindred subjects.
H. RAND. POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY. Jan., 1914. The Mechanaism of Heredity as Indicated by the Iniheritance of Linked Characters. Professor T. H.
Morgan. Pp. i-I6. The author explains the linking or coupling of characters which sometimes occurs in Mendelian inheritance by the hypothesis that the factors representing characters so linked or coupled are born in the same chromosome. The coupling occurs with various degrees of intimacy, being sometimes a rigid bond and at other times merely a slight tendency for the characters to be associated together in inheritance. In order to explain this a further assumption is necessary. This is supplied

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

8'5

as follows :-" It may be observed that when homologous pairs of chromosomes unite before maturation of the egg and sperm that they twist round each other. In consequence parts of each chromosome may come to be on one side of the twist, and other parts on the other side. If at times the chromosomes break at the crossing point, and each then unites with that part of the other chromosome that lies on the same side, the new chromosomes that emerge later from the pair will be made up of parts of each chromosome to the extent to which breaking has taken place at some of the crossed levels. In consequence the two new chromosomes are no
longer made up of the same parts as the original chromosomes, but of pieces of both." Thus the linkage will be disturbed or broken. The theory outlined above is illustrated by reference to observations made on the results of crossing different varieties of Drosophila, the fruit fly.

Cancer Research. Dr. Leo Loeb. Pp. 17-38. In a very clear and interesting manner Dr. Loeb describes the nature of the various growths to which the name of cancer may be applied and summarises what is known of their causation and distribution. The question of inheritance is not gone into at all exhaustively, but what is said on the subject is of sufficient direct interest to eugenists to be worth quoting in full :"Heredity is undoubtedly a factor in those cancers which develop occasionally in case of xeroderma pigmentosum or from pigmented moles. We know that here the conditions preceding cancer are hereditary and therefore cancer itself is indirectly hereditary. We furthermore know that a certain class of cancers originates on the basis of embryonic malformations, and inasmuch as these are under certain-as yet not well definedconditions hereditary, we may assume that certain cancers belonging to this class are also hereditary. There is indeed some evidence which points to this conclusion. There is, for instance, a case known in which both the mother and her one and one-fourth years old child became affected by glioma of the retina (a tumour originating in modified nerve cells of the eye). In another case a twenty-one-year-old man had 17 osteomata (tumours consisting of bone tissue) symmetrically arranged, and his father had similar tumours. It is furthermore known that in certain cases polypus of the intestines are congenital and occur in several members of the same family. On the basis of such polypus cancer not infrequently develops."
A Comparison of White and Coloured Children measured by the Binet Scale of Intelligence. Josiah Morse, Ph.D. Pp. 75-79. The white and coloured children tested belonged to the schools of Columbia, South Carolina. The coloured children had, in the same manner as the white, come from good homes and seemed to do their best in the tests, nevertheless a certain superiority was shown by the white children, as is indicated in the following comparative table:

Coloured. White.

More than one year backward Satisfactory -. ... ... More than one year advanced

Per cent. Per cent.
... 29-4 ... 702
... 69'8 ... 84-4
... o-8 5. 3

POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY, Feb., 1914. Current Progress in the Study of Natural Selection. Dr. J. Arthur Harris. Pp. 128-146. In this paper, which is a continuation of previous articles in the same journal, Dr. Harris summarises definite evidence of a statistical nature as to the occurrence of natural selection. He distinguishes two problems: (I) To determine in any given case whether the death-rate is random or selective; (2) to ascertain what physical, physiological, or psychological characteristics make for fitness or unfitness for survival. As the work is already a summary no

86 EUGENICS REVIEW.

attempt will be made further to summarise it here, but reference may

fittinglv be made to Dr. Harris' original contributions to the subject.

Working on garden beans, he found that those seeds which germinated

were not a random sample of the whole number planted, but that a certain

definite selection small beans had

had occurred to some extent

in that the very large beans been weeded out. Thus the

vaanrdiabtihleitvyerofy

those which germinated was distinctly less than planted; the average size was also somewhat

that of the greater.

Cwohrorleesponnudmibnegr

results were obtained also with regard to seedlings. Nine thousand normal

and abnormal plants from a large number germinated in the greenhouse

were planted out in the field, and it was found that the mortality was

distinctly higher in the normal than in the abnormal plants. Dr. Harris

concludes by remarkinig that "evidences of the occurrence of natural

selection for many characteristics are rapidly accumulating. That

mortality is not random, but differential, and that the intensity of the

selective death-rate is a problem open to quantitative treatment are pro-

positions supported by large bodies of sound scientific evidence."

1913.THE CHICAGO M\IEDICAL RECORDER. Vol. xxxv. No. ii. Nov.,
Contains reports of the addresses delivered before the Chicago Medical

Society on October Ist on the subject of the teaching of sex hygiene in

the public schools. Professor C. R. Henderson, in describing the methods

and aims of the Chicago Society of Social Hygiene, of which he is president, said (p. 596) that it was instituted for study and for giving

information in regard to sex hygiene, and expressed the hope that educa-

tion with reference to sex, biological science, morals and physical training

will be taught to young and old. He gives two warnings; first, that

instruction is the least part of education, a high ideal must be instilled.

Secondly, that if disease could be prevented and sin made safe, while
prostitution was yet left, only half a victory would bewon. Sex hygiene

must not deal too exclusively with prevention and with venereal poison,

but the deeper lying effects of character poison must also be prevented.

In " The Innocent Bystander," p. o90, Dr. William Belfield states that

in several of the sexual purposes at

United States a girl may lawfully sell her io years of age, but may not sell a ring until

sbhoedyis

for 21.

This being the law, it may be accepted as an official utterance of public

sentiment that sexual indulgence among the unmarried is one of the

personal rights of men, and that this is a recognition of an instinct com-

mon to animals and men. It is now realised that this policy is detrimental

not only to the individual, but to the State as well, and that the instinct to procreate must be restrained and regulated by the State, as are the savage

instincts to rob and slay.

In discussing Practical Possibilities, p. 6oo, Mrs. E. Flagg Young

reported that in 1912 the Chicago Board of Education appropriated five

thousand dollars for lectures to fathers and mothers on sex hygiene, and

in addition ten thousand dollars for such instruction in the High Schools

of the City during 1913. Two conditions were laid down: First, that the

lecturer must be a medical man or woman; second, that he must have the
power of dealing with the subject in a serious, noble, and high-minded way. M\rs. Young thought that boys could be taught in large classes,

but girls in not larger groups than fifteen to twenty. That parents should

wrashave option of allowing a child to attend or not.
IYnasrtrroIusncs,ttirwouhinicltiienonRtehiven.HtJohomehenScU(hpT.o.o6loM6e)(l,p.oad6ny0d3s)dpioskceusosdfeedatlhwtehawditetshitrhaebbyinlaiDttruy.reofRoafgcihvseiulnclghe

instruction should be and some of the objections to it.

1913.THE TRAINING SCHOOL BULLETIN. Vol. x. No. 8. Dec.,

Mental and Physical Development of Normal Children. E. A. Doll.

Pp. II3-120. The material of this article is taken from a chart compiled

PERIODICAL LITERATURE.

87

by Professor Johnson (formerly of Clark University). The data were

originally gathered from the publications of Dewey, Tracy, Kirkpatrick,

and others. The compilation has been rescued from obscurity, and is

now presented in the form of continuous paragraphs. The child's develop-

ment is divided into five periods: (i.) 1-3 years, (ii.) 4-6 years, (iii.) 7-9

years, (iv.) 10-12 years, (v.) 12 years onwards. Under each period changes

in height, weight, brain, muscular development and activity, sense-percep-

tion, memory, imagination, interests, language, judgment, and reasoning

are summarised in two or three concise sentences. Sex differences are

noted in the later periods. Figures are given only occasionally, and minor

inaccuracies have not been revised in the light of later literature. But

the article is of great value as giving, in an extremely compact yet read-

able form, a reliable summary of the bodily and mental growth of the

normal child.

CYRIL BURT.

BULLETIN OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF MEDICINE. Vol. xiv., No. 6, December, 1913. The Schoolhouse as a Crime Contributor, E. C. Elliott.
The Physical Bases of Crimne, from the Standpoint of the fudge of a
Juvenile Court, E. F. Waite. The Physical Bases of Crime as Observed by a Prisont Physician, Rock Sleyster. Crimes of the Adult from the Standpoint of the Alientist, F. W. Robertson. The Physical Bases of Crime-Viewed from the Prison. Z. R. Brockway. Pp. 383-41I. These papers, read at the annual meeting of the American Academy of Medicine last June, deal with various aspects of the problem of criminality. The subjects discussed are rather too large and complex to admit of being adequately surveyed in the few pages which the authors have been able to devote to their consideration; and as a result the papers are somewhat vague and sketchy. They are interesting, of course, as expressing the opinions of men of judgment and experience, and many of the views put forward are sound and practical, but for the most part the authors have had to be content with assertions in lieu of proofs, and such facts as they have adduced in evidence have not always been presented in a very critical spirit.

Professor Elliott, in his remarks, emphasises the importance of using the school as a centre for the physical and social activities of children outside of school hours, and advocates measures for securing a more continuous operation of school influences, so as to enable them to compete more successfully with the crime-producing influences of the streets. Mr. E. F. Waite, who writes with the authority of his experience as a judge of the Juvenile Court of Minneapolis, expresses the opinion that physical defects are responsible for an appreciable proportion of juvenile delinquency. He attaches, of course, a still greater importance to the influence of mental deficiency, and he notes in this connection that in a series of young offenders brought before him on examination by the Binet-Simon tests showed that about 25 per cent. were feeble-minded. Similarly, the Seattle Juvenile Court, one of the few that command the services of an expert psychologist, reports that i8.5 per cent. of the delinquency with which it deals is attributable to mental defect. Mr. Waite's experience leads him to urge very strongly the systematic examination of the
mentality of juvenile delinquents with a view to the detection and segregation of the feeble-minded, a measure which he rightly considers imperative both for the protection of society from the criminal and for eugenic ends.

In his paper on "The Physical Bases of Crime as Observed by a Prison Physician," Dr. Sleyster summarises the results of his anthropometric observations on I,521 convicts in the Wisconsin State Prison. He lays special stress on the fact that these convicts showed a marked inferiority in height, amounting on the average to i'8 inch, as compared with the typical American, the standard for the latter being taken from

83 EUGENICS REVIEW.
the measurements reported by a number of life insurance companies and referring to over 220,000 adults. Dr. Sleyster unhesitatingly sets down this shortness of stature as " a marked and unmistakeable stigma of degeneracy "; but it would appear to be susceptible of other explanations, and one of the most obvious is suggested by the fact, recorded in another table in this paper, that upwards of 30 per cent. of the Wisconsin prisoners are foreign-born. Mr. Brockway, who maintains the same thesis of the organic inferiority of the criminal, also remarks that of the Elmira prisoners " a majority were themselves immigrants or the immediate descendants of immigrants from the crowded parts of Southern Europe "a fact which might quite sufficiently account for their lack of inches. Anthropometric statistics which take no regard of racial differences are
obviously of very qualified value. Dr. Sleyster attributes much importance to defective sight, both as an indication of degeneracy and as an actual cause of criminal conduct through the influence of the nervous
strain incident to refractive troubles. He found defective vision in about
a third of the prisoners, astigmatism and myopia being specially frequent. Mlore details on this point would be of interest, as also data for comparison with the non-criminal population. The papers of Dr. Robertson and Mr. Brockway deal with the question of crime and the criminal in general terms, their views being in the main similar to those of the
other writers. THE JOURNAL OF HEREDITY. Vol. v. No. I. Jan., 1914. How to
Improve the Race. Alexander Graham Bell. Pp. I-7. The author points out that the methods of practical eugenics must be entirely different to those of the animal breeder. If the breeding of animals were restricted by law and sentiment in the same way as that of human beings he believes that it would be impossible to improve them by selection. In his opinion little is to be gained by preventing the reproduction of defective and undesirable stocks, and the most hopeful means of advance is by the
mating of the most desirable with one another. Yet " It is neither prac-
ticable nor advisable that the individuals referred to (the desirables) should marry exclusively among themselves but only to a much greater
extent than now prevails." Eugenics and Breeding. 0. F. Cook. Pp. 30-33. This paper teaches
a somewhat similar lesson to that of Mr. Graham Bell. The eugenist has aims and must use methods differing from those of the animal breeder,
but yet may learn a useful lesson from the experiences of the latter. For
a knowledge of the laws of heredity, on which eugenics is based, may be acquired by plant and animal breeding. The cultivation of the eugenic instinct is more important to the future of the race than the weeding out
of defective persons.
Prenatal Intfluzences. David Starr Jordan. Pp. 38-39. The author insists that the theory of maternal impressions and of telegony have no
basis in fact.
SOCIAL DISEASES. Vol. iv. No. 4. This number is taken up mainly with three papers read at the annual meeting of the American Society ot Sanitary and Moral Prophylaxis, held at New York in April, I913. Two of these papers referred to the effect produced by syphilis on the nervous
system and its connection with insanity. The authors insisted on the close connection between syphilis and general paralysis. Dr. Goodhart, the title of whose paper was " Syphilis and the Nervous System," stated that about 2 per cent. of infected people developed this condition: onset occurring about I5 years after first infection. In its hereditary form
syphilis produced infantilism, hydrocephalus, and general paralysis. Dr.
Kirby (syphilis and insanity) stated that I4 per cent. of the admissions to
the New York State hospitals were due to general paralysis, this representing the ratio of the disease amongst the lower criminal classes. He quoted Plaut to the effect that 45 per cent. of the children of paretics were

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

89

mentally or physically damaged, or both. Dr. Fisher read a paper on
" The Necessity for Social and Statutory Recognition of Syphilis," in which he urged that this disease should be treated on the same lines as
any other infectious disease, and that all individuals suffering from it, who happened to come under State control, whether as criminals or recipients of public charity, should be detained until the infectious stage was past. The general tone of the meeting was in favour of notification, and repressive measures in respect of the marriage of syphilitics. The experiences of the State of Michigan in this connection are instructive. Assuming, as we must, that syphilis is a race poison, and one that as eugenists
it is our duty to combat, it is none the less necessary for us to consider most carefully our strategy in this campaign. Nothing is simpler than to issue laws restricting the right of syphilitics to marry, nothing in appearance more righteous. When, however, we come to enforce this rule have we any right to assume the presence of syphilis, that is (in present popular
acceptance) of guilt in the accused, without evidence? As far as the man goes, perhaps, knowing the risks run by the average adolescent male; certainly not in the case of the woman, unless very definite reasons are adduced for suspicion. This objection may be got round no doubt on the plea of the importance of the danger to the public in general, but the existence of the objection will not tend to make the administrative application of the rule any the easier. Having overruled this objection, how
are we to find out the presence or absence of infection ? The Wassermann test is the only even approximately certain test, and this demands the
services of an expert, not many of whom are available except in large centres. The proof being found and marriage forbidden, can we, prohibiting marriage, prevent concubinage? In the socially speaking "upper " classes perhaps, in the lower certainly no. And the further down the social scale we go, the less possible will it be to prevent this short cut to the fulfilment of the desires of the men and women affected. What remains? The prison or the lethal chamber, and in addition, what is even worse, one law for the rich and another for the poor. This is not to say that the case is hopeless. Far from it. Education and facilities for efficient treatment will do much; in time, a very long time, perhaps all we hope for. Until the public are educated, the more cautious our advance, the more successful is our final attack likely to be.

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.
CENTRAL SOCIETY.
February 5th.-At the Grafton Galleries, 5. IS p.m., Professor C. Spearman on " The Inheritance of Mental Energy." Chairman, Dr. Edgar Schuster.
March 5th.-At the Grafton Galleries, 5.I5 p.m., Mr. M. W. Keatinge
on " Education and Eugenics." Chairman, Major Leonard Darwin. February i6th.-First " Galton Anniversary " dinner and lecture at the
Hotel Cecil. Lecture on " Francis Galton " by Sir Francis Darwin, F.R.S.
COMMITTEES.
January 12th.-Finance Committee Meeting. ,, x6th.-Executive Council ,, 29th.-Research Committee ,,
February 2oth.-Executive Council ,, 26th.-Informal Council discussion, 12, Egerton Place. Subject, "What Reforms in the Treatment of Habitual Criminals should now be Advocated on Eugenic Grounds? '
March 25th.-General Council Meeting.

90 EUGENICS REVIEW.
MEETINGS.
December 21st.-Mr. R. Dixon Kingham at the Anerley Congregational Church on " Parenthood and Patriotism."
January x4th.-Dr. Murray Leslie before the Free Woman Discussion Circle on " The Woman's Aspect of Eugenics."
January i7th.-Dr. D'Ewart before the Eugenic Study Circle of the
Oldham Branch of the Workers' Educational Association on "Eugenics and the Workers."
January 27th.-Mr. R. T. Bodey before the Headingley Young People's Guild on " Eugenics."
January 27th.-Meeting at the Brighton Royal Pavilion to inaugurate a branch of the Society. Speakers: The Mayor, Major L. Darwin, Mrs. Gotto, Councillor Wellman, Rev. F. Asher, Dr. Hobhouse, Mr. A. 0. Jennings.
February 4th.-Mr. R. T. Bodey before the Halifax Branch of the Child Study Society on " The National and Scientific Aspects of Educational Policy."
February 5th.-Miss Bonwick before the St. Luke's Girls' Social Club.
February 6th. Dr. M. Greenwood before the Hampstead Scientific Society.
February 13th.-Mr. R. Dixon Kingham on "The Eugenic Ideal" before the Nottingham Branch of the Workers' Educational Association.
February 25th.-Dr. Edgar Schuster on "Eugenics" before the Biological Club of the Working Men's College, Crowndale Road.
March 3rd.-Mrs. Gotto before the St. Paul's Literary Society, Croydon, on "Literature and Eugenics."
March 3rd.-Mrs. Gotto proposed at the Croydon Women's Debating Society that "Government on Eugenic Principles is both a social and economic advantage to a community."
March 6th.-Mrs. Gotto before the Walton-on-Thames Girls' Club on "Eugenics as a Practical Policy."
BIRMINGHAM HEREDITY SOCIETY.
On February 3rd a lecture was delivered by Dr. A. F. Tredgold on "Degeneracy." The lecturer deprecated the manner in which certain enthusiasts had allowed Weissman's views to become an obsession, so that they denied that the somatoplasm could have any influence on the germ plasm at all. He emphasised the fact that circulating toxins in the parental blood, from whatever source derived, had a very definite effect on the germ plasm, and ascribed most cases of degeneracy in the offspring to this cause. He also asserted his belief that such degeneracy, especially in the form of a weakened nervous system, could be again transmitted by heredity, though the particular form in which the degeneracy manifested itself might be different in parent and child. The lecturer evidently believed that certain acquired characters could be transmitted, and though he quoted no extensive statistics to prove his case, the members present were deeply impressed by his views. After a few questions which could only touch the fringe of an enormous subject, the meeting concluded with a hearty vote of thanks.
On March 6th Dr. Edgar Schuster very kindly stepped into the breach caused by the postponement of Dr. Mj6en's intended tour. The title of his paper was " Eugenics and Human Analysis," and he dealt extensively with the efforts which he and others are making to measure physiological and psychological qualities. Prefacing his remarks, he said that before qualities could be compared they must be measured, and his description of the methods by which this was attempted in the case of mental qualities was always interesting and frequently very entertaining also. While freely admitting that the difficulties of accurate measurement were great, Dr. Schuster considered that data sufficiently accurate for the determina-

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

9I

tion of the coefficients of mental correlation between various relatives,

could now be obtained, and hinted, moreover, that a psychological

examination of this kind might come to replace in part the ordinary type

of examination so unpleasantly familiar to the modern student. The

former measured the mental capacity, the latter only the mental content.

The subject proved rather too technical to arouse much discussion, and

after Dr. Schuster had answered a few questions, the proceedings ter-

minated.

J. PERCIVAL MILLS, Hon. Secretary.

BELFAST BRANCH.

February iith, 1914.-A public meeting of the Belfast Branch was held in the Queen's University on this date. The Right Rev. Dr. D'Arcy, Bishop of Down, presided, and introduced the speaker of the evening, the Rev. H. J. Rossington, M.A., B.D. The subject of Mr. Rossington's paper was " Eugenics and Politics." The able manner in which the various eugenic problems were handled elicited the admiration of the audience. In the disc,ussion which followed, Bishop D'Arcy, Canon O'Connell, and Dr. W. J. Wilson took part.
March ioth, 19I4.-On the afternoon of this day the Belfast Branch had the privilege of hearing a lecture on " Practicable Eugenics " delivered by Prof. J. Arthur Thomson, M.A., of Aberdeen University. There was a large and representative audience, including mainy public men and the leading members of the clerical and medical professions. In the unavoidable absence of Dr. D'Arcy, Bishop of Down, the chair was taken by Mrs. D'Arcy, who, in a very suitable manner, introduced Prof. Thomson. Through the generosity of the Lady Mlayoress, the reception was held in the Carlton Hall, and though the Lady Mayoress was unable to be present on account of having to leave Belfast before the meeting was held, she was really our hostess in absentia.
Prof. Thomson's address was warmly appreciated, and though some thought he did not go far enough in any of his eugenic suggestions, still the beauty of the literary expression of the lecture appealed to all. Since
there were many present to whom eugenics previously had been a mere
name, the Branch could not have secured a lecturer better able to put the subject in a more agreeable light.
A vote of thanks to Mrs. D'Arcy and Prof. Thomson was proposed by
Sir Otto Jaffe, seconded by Dr. Campbell, President of the Methodist
College, and conveyed by Prof. J. A. Lindsay, M.D. At the conclusion tea was provided by the kindness of the Lady Mayoress.
W. JAMES WILSON, Hon. Sec.

HASLEMERE BRANCH.

A meeting of the branch was held on Monday, February 2nd, at St.

Edmund's School, Hindhead, when Miss Morgan-Brown opened a discus-

sion based on the article, "A Criticism of Eugenics," from the October,

1913, REVIEW.

The branch arranged a public meeting on Saturday, March 14th, at

the Haslemere Hall, when Major Leonard Darwin spoke on " Eugenics

and Some of Its Unsolved Problems." Lord Parker of Waddington took

the chair.

L. E. MUIR, Hon. Sec.

LIVERPOOL.

Council meetings have been held on January I9th, February I3th, and February 25th. The annual meeting was addressed by the President upon "Positive Eugenics"; the report and accounts for 1913 were read
and passed, and three officers re-elected; Miss James, Dr. Nathan Raw, F.R.S.E., and Dr. George Macleod were elected to vacancies on the Council. The February meeting was addressed by the Rev. James Hamilton, M.A., upon " Christianity and Eugenics." The Hon. Secretary

92 EUGENICS REVIEW.
spoke to the St. Mary's Men's Society on " The Trust of Life," and has lectured twice in Yorkshire. A small library has been formed for the use of our members, but too recently to record its working.
R. T. BODEY, M.A., Hon. Secretary.
MANCHESTER AND DISTRICT.
During the first quarter of the year two public meetings have been held. The first was addressed by Dr. Starr Jordan, but, being held in the afternoon, was not a great success numerically.
On March ioth the second was addressed in emergency by Dr. D'Ewart on " Eugenics and Insanity," the main theme being that as the bulk of insanity in England was attributed to heredity, alcohol, and syphilis-preventable causes-the amount of insanity might be reduced greatly in a very short time. Questions were numerous.
During the quarter members have been very active. Dr. Vipont Brown has spoken on " Eugenics " and allied subjects on several occasions. Mr. Warburton, of Romiley, addressed a meeting there dfealing generally with the " Eugenics " and specifically with " Feeblemindedness." The Hon. Secretary addressed a large meeting of teachers at the North of England Education Conference at Bradford on January 3rd, the address leading up to Miss March's paper on " Sex Training." He also spoke to a meeting of young men in the gymnasium of the Y.M.C.A. on " Venereal Diseases." The attention was as intense as usual when this subject is definitely dealt with, and the numerous questions were remarkable for their insight and intelligent grasp of the situation.
During the next few weeks the annual meeting will be held, and a public meeting on "Venereal Diseases." Dr. Catherine Chisholm is to speak on " Sex Training," and the Hon. Secretary has been invited to address a group of " Scouts."
J. D'EWART, Hon. Sec.
OXFORD BRANCH.
On March 3rd, Mr. Rolleston Stables lectured before the Oxford Branch on " Eugenics." Professor Poulton was in the chair.
E. SCHUSTER, Hon. Secretary.
A New Braneh of the Society at Brighton.-A new branch of the Society has been opened at Brighton, of which the mayor, Mr. Otter, is president, and Mr. Wellman temporary honorary secretary. On January 27th a public meeting was held at the Pavilion, the mayor presided, and speeches were made by Major Darwin, Mrs. Gotto, and others, after which the Rev. Felix Asher proposed that " a branch of the Society should be opened in Brighton." This was passed unanimously. Members of the audience wishing to join the new branch were asked to send in their names to the Committee of \'xIanagement, who undertook to call a meeting and formally adopt the constitution of the Society at an early date. The constitution was formally adopted at the meeting held on February x7th, and was ratified by the General Council on March 25th.
A Course of Instruetion in Statisties will be given at the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine on Fridays, at 5.30 p.m., during MayJuly, 1914, by Dr. M. Greenwood, Junr. The syllabus is as follows: General Principles of Statistical Method. Chief Sources of Data. Census Reports and Registrar-General's Reports. Birth and Death-rates and how they are corrected. The nature of a Life Table. The measurement of Variation. The Standard Deviation. Frequency Curves. Significance of Deviations from an Expected Value. Sampling Errors. Simple cases of Mendelian proportions and their testing. Correlation and Regression. Mfultiple Correlation and multiple Regression. So far as possible the

QUARTERLY CHRONICLE.

93

classes will be informal and mainly devoted to practical work and discussion. Although no previous knowledge will be assumed, students will find it helpful to have read an elementary book on statistics, such as "A Primer of Statistics," by W. P. and E. Elderton (Black, price is. 6d.), and if they could find time to revive their acquaintance with elementary algebra this would also be an advantage. The fee for the course is one guinea. Application to join should be made to the Hon. Secretary, Eugenics Education Society, Kingsway House, Kingsway, W.C.

Introduetion to the Study of Heredity-Professor McBride, of the

Imperial College of Science and Technology, has arranged a course of

lectures to be given in his department by Mr. H. M. Fuchs, and has most

kindly invited the council of the Eugenics Education Society to nominate

a certain number of students, who will be admitted to the course free of

charge. The lectures will take place at 5.30 p.m. on Wednesdays, com-

mencing Wednesday, April 29th, and closing Wednesday, June 24th.

Members and associates wishing to attend should send in their application

to the Hon. Secretary immediately, to be placed before the council.

The following is the syllabus of the course:

i. Introductory. The organism and cells. Growth and cell-division.

Sexual reproduction. Germ-cells. Maturation. Fertilisation. Develop-

ment. Origin of germ-cells and their relation to the body. Other modes

of reproduction.

2. Heredity and Evoluttion. Heredity, meaning of term. Inheritable

and non-inheritable characters. Nature of species. Darwin's evidences

for evolution.

3. Variation. Methods of recording variability. Inheritable and non-

inheritable variations. Pure races and populations.

4. tions.

Analysis of Heredity. Hybridisation-Mendel's
Unit-characters, segregation, dominance, etc.

work. Its implica-
Reversion.

5. Analysis of Heredity (continued). Presence and absence'theory.

Quantitative characters. Coupling and repulsion of characters. Relation

of Galton's statistical law to Mendel's law.

6. Heredity of Sex. Mendelian interpretation. Parallel phenomena of

cytology. What are the carriers of hereditary qualities? Determination

of sex. Sex-limited characters.

7. Changes in Heredity. Mutation. Causes of the origin of new char-

acters. Theories as to the origin of new races. Directions of future work.

8. Inheritance in Man.

Nesure de l'Intelligenee is the title of the lecture which Dr. Simon, the well-known colleague of Dr. Binet, has consented to deliver before the Eugenics Education Society. By the kind permission of the Royal Society, the lecture will be held at Burlington House on Tuesday, April 28th, 8.30 p.m. As the accommodation is limited, admission will be by ticket and members should apply for tickets' without delay. The subject of the lecture is of so much interest td others as well as eugenists, that after
April isth tickets still unappropriated by members will be sent to other
persons who wish to attend. Sex Edueation and Eugenie Training has been made the subject
of a course of four lectures by Miss N. March. They were especially arranged for parents and teachers, and held at the Holborn Estate Girls' School between March 20th and 3oth.

The Present State of the Seienee of Eugenies.-Under this heading a letter from Prof. Pearson to the Times was discussed, and we greatly regret to say his words were accidentally misquoted. The extract should have read as follows :-" But even he in the last few months of his life saw that the popular movement he had started was likely to outgrow its knowledge, and feared that more evil than good might result

94 EUGENICS REVIEW.

from it." As printed in the REvIEW the word " years " was substituted for

the word "months." Our sincere apologies are due to Prof. Pearson for

considerably, 9I10,this mistake, and the consequent alteration in the meaning of his words.
In this discussion we also stated that " In when Sir Francis Galton's

health was failing on by his niece, Miss Biggs."

much of the correspondence was carried As these words may possibly have given the

impression that Sir Francis was failing mentally during this period, it

may be as well to state definitely that this was not intended. We believe

that he remained perfectly clear in intellect until the end. The object of

our note was to show that Sir Francis Galton did not withdraw his

Pedologie "ofapproval
remained

from the
honorary

A Course

work of the Society. This is
President of the Society till
Criminal Anthropology.-

shown by his death. We have

the fact that he received from

Facultethe " Internationale de

de Bruxelles particulars of a

course of six lectures on this subject to be given by Dr. Vervaeck. The

first lecture deals with the history and evolution of criminal anthropology.

The second with the influence of the environment in the production of

criminals. In the third the nature of the criminal is discussed, while the

fourth deals with heredity as a factor in the causation of criminality. The

fifth and sixth are practical demonstrations of the methods of examining

atishnetthhrepohdpyiosrliecocagtliorep.aennditmeennttiaalireconddeiltaiopnriosfoncrdiemiFnoarlesst,atof

the Laboratoire d' which the lecturer

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

Amidleixstheerri:tyW.andHeiMneenmtaalnn,CulLtounred,on,by191H4.. MAPrCiNcAeU2GSH.TO6Nd.-JOPNpE.S.102.)(Pub-

Cavour G.

and the Making of Modern Italy, P. Putnam's Sons, London, 1914.

PbryicePI5EsT.ROPp.ORSI3.85.)(Publishers:

Child Life and Labour, by M. ALDEN, M.D. London, 1914. Third edition. Price is.

6(d.PublPips.hIe9rIs.:)

Headley Bros.,

139.13. 1913.LIECm'uomUgmzemoiNTalnegminheirrosdecacwhtsieIMiraCYneosaalvo:ndpiner,iissdktote,Gboi,dSrygloaa1Pbc9tnAH1riiytl3.oao.bsnlCRatPiOinRWctRySPAehuRt,rlTataAifriTtcDNoadeeOnsreF,eBA7wi,osInG.LRaItYCBNrNd6oHuId.derIl.,.klLwo.eDLft.oYP(iCPpnPonhp.udra.bo(rkNlI4Pino5i3ut,.C5sib0i.ehl.t)seiy.r,s:hbeSryATtstha:GPhte.reeiTncJoBha.efuee7rKusNNem.MeE,aaEwuc6LdRmA.YooiNfomlDrlaPA.kpa,n.,nal(13yPC93suo14i.b4..,s-)

Pp. 24.)
Balliere, L.R.C.P.,Study, GREEN,PMTrehonesttRL(aieCoPtlvuanubidntDlsocieieonefsdn,rhiecIiPari9nnsreI:dno4Ec.buylErenoPlm(prAa:eimr,cegAneetbdi.y7SasT.t)Aai,.tnP6idrdsb.aitFycliLelcEPaAXpla.1N.n2ESd.RF4.5.C56od.T.)x,R(EPbDLPuypoGb.nOldLCi.osD49nh,1e,E.r).:1914G.ran2tndRMFi.E.cdRRhi..atSCri..doESsn..,,

(Publishers: W. Green and Sons, Edinburgh and London, 3rd edition,

The HICu9oItu4c.rhtisnhPsrioipnc,eof5LsA.onnidmPoapnl.,s,981b.9)1y3.W.PrPi.cePY6CsR.AFTP,p.A.3LI.8B..), F.Z.S. (Publisher:

I913. Pp. I55.)The

plGrirseheveaartl:eSnccEoe.zuorfgPeavneaknhneudrresHatlo,wdisLteooansEed.nond,AIt,clbeayr

C. PANKHURST, LL.B. (Pub-
Deals with the statement of the facts of the

case. The author sees a solution of the evil in "Votes for Women

and Chastity for Men." With regard to the latter there are no two opinions, but it is difficult to see why the former should materially affect the case. It does not seem necessary to await an extension of the franchise before attempting to remedy the evil.

PUBLICATIONS RECEIVED.

95

The Health of the State, by SIR GEORGE NEWMAN, M.D., F.R.S.E. (Publishers: Headley Bros., London, i913. Price is. 6d. Pp. I98.)
The Mother's Reply: A Pamphlet for Mothers, by NELLIE M. SMITH. (Publishers: The Society of Sanitary and Moral Prophylaxis, New York, 1914. Price Io cents. Pp. 24.)
The Problem of the Continuation School and Its Successful Solution in Germany: A Consecutive Policy, by R. H. BEST and C. K. OGDEN, B.A. (Publisher: P. S. King, London, 1914. Price is. Pp. 79.)
The Quarterly Review, Nos. 432, July I9I2, and 437, October, 19I3. The Unfolding of Personality as the Chief Aim in Edutcation, by H.
THISELTON MARK, M.A., B.Sc. (Publisher: T. Fisher Unwin, London, I9I2. Price- is. Pp. 224.) Travail et Folie, by DR. A. MARIE and DR. R. MARTIAL. (Publisher: Bloud et Cie, Paris, I909. Pp. I'I.i)

