COMMENTS AND CRITICISMS.

Vital Statistics and the War.-The following are some

interesting points from Sir Bernard Mallet's recent lecture before

the Royal Statistical Society:

(i) Births in the United Kingdom since the War have ex-

ceeded deaths, including those in the field, so as to produce a

considerable net addition to the population. In the Central

Empire on the other hand, the total population had decreased

by about 4,000,000, the decline in the birth-rate being about

double that of England and Wales.

(2) The War has had no appreciable effect upon the number

of illegitimate births.

(3) Roughly speaking, since the outbreak of the War to

June, 19I7, there have been about 200,000 more marriages in

England and XVales, and 8,ooo more in Scotland, than would

ordinarily have taken place. In the Central Empire the

marriage-rate has declined.

(4) The infant mortality rate has dropped, and though this

is the case in Germany also, it yet remains very much higher

there than here.

In this connection Sir Bernard Mallet makes a comment of

the greatest interest with reference to the decrease of infant

mortality through overlaying-a common result of Saturday

night's drinking-since the restrictions on the sale of liquor

came into force.

(5) The adult mortality rate shows fewer deaths from suicide

and alcoholism.

N. A.

Juvenile Delinquency and the Mothers Pension Scheme.No one is likely to question the validity of the principle on which the State Aid for Mothers, so ablv advocated bv Judge Henry Neil, is founded, i.e., that the woman who bears and rears healthy children is doing valuable State service and that the mother is the best guardian of her children. But in con-

,326 EUGENICS REVIEW.

nection with the figures forthcoming from U.S.A. as to the heavy decrease in juvenile delinquency produced by bringing into force the Mothers' Pension Scheme, it must not be for-
gotten that across the water children, either without parents or with unsatisfactory ones, are far more readily " dumped " into delinquent homes than in this country, with the obvious result that many, not really delinquent, are classified as such.
N. A.

Eugenics and the Population Question.-The Right Hon.

J. M. Robertson, M.P., has been hotly advocating Birth Control, and preaching to " the poor " their " clear duty " in this

respect. Without entering into the question as to whether or

no Birth Control in itself is a " consummation devoutly to be wished " one may question whether it is either just or desirable

to use poverty per se, minus any qualifying adjective, as a bar

to even extensive parenthood. Eugenists are concerned with biological fitness, which is not necessarily a concomitant of economic stability, e.g., the ranks of lunacy are more largely recruited from the middle and upper classes than from the
poorer section of the community.

Although it is true that among certain sections of the poor, such as the epileptic and the feeble-minded, parenthood is both large and undesirable, yet poverty is not the chief factor which renders it so, and any attempt to make economic status the
definite line of cleavage could only be disastrous and might deprive us, for example, of our future Faradays, Stevensons,

and the like.

The real line is, so to speak, not a horizontal but a perpen-

dicular one which may equally cut off the millionaire and the

pauper, since heredity is vastly more important in the sphere of

physical, mental and moral qualities than in that of bank

balances.

N. A.

