THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP

The President's Account of the Society's next Task

By Sir BERNARD MALLET, K.C.B.

IN the year 193I the Eugenics Society London area. It is hoped that the first

can claim to have raised the question of volume of Mr. Lidbetter's book will appear

eugenic sterilization from the status of in I932. This alone should go far to direct

a vague social problem, about which there public attention to the group. But it is

has been much loose talking and thinking, desirable that it should be investigated from

to a concrete political issue which has other aspects.

received the careful scrutiny of a large I should like to draw the attention of

number of highly competent persons out- readers of the REVIEW to a way by which

side the Society. Our policy has been set they could help the Society in such an

forth in a pamphlet which has received investigation.

widespread attention, and has been focused in a bill which was recently introduced into THE DISCOVERY OF THE GROUP

the House of Commons under the ten- Since the idea of the existence of this

minutes rule. Our proposals have been group is new, and since the term is little

extensively noticed and commented on in known, a brief description will be given of

the Press, and of the daily and weekly how the conception first originated. It

papers which have expressed opinions, the arose in connection with a recent investiga-

great majority have been favourably dis- tion of the incidence of mental deficiency in

posed. There are now few educated persons England and Wales in the following way.

throughout the country who do not realize The first authoritative pronouncement

that eugenic sterilization is an active con- upon this incidence was delivered by the

temporary social issue.

Royal Commission for the Care and Con-

I would suggest that as, in the year I931, trol of the Feebleminded which made its

we have drawn public attention to the idea report in the year I909. This Report con-

of legalizing eugenic sterilization, so, in the tained certain recommendations relating to

year I932, we bring before the public the the process of " ascertainment " (i.e. to the

idea of a " Social Problem Group." Such process by which mentally defective persons

a procedure would be a wholly logical are discovered and recognized as a pre-

development of our activities this year, in liminary to being dealt with) which were

that the ultimate aim of our sterilization incorporated in the Mental Deficiency Act

policy is not to make the measure com- of the year I9I3. This Act only came into

pulsory for sufferers from mental defects operation at the beginning of August 19I4,

and diseases, but rather to make it volun- with the result that during the following

tarily practicable by the social problem four years there was little opportunity for

group, if such a group exists, as is alleged. its efficacy to be judged. When, after the

If the group does not exist, the useful scope War, its workings came under scrutiny, it

of our sterilization proposals will be was found that the process of ascertainment

restricted.

was being inadequately carried out by

For a long time this Society has inclined many Local Authorities. The result was

towards a belief in the existence of a social that in the year I924 an Inter-departmental

problem group as a result of the researches Committee was jointly appointed by the

of Mr. E. J. Lidbetter into the relation of Boards of Education and Control, whose

heredity and social inadequacy in an East terms of reference were to estimate how

203

204 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

many mentally defective persons there were that low grade defectives tended to be born

in England and Wales, and to make recom- of parents who, in most observable respects,

mendations as to how these persons could differed little or not at all from the average

best be dealt with. This Committee came of the population. The feeble-minded

to be called the " Mental Deficiency Com- group, however, arose from families whose

mittee," and by it the conception of a general standard of living was con-

"Social Problem Group " was formulated. spicuously below that of the average. His

The chief statistical conclusion reached findings are summarized in the following

by this Committee was that the incidence table, which shows the proportions of the

of mental deficiency had apparently in- three grades of mental defectives found in

creased from 4.6 per thousand, as reported superior, good, average, poor, and very

by the Royal Commission in I909, to 8.56 poor homes.

per thousand in I929, the year in which the
report of the Mental Deficiency Committee appeared. That is to say that the incidence had apparently nearly doubled in about twenty years. The total number of mentally defective persons in England and Wales was
moreover estimated as 300,000.

Condition of Homes*

Grade

Superior Good Average Poor Very Powr

Feebleminded I.2 IO.I 27.0 36.5 25.2

Imbeciles ... 5.9 23.7 36.2 I9.5 I4.7

Idiots

... 9.5 23.0 40.5 2I.6 5.4

All grades ... 2.4 I3.2 29.3 32.7 22.3

The conception of the " Social Problem THE " SUBMERGED TENTH "

Group " emerged from an analysis of the types of families by which these three main
grades of mental defectives were produced. These three grades have been given legal definitions. The lowest or most defective grade is that of idiocy. Idiots have a " mental age " of up to two, and
comprise some five per cent. of all defectives. The middle grade of imbecility comprises persons who, as adults, have a mental age of from two to six, and includes some
20 per cent. of all defectives. Idiots and imbeciles are often collectively referred to as " low grade defectives." The highest grade of mental defective, known as the feeble-minded, has a mental age of from six to eight, and comprises some 75 per cent., or
about three quarters, of all defectives. The feeble-minded are sometimes referred to as " high grade defectives." It will thus be seen that from the numerical standpoint alone, feeble-mindedness presents a more important social problem than idiocy and imbecility combined.

Dr. Lewis' procedure when investigating an area for the presence of mental defectives was to apply for information from the various
services and organizations which would normally come into touch with defectives.
Such were the education authorities, prisons, hospitals, public assistance authorities, relieving officers, and charity organizations. His was then the surprising experience of
finding the names of the same families given him by several of these different and independent bodies, as in one way or another presenting difficulties and problems. These families, while not necessarily certifiably defective, were composed of subnormal and low grade persons, who were useless or, in various ways, burdensome to the community, and presented " social problems. " From these families, it was found, were recruited the bulk of unemployables, incorrigible slum makers, prostitutes, inebriates, habitual criminals, chronic paupers, and high grade defectives that
existed in the community. This group was

TWO DIFFERENT SORTS OF FAMILIES
When.Dr. E. 0. Lewis, the investigator of the Mental Deficiency Committee, came to examine the families from which these

christened the " Social Problem Group," and by the Mental Deficiency Committee it was estimated as comprising about a tenth of the total population of the country, that

three grades of mental defectives arose, he made an interesting discovery. He found

* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee,
Part IV, page 202.

THE SOCIAL PROBLEM GROUP

205

is to say, some four million persons. This
sweeping and comprehensive estimate was adopted with singularly little comment by a number of eminent authorities among whom is included Sir George Newman, the
Chief Medical Officer of the Ministry of Health.
The actual words used by the Report to describe the Social Problem Group are here quoted:
" Let us assume that we could segregate as a separate community all the families in this country containing mental defectives of the primary amentia type. We should find that we had collected among them a most interesting social group. It would include, as everyone who has extensive practical experience of social service would readily admit, a much larger proportion of insane persons, epileptics, paupers, criminals (especially recidivists), unemployables, habitual slum dwellers, prostitutes, inebriates and other social inefficients than would a group of families not containing mental defectives. The overwhelming majority of the families thus collected will belong to that section of the community, which we propose to term the ' social problem ' or ' subnormal ' group. This group comprises approximately the lowest io per cent. in the social scale of most communities. Though the large majority of its members are not so low grade mentally that they can be actually certified as mentally defective, it is possible that a not inconsiderable number of them might prove, if examined by expert and experienced medical practitioners, to be certifiable and subject to be placed under care and control."
The Report also says:
" In point of fact the disparity in the actual as opposed to the potential fertility of the normal and subnormal sections of the population is increasing, the families of the subnormal group remaining as large as hitherto while those of the better social groups are steadily diminishing in size."*
A BURDEN OF FOUR MILLION
Surely few more challenging statements
than this have ever been uttered by a
* Report of the Mental Deficiency Committee, Part III, pp. 8o and 82.

Departmental Committee. Four million persons in England and Wales who are the great purveyors of social inefficiency, prostitution, feeble-mindedness and petty crime, the chief architects of slumdom, the most fertile strain in the community! Four million persons in a socially well-defined group forming the dregs of the community and thriving upon it as a parasite thrives upon a healthy and vigorous host. It is difficult to conceive of a more sweeping or socially significant generalization.
In this conception of the " Social Problem Group," the Mental Deficiency Committee has issued a challenge not only to social reformers but to every thinking person in the country. It is a challenge which it would befit a Royal Commission rather than a private society to take up. In so far, however, as the social problem group, if it really exists as is alleged, has a special interest for eugenists, the Council of the Eugenics Society has sanctioned the formation of a committee whose aim it will be to make a preliminary investigation of the subject.
PROPOSED AIMS OF THE INVESTIGATION
The Mental Deficiency Committee has stated that the social problem group contains an unduly large proportion of socially inefficient and burdensome persons who fall into the groups specified in the italicized passage quoted above from the Mental Deficiency Report. These different groups are dealt with by different organized bodies. It is proposed to form as many sub-committees of a Social Problem Investigation Committee as there are special groups, and it will be the aim of these sub-committees to ascertain whether the persons of whom they have cognizance as falling within those groups come of families who are appreciably below the normal social average.
At a preliminary meeting held at the rooms of the Eugenics Society on Friday, July 3 ISt, the formation of the following sub-committees was approved, the members of each sub-committee having power to co-opt at their discretion.

206 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

i. Public Assistance. 2. Mental Disease and Defect.
3. Epileptics. 4. Criminals.
5. Slum Dwellers. 6. Unemployment. 7. Prostitution. 8. Inebriates. 9. Casuals.
The co-operation of persons having special knowledge of these nine groups has been invited. It was surmised that some of these persons might have at their disposal or might be able to obtain access to, records which would go some way to answering the essential question which the Committee has
set itself the task of answering-viz. are the
families from which the persons comprising these groups tend to come, conspicuously below the general social average?
A POSSIBLE BOOK
If sufficient interest can be aroused and if the information obtained is adequate, it might prove possible for the Society to produce a small book entitled " The Social Problem Group," consisting of a short introduction and nine subsequent sections dealing with the groups above enumerated.
It is suggested that those Fellows and Members of the Society who are interested in this subject and who have the necessary leisure might care to institute investigations of a similar kind in the neighbourhood in which they live. The best procedure for conducting such enquiries is for the person

or group of persons who are mainly interested to form around themselves a small committee (directed, if possible, by an influential chairman) with power to form sub-committees with a view to pursuing the various special investigations. There could be no better way of interesting the residents in a given locality in the principles of eugenics than this. It is possible that the findings may vary from place to place, and it is clearly important that the investigations be conducted in a spirit of disinterested impartiality. For these reasons it is advisable to include on the proposed committee at least one public-spirited person who, while retaining an open mind, is on general principles sceptical of the influence of heredity in determining the various forms of human
inadequacy. The results obtainable by such a small
investigation could not be regarded as final. They could not be held definitely to establish or to refute this conception of the existence of a social problem group. But in so far as they would express the views of persons with special knowledge of the constituent elements of this group, they might well serve the purpose of drawing attention
to the necessity of instituting a more ambitious and thorough investigation equipped with financial aid-perhaps a
Royal Commission. The General Secretary will be pleased to
give what assistance he can to those who contemplate starting such an investigation
in the areas in which they live.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XXIII, No. 3.

