FERTILITY AND CHILD MORTALITY IN COUSIN MARRIAGES*
A Study in a Moslem Community in East Africa
By R. E. -S. TANNER

Introduction
HIS study was undertaken to discover if there were any significant variations in the fertility and child mortality of cousin and non-cousin marriages in the Madanga chiefdom of Pangani district Tanganyika, which might indicate reasons for the high infertility distinguishing a wide area surrounding the sample locality. It was also undertaken to test the statements made by a number of European officials to these people that their preference for cousin marriages was a prime cause of their infertility.
The data were obtained from married men resident within two miles of the chiefdom headquarters, each of whom gave details of their various marriages in reply to direct questioning. Details were obtained of 503 marriages of which I90 were cousin marriages.
All the informants were Moslem men for whom local custom allowed marriages with the daughters of their paternal uncles and aunts as well as with the daughters of maternal aunts. It was forbidden to marry the daughter of a maternal uncle.

marriages were also distinguished by easy divorce without rancour in sharp distinction to the prevalent and lengthy bickerings. which marked the progress and dissolution of so many non-cousin marriages. First marriages of women were a source of considerable prestige and expenditure.
Details were only recorded of live births during the marriages as information on miscarriages and still births was found to be unreliable. The information was confined to the fertility of 27I men during the periods of their marriages either terminated or still continuing at the time of questioning. This total represented approximately go per cent of the married men in the sample area comprising the adjacent villages of Barabarani and Jaira.
At the time of the enquiry this area was being treated as a control for various investigations by the Malaria Division, Tanganyika Medical Department and had received no wholesale prophylaxis, although individuals may have received treatment for malaria at the local dispensary.

Cousin marriages were preferred in this community because of the lower rate of bride-wealth demanded between relatives and because their patrilineal system of inheritance ensured that property was re-
tained within the family by such a marriage between patrilineal relatives since both man and wife belonged to the same lineage. Such

Fertility
The sample showed II9 cousin marriages (or 6o-6 per cent of the total of I90 marriages) and I25 non-cousin marriages (or 57-6 per cent of the total of 3I3 marriages) to be fertile. Although in cousin marriages the average number of children per fertile marriage was 3.37 and in non-cousin

* Owing to lack of space we are unable to print the Tables on which Mr. Tanner's paper is based. These have, however, been filed in the Society's Library and are available for further study on application to the Librarian.
The section headed Fertility is covered by Tables I-3; Infertility by Table 4; Child Mortality by Tables
5-7-

marriages was 2-79, the gross child mortality showed little variation (32-I per cent and 3I-I per cent). Also a higher proportion of
cousin marriages (23 to I5) produced more
than six children (I82 to III) possibly as a consequence of their greater stability (eighty-

'97 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1958. 49, 4.

1I98 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

three continuing as against forty-nine only area (39.4 per cent and 42-4 per cent) and a

in non-cousin marriages).

cause for continuous comment. There was a

More women in cousin marriages (89 per universal desire for children but no wide-

cent) were married under twenty years of spread magical search for the causes of their

age than in non-cousin marriages (74-4 per infertility.

cent). But a lower proportion of children

were born to them in the first ten years' Child Mortality

marriage (52-9 per cent as against 64-8 per
cent). Long-term marriages of over eleven years showed a higher live birth rate for
cousin marriages (3-66, 4-73 and 6-79 per woman) than in non-cousin marriages (3.I2, 4'2 and 5-66 per woman).
In both cousin and non-cousin marriages
more girls (5422per cent and 52-4 per cent) than boys (45.8 per cent and 47-6 per cent)
were born. There were only nineteen
polygynous marriages (of which four were marriages with three wives) and these showed a higher proportion of infertile unions than in monogamous marriages
(43.7 per cent to 39-4 per cent and 73.I per
cent to 42-4 per cent). Although in both categories the fertile women had a higher
average of children (4-3 to 3-37 and 3-0 to
2-79) the sample was too small for any definite conclusions, especially as four of the women recorded were multipara of high
fertility with a total of 35 births between
them.

In the first year of life the infant mortality was highest (47.8 per cent and 62-5 per cent) amongst boys in both categories but in the
children of cousin marriages the mortality for both sexes between two and ten years was considerably higher (47-7 per cent and
48*6 per cent) than in non-cousin marriages
(32.8 per cent and 30-9 per cent). The overall mortality was highest for girls
(38 per cent) in cousin marriages and for boys (35.9 per cent) in non-cousin marriages and after surviving to eleven years children were
almost certain to survive their parents. In relating mortality to the size of the
family from each marriage, the majority of all deaths in cousin marriages occurred in families of six and more children (58.i per cent) whereas in non-cousin the mortality although showing a high figure (38.6 per cent) for large families, was more evenly distributed although a majority of deaths occurred
in families of three or less children. In cousin marriages fifty-four of the

Infertility

fertile women (45-4 per cent) experienced child mortality averaging 2-38 deaths per

Although cousin marriages were more marriage but in non-cousin marriages a

stable (45 per cent continuing as against higher proportion of the fertile women (51.2

3229 per cent in non-cousin marriages) a far per cent) were involved although the average

higher proportion of the women married mortality (i.87) was a little lower.

before they were twenty years old, were Women who married cousins before they

infertile in the marriages recorded (49.3 per were twenty years of age showed a higher

cent as against 2I-8 per cent).

child mortality (I 05 children per marriage)

In both categories an infertile marriage than in non-cousin marriages (o084 children

was unlikely to last over ten years but a per marriage) although in non-cousin

higher proportion (36.2 per cent) of infertile marriages a higher proportion (135 to o045

non-cousin marriages were contracted when children per marriage) was found for those

the woman was over 30 years of age. women who married between twenty-one

Similarly a higher proportion of infertile and thirty years of age.

marriages were terminated (55 per cent to In cousin marriages up to fifteen years'

47-I per cent and 67-I per cent to 6o08 per duration there was a lower mortality per

cent). From sociological evidence available woman (0.32, o046 and i.o6) than in non-

infertility was infrequently given as the cousin marriages (o046, 0-7I and 107) but

grounds for a divorce. The high proportion beyond that the average rose (I.53 and 3-og as

of infertile women was characteristic of the against o09 and 2-46 in non-cousin marriages).

FERTILITY AND CHILD MORTALITY IN COUSIN MARRIAGES I99

Conclusion
The figures showed no consistent differences between cousin and non-cousin fertility and child mortality rates which could suggest that genetic or endemic disease factors might be involved.
Cousin marriages showed a slightly higher percentage of fertile women and a much greater fertility per woman as a whole except for marriages lasting between six and
ten years. In both categories infant mortality was
highest among boys in the first year of life but after that the proportion between them varied with age at marriage of the woman and the length of the marriage.

Infertility in cousin marriages was conspicuously high for women who married before twenty years of age.
It is considered that the explanation of these figures will be found in individual ill-health and in social factors relating amongst others to marital stability and family care.
Acknowledgments
My grateful acknowledgments for advice and criticism are given to Dr. D. Clyde of the Tanganyika Medical Department and to Messrs. Goldthorpe and .Southall of the East African Institute of Social Research.

the Review of the ITALIAN COMMITTEE FOR THE STUDY OF POPULATION PROBLEMS
and of the ITALIAN SOCIETY OF GENETICS AND EUGENICS
edited under the auspices of the National Research Council
Editor: CORRADO GINI

Summary of Volume XII, December 1956.

C. GINI

Un'inchiesta sugli emigranti italo-americani.

C. CANALI DE RoSSI Appunti sociologici su tre centri di emigrazione (S. Giovanni Incarico,

Ceccano, Ricigliano).

A. NADDEO

Ulteriori studi sulla fecondita e fecondabilita delle primipare.

A. NADDEO

Su una nuova funzione rappresentativa dello sviluppo demografico.

C. A. ANDERSON A Footnote to the Social History Modem Russia; The Literacy and

Educational Census of I897.

F. PEDRONI

Sviluppo e situazione attuale dell'istruzione pubblica dell'Unione Sovietica.

L. E. TAVENER New Light on the Adventure and Beagle Expedition, I826-36.

C. GINI

Facolta extra-sensoriali e subcosciente.

C. GINI

E la Sociologia estranea alla cultura italiana oppure chi lo dice ignora i

sociologi italani?

C. D'AGATA

Intelligenza e prolificita.

Review of Italian, English, American, French, German, Dutch, Belgian, Chinese, South-American

books.

G-E N U S

accepts scientific articles, papers, notes and communications written in Italian, English, French, German and Spanish in the field of the different sciences related to population problems (Demography, Sociology, Economics, General Biology, Genetics, Eugenics, Anthropology, Social Hygiene, Psychology, Geography)

Orders should be addressed to: Segreteria del Comitato Italiano per lo Studio dei Problemi delia Popolazione, Via delle Terme di Diocleziano, nO l0-Roma (M-8) (Italy).

