A -SUBCULTURAL FAMILY

By D. NEWLYN
(Research Assistant, Rayal Eastern Counties Institution, Cokhester)

THE:RE is at present widespread in- the village and is recognized as being " not

terest in the problem of mental exactly the thing" mentally. Probably, in

deficiency and it is common know- any but a quiet agricultural community, he

ledge that there exist in our midst families, would have drifted into the workhouse, or

most, or many, of whose members are below have been dealt with as mentally defective,

normal in intelligence. There is also much but he has in fact not only supported himself

discussion about prposals for legislation by farm-work, but has married and brought

with a view to prevention or extermiation up seven children. Of these children, one is

of such families. The detailed history of one said to be of quite normal mentality, two are

such family may be of use in demonstrating of average intelligence, but liable to fits of

some of the practical difficulties which uncontrollable temper, three were dull at

confront any such ps. The family school but pass as normal, and one, Bill, is,

described here may be taken as fairly typical, like his father, " not exactly the thing." Bill

only differing from others of the same

has married a woman of lower mental level

which have been investigated in that it has than his own and their only child, a boy, is

been possible to obtain more detailed and mentally dull and a " bundle of nerves " but,

comprehensive inormation than is often the so far, not certified by the school medical

case, and it describes four generations.

officer as mentally defective. Environment,

To make the history clear we must go back as well as heredity, is against this unfortunate

to the beginning of last century and focus boy, as he is neglected and ill-treated by his

our attention upon three brothers, Joe, Ben, parents.

and Sam Small. These men lived in a tiny The second of the three brothers, Ben

village, within easy walling distance of a Small, was apparently of a quarrelsome dis-

county town but nevertheless, until recently, position, and on one occasion, in the course

an isolated spot-the kind of place where of a fight with a fellow-workman, he was

families were born, grew up and died without hit on the headwith amilLng stool. His

ever moving farther than from one side of relatives believe that it was in consequence

the street to the other. There is only one of this blow that he had to be removed to a

street, straggling down a hill, with the church mental hospital, where he ultimately died.

and school at the top, and the village inn at Only two of Ben's children have been traced

the bottom, and the Smalls have lived in -George and Sarah. George still lives in the

one cottage for three generations.

village, where he is considered normal, and

Of Sam SmaU nothing seems to be known his only child, a girl of five, is doing well in

personally, but his son, David, still lives in the infant school. Sarah is married and has

u Ravi*
N

)M(9)
) 9)~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~7

I6

211

238 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

nine children, who are looked on at school as he says he attended a night-shool for some

a dull family, but none of them has yet been time after he started work, in a laudable

picked out by the local education authority endeavour to learn. Tom's wife came from

as mentally defective.

an altogether superior family living in the

The third brother, Joe SmaU, was unable same village. Her father was accepted for

to read or write. This may mean nothing the borough police force of the county town

more than lack of education, but it suggests at the age of 25. Four years later he was

that he was below normal in intelligence. He dismissed from the force on account of

seems, however, to have been a steady, drunkenness and obtained employment as

reliable workman, and was employed as warehouseman. He seems to have been able

horseman on the farm next to his cottage for to keep this employment but continued to

forty years. He had ten children. One drink and, at the age of 40, he committed

daughter died young in child-birth. The suicide by hanging himself in the wash-house

other nine are said to be alive, but only three behind his house. His widow now keeps a

have been traced. Archibald is normal very respectable lodging-house and seems to

mentally and, while still living in his native be a capable woman.

village, has employment in the neighbouring it i surprsing that the eldest daughter of

town with a firm of agricultural implement this couple should have married a man of

makers. Of his three children, the eldest, Tom Small's mentality and social status.

Fred, had difficulty in learning to read and Her nine brothers and sisters, though not

write. He is of low mentality and was apparently more intelligent than she, are all

noticed to be " silly " in his behaviour when in superior positions and doing well. A Mrs.

at school. The second child, Nancy, is said Dawson, who lives a short distance from the

to be normal, and the youngest, Peggy, a Smalls' cottage and has lways taken a

bright, sensible child, now ten years old, is kindly interest in the family, described her

"head" of the infant school.

as " a sweet woman " who would have made

Another son of Joe, Bert, is illiterate, an excellent mother to a small family but

alcoholic and almost certainly feeble- was not equal to the hardships of her married

minded, though he manages to support life with Small. During the sixteen years she

himself by farm-work. He is said to be had eight living children, two misariages

"happy-go-lucky" and good-tempered even and finally a stillbirth which caused her own

when drunk. He has married a woman who death at the age of 37. Small was kind to

is also mentally weak, and of their four her but he has no idea of money values and

children, one is described by the school- is said to have spent about 2s. a day out of

teacher as a " very low normal," the next is his meagre wages on beer. According to her

considered definitely defective, but has not mother, Mrs. Small was consistently under-

yet been certified, and the other two (a nourished and all her confinements were

twin boy and girl) are too young for any difficult.

definite opnon of their mentality to be Of the eight surviving children, the eldest,

formed. Bert had another child which died Valerie, is normal mentally and is generally

in infancy as the result of scalds. The mother spoken of as a " very nice girl." She is now

is said to have upset some boiling water over married, has moved away from her native

the child, and, instead of attending to it, village and is said to have an ideal working-

carried it up and down the village street to class home with two apparently normal

show the neighbours.

babies. The second child, Kenneth, is feeble-

Tom, the eldest of Joe Small's family, is minded but not certified. He suffers badly

of much the same mentality and tempera- from asthma which preventshis keepingwork

ment as Bert-amiable, but feeble-minded. on a farm and so he lives with his father and

He is a satisfactory workman, having been is responsible for the housework. The third

a cowman on the same farm for twenty-one child, Daphne, is in an institution for the

years. He is unable to read or write though mentally defective and her history will be

A SUBCULTURAL FAMILY

239

retlured to later. The fourth, Daisy, was
dull at school but now passes as normal and is said to be capable in a house. She is married to an iron-moulder in a neighbouring town but has no children. The fifth, Charlie, is said to be normal. The next two children, Tom and Ian,- were both certified feebleminded under the Education Acts while at

father's support in any dispute. The first
thing she wanted, of course, was to get free
from school, so, on her thirteenth birthday, she and her father announced that she was fourteen and stated this so firmly and con-
vincingly that they were believed-the school
registers were altered and Daphne was allowed to leave. A year later they celebrated

school, but have never been certified under the Mental Deficiency Acts. They are both illiterate but are able to earn their living at

her fourteenth birthday by prclaiming the joke to the village! Three years later the older sister, Valerie, married. Daphne be-

farm-work. They live with their father. IThe came the housekeeper. In this capacity

youngest child, Mary, is thought by at least she was deplorable. She spent the time

one school-mistess to be feeble-minded, but which should have been devoted to house-

she has not, so far, been certified, possibly work i "running after " the workmen on

because she has moved between various the farm, especially one particular cowman

schools in different areas.

who was her father's friend and contem-

The only member of this whole family porary. The cottage remained dirty, untidy,

complex who has been actually certified and practically unfurnished.

under the Mental Deficiency Act is Daphne, This state of affairs went on until Daphne

Tom Small's third child. She is a fat, rather was 23. Then, one morning, her father went

flabby but pleasant-looking g of 25 with to Mrs. Dawson to say that the girl was

pink cheeks and light curly haw. Her mental " awful queer" and he thought she must

age is 8 years. Her vocabulary is limited but have influenza. He went on to his work and

she speaks clearly, is capable of doing laundry Mrs. Dawson called at the cottage to see

work and simple sewing and she enjoys out- Daphne. She found the girl lying on a pile

door games. In the institution she is smart and well-behaved, but sometines stubborn.

of dirty clothes, and evidently in labour, in a room lacking even the barest necessities

In her childhood, up to the time of her in the way of furniture. The district nurse

mother's death, she seems to have been fairly was sent for, and she, Mrs. Dawson, and

well cared for, though the cottage (containing Kenneth, rushed to and fro fetching the only four rooms) was overcrowded and the necssary equipment, lighting fires and

family lived in great poverty. Daphne was heating water. Their preparations were

sent regularly to the village school but disliked her lessons and was judged very backward. On one occasion, when she was io or

not completed before a little girl was born. Daphne and the baby were removed by ambulance later in the day to a maternity

iI years old, she stole the key of the school home. There seems to have been some doubt

from the caretaker and dropped it into the dustbin outside the head-mistress's house. The key was not found until months afterwards, when it was dug up in the garden, which had been manured from the dustbin; but, in the meantime, Daphne had explained that she thought, if she threw away the key, that there could be no more school. It was

about the child's paternity, but the cowman valiantly came forward, paid the fees at the maternity home and the bills for the baby's outfit and is still paying for the child's maintenance with a foster-mother. He offered to marry Daphne but the authorities interfered and an order was made for her admission to an institution under the

a blow to her to find that another key was produced and the school opened as usual.
When Daphne was I2 her mother died. The elder sister took charge of the household. She seems to have had no control over Daphne, who could always count on he"

Mental Deficiency Acts. In surveying the details of this family
history, I wish to emphasize that, out of nineteen individuals who are known to have been of subnormal mentality, only two have
ever been definitely certified-old Ben Small

24o THE EUGENICS REVIEW
(who was certified under the Lunacy At) certificatio is no true criterio of feeble. and Daphne. In the cae of Daphne, had the mindedness, and no guide at all on qust
cowman married her before the birth of her of heredity: in high-grade cases it is merely
child, she would never have been certified a reflection of the morals of society. In each and the family never would have been part of the family which has been deribed, investigated. She is, in ail probability, of the level of nteligence of the children is about the same mental grade as her father, similar to that of the parents, although there brothers, and some of her uncles and cousins. is a range of int ce fom normality to
Possibly she is more itelligent than some of low-gade feeble-mindedness. It is not them. If she had not become subject to be possible from the study of such fmilies as dealt with on acount of her " immoral" this to ascertain the relative importance of
conduct, she would have settled down and heredity and evionment-all we can assert brought up a family in the village and would is the general rule that within the same comhave remained unknown to the authorities. munity succeeding generations resemble one
It fo}lows from all this that necessity for another.
SCIENTIFIC BOOKS
Currnt and Standard ENGLISH, PRENCH and GERMAN Literature in MEDICAL, CHEMICAL, BIOLOGICAL, and PHYSICAL SCIENCE supplied from stock, or obtained promptly to order.
A visit to this Department is rspetfdly .
Please write for CATALOGUES, mentioning intrets.
H. K. LEWIS & Co. Ltd., 13LOWED STRCEET
flw..iRuow, VL XI, No. 4.

