THE EUGENICS REVIEW
ideologies which he subdivides into "traditional" and "romantic", the first categorized by the belief that woman is the weaker and inferior sex and that her activities must be sharply differentiated from those of man. The "romantic" ideology is also based on the belief that men and women are essentially different, but that neither sex is weaker or inferior. The current progressive ideologies he divides into moderate liberal, radical liberal and radical marxist. The moderate liberals adhere to the view that although it is legitimate for women to have two roles, that of motherhood must take precedence over that of worker while the children are very young. The radical liberal ideology asserts in contrast that there must be absolute equality between the sexes including comparable male participation in the care of the young. This view, which still emphasises the importance of the family, is in its turn contrasted with the radical marxist view which suggests that the family itself is an institution which inevitably leads to the exploitation of the wife and mother, and urges the development of socialized methods of child-rearing which do not place such degrees of responsibility on the biological parents. It seems that the two radical ideologies, and in particular the liberal as opposed to the marxist one, have more active support in Sweden than they do in Britain, where the debate still centres round the divisions between conservative and moderate-liberal ideologies.
The book does not pretend to present new material. It is concerned rather to take stock of what has been established and what still needs to be done. The material presented, while highly compressed, is clearly expressed and well referenced.
MARGOT JEFFERYS
Rainer, John D. and Altshuler, Kenneth Z. Comprehensive Mental Health Services for the Deaf. New York. 1966. New York State Psychiatric Institute. Pp. xiv + 191. Distributed to interested agencies and individuals upon request; mailing charge $1.00.
THE IMPLICATIONS OF early profound deafness are not widely recognized not only by the lay public but often by those whose work brings them into contact with the deaf. The need for specialized psychiatric services for the deafis now becoming increasingly recognized and the Department of Medical Genetics, New York State Psychiatric Institute, have pioneered the development of such services.
This work is a fitting sequel to the previous monograph produced by the Institute entitled Family and Mental Health Problems in a Deaf Population, published in 1963, which described the findings ofan investigation undertaken into the genetic and demographic aspects of mental health of the deaf population of New York State. The initial investigation demonstrated the need for the development of comprehensive psychiatric services for the deaf with special training in manual methods of communication and the psychological aspects of deafness.
This recent publication describes the developent of an out-patient programme and of a special unit for the deaf within a large mental hospital. It describes the administrative framework, the mode of ward administration, methods of treatment and the special educational and group therapy techniques needed for a comprehensive programme. The particular needs and difficulties of a special psychiatric unit for deaf patients are delineated, but it is shown quite clearly that such patients can derive enormous benefit from these services.
This volume and its predecessor are the only two comprehensive works in this very important but long neglected field and will be of immense and special value to others who are developing or are about to develop psychiatric services for the deaf. It is to be hoped, however, that they will be read by all whose disciplines bring them into contact with those suffering from early profound deafness.
We await with interest the findings of the third project now being undertaken by the
276

REVIEWS OF BOOKS
same Department involving rehabilitative and preventative psychiatric programmes. The latter will include genetic counselling and a comprehensive psychiatric programme for deaf children.
JOHN C. DENMARK
Etzioni, Amitai. Studies in Social Change. New York, 1966. Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Pp. xii + 226. Price 32s. Paperback.
AMITAI ETZIONI is well known for his stimulating contributions to sociological theory, particularly in the field of social organizations. In this book he has brought together a number of studies, all, with one exception, published previously in various journals. By adding introductory comments he uses them as case-studies for theoretical arguments on social change. In the first section he offers two illustrations of biologically derived models for sociological analysis. In one case (the formation of elites in a Kibbutz) a process of differentiation is demonstrated to show that a social unit contains in its simplest or rudimentary form all the structureswhich, in thecourse of development, will becomedifferentiated until the unit achieves the complexity of an advanced system. A second model is suggested in another study (the formation of international unions) where a social unit is shown to acquire new parts, not previously present in rudimentary form. For such a process Etzioni uses the concept of epigenesis. The second part of the book deals with "the differences among strategies that seek peaceful change" (p. 54) and is illustrated by a study of the formation of the European Economic Community and by a particularly interesting analysis of the American-USSR detente in 1963. In the third section Etzioni deals with the problem of consensus formation and this is supported by two more international studies. In a final part we are offered three case studies of social change, two dealing with Israel and one with the religious organisations of American Jewry.
Those who have learned to accept the often heavy and clumsy American sociological style of writing in the tradition of Talcot Parsons will welcome this book even though one is not convinced that the various theoretical formulations are fully supported by the material offered. Two small criticisms are the relatively high price for a paperback and the author's failure, in his last chapter, to provide explanations for Hebrew and Jewish religious terms which are used in a paper originally addressed to a Jewish readership.
JULIUS CARLEBACH
ECONOMICS
Stassart, Joseph. Les avantages et les inconvenients economiques d'une population stationnaire. Collection Scientifique de la Faculte de Droit de L'Universite de Liege 20. Liege and The Hague, 1965. Faculte de Droit, Liege, and Martinus Nijhoff. Pp. 256. Price 18 guilders; 36s.
THE OBJECT OF this book is to review the strictly economic issues concerning population growth in a developed economy. In this, it succeeds admirably. The discussion is set against a background of slow demographic growth in Belgium, where for a period the net rate of reproduction fell below one, and where population trends have caused a great deal of alarm. The book is not concerned, however, with the problems of a declining population, but with the economic effects of having a higher level of fertility rather than a lower one. The arguments in favour of lower fertility are first presented and every possible objection is assessed. Then the same process is adopted for the arguments favouring higher fertility. Each issue is treated lengthily but clearly, and the book should be easily understandable by those without a prior knowledge of economics.
277

