FOOD, FAMINE AND THE FUTURE

ft, By W. J. SHAW, M.A., L1.B.

The Scientific Dilemma

increase of mankind, with a margin of the

P ROFESSOR HILL, by his presi- human race existing always at starvation or

dential address at Belfast to the subsistence level. Any departure from this

British Association, has given prominence to a problem whose implications

condition is an unstable one tending to be overthrown by the operation of inevitable

concern not scientists alone, but all who live laws. " There is no need for the procreative

in this troubled and distracted scientific age. The problem is the ethical dilemma of science. " If," said Professor Hill, "ethical

instinct to become even remotely as strong as the sexual for it to defeat any opposing
creed that favours limitation of populations."

principles deny our right to do evil in order Those communities that limit population are

that good may come, are we justified in doing good when the foreseeable consequence

at a biological disadvantage in the millennial struggle for existence. The very nature of

is evil ? " As an illustration, he instanced the trait ensures its own extinction. Simi-

" the gravest of world problems, the shortage larly, within the community, those who limit

of natural resources, particularly food. This their fertility will, if only in the course of

had arisen from the vast increases of popula- ages, be outnumbered and overwhelmed by

tion, due to public health measures and the conquest of disease. Thus science applied

those who do not. The present standard of life in the Western world, says Darwin, is

for- motives of decent humanity entirely phenomenal. The absence of a Malthusian

beyond reproach had led to a problem of pressure of population on the means of

the utmost public gravity.... Suppose it subsistence is purely transitory, due as it

were certain now that the pressure of increasing population, uncontrolled by

were to the accidental opening up of the Western hemisphere coupled with the enor-

disease, would lead not only to widespread mous advance in technology and production.

exhaustion of the soil and other capital Temporarily the increase in subsistence has

resources, but also to continuing and outstripped the growth of population.

increasing international tension and dis- Inevitably, however, by the pressure of

order," what view ought humane and numbers from without the area if not from

reasonable people to take ? If men will breed within, the balance will be reversed.

like rabbits would it not in the long run The situation has, on a lesser scale, a

bring less evil if they were allowed to die parallel in the irmrgation of the desert of

like rabbits? Did human rights extend to Sind in India. That vast undertaking was

unlimited reproduction, with a consequent designed to relieve the surrounding popula-

obligation falling on the more careful? tions from the threat of endemic famine.

Another recently to emphasise this same The design succeeded-foratime. Ultimately,

dilemma underlying scientific advance is Sir however, the press of population has over-

Charles Darwin. In his somewhat unnerving forecast The Next Million Years,* he seeks for factors defining the limits of human
progress, much as the laws of thermodynamics define the limits of advance in engineering. One such factor he finds in the Malthusian law of population. This postulates a condition of stability for the

taken the new-won productivity, with a result that there are now in aggregate more
starving human beings in India than ever before ! Whatever unopened spaces the world may yet hold for exploitation, whatever advances in technique and production
the future may have in stoke, the logical
outcome is the same. They can win for Man

* See p. 224.

only a respite from the state to which lie

2I6

FOOD, FAMINE AND THE FUTURE

2I7

inevitably tends, the stable state of over- standard of life by the one without the other

population.

is to empty resources into a bottomless pit.

Now all this has a depressingly plausible It is not unlikely that th'e consensus of

logic about it. It does look to be true. opinion among thinking people already

Perhaps we ought, awe-struck though we are supports the more factual outlook, but it

by the brilliant chievements of contem- needs direction and a voice to be given effect.

porary science, t6 join its leaders in a Of clamant opposition there would be plenty;

justified pessimism. But it is hard to be already the World Health Organization has

bereft altogether of hope ! There is, after been divided on this very point. But a

all, a certain formal quality about the conscious policy aimed at the control of

dilemma so clearly presented to us by Hill population by the spread of contraceptive

and Darwin. Theoretically, says the latter, methods cannot be ruled out as a future

there is no escape from this " doubtful possibility.

doom of human kind." It is just this theoretical inevitability of the fate forecast that I want to question here.

The cost is another matter. In areas such as Egypt the agricultural labourer can get work for only part of the year at wages

The Possible Path to Salvation
Logically, at any rate, there is a means of
resolving our dilemma. Take first the merely technical aspect. The discovery and development of contraception has proceeded almost unheralded among the advances of the scientific age. No doubt this is due to taboo., Even now the subject has scarcely achieved sufficient respectability to be mentioned in
public.1 But I do not wish here to enter into
a discussion of morals. I must confine myself to saying that it is wrong lightly to pass over the claims of profound thinkers that the science of contraceptioa possesses immense possibilities for human betterment as great or greater than any other discovery of the scientific age. It is strange that this idea should find such hard acceptance and that there should be so much opposition from religious bodies, for " Malthusian

which barely keep 'body and soul together. The Rockefeller Foundation, after five years' research in Egyptian villages, has reported
that the conditions of the people measured by income, housing, nutrition, sanitation, health and education are worse than in any
of the other countries-including China and
India-in which the Foundation has made
comparable studies. The standard of living, estimated on the consumption of such basic essentials as food and cotton cloth, is falling. But the population has doubled in fifty years. Obviously here a protracted expensive campaign of education in, and the provision of free clinics for, the spread of contraceptive -methods can alone hope to stem the tide. But how much less expensive this would be and ultimately how much more effective than economic aid in other forms we can only guess.

restraint," though theoretically possible, is But even if the spread of contraceptive

scarcely a practicable doctrine to preach. methods becomes an openly recognised policy,

Except for contraception, it must be our dilemma is by no means resolved. It

increasingly apparent to all, limitations on is just where the standard of life is lowest

the growth of population will come by famine and the policy is most needed that it is least

and disease in conditions fraught with the likely to be effective. The prolific, Darwin

causes of war. Only the most heartless might argue, must inevitably inherit the

dogmatist could continue to set his face globe. Those who restrict their increase

against the more humane alternative. In make space only for those who do not. And

the under-developed areas of the globe population will always tlherefore be tending

particularly, a conscious and open policy to a state of stability with a Malthusian

of encouraging and teaching birth control is pressure upon the means of subsistence. The

the almost indispensable complement to only possible check in the last resort is the

material aid. To attempt to raise the natural one.

218 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Needed-A Change of Ideology
Well now, is this true? Granted, it may transpire to be true so long as the governments of mankind are so foolish as to do
nothing about it. But something can be done.
For just as it is possible artificially to control conception, so it is possible to create an
artificial subsistence level. Already in the Welfare State we stipulate the minimum standards of life for all. If one follows the
course of the Industrial Revolution in Britain one cannot but endorse the measures that
have raised the mass of the working population from disease, ignorance and squalor step by painful step to this latest achievement of social security. But social security is no end in itself. By itself it may have no
greater ultimate effect than irrngating the
desert of Sind. My prophetic eye discerns as the next stage, the next turn of the wheel of welfare, a shift of responsibility back from the all-providing State to the parent and individual. The great social services perhaps will remain compulsory but no longer free. Accurately costed, they could be charged proportionally to those who benefit. And the State's imperative, "For every child that is born shall be provided.. ." may in the course of time become " For every child you bear you shall provide...." The whole mechanism of administration is already in existence-school inspectors, inspectors of housing, of sanitation, of child welfare, even the sanctions of the law. There remains only the shift in cost back from State to parent for the system to provide in effect the artificial level of subsistence mentioned earlier. Such a system implies that parenthood should be voluntary. The necessary knowledge for family planning would have to be available to all. Also implied is a far greater equality of economic opportunity than ordinarily exists at present. The very powerful argument against a system such as is here envisaged is that in the end it might resolve into nothing but a means of oppression by one class of another. Manifestly one cannot prohibit people from having children they cannot support, or punish parents for failure to support those children they have, when one denies them at the same time full

scope to earn the means. A man must have his due.
What is required, and may eventually come, is not an increase in the State's dictation, or an arbitrary interference with the most sacred of functions. It is an impartial rule, as impartial, for instance, as the rule of
the road. It would say in effect to all prospective parents, in or out of wedlock, wise or feckless, " Children must be cared for. But if you have children you must pay for them.
They shall not be a charge on others more careful than yourself." If this is injustice it would be surely less unjust than the present burdening of one man with the care of another's children, albeit indirectly through the medium of taxation. Nor would the limited interference with the right of parenthood be exactly an innovation. The State already prescribes the size of a man's family, if he is of a calculating mind, by every measure which touches the pocket.
A system such as I have described above would need to be supported by all the sanctions of law and public opinion. It would require a new interpretation of morality. But once established it would have the effect, within the State at least, of creating this artificial level of subsistence. In the long run population would tend
towards stability with a margin at the pre-
determined level, just as Darwin stipulates a condition of stability at subsistence level. Over-population would lead to fewer births
at the margin; infertility above the margin
might lead to its own extinction. But the standard of living, other things being equal, could be held. It might be raised progressively as machines replace human drudges.
International Implications So much for our dilemma within the State.
What of the future for communities limiting their populations in this way? Would they be at a biological disadvantage in the millennial struggle for existence ? I strongly question it. Rather it would seem the future belongs to them and that they would be able to impose their will and their way on those who do not follow suit. For in the last resort

FOOD, FAMINE AND THE FUTURE

2I9

the principle can be applied on the international plant, perhaps regulating immigration and access to raw materials upon just principles; ending perhaps the tensions that spring from the fear and threat of overspilling populations. But that is another story.
Not Les Science, But More I have tried thus far to show, if only
theoretically, how man can yet escape from the horns of Sir Charles Darwin's awful dilemma. Whether in fact he will escape is a different matter. But there is at least one avenue of hope. Its exploration continues. There is a growing acceptance among influential groups of the attitude I have been endeavouring, as best I can, to describe. The cure for our troubles is not less science but more. But there is indeed much to be discovered-by the economists, how to measure a man's due, by the psychologists (to use their own colourless phrase), how to change a man's social norms. But let us have no more evangelizing. If science dic-

tates a change of beliefs, let them be changed in a scientific way. The metamorphosis,
however, is of no small order. For the system
I have envisaged means a revolution in the
climate of thought of catholic, communist and socialist alike. Perhaps it is too late,
or perhaps the change is too tremendous. Perhaps we and our descendants will see
another convulsion of civilization comparable to the decline and fall of Rome, for often falling back a step seems a condition of the world's advance. We live in a time of vast
uncertainties and perplexities with little guiding light. But by what light we have the aim of eugenic reform seems not a
hopeless or unworthy aim to follow. I
cannot do better in conclusion than to quote the words of Galton: " Man is gifted with pity and other kindly feelings; he has also the power of preventing many kinds of suffering. I conceive it to fall well within his province to replace Natural Selection by other processes that are more merciful and not less effective. This is precisely the aim of eugenics."

GENETICS AND DISEASE
by
TAGE KEMP, M.D.
Professor of Human Genetics, University of Copenhagen Director of the Institute for Human Genetics, Copenhagen

Professor Kemp has produced a book on Genetics and Disease that is thoroughly scientific, and

that at the same time will be completely comprehended by both the doctor and the biologist. After

a lucid summary of the Mechanism of Heredity, he deals adequately, but non-mathematically,

with the peculiar difficulties of studies on human pedigree data. Then follows an account of Normal

Hereditary Factors in man, including a notable chapter on the Blood Groups. Hereditary Diseases

next come under review, and are considered from both the clinical and the genetic aspects. This

section is enriched by a large number of excellent photographs. Finally comes a section on Genetic

Hygiene, which discusses practical applications for the individual about to marry (as well as for his

medical adviser) and as matters of public policy. The book embodies the results of many large-scale

investigations carried out in the Institute of which Professor Kemp is Director, and of the author's

own reflections, based on his unrivalled knowledge and experience of human genetic problems.

gi in. X 61 in. 330 pages

ioo ilustrations 27 tables

Price 6o/- net

OLIVER AND BOYD LTD.
EDINBURGH: TWEEDDALE COURT
LONDON: 98 GREAT RUSSELL STREET, W.C.1

Eugenics Review, Vol XIV, No. 4

