' Eugenics is the science which deals with all influences that improve the inborn qualities of a race; also
with those that develop them to the utmost advantage. '-SIR FRANCIS GALTON (1904)
The Eugenics Review
EDITORIAL OFFICES: THE EUGENICS SOCIETY - 69 ECCLESTON SQUARE - LONDON * SWI - VICTORIA 2091
Editorfor the Society: Mrs. K. Hodson

NOTES OF THE

does not present any radically new picture of the likely growth in our numbers until the end of

QUARTER

the century. The estimated population in broad age-groups for the year 2001 is shown in the

following statement for both the newly published

figures and for those issued a year ago:

THE BIOLOGY OF CO-OPERATION

WE PRINT IN this issue of the REVIEW three papers which were read at a half-day Symposium

1965 1964
Age Projection Projection (Numbers in millions)

for young scientists which took place on 11th December 1965 at University College, London.
This meeting, on the Biology of Co-operation,
was held as part of the British contribution to

0-14
4155s-6444*
65 and over*

18-7 274
114
8-9

18-3 274
11-6
91

International Co-operation Year. It was organ-

Total 66 4 66.4

ized by Dr. G. Ainsworth Harrison as a joint project of the Eugenics Society, the Royal Anthropological Institute and the Society for the

* The dividing line is age 65 for men but age 60 for women.

Study of Human Biology.

The Chair was taken by Professor J. S. Both the total and the number at ages 15-44

Weiner; he was, in 1963, appointed Convenor of are unchanged, but the population of children

Project D (Human Adaptability) of the Inter- has been increased by nearly half a million

national Biological Programme. The first paper whereas the number of persons aged 45 and over

read, Co-operation in Mammalian Societies by have been reduced by a corresponding amount.

Dr. M. J. Cullen, is unfortunately not available These changes directly reflect a mild rise in

for publication; the three which followed it form expected fertility and a projected net migratory

an interesting series-Co-operation in Primate intake that is halved after 1978 in comparison

Societies by Dr. John Hurrell Crook, in Primitive with the previous year's assessment.

Human Communities by Dr. Burton Benedict In recent years the public has been accustomed

and, finally, the Psychology of Co-operation by to see dramatic changes in the long-term popula-

Dr. Henri Tajfel.

tion outlook, a magnified representation of

year-to-year developments in current experience

in regard mainly to fertility and migration. By

POPULATION PROSPECTS

such standards the changes between the 1964 and

THE LATEST PROJECTION of the population of 1965 are very mild, and with the numbers of

England and Wales, to be seen in the Registrar births wavering at their peak it is all too possible

General's Quarterly Return for December 1965, that the next exercise of this kind will show a

ER-E

57

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

stronger variation of outlook, perhaps with a they did in the case of the abolition of capital

diminution of prospective numbers.

punishment. When the House rose on 5th

In an interesting article in New Society (3rd August for the summer recess, 144 Members of

March 1966) Mr. John Boreham, a Chief all parties had signed the motion.

Statistician of the General Register Office with At about this time the Abortion Law Reform

special responsibility forpopulation and censuses, Association began to direct its activities to the

explained in broad outline how projections are House of Lords where there are more facilities

made and the connection they have with the re- for debate. A previous attempt had been made in

shaping of social policy. He asked whether, in 1954 by Lord Amulree but after presenting a Bill

the light of the latest figures, a new population which would have done no more than give

policy is needed for Britain, in relation to statutory effect to the Bourne judgement of

population pressure generally and the drift to the 1938, he withdrew it in the face of opposition.

south-east in particular.

Now that the Lords had found a new zeal for

As befits a Government official, he did not social reform, and had already tackled two

give any direct answer to this question, although highly controversial issues, homosexuality and

he emphasized that complex considerations are capital punishment, the time seemed ripe for a

involved. But he did draw attention to the fact third: abortion. Lord Silkin, a former Labour

that in the period 1865-1900 cities were hurriedly Member for Peckham and Minister of Town and

built for a population increase of twelve million Country Planning in a previous Labour Govern-

whereas over the thirty-five remaining years of ment, was approached and agreed to take a Bill.

the present century cities must be equally speedily He could hardly have foreseen the tremendous

built for an increase of twenty million. The amount of public interest his Bill would arouse,

remnants of the Victorian cities are often mean the hundreds of letters and the requests to

and squalid: could we now do better? It might address meetings, nor the many hours he would

perhaps be added that the Victorians left some spend in trying to find a basis for agreement, the

countryside between the cities whereas, in the pressures that would be brought to bear, the

current expansion, sprawling conurbations eat delaying tactics, and the emotions which

up agricultural land over huge areas.

persuaded the House on one occasion to go back

It is against such a background that any on an earlier decision.

suggestion of a general increase in family Unlike the Commons where a Bill that goes

allowances should be considered.

into committee is usually dealt with by a selected

number of Members, a committee of the House

of Lords comprises the whole chamber and,

ABORTION LAW

according to the attendance, may vary in size and

MRS. VERA HOUGHTON writes: When it became composition with each sitting. This adds to the

clear on 9th July 1965 that the abortion Bill strain of steering a Bill through the committee

introduced by Mrs. Renee Short, Labour stage. A further hazard, common to both

Member forWolverhampton, North-East,* could Houses, is that the help of Parliamentary drafts-

make no further progress before the end of the men is not available to private Members, and if

session, supporters of this reform, headed by the Government is adopting a neutral attitude,

Mrs. Short, tabled a motion asking the Govem- departmental advice is also withheld until the

ment to provide time in the next session, wish of the House on the principle of the Bill is

beginning in the following October. Replying to clear, that is, after the Second reading.

a question the previous day, Miss Alice Bacon,

Minister of State, Home Office, had said that if any Member were to be lucky in the ballot, then

Lord Silkin's Bill

the Government would have to see what their Despite all that was said about the drafting

attitude would be about doing for abortion what defects of Lord Silkin's Bill, it was certainly no

worse and probably a good deal better than

* The Eugenics Review, 1965, 57, 105-7.

many others. What started off as a relatively

58

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

straightforward five-clause Bill became in- was adopted on 3rd February after an amend-

creasingly complex as each critic tried to define ment, moved by Viscount Dilhorne and the

it more exactly. The amendments were so Bishop of Exeter, to leave out this clause, had

numerous that a second committee stage was been defeated by 71 to 51 votes. But at the

necessary and the Bill itself was reprinted four report stage on 22nd February when Lady

times. It occupied seven sitting days from the Wootton and the Archbishop of Canterbury

Second reading on 30th November to the joined Viscount Dilhorne and Lord Brain in

passing of the Bill at the Third reading on 7th again moving the amendment, it was carried by

March 1966, three days before the dissolution of 81 to 51 votes and the earlier decision was

Parliament, when it fell along with all the other reversed.

Bills that had not completed their passage Was it an accident that on the second occasion

through both Houses. Twenty-six Peers gave there were 61 Peers who had not been present on

advance notice of their wish to speak in the the earlier occasion, and that 42 of them voted in

debate on the Second reading; 227 Peers in all favour of the amendment? Lady Summerskill

voted at one stage or another of the Bill.

thought otherwise ". . . never before, in the

Lord Silkin remained imperturbable through- whole of my Parliamentary career, have I seen a

out, his patience was monumental and his vote manipulated as was the vote last week"

staying-power remarkable. He proposed to (22nd February). It was certainly a disaster that

introduce a fresh Bill early in the new Parliament 33 of those who voted on 3rd February to retain

which should have every chance of reaching the the clause were absent on the second occasion,

Commons early enough in the session for time and a matter for conjecture that 12 Members

to be given for a full-length debate and for it to changed their minds.

make progress. Abortion law reform supporters Commenting on this clause in the British

in the House of Commons who now number Medical Journal of 19th March,* Lord Brain

over 300 would help to make sure of this.

states it "was attacked on the grounds that

physical and mental inadequacy was an ill-

defined concept, that its implications were social

Grounds for Abortion

rather than medical, and that therefore it was

The original Bill as passed at the Second reading differed in one major respect only from the Bills introduced by Mr. Kenneth Robinson, now the Minister of Health, in 1961 and by Mrs. Short in June 1965. It sought to add a new provision to enable social indications to be taken into account in so far as they affect the patient's suitability as a mother:
... in the belief that the health of the patient or the social conditions in which she is living (including the social conditions of her existing children) make her unsuitable to assume the legal and moral

not a matter for decision by doctors, and that, in any case, if the mother's physical or mental health was likely to be seriously impaired by the continuation of the pregnancy, grounds for its termination were already provided by subsection 1 (a)", which gives statutory effect to the Bourne judgement.
Rape was another ground where it was
suggested that the pregnant woman's physical or mental health should be the deciding factor, and that doctors should not have to decide a question of fact. Despite Lord Silkin's introduction of a

responsibility for caring for a child or another child safeguard against wrongfully alleged rape, that

as the case may be.

the woman must have consulted a registered

Because of the difficulty of defining social conditions to everyone's satisfaction, Lord Silkin agreed to try to find an alternative wording at the committee stage.
The new wording that
... the pregnant mother is or will be physically or

medical practitioner as soon as practicable after
the incident and that there was then medical
evidence of sexual assault upon her, Viscount Dilhorne's amendment to leave out rape was carried by 40 to 31 votes. At the time that this division took place a number of Peers who had

mentally inadequate to be the mother of a child or

of another child as the case may be

* "Medical Issues in Abortion Law Reform."

59

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

earlier in the day supported the "inadequacy" fundamental question of all was hardly discussed:

clause and who might well have been in favour of retaining the "rape" clause, had had to leave

how does one decide what physical or mental abnormalities deprive a child of any prospect of reasonable enjoyment of life?

for other engagements. This was just bad luck,

the sitting had not been expected to continue The last ground to be fought over was where

so long.

the girl becomes pregnant while under the age of

At one stage, on 28th February, it looked as if sixteen. As Lord Brain points out in the B.M.J.

the "deformed child" clause would founder on "this provision was defended on the ground of

the degree of probability of abnormality. Lord the psychological immaturity of the girl,

Silkin had finally moved an amendment to interference with schooling, and the social stigma

provide for termination of pregnancy on the involved in pregnancy". I thought Lord Raglan

ground that "there is a substantial risk that if the put this issue in a nutshell in the debate: "A

child were born it would suffer from such young girl under sixteen is supposed to be

physical or mental abnormalities as to deprive it protected by law, and yet we say that she has no

of any prospect of reasonable enjoyment of right to a remedy if she conceives. I see no point

life". Viscount Dilhorne wanted to leave out in having one law which is meant to protect, and

"there is a substantial risk" and to insert another law which ignores the damage if that

instead "it is more probable than not". Lord protection fails". The girl under sixteen remains

Brain's comments on the degree of abnormality in the Bill.

will be of interest here to readers. I quote from The Lords also accepted that termination of

the B.M.J.:

pregnancy should be allowed where the pregnant

The accuracy with which the risk that a child will woman is a defective. On the understanding that be born abnormal can be estimated must vary he could look at it again before he re-introduced

greatly in different circumstances. There is a high his Bill, Lord Silkin accepted an amendment

degree of probability when a pregnant woman suffers from rubella during the first few weeks of pregnancy. ... The risk of transmission of a disorder inherited

from Lord Molson that "defective" should mean in England and Wales a person suffering from

as a Mendelian dominant, and for which one parent subnormality within the meaning of section 4 of

is heterozygous, being 50 per cent, would not qualify for the termination of the pregnancy on the basis of Lord Dilhorne's amendment. When this was pointed out, he said that another suggested phrase, "as probable as not", would cover that particular risk. It would not, however, cover the risk of inheritance

the Mental Health Act, 1959, or in Scotland a person suffering from mental deficiency within the meaning of section 6 of the Mental Health (Scotland) Act, 1960.
The remaining clauses of the Bill deal with who

of an autosomal recessive factor for which both should be permitted to terminate a pregnancy,

parents were heterozygous, which is 25 per cent. Other factors which need to be taken into account
in this context are the increasing frequency with

where it should be done, who should certify (previous Bills have only specified that there shall

which clinically normal carriers of abnormal genes be a second medical opinion) and with the

can be detected, and also the possibility of dis- notification of termination of pregnancy. All

covering in some cases whether the foetus in utero is normal or abnormal. The issue in the Debate really turned on the meaning of "substantial risk" and how this was to be assessed. It may be questioned whether

designed supposedly to safeguard the patient from the unscrupulous doctor, but also to protect the doctor from the patient who knows

the relevant considerations can all be expressed what she wants, and to reassure society. Never

mathematically....

before has an attempt been made to legislate on

As the Bill stood there was no special provision requiring an expert opinion on this difficult question. The responsibility was left with the gynaecologist terminating the pregnancy and the undefined doctor

the circumstances in which a surgical operation may take place and the conditions under which it may be done. If it was necessary to do this for

providing the second certificate. In any case, if the mother's mental health is
seriously threatened by the fear that the unborn child may be abnormal, the pregnancy could be terminated under the provision of 1 (a) without the need for a precise assessment of that risk. The most

all operations, we should recognize the absurdity of it. But as long as we stop short of allowing the individual the freedom of personal decision and
the surgeon the freedom of his profession, this problem will remain with us.

60

NOTES OF THE QUARTER

Mr. Digby's Bill

termination where "the pregnant woman's

While the House of Lords was grappling with the final stages of Lord Silkin's Bill, another
attempt, the fourth, was being made in the Commons. One of the supporters of Mrs. Short's Bill, Mr. Wingfield Digby, Conservative Member for Dorset, West, had drawn eighth place in the ballot for private Members' Bills, and bravely decided on medical termination of pregnancy. Since only a limited number of days are allotted

capacity as a mother will be severely overstrained by the care of a child or of another child as the case may be". The interpretation of "defective" has been reversed from "subnormality" to "severe subnormality".
In the Commons Mr. David Steel, the Liberal Member for Roxburgh, Selkirk and Peebles, who drew third place in the recent ballot will introduce a Bill on abortion this summer.

to private Members' Bills Mr. Digby knew that

his could not be the first on the order paper for

the day and that therefore it ran the risk of being THE GYPSY UNDER SOCIALISM

"talked out" as happened with Mr. Reeves's Bill in 1953 and with Mr. Robinson's in 1961.
Mr. Digby confined his Bill to giving statutory effect to the Bourne judgement and to cases where "it is as probable as not that the child if born would suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities or both as to deprive it of any prospect of reasonable enjoyment of life". At
the time his Bill had to go to print, rape had already gone from Lord Silkin's Bill and the girl under sixteen was still in the balance. At 4 o'clock on Friday, 25th February, Mr. Digby's

COLONEL JAMES CAMPBELL writes: Eugenic considerations have been and still appear in
many countries to be obscured and bedevilled by the odium attaching to Hitler's ideas on race. So
obsessed are some governments and individuals with their old anti-Hitler feelings and propaganda that their ideas are still in danger of becoming fixed and immutable.
The Prague correspondent of The Financial Times (1st March 1966), on the subject of the Gypsy under Socialism, writes:

Bill was talked out by a Roman Catholic M.P., Formerly a high mortality rate, particularly of Mr. Peter Mabon (Labour, Preston, South) amid infants, kept the gypsy population stagnant among

cries of "shame" from both the chamber and the growing nations of the Czechs and Slovaks.

public gallery.
Mr. Digby and the supporters of his Bill immediately put down a motion calling for

Now the gypsies are staging a population explosion contrasting sharply with the no-babies attitude of the Czechs and Slovaks. The percentage of gypsies in the population has almost doubled since 1927 and

"early reform" and in the few days left before is now increasing at a still faster rate. In a single

Parliament was dissolved on 10th March
Members of all three parties quickly added their signatures.

year, gypsy families working side by side with Slovaks in a certain new factory had 25 births for every one birth in the same number of Slovak families.

In some districts the gypsy population increment

Addendum:

was estimated in 1965 at 10 per cent. The explanation is simple. The gypsies not only ignore contraception

The House of Lords gave Lord Silkin's new Bill (identical to the Bill passed on 7th March) an unopposed Second reading on 10th May and

but would not dream of making use of the opportunity open to women with several children or in difficult circumstances of having a legal abortion.
The solution of the problem was made more

completed the committee and report stages on difficult by a muddled approach in the post-war

23rd May. Amendments accepted in committee period. With the Nazi extermination policy and

include a re-wording of the "deformed child" clause to read that the child "would suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities as to be

deportations of gypsies to the death camps fresh in their memory, people were understandably shy of doing anything which could be misinterpreted as racial discrimination and tended to overlook many

seriously handicapped" (instead of "to deprive petty offences.

it of any prospect of reasonable enjoyment of

life"), and a new clause (by the overwhelming I have not heard elsewhere of a "no-babies"

majority of 60 votes to 15) which provides for attitude of Czechs and Slovaks, though I have

61

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

heard of their desire for efficient family planning. we may now look forward to a steady flow of

The correspondent continues:

research from this part of Europe.

The gypsy problem may get still worse if new measures, contemplated by the government in the field of family allowances, are adopted. Family

ABORTION BY VACUUMASPIRATION METHOD

allowances, paid in Czechoslovakia on a scale COLONEL JAMES CAMPBELL writes: "Use of

increasing with every further child have been for
many gypsies an important part of income, but so far have been paid only to parents who could prove

the Vacuum Extractor" is the title of an article in the British Medical Journal of 19th January

a certain minimum period of employment.... It is 1963 by Moshe Lancet, M.D., Department of

obvious that an increase in allowances and their Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Rehoveth, Israel.

payment regardless of parents' employment would put a premium on the gypsy way of life.

It is surprising that some who read this article have failed to notice that this vacuum extractor,

One does not have to look far in the United Kingdom to find somewhat parallel population problems, not only in regard to gypsies but even
sections powerfully represented in Parliament. Here also the same hangover from the reaction to Hitler's policies inhibits clear thinking and

to be used instead of forceps, should not be confused with the vacuum-aspiration device introduced in the USSR which was discussed in THE EUGENICS REVIEW for January 1963 (54, 189) and was more fully described in its pages in October 1964 (56, 129).

open expression of views. Perhaps the next generation may be free from these inhibitions but in the meantime much harm may be done unless the facts are faced.

SOCIAL AND GENETIC INFLUENCES ON LIFE AND DEATH
FOLLOWING ITS SUCCESSFUL Symposia in
1964 on Biological Aspects of Social Problems

and in 1965 on Genetic andEnvironmental Factors

HUMAN GENETICS IN ROMANIA

in Human Ability, the Eugenics Society is organizing a two-day conference on Social and

GENETIC STUDIES IN Romania, as in other East Genetic Influences on Life and Death which will

European countries, did not develop until a few be held on Wednesday and Thursday, 28th and

years ago. This was due to the influence of the 29th September 1966 at the Botany Lecture

Russian biologist, Lysenko, whose dead hand on Theatre, University College London, Gower

all scientific genetics extended to the satellite Street, London, W.C. 1.

countries. With the relaxation of his hold and As before, the Symposium will be divided in-

with the growing independence of Romania from to four sessions: Conception, Pregnancy and

direct Russian control, serious research in Birth; Some Major Causes of Illness, I. Somatic

genetics began about seven years ago in the field Illness (session 2) and II. Psychological Illness

of microbiology in which Romania is very well (session 3); and Causes and Effects of Ageing.

advanced, with two major institutes in Bucharest. The full list of chairmen, speakers and their

In the last six years good departments of human subjects is advertised in this issue of the Review;

genetics have also developed, both in the the proceedings will be published as Eugenics

Institute of Endocrinology and the University Society Symposia, Volume 3.

Department of Forensic Medicine in Bucharest. Admission is free but by ticket for which

Similar developments are, no doubt, taking place application should be made to the General

in other eastern European socialist republics and Secretary of the Eugenics Society.

62

