HAROLD SANDON
M.A., Ph.D., Professor of Zoology, University of Khartoum
On University Entrance Qualifications for Students of Biology

O FTEN IN THE past, and especially during this year ofcentenary celebrations. I have wondered uneasily what we should have
made of Charles Darwin had he been one of our students today. Now we have the REvIEw's editorial answer:* "Darwin was a truly late developer. In the modem competition for university places it seems evident that he would have failed. To-day precocity is at a premium."
This conclusion is important, not merely because of our interest in everything concerning Darwin, but even more because in this he was typical of a considerable class of biologists both great and small. "As a schoolboy, and for long as an undergraduate, I was ignorant of my true vocation, and never had sufficient mental enthusiasm for the studies put before me to win any scholarships.... A child of workingclass parents who, like me, did not succeed in finding his real aim in life until nearly the age of nineteen or twenty, would have little chance of pursuing it." That was written by Joseph Needham, but there are many other eminent biologists who might equally truthfully have written it.
As for the less eminent ones, no doubt every university teacher of these subjects can recall numerous instances among his own students. How often does it happen that in the final years of a course the winner proves to be a dark horse who, throughout his school and early university career, had done no more than just hold his place in the general field among the mediocrities? How often has one had to struggle to press the claims of such a student against incomprehending colleagues of other departments who firmly believe that a man cannot possibly be first-class unless the whole of his career has been marked by an uninterrupted series of brilliant
* EUENICS REVIEW, July 1958, 50, 2.

successes? The linguist, the mathematician, the physicist or the chemist almost invariably reveals his special abilities almost from the first day he enters school. So do some biologists, but there is a large class of these who do not. How many of these will be lost entirely if we yield to the rising clamour of the raising of university entrance qualifications, especially in Mathematics and Chemistry?
Yet the terms "late" and "precocious" are misleading. Gregor Mendel failed the State Teachers' Examination for the second time at the age of thirty-four. This was only very shortly before he started that series of experiments which led, only nine years later, to the publication of his Experiments on Plant Hybridization. Can we believe that his scientific abilities had been retarded up to the age of thirty-four and then suddenly blossomed out? Or if we compare the "late developer" Darwin with a precocious one such as J. S. Mill, the differences are obviously qualitative ones. The remarkable abilities in languages and mathematics shown by Mill even in infancy did not develop more slowly in Darwin. They simply did not develop at all.
Mental Characteristics of Darwin and Wallace Ifwe try to define just what are the characteristics which make for the success of the DarwinMendel type of biologist, our first impression is that these are marked mainly by negatives. Darwin, by his own admission, was not very
quick at learning anything, was singularly incapable of mastering any language, was not
able to see any meaning in the early steps of algebra, was not quick-witted enough to hold an argument with anyone, had only a very limited ability to follow a long or purely abstract train of thought and therefore could never have succeeded with metaphysics or mathematics, had an extensive but hazy memory so that he

247 THE EUGENICS REVIEW, January 1959, 50, 4.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

had never been able to remember for more than Father was able to afford to pay for the extra

a few days a single date or line of poetry, could years of study. But now, when the great majority

neither sing nor draw and, according to his son, of students are educated at the public expense, to

regarded a skilful dissection as something almost change one's course of study mid-way is a

superhuman. Alfred Russel Wallace's self- luxury that can rarely be permitted. This is a

analysis is very similar; he did not think that as pity, for a university is, above all, a place where

a young man he could be said to have shown one changes one's mind about a lot of things,

special abilities in any of the higher mental including for many people their own aims in life.

faculties but he records a long list of his defects A school-boy enthusiasm for natural history is

including an inability to appreciate the niceties no indication that a man will make a good biolo-

of melody and harmony in music, bad verbal gist, for, unlike Wordsworth's Happy Warrior,

memory which, combined with the inability to he is liable to grow up and, when brought among

reproduce vocal sounds, rendered the acquire- the tasks of real life he may well find that the

ments of foreign languages very difficult and plan that pleased his boyish thought made no

distasteful, inability as a speaker to find the provision for ambitions which, with maturity,

right words or expressions, a very limited power become dominant. We ought to be able to

of drawing or perception of the intricacies of know a student better than he knows himself

form, and so on. When we ask what there is on so as to be able to guide him into a career which

the credit side of such balance sheets, all that will give him permanent satisfaction regardless

Darwin could claim was " strong and diversi- of his temporary fancies.

fied tastes, much zeal in whatever interests me

and keen pleasure in understanding any complex Student guidance in under-developed countries

subject or thing" together with "a fair share of Nowhere is this matter of student guidance

invention and of common sense or judgment more important than in the new universities

such as every fairly successful lawyer or doctor in what it is customary to call the "under-

must have but not, I believe, in any higher developed" countries. Many students come to

degree". For Wallace it was "a strong desire to them with very little idea of what a professional

know the causes of things, a great love of beauty scientist is or does. Their choice of curriculum

in form and colour, a considerable but not is determined, only too often, by accident or

excessive desire for order and arrangement in misunderstanding and if, later on, they regret it,

whatever I had to do and a power of correct there is little that can be done to alter it. If in

reasoning from a review of known facts in any later life some of these provide examples for

case to the causes or laws which produced cynics who assert that university education

them". These are hardly things which come out merely produces disgruntled, socially unde-

in any kind of scholastic test. It appears that sirable individuals, with no sense of vocation

motivation is a more decisive characteristic of and whose ambitions are simply to have a

such men than any special intellectual gifts. bigger salary, a more impressive office desk and

a smarter car than their neighbours, is this

Late Development

surprising? These are the natural consequences

This is where late development comes in for it of the circumstances which pushed them into

seems characteristic of men of this type that careers which they find, as Wallace found

their early interests are wide and diversified and languages, "difficult and distasteful" and could

only relatively late converge to a definite point. in most cases have been avoided if they had been

It is not accidental that a rather large pro- guided into careers more fitting to their abilities

portion of eminent zoologists started their and tastes.

university studies with some totally different In the biological sciences the problems of

career in view and only switched over to their student selection and guidance are complicated

definitive vocation later on. In the old days, by the fact that we ourselves do not really know

when one went to the university at Father's what we want. The change that comes over a

expense, this did not matter provided that class when it passes on from the descriptive

248

ON UNIVERSITY ENTRANCE OUALIFICATIONS FOR STUDENTS OF BIOLOGY

parts of zoology or botany to genetics is a tions to it. At the present time there is no doubt

familiar one. The faces of the brightest students that the most exciting advances are in those

-those whose drawings and dissections are branches for which expertise in the mathematical

impeccable and who can always unhesitatingly and physical sciences is essential and, if this

remember the correct names of everything- were all, the arguments in favour of raising the

immediately assume a blank look, while it is qualifications for admission to the courses

from some previously very ordinary members of would be unanswerable. But progress would be

the class that all the answers come, correctly very lop-sided and would soon come to a stand-

and effortlessly. Which kind of student do we still if there were not also a strong body of

consider the better zoologist or botanist? Or morphologists, systematists, ecologists and field

do we rank them both inferior to those who just naturalists. The health of the science depends

do moderately well at everything without show- more than anything else upon the influence of a

ing any particular ability at anything? Curricula solid core of men distinguished by their intimate

are usually weighted heavily on one side or the familiarity with and intuitive sympathy for

other and fashions change rapidly. Only a living things.

generation ago it was quite common to assume These varied kinds of work call for men of

that a man could not possibly be considered as a very varied kinds of abilities which rarely coexist

potential zoologist unless he combined artistic in a single individual. In fact it is quite possible

skill with the kind of visual memory that would that some of them may be mutually exclusive.

enable him, for instance, to draw a complicated Somehow we need to adjust our curricula and

three-dimensional object such as a skull neatly examinations in such ways as to enable men of

and accurately from memory in an examination. all these different types to make the best of the

Now-a-days the pons asinorwn is more likely abilities which they have without being held

to be biochemical. Both kinds of test are effec- back on account of those which they lack. How

tive for picking out men whose special gifts are to do this is, at present, much more a matter of

needed for work in particular branches of guess-work than of knowledge. Research into

biology. But they are equally effective in failing such problems is urgent for without the under-

some others and it is doubtful if the Darwins, standing of these matters which research alone

Wallaces and Mendels would manage to cross can give, quite a considerable part of the re-

either of the bridges.

sources available for higher education in

science will continue to be wasted in efforts to

fit square pegs into round holes. This is not

The need for varied abilities

merely a deplorable waste of money but a

Biology is the most catholic of all disciplines. potent source of trouble alike to the unfortunate

Men of almost every kind of natural endow- individuals on whom we make our mistakes and

ment can make their characteristic contribu- to the communities to which they belong.

249

