THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION
The Demographic Position By Sir CHARLES ARDEN-CLOSE, K.B.E., C.B., F.R.S.

T HE Royal Commission on Population,
consisting of Lord Simon as chairman
and fifteen members, was appointed on March 3rd, I944. One member resigned in I946, and Lord Simon resigned the chair-
manship in May I946, his place being taken by Sir Hubert Henderson. The Report was signed on March i8th, I949, So that the Commission was in being for five years. The Report is published by the Stationery Office in a handy little volume of 26o
pages.
This review is an attempt to estimate the value of the Report from a demographic point of view, leaving the eugenic and economic aspects to be dealt with by expert authorities. The Statistics Committee, with whose work we are now chiefly concerned, was presided over by Sir Alexander Carr-Saunders. Certain special investigations were undertaken by the Commission, notably the family census of I946, which was carried out "to discover what were the numbers and distribution of families of different size in Great Britain " and to trace the changes that had taken place in the trend of the size of families.
It is noted in the introduction to the Report that it is by no means safe to predict, from past statistics, what may be the likely course of events in the future. This difficulty is illustrated by the unexpected variations in the birth-rate between 1920 and 1948. Thus, the number of births in I948
was 25 per cent higher than the average during the years I935-8, and so on. We may be permitted to remark that many painstaking tables of prediction of the future totals of our population, which were published some years ago and contributed to the creation of a general feeling of anxiety as to a possible " catastrophic " fall in our numbers, were entirely falsified by events. It was
chiefly this unjustified public anxiety which

led to the appointment of the Royal Com-
mission, so that some good came of it after all, for the Report of the Commission is a
valuable and authoritative addition to our
demographic literature.
After the introduction we have eight chapters under the general heading " The Trend of Population," commencing with an account of the past growth of numbers in this country and in the world at large. Great Britain, in spite of its small size, has the eighth largest population among the fifty countries of the world, including those giant areas the United States, China and Russia.
About the year I700 our population was about one-seventh of what it is now. " The growth of population in Great Britain was ... an essential condition not only of the development of Britain itself as a great and rich nation, but also of the growth of the new overseas countries inhabited mainly or largely by people of British descent." In fact, British emigration in the nineteenth century not only relieved pressure at home but increased British influence in the world at large. But an eventual decline in the rate of increase at home was, of course, inevitable, and the obvious fact is pointed out that a
continuous increase of the nineteenth-century pattern would have resulted in such enormous numbers that it would have been impossible to support them, and that " the growth of population in Great Britain would ultimately have been slowed down by the Malthusian forces of famine and disease."
As to age distribution, we may consider the group of the " over 6o's," and we shall find that whereas in I89I they amounted to 7 per cent of the total population, in I947 they accounted for no less than I5 per cent. The character of the change in the age structure is shown clearly by the age pyra-
mids which are drawn for those two years, the latter being similar to that given in this

"17

ii8 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

REVIEW for October I948.* It is stated that the average age of our population has risen from 27 years in I89I to 35 years in I947. Oldish people must take a larger share in the work of the country. The remark may be hazarded that there is some reason to think that, nowadays, the middle-aged and old work more conscientiously than the young.
The chief factors which determine the trend of population are, of course, migration, deaths and births. The migration figures from I87I are analysed, and it is shown that, during the forty years to i9II, the net emigration amounted to nearly 2 million, or about one-ninth of the national increase, and this did not greatly slow down the growth of population. But, owing to the greater number of male emigrants, there resulted a considerable surplus of women at all adult ages, and this, in its turn, affected the marriage statistics.
Passing from the census of I9II to the difficult years of the first world war, with their loss of hundreds of thousands of young men, we come to the troublesome post-war period and the depression of the 'thirties; we find that between I93I and I94I there was a net inward migration of 650,ooo, the majority being Britons impelled to return by the world depression. It is suggested, however, in this Report, that the effective cause of variations in migration is not only the trade cycle but that some more permanent cause is also at work.
Only a few of us emigrate, and not everybody marries, but all of us die, so that the study of mortality rates is of interest to all of us. Several tables are given to illustrate the effect of this factor, notably a table of survivors of females to various ages, from
birth to over 85, and a comparison is made
between a life-table of I838-54 with one of I942-4. It appears that " under the mortality of a century ago only about two-thirds of the female population reached the age at which they would begin to marry," whereas, at present, go per cent survive to that age. There has been much improvement in the survival rates at young and middle ages; it
* P. I39.

now remains to improve substantially the
expectations of the " over 65's." We now come to the question of births,
the question which was the cause of the appointment of the Commission. The first table given is that of the proportion of persons, of ages 45-54, who were or had been married. This proportion is shown to be
very constant for the period given (I87II947), and amounts, on an average, to about 87 per cent, with but slight variations. But,
though the total proportion is stable, the age at which people marry " can vary a great deal." And an important fact is that the numbers of those marrying in the age group 20-4 has risen in recent years. It is stated that " people in the higher social classes marry later than those in the lower."
The most important investigation undertaken by the Commission is that connected with the size of the family. The Commission did good service by carrying out a sample census of families, of which the full result will be published in a special report. Tables are given to show the steady decrease in the number of children in the average family
during the past hundred years. That decrease
was beginning to show itself even in the 'forties and 'sixties, the main source of information about the size of Victorian families being the fertility census of i9ii. There was little information after this census until the
investigation known as the sample census
above mentioned. The facts are straightforward; the aver-
age number of live births per completed family decreased from about 5 in mid-
Victorian times to 2-2 now. Another expression of the same fact is that, in modern
times, large families are exceedingly rare; families from o to 3 account for 8o per cent
of the total, the largest numbers consisting
of i or 2 children. A table is given of the present estimated
size of the completed family under two
headings, manual workers and non-manual
workers. It appears that the size of the average family of manual workers is now nearly half as large again as that of the non-
manual workers; in figures, about 21 to If.
There are, as might be expected, differences

THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

II9

in occupational groups, and in geographical family, and that a rise in the number of

regions, and also, though to no great extent, births has also occurred in other countries of

amongst religious denominations. But the North-West Europe, and that in these

broad picture remains, that the non-intel- countries, as in our own, one of the most

lectual workers breed more than the intel- obvious influences in the encouragement of

lectual, if we may so class the non-manual larger families has been the condition of ful

workers.

employment.

The report includes an interesting discus- There is a short ably-written chapter on

sion of the extent and causes of family "The Question of Replacement," which all

limitation, going back even to the customs of interested in our demographic position may

our very remote ancestors of the palaeolithic be advised to read. It is pointed out that the

period !

notion that our numbers, though continuing

A rather intricate chapter deals with " The to increase, were heading for a decrease, and

Recent Increase in Births," and, to begin that the number of births was well below

with, a table is given showing the average eventual replacement level, led more than

annual births and deaths, in three-yearly anything else to the appointment of the

periods, from 1922 to I948. The first thing Royal Commission. The net, and the effec-

that would strike the reader is that, excepting tive, reproduction rates, until the advent of

the years I940-2, the average number of larger birth-rates, painted much the same

deaths each year was unexpectedly constant picture. But now we have to deal with the

at about 550,000. But, in those three years, " remarkable increase of births which has

I940-2, the average number of deaths rose to taken place in recent years," a result chiefly

602,000, and this increase is put down to of the lowering of the average age at which

air-raid casualties. The average annual people marry. This will not have a lasting

excess of births over deaths, for the years effect on the replacement situation unless the

I922-48, was 2I2,000, but, owing to the great size of the average family increases. The

variations in the birth-rates, the annual Commission is doubtful if this is likely to

excess varied very greatly. The significant occur, for the available indications are that

feature, however, is that, whereas this excess the recent unexpectedly high birth-rates will

diminished steadily from I922-42, during the not continue.

next six years there was a remarkable It is observed that " the crucial factor in

increase, due to the great increase in the determining the number of births in the long

number of births, of which the average run is the size of the family," and the Com-

annual number for I946-8 rose to no less mission is to be congratulated upon settling

than 934,000.

upon this simple expression which the public

The Report states that " the increase in the at large can understand. But, like all such

married population has been sufficient to expressions, it needs care in its application.

account statistically.. . for a considerable It is stated in the Report that, " Our calcula-

growth in the number of annual births." It tion that the present average size of the

is shown that striking increases have taken family in Great Britain is about 6 per cent

place in marriages at early ages. Thus, in below replacement level implies . . . no pre-

the age group 20-4 there was an increase diction, however tentative, that total num-

from I97 per cent in I93I to 32-5 per cent bers are likely to decline at this rate " during

in 1947. Some paragraphs deal with the any reasonably predictable period. We can

effects on marriage of the second world war; bear in mind the fact that previous predic-

the separations, the hurrying up of marriages, tions of heavy falls in our numbers proved

the earlier ages, and the slightly increased very erroneous. Meanwhile, we may accept

fertility.

the statistical fact that the present average

It is stated that it appears likely that the size of the family is probably slightly below

reduction in age of marriage will tend to- replacement level, without necessarily

wards the increase of the average size of the lamenting the fact.

120 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Two chapters deal with " The Future of assumptions made. It is clearly stated that

the Population" under various sub-heads, it is the size of the family that will be the

such as mortality, marriage, family size, decisive factor.

future numbers and migration. A chart is Figures are given of the projected size of

given of the actual age distribution in i947, the total population on three different

compared with a life-table distribution of assumptions of the size of the average com-

the same total size, and this shows clearly the pleted family. If we content ourselves with

differences between our present distribution the year I977, the three different figures are,

and what the Commission calls a " normal " in millions, 507, 5I@8 and 48-6. The actual

one. In the discussion of future numbers it figure for I947 was 48-2. It may be added

is assumed that the fall in death-rates will that it is shown that the population of the

continue, and it is to be noted that it is working ages, I5 to 65, wil remain remark-

thought that even at old ages the death-rates ably constant until I977, on any of the

may diminish. Improvement in mortality chosen assumptions, at about 33 million.

rates may cause a marked increase in the So there is not much to make a song about!

total numbers, particularly on account of The use of the size of the average com-

the larger proportion of old people.

pleted family in the method adopted for

As to the age at which people marry it is measuring reproductivity is dealt with, at

remarked that the tendency to marry earlier some length, in an appendix written by the

was to be noted during the period I9II-32, assistant secretary to the Commission. This

and this tendency increased after the latter appendix will repay study by those interested

date, and it " may reflect the growing in population " projections." It is first

acceptance of family limitation by means of noted that, at present, fertility clearly much

birth control"; and this acceptance must more than balances mortality, but having

be regarded as an influence making for a slow regard to age structure, may be an unreliable

fall in the average size of the family. But " it guide to future growth.

is clearly impossible to predict confidently Then, glancing at a " life-table " popula-

the future trend of average family size," tion, in which the number of births each

though certain alternative assumptions were year is equal to the number of deaths, if we

made use of in the calculations of the take this figure as 697,000 (the average

Commission.

annual number of births in Great Britain in

A table is given of the average annual I935-8), and we multiply this figure by the

births, " projected on the assumption that average expectation of life at birth, in years,

average family size is constant at the same which is now 65-o8 years, we obtain a " life

level as among couples 'married I927-38," table" population of 45-4 million. It may

that mortality continues to fall and that be noted that in I942 the Registrars-General

there is no net migration. Perhaps the most used the figure 700,000 as a kind of standard

useful, and simple, figure to be derived is figure. But it is shown that the average

that 700,000 births a year might be looked actual population for that period was 45.9

upon as a kind of limiting number, " the million. An interesting comparison, but no

maintenance of such an annual flow of more.

births would sustain a population about The calculation of replacement used to be

equal in total numbers to that of the present carried out by means of the net reproduction

time." The table carries us as far in the rate of the late Dr. R. R. Kuczynski, and we

future as A.D. 2047, and we need not take were all of us accustomed to this method, or

the calculation too seriously as regards the the slightly modified one of the Registrar-

distant years. If we limit our outlook to General entitled the effective reproduction

I977 we shall find that the Commission gives rate. This rate " defines the trend of num-

a projected number of annual births of bers per generation that would ultimately

689,ooo, about the same as in I933-7. But result from the indefinite continuance in

the figure does, of course, depend upon the force of the age-specific fertility and mor-

THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION

I2I

tality rates " adopted. It is pointed out that (ii) The population of working age will remain

"the index of replacement of the parental age group (I5-49), as a whole, is a sufficiently accurate approximation" and is easier to calculate.

at about its present size for at least the next thirty years, though it will come to form a sometwhat smaller proportion of the total.
(iii) The population of young adults (I5-39) will show a fall of about I*4 million in the next

But the ups and downs of the birth-rates

fifteen years.

make the above methods unsatisfactory (iv) The number of old people (over 65) will grow

guides. We have had ample evidence of this. The defect of the method is that " it defines
the demographic habits of the population in

steadily over the next thirty years, the increase amounting to at least 2*3 million and very probably much more. The proportion of old people to the total will increase

terms of age-specific fertility and mortality

considerably.

rates of a particular year or series of years." It is not for an old person to object to the

Then we have the following important pronouncement, " If there is any fundamental element in the fertility habits of married couples, common sense suggests that it lies in the average size of their completed families; and the statistics show that this is a quantity which, even in disturbed times, has not fluctuated irregularly."
We then come to the calculation of replacement from a consideration of the size of completed families. The calculation is more complex than that of the net reproduction rate to which we were accustomed, but the steps can be followed in the appendix men-
tioned. It might be a good thing if, eventually, a complete numerical example, in all its steps, were given. Meanwhile the character of the method can be ascertained from the
appendix.

last prediction.
In the above Summary it is stated that the forecast takes no account of substantial net migration. But the Commission has some important remarks to make upon this matter. Three possibilities are considered, namely: no net migration; a net emigration of 50,000 a year; and a net emigration of IOO,0oO a year. Taking the middle assumption, the projected total population in I977 works out at 48-8 million, i.e. rather larger than at present. The migration would, of course, affect the, age structure, and the i5 to 65 group would be slightly, but not very materially, reduced. Then there is some discussion on the effect of considerable and continuous immigration; but we may hope that this is not in store for us !

A warning is given that the method has difficulties and defects of its own. But the public is sure to like the fixing of the size of the family as the criterion, and will understand that, as judged by this investigation, the average size, viz. 2-2, is slightly, though only slightly, below eventual replacement level. But this does not mean that the population is likely to diminish for a long
time.
The following is the " Summary of Conclusions " arrived at by the Commission:

It is thought by the Commission " neces-
sary to accept the fact that, assuming Great Britain's economic position does not deterior-
ate, the flow of emigrants from Great Britain ... is unlikely to be more than about a third of the number of immigrants which the other Commonwealth countries would need...." This problem, of the supply of emigrants to
the other British countries, involves other considerations beside that of our numbers at home, but our numbers and the population
trend have a marked bearing on interCommonwealth policies. The maintenance of

If there is no substantial net migration, the following developments may be confidently predicted, even allowing for a considerable degree of uncertainty about future births:

the British element is a matter of vital con-
cern to the whole Commonwealth, and it is urged by the Commission that this grave

(i) Total numbers will continue to grow in the problem should be studied jointly by the

near future, perhaps even for another governments concerned. An admirable sug-

generation. The growth will not be rapid, and the further addition to the population which can be expected is not large.

gestion ! We may end by quoting a paragraph on

122 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

page 126 which is at least as important as any other pronouncement of the Commission:
The general considerations which .the Committee on Empire Migration had in mind seem to us to be at least as cogent now as they were in

1932, and *eighing the advantages and disadvantages of emigration, we have no doubt that it is in the long-run interests of Great Britain
and the Commonwealth as a whole to mainta,in the flow of emigrants from Great Britain to the
other parts of the Commonwealth at as high a
level as'possible.

ROYAL COMMISSION ON POPULATION AND THE SOCIETY'S AIMS

By C. P. BLACKER

O N April I3th, I945, oral evidence was
given on behalf of the Society to the
Royal Commission by Dr. J. A. Fraser Roberts, Professor A. J. Lewis and
myself. Previously, a memorandum prepared at the request of the Royal Commission had been submitted, and it was mainly about the contents of this document that we were questioned. The memorandum was published in the October I945 issue of the
EUGENICS REVIEW.
Now that the Royal Commission's report
has been published we may profitably turn back to our memorandum, to-day more than four years old, and ask ourselves how far our
points have been met. We have many grounds for satisfaction.
Indeed, the report of the Royal Commission compares well with the Brock Committee's report as a document almost completely vindicating the Society's policy as presented to these two bodies. Let us compare our written evidence with the relevant recommendations of the Commission.
Our memorandum consisted of eleven sections. It begins by quoting Galton, whose conception of what eugenics is, and what it aims at, has been partially lost sight of in the controversies of later years. Galton contended
that the inborn qualities of future generations should resemble the better rather than the worse moiety of the nation to-day; and that our im-

perial and world responsibilities impose on us a special obligation to foster the valuable inborn qualities of our people.
Much attention has been paid by eugenists in the past to the question of differential fertility; and a chart, specially prepared from the report of the I9II census, of the standardized fertility of each of the eight social classes into which the population of the country was
then divided, was included in our memorandum. Less attention, we said, was paid to-day than formerly to differences between classes, and more to those between intelligence. Perversions of eugenics such as the doctrines of race superiority had somewhat spoiled the word eugenics, which stands in need of rehabilitation. We compared the liberal and authoritarian conception of eugenics, the essential difference lying in the use made of the expert. In the authoritarian system the expert is vested with powers whereas, in the liberal, his function is never
more than advisory. The word eugenics contains a challenge-
to define the particle"' eu." Each person is entitled to his own views which will reflect his private system of values. We advanced
five standards:
(a) Sound physical and mental health and good physique;
(b) Intelligence; (c) Social usefulness; (d) Freedom from genetic taints;

