THE GALTON LECTURE, 1949

T HE 1949 Galton Lecture, under the Was prejudice or antipathy towards colour

title " The Mixing of Races and Social
Decay," was delivered before a large audience, which included Fellows and Members of the Society and an unusual number of visitors, at Manson House,
Portland Place, on February i8th. The lecturer was the Rt. Rev. the Lord Bishop of Birmingham.
Lord Horder, who was in the Chair, said that his task was pleasant and also very easy. It was pleasant because he was, if he might say so, an old friend of Dr. Barnes, whose brother was a closer friend and a fellow leech. The Bishop of Birmingham needed no introduction to a British audience.
The Galton Lecture was held as near to Galton's birthday as practicable; February i6th of this year was the I27th anniversary of Galton's birth'. An invitation to deliver the Galton Lecture was the greatest compliment which the Society paid to a distinguished person, who was very " hand-picked." Dr. Barnes had chosen a slightly controversial subject, but one of great interest.
At the close of the Lecture, which is published in full elsewhere in this issue, there was a lively discussion opened by Mr. J. C. Trevor.
Mr. Trevor said that the subject of Dr. Barnes's Galton Lecture had interested him for some years. Nobody, he imagined, would dispute two of the propositions advanced, namely that all human groups, however diverse their origins, were interfertile, and that, as opportunities for communication and contact improved, racial crossing must increase. He would also accept, with little reserve, the conclusion that the prospect before us need not be depressing since we were all in a sense hybrids. On the other hand, speaking both as an anthropologist and as somebody who was reared in South and East Africa and had lived and worked among racially mixed communities in the New World, he felt that several points raised

in Britain, or for that matter elsewhere,
which, as the lecturer had rightly assured his audience, distorted judgment on mis-
cegenation, in fact " instinctive " ? Growing
up on a lonely farm in the Zoutspansberg with Bantu children as his only companions, the speaker had been unaware of it until
inculcated with the Herrenvolk idea, of which
it had taken him years to disabuse himself.
Again, as Professor MacCrone of Johannes-
burg had shown in a brilliant historical and psychological study,* the sanctions relating
to marriages between early Dutch settlers at the Cape and non-European women were
those of religion and not of colour or race.
He appreciated Dr. Barnes's difficulty in
assessing the extent to which the alleged defects of " half-breeds " were due to innate
limitations rather than to unfavourable home
or environmental conditions, yet this had to be faced by every investigator. It seemed to
the speaker that experience favoured the second possibility, but the real issue here was the quality of the parents irrespective of their racial origin. While he believed Dr. Barnes to be correct in asserting that unions
between different European peoples did not on the whole arouse popular disapproval, he deplored his confusion in such a context of nationality, language, culture and race.
The Germans were by no means wholly or even mainly " Nordic " in the widely accepted sense of that equivocal term. There was no single Latin " race," nor did the Slavs form a racial entity. These distinctions were far from being mere categorical quibbles but were fundamental to the
proper consideration of problems of the kind under review. Dr. Barnes had said that " troublesome or degenerate children " were not expected from alliances involving the groups just mentioned, implying the opposite in other cases but excepting the products of the " best representatives " of AngloChinese unions. He had further contrasted

by Dr. Barnes stood in need of very serious qualification.

* I. D. MacCrone, Race Attitudes in South Africa,
London, Oxford University Press, I937.

28

THE GALTON LECTURE, I949

29

the members of " advanced " European, they were groups among which the vari-

Arabian, Indian and Chinese civilizations ability of physical characters was small,

with those belonging to the " more primi- though this need not imply singleness of

tive" Negroid races of Africa. Here, too, racial origin. For example, the descendants

culture and race were confounded and a of the Bounty mutineers, sprung from half a

social heritage was equated with a biological dozen Englishmen and twice as many

one. Tahitian women, were less variable than

This masked clear thinking on the subject. either of the two parental populations.*

Dr. Barnes's " advanced " civilizations or As to Dr. Barnes's views on the Norman

cultures surely meant those developed in Conquest and its consequences, Mr. Trevor

literary and technological resources, his felt it was extremely hazardous to interpret

" primitive " ones those not so developed, history in racial terms. A still incomplete

and race was only incidental to them. The study of the skeletal remains of the inhabi-

barbarities wrought in Europe in our genera- tants of medieval England suggested that

tion in the pursuance of so-called racial the bulk of immigrants into this country

policies would recur to all, and they were following the Conquest conformed to the type

largely the outcome of anything but dis- generally known as Alpine than to Ripley's

passionate theories of the nature of race. Teutonic or Nordic type. Whether they

Like the social workers that Dr. Barnes improved the existing native stock by

quoted, the speaker took the view that diluting the " Celtic or pre-Celtic " strains

where " degradation " occurred it was not so within it was a matter of opinion. An

much to be attributed to " racial dishar- element common in the Iron Age of Britain

mony" in any physical respect-the weight had long reasserted itself, having predomi-

of anthropological and genetical evidence nated among us since at least Tudor times.

seemed patently ranged against that-as to Was it not the culture of the invaders rather

environmental maladjustment.

than their genes that might have formed the

To be more specific, continued Mr. Trevor, intellectual catalyst of the Elizabethan

the crossing of races appeared to him in period ? Regarding the emergence of " a

the final analysis a social rather than a new racial type" in France and the belief

biological problem, and a noted authority, to which Dr. Barnes had alluded, that the

Dr. Castle of Harvard, had repeatedly ephemeral nature of recent French govern-

stressed the same conclusion.* Its success ments was due to the racially unstable

or otherwise depended on the degree to which character of the inhabitants of that country,

the offspring of inter-racial matings were he would point out that Professor Vallois,

socially acceptable to the community into in a work published during the war,t had

which they were born. If the prevailing described France as a mosaic of races from

attitude was that the community stood in an the Bronze Age onwards.

inherently superior position to any other, The speaker hoped that Dr. Barnes would

then the results of miscegenation might be furnish more precise details of the " dis-

tragic. In the present state of knowledge, reputable pockets" he had stated were

however, value-judgments as to " higher." formed by the alliances of Indian pedlars

and " lower " races were best avoided and, with " certain types " of English girls in our

to recast the parable, the role of the scien- midst. " Centres of social disorder " and

tifically humble publican was to be preferred "moral contamination" were strong phrases

to that of the racial Pharisee.

requiring the support of explicit evidence,

The speaker agreed entirely with Dr. and who were the " decent people " usurping

Barnes in the importance he ascribed to the functions of the police and indulging in

isolation and inbreeding in the formation of racial riots ?

"pure " races. Expressed in another way,

* J. C. Trevor, EUGENICS REVIEW, 30, 1938.
* W. E. Castle, J. Hered., 15, 1924; Amer. J. Phys. t Henri V. Vallois, Anthropologie de la Population

Anthrop., 9, 1926; Science, 71, 1930.

Franfaise, Toulouse, Didier, 1943.

30 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Turning to the Negro, Mr. Trevor felt there subject was, in his opinion, a very difficult

could be no solution of the antagonisms that one, little definite being known and there

existed in South Africa to-day other than being great opportunities for confusion of

tolerance, understanding and, above all, the thought. Intentionally taking an example

recognition of human dignity. In the U.S.A. which had fortunately not yet arisen, Mr.

legislation forbidding interracial marriage Binney remarked that were the present

was not merely proposed but already in the Government of India to decide to expel the

statute books of thirty States, by no means Eurasian population, which had been men-

all in the South. The fact that most eminent tioned in the paper, the outcry aroused

American Negroes were of mixed racial would drown all consideration of the reasons

origin was no mark of any inborn inferiority for such a policy. There were three entirely

on the part of the African Negro. Owing to separate grounds on which it might be

wide-scale miscegenation in the United adopted. First, the Government of India

States, this might well be a question of simple might merely be wishing to expel what they

probability. At the same time it was regarded as an alien population and this

notorious that a light skin colour among could not be said to be illogical, since no

Negroes there conferred immense material nation state would admit within itself an

advantages on its possessor, as it did in every indefinite number of foreigners. Second,

other " chromatocracy" with which he was the Indians might hold the view that they

familiar.

were as a race superior to white people.

Dr. T. M. Ling said he felt he was some- Third, they might adopt the attitude that

what at a disadvantage following two such while approving both white and coloured

erudite speakers. He had greatly enjoyed people they disapproved of a mixed race.

Dr. Barnes's paper, but wished to make two This was the only true objection to mis-

or three points. Dr. Barnes made no refer- cegenation.

ence to the considerable increase of national- It had been frequently stated that a half-

ism in Western Europe which had built up caste population was inferior to either of the

opinions based partly on economic factors. races from which it came, but there was

It should also be remembered that improved really no evidence of this. Furthermore, it

transport did not necessarily lead to increased depended on what criterion one took. It

inter-breeding. He was surprised at the was possible, for example, to argue that a

fatalistic way in which Dr. Barnes spoke of white race was superior to a black one, or

these examples of social decay. The im- vice versa, and accordingly the whiter, or

portant factor was the influence of anta- the blacker, the person was the better. On

gonistic social and economic pressures. We the other hand, the view might be adopted

knew the child's need for a sense of security that the white and black races were both

in its early years; in racial groups living in good, but a half-white race was inferior, just

areas where social antagonism existed it was as dog breeders might say that they liked

hard to give the child emotional stability. both bulldogs and bloodhounds but had no

Such environmental and economic factors use for mongrels. Obviously such decisions

needed the attention of us all.

were mere matters of taste, but that brought

Mr. Cecil Binney said that he had listened one to the difficulty that the only points on

with great interest to the paper, both because which different races could be valued as

he would always enjoy hearing the views of against one another were questions of moral

the Bishop of Birmingham on any subject character and intellectual ability, as to which

and also because he was peculiarly interested there were no statistics, and it seemed almost

in the subject of the paper. He had, how- impossible to obtain sufficient information

ever, never previously spoken on it in public on these points to judge the value of any

because he did not feel there was any view mixed race. In most cases the objection to

he could usefully express and he felt much a half-caste population was not that it was

the same after hearing the paper. The mixed but that it represented an admixture

THE GALTON LECTURE, I949

3I

of a race which the dominant race regarded a college of some six hundred undergraduates

as inferior. A further confusion easily arose they deliberately took a number of men from

between race and civilization. It might, for Asia, partly from India, as a result of a

example, be thought that Chinese civilization request from John Morley, whose name

was inferior to our own, but this was irre- would still be remembered. There was some

levant to race mixture, unless it could be hesitation with regard to these men even

shown that a Chinese child if brought up from the best of the undergraduates, who set

among Europeans was incapable of acquiring themselves to make the visitors feel happy in

European culture. Accordingly, Mr. Binney their environment.

thought that the Bishop was right in con- As regards his suggestion that the result

centrating attention on the purely practical of the Norman invasion was a mixture of

problems raised by the pockets of mixed races somewhat analogous to the invasions

race which he had remarked as existing in which produced in the ancient Greeks the

England.

finest people in the history of the world, he

Dr. Barnes in replying said that he was would accept correction, but the invaders

afraid that he could say very little that was were certainly Northmen and the country

adequate. He thanked the speakers for the had had a succession of Northmen invading

kindness of their criticism, and confessed it for two or three centuries previously. He

that he was surprised that more strongly thought that there was a change not merely

expressed divergent opinions had not mani- in the quality but in the capacity of the race

fested themselves. Of course the whole after the two strains had been amalgamated.

matter was full of complexities. We all We were bewildered by many factors and

tended to argue from our personal know- by the possibility of arguing in many

ledge and from the knowledge which came directions. If what had been said led to a

to us from our newspapers. lIe personally little light he would feel that his contribution

had tried to be free from the bias that came had been useful.

from reading news that had been too care- Lord Horder agreed with Mr. Binney that

fully sifted and which tended to exaggerate the problem lacked definition. The approach

the difficulties of the mixture of races. therefore could be biological, anthropological

Naturally, when races were mixed, difficulties or psychological. Considering our limited

showed themselves in political and social life knowledge on this matter, the lecturer's

and we paid attention to them rather than presentation of the subject struck him as

to the success of the developing mixtures having been extremely temperate, very

which were being formed. There was surely tentative and very intriguing, so that anyone

a very strong, though possibly irrational, who might care to enter this very difficult

instinct which made many, he did not say field of research had got all the encourage-

all, English people dislike the thought of ment he might want.

mixture with coloured races. He did not In conclusion, Lord Horder thanked Dr.

think that the feeling was the result of Barnes for his excellent address, and a most

education. He had been for some eight years successful Galton anniversary ended amid

a tutor at Trinity College, Cambridge. In general applause.

Eugenics Review, Vol. YLT No. 1

