JOHN ROCK
Rock Reproductive Clinic, Inc., Brookline, Massachussetts, U.S.A.
Sex, Science and Survival*

IN 1921, WHEN I began the practice of of sex and morality, nor ofmorality with religion,

gynaecology, medicine had precious little to and, thus, theology.

offer infertile wives. Therefore, I chose to In addition to his sex instinct, Man, in his

devote what time and effort could be spared ascent from bestial ancestors, took with him,

from earning money to the study of human also, the strong emotion, fear. This is so vital a

reproductive functioning, that I might get as part of the instinct to survive that often we hear

many of these unhappy women as possible of "the basic instinct, fear", as we do of "the

pregnant. Primarily to that end, for forty years instinct, hunger", another component of the

I have studied, researched and tried to solve survival complex. Elaboration of the anthropoid

problems in Man's pervasive sexuality, the nervous system blessed Man with his peculiar

biological requisite for species survival.

attribute, intellectuality. Gradually, his apper-

ception expanded into imagination; and instinc-

Sex, Fear and Religion: "The Natural Law" tive fear spread from things seen, felt, heard,

Common to most animals is some form of sex tasted or smelled, into the immaterial world

for propagation. A few species reproduce merely about him. He became aware of himself as a

by fission, like the amoeba; or by budding like human being, but also of some outside Force

jelly-fish in cold water; or by differentiating pervading the universe that, deep within him, he

growth of the single ovum, called partheno- felt ruled over all, including himself.

genesis, as in the water flea. There are also some Primitive Man, overawed by what little his

varieties, such as many of the worms, in which mentality could interpret of the manifold ex-

sex functions in two different organ systems, but ternal manifestations of this Force, feared it.

in a single organism. In most animals, however, To protect himself, he constructed religion, the

sex appears in two separate individuals-male frame of his beliefs about it, on which he could

and female. For propagation, the germ cells of build principles of behaviour, so that his acts

each must unite. In the mammalian class, this is would conform to its laws, as he was able to

accomplished by some manner of copulation. discern them. His realization of the universal

Hence it is that Man is equipped (we cannot in Almighty, and of his subservient dependence

our present dilemma unqualifiedly say upon Him, marks the indefinable particular

"'endowed", and most of us are not yet willing spirituality of Man. Indeed, may this spirituality

to say "cursed") with a powerful urge to not be in Man the evidence, perhaps even the

copulate.

essence, of the universally intrinsic Force of

The gynaecologist has much to do with Man's which Man (of all animals) is aware, and, in our

copulatory urge. Inevitably analysis of it has led language, calls God? Those of Judaeo-Christian

into consideration of the family, to sociology, culture attempt to know His law by interpreta-

and thence to population. Being a Roman tion of Revelation in the light of science when

Catholic, dealing medically and scientifically this is available, and by speculation when it is

with sex and its social implications, under- not.

standably, I think, I became involved with Science is but the product of the careful appli-

theology. None will deny the interrelationship cation of the intellect (with which God endowed

* The seventh Oliver Bird Lecture delivered on
Decenber 9th, 1963, at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.

Man that he might know Him, love Him, and serve Him) to that which his senses present to him. His religion gives Man a moral code by

67
THE EUGENICS REVIEW, July 1964, 56,2.

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

which he aspires to obedience to God's law- It is from this "they derive their respective

and particularly to that aspect of God's law, the inclinations to their proper acts and ends."

eternal law, which determines in Man the nature Regarding Man, he says, you remember (v.s.):

of his every part with due regard for its proper "this participation of the eternal law in the

use. Man therefore strives by science to know his rational creature is called the natural law." As

own nature. If his doings were utterly controlled the light of science extends and grows brighter,

by the physical, chemical, or electronic qualities we ever more accurately recognize this law to

of each component of his structure, as are the which all creation is subject.

acts of a robot, of a computer, even of all his

distant relatives, the unintellectual mammals, The Struggle for Human Welfare:

and-to a large extent-of his nearer kinfolk, Interpretive Theories versus Science

the anthropoid apes, he would have no choice When science pertinent to any aspect of religion

but to act like one of them. As yet, psychology is unavailable, the imaginative mind of Man

has not proved to all of us that he has no choice. speculates on what he reads in revered texts and

It still appears that, within his species-particular on what little he is able to perceive in the world

intellect, he has Reason and Free Will, the latter about him, and evolves interpretive theories

of which is strongly influenced by his utterly which, historically, have been made to serve as

peculiar spirituality. By Reason and Will he can facts. These theories, perforce, are then used to

select actions in conformity to or in defiance of direct his desired conformity to natural law as he

what we call "natural law."

interprets it. In primitive and much later cultures

The Christian concept of this derives from St. -as even in our own-in lieu of facts, theories

Thomas Aquinas,' a Dominican friar of the have sometimes acquired majestic, dogmatic

thirteenth century. He was the theological giant authority.

who produced the Swnma Theologica, and in Against entrenched theories, great benefactors

Question XCI, Second Article, defined natural of mankind-St. Paul, Copernicus, Galileo,

law as the "participation of the eternal law in Galen, Aquinas, da Vinci, Columbus, Pasteur,

the rational creature." Man applies his reasoning Darwin, Jenner, Newman, and many, many

intellect to learn the nature of all his parts; and, others were forced to contend. They resembled

then, if he would exist in comfortable submission Sisyphus in their uphill struggles against the

to God, he wills to act only in conformity to the boulders of theories-theories habitually, yet

natural law which governs these parts.

mistakenly, attributed to a celestial origin by

Thus must the biological and medical scien- men truly dedicated to human welfare and

tists, including the gynaecologist, when dealing trying hard to improve it.

with human sex, deal also with religion. They Humanitarianism far antedated scientific

strive to discover the exact nature of human sex medicine and therapeutics. It called for action in

in order to supply the scientific facts that will the face of need; so pestilences that decimated or

enable moralists correctly to interpret what God wiped out whole populations were attacked by

has often enigmatically revealed of His law that religious theories. Long after science provided

governs sex. It is these gradually accruing facts truer insight into the nature of disease, these

that moral theologians use to rectify whatever futile concepts were zealously upheld, and only

erroneous interpretation of Revelation or tradi- after unremitting exposition of science were they

tion, to meet the needs of the times, has been reluctantly relinquished.

built into religion in lieu of the appropriate

scientific insight, contemporaneously missing- The Triumph of Medical Science:

as Pope John miglht say-to achieve "aggiorna- Population Increase

mento."

Were it not for our efficient humanitarian

What things are and how they work, in our application of what science has been able to

universe, comprise the essence of eternal law. As discover about the causes of death and of how to

Aquinas put it: '. . . all things subject to divine avoid or neutralize them, we would not be so

providence are ruled ... by the eternal law ... 99 perilously numerous, and-with confounding

68

SEX, SCIENCE AND SURVIVAL

speed-becoming more so. During untold quately, much less to supply surplus wealth to

centuries before the last few, science laboriously, invest towards a rapid increase in national

and against great odds, struggled to discern the products.

actual nature of disease, its causes, and their Stephen Enke,7 a former professor of econom-

susceptibilities to discoverable means of removal ics at Duke University, has again called atten-

-to learn the eternal law that must govern the tion to the fact that high birth rates cause a very

multitudinous factors of disease, just as it does high proportion of the total population to be

all the attributes of Man and their functional children, who naturally consume but are too

interplay.

young to work. If there were fewer children than

Happily, during the last three centuries, in must now live (for short or perhaps longer

spite of obfuscated tradition, the common sense periods) in hunger and squalor and spiritual

of the people in the civilized world-awakened, stagnation, what those properly unconceived

perhaps, by desperation-brought them gradu- would consume could be invested as capital for

ally into allegiance with the medical sciences. irrigation, transport and education. Real

Death rates began their still persisting, increas- economic development might result, so that

ingly steep decline. More, more, and yet more surviving children and their parents would not

persons survived into and during adulthood, to be obliged to live miserably and with little chance

exercise their copulatory urge. Conceptions of any spiritual uplift for them and their

soared. Babies lived. Population growth, which successors.

is but the difference between births and deaths, Nor, experts tell us, have we, of the compara-

rose sharply throughout the world. The Popula- tively rich nations, sufficient excess of money,

tion Reference Bureau in Washington13 reports goods, brains and facilities adequately to aug-

that not until after untold hundreds of thousands ment our efforts to help the underdeveloped

of years did the human race number its first emerging nations to increase their rate of

billion-about 1850. But merely eighty years national products so as to meet the enormous

later, in 1930, it reached two billion; in the next requirements made by their explosive growth

thirty years, the third billion was attained. In rates.

only fifteen years more, in 1975, the fourth Lester R. Brown2 of the U.S. Department of

billion will be on hand. In the year 2000-only Agriculture writes:

thirty-six from now-according to United Nations19 estimates, there will be not only the

Although the projected flow offood from North America to the less developed regions in future

fifth billion of people in the world, but probably decades will be much larger than at present, it will

at least six billion-unless we apply immediate
stops.

be rather small when compared to the growing needs of these regions.

Our humanitarianism, as yet gloriously viable

Dangers of Population Increase

and even becoming stronger, forbids our

Physical Aspects I doubt if any ecologist will deny that theoretically this planet could feed, clothe and house
a population twice the size of to-day's-but not before the year 2000, only thirty-six years from

increasing the death rates that it has sent tumbling down.
Calmly judicious, practical scholars see no alternative to an immediate slash in the birth
rates.

now. Time is what is running out, not plankton

in the vast reaches of the ocean, not nitrogen in Psychological Factors: Stress

the air about us, nor usable minerals in the earth, The appalling danger that threatens mankind

nor atomic energy to run enormous distilleries may be even worse than one of far-and-wide

to furnish fresh water for the multitudes, or to starvation and an abysmal decline in standards

run fertilizer factories, or to make agricultural of living. Our very humanity may be at stake.

machinery. No, too large a part of earth's Man has moved up the steep, tortuous,

peoples have not now material enough to feed, obstructed incline of civilized humanitarianism

clothe and house their present numbers ade- by use of his divinely bestowed Reason applied

69

Sa--a

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

to his divinely permitted, but only indirectly students who, instead of studying, indulge in

empowered perceptiveness. Apperception is left panty raids and other ridiculous if not shameful

to his freedom to use his mind without duress. stunts, sometimes even wanton destruction of

It is apperception and Reason that we will property. Only after dispersion of the irrational

sacrilegiously destroy if we inadvertently or mob, does each member realize the silliness of

stupidly allow such crowding as will surely his behaviour. In too many lands, dispersal-

subject us to an invincible degree of disruptive freedom from rubbing elbows-is rapidly

stress.

becoming impossible.

Stress is that demonic state of being dis- Comparative biology also suggests that, if the

organized. By it, our finely articulated, species- highly developed mentality of Man is not to be

specific mental processes are thrown out of disorganized by the stress of crowding, human

gear, so that we think and act irrationally. It populations might spontaneously decrease, as

also unbalances the natural proportionment of eventually do those of some other vertebrates,

the grosser biochemical agents, including the simply by stressful loss of sexual potency, or

hormones, that render our physical parts able to marked lowering of fertility. Even by the tiny

function co-operatively. One or another debili- minority who would welcome it, the breeding

tating form of stress reaction has been scientifi- out in Man of such deeply implanted qualities

cally observed and described in a great many cannot be expected, at present levels of real

species of vertebrates.

harassment, in the few years allotted to us

Hoagland'0 has recently recalled studies of the before disaster overtakes us. It were well for us

jack rabbit population in Minnesota. When to anticipate that the informed and aspiring, but

their numbers rose to a certain point, and in increasingly congested and stressed, "have-nots"

spite of plenty of food and the absence of of the world may be impelled, perhaps even

predators, a high death rate, associated with martially, to express their not surprising nor

hypoglycemia and convulsions, ensued. While unexpected covetousness. Stress may move them

no specific disease entity could be diagnosed, madly to grasp for that which we, the "have"

autopsy revealed abnormal adrenals, along with nations, will be unable to protect in their

liver damage, atherosclerosis, and other signs interest and ours, unless, in practical and

of acute stress. The same has been found among charitable common sense and sacrifice of

deer. Sometime during the 1920s, one buck and unessentials, we prepare ourselves.

one doe were placed on an island in Chesapeake Cass Canfield,3 the distinguished editorial

Bay. When, after some years, their descendants chairman of Harper & Row, has stated:

had reached a density of more than one deer per acre, and "in spite of adequate food and care",

The nations of the world live today in an historic intimacy. To an unprecedented degree,

the animals began to die off. Again autopsy the richer countries are putting their skills and

disclosed the classic signs of the stress syndrome.
Widely reported are the frequent, aperiodic mass migrations of the Scandinavian lemming. In mad desertion of over-crowded feeding

substance at the disposal of the newer nations. The tragic irony of the present situation is that, despite all this investment of wealth and effort, population growth will in many areas abort plans for economic and social development.

grounds and living quarters, about every seven to ten years, they rush to their deaths-if not under the wheels of automobiles in the streets of Swedish cities and towns, then by drowning in

In nation after nation, the anticipated economic gains resulting from carefully planned programs have brought little, if any, rise in the standard of living of the individual family. Gains are being drained off into the job of maintaining existing

the cold waters nearby. Kessler" has cited standards for more and more people. Few of the

numerous other examples of self-regulatory mechanisms in the control of vertebrate populations.

newer nations have been able to keep ahead of population growth. The rising hopes of their people for a life free of want are being frustrated.

Somewhat slighter, but similar madness is We must keep ourselves strong without the

commonly evidenced, temporarily, by human least decrease in our humanitarianism which,

crowds in our larger cities, as by university for our integrity as humans, demands, among

70

SEX, SCIENCE AND SURVIVAL

other things, that we give all possible aid to the rates, these texts must be re-examined in the

despairing "have-nots".

light of what is presently known of human

This is a tough but imperative task. Survival sexual physiology. These facts our God-given

of our culture, if not of ourselves, clarions us to perceptiveness has made evident long after

action at once. As Lawrence Lowell is said to pertinent speculations were necessarily em-

have observed, when he was President of ployed by ancient moralists. Careful application

Harvard, "What must be done to-day, should of our also divinely derived Reason and common

have been done yesterday". I pray that we have sense to physiologic and sociologic facts will

not delayed too long.

bring Prudence. This is the practical wisdom that

will furnish our consciences with directives more

Proposals for Action

nearly in accordance with the facts of our created

Re-evaluation of Religious and Speculative Con- nature. Thus we will know the Good we are to cepts do, and the Evil that we are to avoid.

How can we do it? We of the technologically

advanced nations must immediately move to Support from Theology: Good versus Evil

hold our own birth rates, especially, but not One of the brilliantly able young Catholic

only, in urban areas. There has been enough philosophers, Fr. Eric D'Arcy,4 in his good little

talk. It is time for action. In addition to food, book, Conscience and its Right to Freedom, has

there must be available space, including ample this to say anent the necessity of recognizing

areas for stress-preventing recreation. Our what is good:

numbers must not be more than can be re- ... the good in question is indisputably supreme: spectably housed, and be afforded superior the sovereign end of the human person. One of the

educational facilities. In the present, as in the years ahead, we must hold our births within
the requisites mentioned: food, space, housing,
schools. We must move fast, boldly but accurately, to insure them to our present population. This job in the larger cities of our country is of

conditions for attaining this is substantial fidelity to moral duty; and this ... consists in following one's conscience. (pp. 214-16).
Later he translates and paraphrases some authoritative comments of St. Thomas Aquinas in these words:

enormous proportions.
What have I to offer-a Catholic gynaecologist with some knowledge of the scientifically demonstrated facts of human sex: facts now well recognized by biologists and sociologists? I can call them to the attention of others with the
fervent hope that scientific facts will immediately
supplant the theories concerning human sex which were doubtless of use in times past. The cruel delay in the middle ages of such substitution of fact for speculation in the case of

A man's moral fulfilment and stature is measured above all by the performance of his will; . . . But the proper object of the will is not the good as it exists objectively, or as it is known to some moral genius with a skill and an insight superior to one's own: it is the good as apprehended and presented to a man by the judgement of his own reason. (p. 215).
Then, perhaps, with what I would call-not a bow, but a respectful glance, at his clerical superiors, Aquinas continues, according to D'Arcy:

astronomy, of disease, of even commercial
practices, I believe is unWarranted in the matter of imperative birth control. Several speculative assumptions are even to-day so firmly ingrained in the minds of numerous influential teachers as

Of course, one of the elements of the decision [as to what is good] which one's reason ultimately makes will be the guidance of authoritative and skilled moralists whose standing we accept; [however, he went on to say:] but it has to be the individual's judgement of conscience that this is an

to make the effective change-over very difficult. authority which we may safely accept. (p. 216).

I am convinced that the time has come when,

if there are obscurities in the natural law of Man in the Image of God

human sexuality, as it has been inferred and then Constantly, in this question of birth control, we

extrapolated from sacred texts, that impede hear repeated God's words in Genesis8: "And

proper and utterly necessary lowering of birth God created man to his own image," that is (as

71

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

explained in a footnote in my Douay-Rheims of family sociology at the Catholic Institute in

version), "This image of God in man, is not in Paris, wrote:

the body, but in the soul; which is a spiritual . . . the Catholic Church ... teaches that there is, substance, endued with understanding and free- in principle, a right, or better, a duty, to practise

will." And then follow the words, very significant a form ofbirth regulation based on careful thought

to our subject, "And God blessed them" [Adam ... (p. 179).

and Eve], (who, we are told, were endued with Earlier in the same chapter, he stated:

understanding and free-will), "saying: Increase Every couple owes it ... to God ... to itself, to

and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it . . ."
It is clear to most ecologists that we have

the community, to procreate those childrenwhom it will be able to bring up and to prepare adequately for life. There is an optimum number for each family and each family alone can judge what it is.

filled the earth, at least to the limit of our present (p. 161).

capacity to fulfil the second command, "to Statements of another authoritative moral

subdue it." As I said before, given time, we may philosopher, recently deceased, Dom Gregory

increase our subjugation and utilization of Stevens18 of the Catholic University of America,

earth's resources. It would seem that only after are similarly instructive:

we have done this, may we in conscience resume Indiscriminate procreation is no moral ideal

procreation, with certitude that we can, by but mere irresponsibility, for the family must make

commensurate rearing and education, also "multiply" ourselves.
I would call your attention to the critical

prudent provision for the future welfare of the children both spiritually and physically. The Church considers the primary goal of the natural institution of matrimony to be that of responsible

difference between procreation-bringing forth, parenthood.

begetting-and reproduction, that is, making a In other words, reproduction should be our

copy, a likeness. My Bible suggests to me that goal-not mere procreation; rather, multipli-

the words, "God created man to his own image," cation of able adults, equal to what the good

mean that man and woman were created with of the times demands.

the endowments of "understanding and free-

will." It was such, He said, were to be increased Scientific Aspects

and multiplied. Intellectually mature human Biological Basis of Hwnan Sexuality

beings do not reproduce, do not multiply them- Contemplation of the social significance of

selves, when they merely beget. The job is not stiffing population growth rates, as scientifically

done, nor can it be done, until such parents have proved by demographers and ecologists, forces

produced sons and daughters with understanding the gynaecologist into thoughts of human

and free-will.

sexuality, for surely the copulatory urge is a

positive factor in population growth. If that

Welfare ofProgeny

comprised all of the indomitable sex instinct of Man, there would be no hope for mankind but

The human infant has but the potentiality of to breed himself into crowded degeneration.

understanding and free-will. In good health he But the sciences of psychology and social

must be educated in order to make kinetic this anthropology discover that this coital urge is

potentiality. Roman Catholics, at least, should not all of the human sex instinct.

look to Canon 1013 of the Code of Canon Law To adjust sexual forces to true reproduction

which defines the pimary purpose of marriage and not animalistic begetting, the mature adult

as "the procreation and education of children." should know the actual forces in Man's inborn

I wonder if anything but the fusion of these sexual nature. The more clearly he knows these,

obligations constitutes "reproduction"', the the more able he is to recognize that aspect of

primary end of the sacrament of matrimony, as eternal law which participates in the natural law

it is also one of the two ends of coitus.

to which his expression of sexuality must sub-

In his book on family planning, the eminent mit; for natural law is but the inclusion, the

Jesuit, Fr. Stanislas de Lestapis," the professor participation, as Aquinas puts it, of eternal law,

72

SEX, SCIENCE AND SURVIVAL

the Mind of God. It is the job of scientists to Inseparable from our human sexuality, because

expose the true nature of human sex. Only by knowing this, can improvement be made in what

it is an integral part ofit however obscured, is love: love of mate and love of young.1'

perforce formerly had to suffice-namely, the Only when love of mate suffuses coitus does

patristic, speculative nature of sex.

orgasm reach its natural fullness of ecstasy.

Science evolves from scrupulous observation And it is the love of young which motivates

of what happens under known conditions informed, intelligent, responsible, mutually

affected by known factors.

loving parents to reproduce instead of merely to

procreate. Forethought, directed by Reason, and

The Coital Urge

utilizing science, will enable them to do this in

After a rather intensive study of pertinent the kind of good conscience defined by St.

zoological and anthropological scientific litera- Thomas Aquinas.

ture, and filtering what I had found through the

screen of my years of dealing with human sexual behaviour, I wrote the following, about a dozen years ago, and in substance would write the same at present. It was this:
The sexual core of the human primate today is, in all probability, quite as it was among our very remote original human ancestors, who-emerging from beastdom-preceded by eons even the most

Monogamy: The Modal Social Unit The Moral Measure of Sexual Behaviour I would suppose the inherency of love within the human sex instinct is responsible for the near universality of monogamy. The archaeologists, the anthropologists, the sociologists report the recognizability of the essentials of this mating

primitive races of our times. Therein is the funda- form in practically all races, in all places, and all

ment from which students of today derive comprehension of human sexuality. The basic normal male, stripped of social, experiential, and-shall we say-spiritual repressions, is as sexually pro-

times. It seems quite clear that monogamy is the modal social unit of the human race.20
Could it not be that, through long ages,

miscuous and dominative as any ape; and, like the intelligent Man learned that monogamous

ape, he is only very temporarily satiated. He is physically superior, and is ever desirous and potent. For untold centuries, moralists have used whatever social pressures they could bring to bear

marriage of loving mates offers the best opportunity for perfect expression of the peculiarly
human qualities of the sex instinct? In mono-

on the human male's coital urge in efforts to gamous marriage of loving mates, they can both

restrict its expression outside of marriage. Current best find full gratification of the two inseparable

news media clearly reflect the degree of their failure. The problem is complicated further by the fact that, basically, the normal woman, if similarly bereft of social, experiential and spiritual inhibi-

components of their instinct-the coital urge, and the love that unites them and that impels them healthfully to rear and productively to

tions, although weaker physically, has deep within educate their offspring.12,15

her an ever-present willingness, and often, like the male-an urge to copulate.

Believing-as I do-that, except for those who can and do become willing celibates, only

Love ofMate and Love of Young

monogamy suffices for full expression of the

To temper the savage anthropoid core of sexuality described above, sex, in the human being of today, has a very strong, very significant peculiarity. It consists of that indefinable but no less actual

human sex instinct in conformity to the natural law, as we are permitted to know it, I wonder if monogamy cannot be used as the test by which

human attribute called "love."

to judge the goodness of any sex act. If a manner

In the evolution of the hominid from his apelike of sex expression conduces to, is compatible

progenitors, and to a large extent directing his development, there arose, from the complex of bestial impulses and emotions, not only the powerful coital urge but also the utterly particular

with, and strengthens monogamy, it would be considered good; if it is not favourable to this natural as well as fundamental social format, it

emotional quality of love. I dare say there are few, would be adjudged bad.

if any, of us who would dare try to define what Christ taught is the greatest of the three virtues: faith, hope and charity-which is love. Yet we are all aware that, in various forms, it characterizes us

By this standard, may one not measure masturbation, homosexual behaviour, prostitution, premarital coitus, adultery, divorce, and-

as human beings.

what is powerfully involved in the sufficiency and

73

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

promptness of birth limitation, our immediate Five days of continence would preclude concep-

obligation-intramarital continence, as well as tion if only the couple knew which were the five

several other effective methods of contraception? days. We have not the time to wait for this

knowledge.

Prolonged Intramarital Continence

It has been pointed out that responsible, intelli- In the Germ Cells lie the Only Solution

gent parents will have a child only if and when "Non-humanness" of the Gametes

they feel they can bring it to healthful physical In the meantime, we should note a few other

and mental adulthood. Clearly the frequency of details of reproductive physiology which science

coitus which is evoked by, and which nourishes offers as possibly helpful towards reformation of

love, has biologically resulted, and would con- older speculations that have given rise to some

tinue to result, for most parents, and for society, of the restrictive stipulations against effective

in more children than is good. Yet prolonged contraceptive measures.

intramarital continence does not conform to The egg, once it leaves the ovary, is in fact a

monogamy, except in the exceedingly rare foreign body. It cannot even reproduce itself. It

marriage of two who are both graced with an has only potential value to either the female or

unusual degree of spiritual fortitude. I would society. It disintegrates within a day or two,

question, therefore, if, for the vast majority of unless it happens to be invaded by a sperma-

married mates, this is not for them an unnatural tozoon. In such event, what were nonentities

and, if so, a sinful practice.

individually become in unity a human being.

We must not fail to realize that there are, Although a parasite in the mother, this is

usually among older couples, some whose entitled, as a human being, to full benefit of our

mutual love, supplemented by God's grace, can, humanitarianism which makes repugnantly for-

when fully accepted sound reasons motivate bidding the destruction of human life. It must be

them, force mutation of their carnal natures into remembered, however, that as a human being it

a kind of angelic companionship. The infre- is a member of society; and, like all human

quency of such couples in our time excludes beings, it will owe allegiance to the good of

extended intramarital continence from any list society which humanity's experience has recog-

ofpractical methods for the immediate reduction nized as for the welfare of all.

in births that is our inescapable obligation.

One may wonder if spermatozoa, likewise,

have any clearer title to humanity than the

Short-term Intramarital Continence Short-term intermittent intramarital continence, for one reason or another, is usual in practically
all cultures, even the most primitive, and does not militate against monogamy. As a contraceptive measure, it is useful and harmless, but only to
those couples who can define accurately, and willingly respect, those few days of the ovulation

separated unfertilized egg. They, too, are but cast-off cells-all but a miniscular few of which are intrinsically expendable are doomed to die promptly, like desquamated cells from tissues other than that lining the tubules of the testis.
In fact, even during the few hours the egg, or the spermatozoon, lives, neither can be regarded as wholly human, for each has only one-half the

phase that would require only short-term sexual nuclear chromatin material which specifically

restraint.5,17

characterizes normal human cells.

It may become more generally applicable

when science supplies us with a true indication of

Recapitulation

just when the egg will emerge from the follicle. But procreation depends on the union of one of

Massive effort should be made immediately by the numberless nonhuman spermatozoa with

money and brains to resolve this uncertainty. the nonhuman egg. It is coitus which makes this

Spermatozoa cannot fertilize much more than possible, but certainly does not decree it. Those

forty-eight hours after placement at the entrance who can believe that simple procreation-

of the womb; and the egg is fertilizable only begetting-is the indispensable natural end of

about twelve hours after escape from the ovary. coitus, cannot, in deference to this much

74

SEX, SCIENCE AND SURVIVAL

debated concept of natural law, tolerate wilful scholars agree with this. These scientifically

prevention of this effect. Yet, by the nature of up-to-date non-Catholic mentors are well aware

Man, unimpeded conception is comparatively that to advise prolonged continence is but a

rare in comparison to the frequency of coitus, pious evasion. They teach that right-minded

although now much too common for the welfare parents should be instructed in how to prevent

of mankind. It is worth while to note that, escape of the potentially dangerous egg from the

according to scientific studies, normal coitus of follicle. They hold, also, that, if justified mates

normal mates, when the egg is free and available, lack the means or the ability to do this, they are

results in conception in probably not much more entitled to know how, by one method or

than 25 per cent of instances.9 Nature seems not another, which does not disturb coitus, they may

to have recognized fertilization as an indis- permit all desquamated sperm cells in any

pensable end of coitus.

ejaculate to undergo intravaginal disintegration.

If we believe that natural law stipulates not This is the natural destiny of all of them anyway,

begetting, but reproduction of able adults, as with the only occasional, but possibly disastrous

one purpose of coitus, and the expression and exception of one.

enhancement of marital love, as an equally valid To most wise leaders, the now urgently

end, we are bound, by the natural law that required restriction of births inescapably calls

commands us to do good and avoid evil, to for the more general use, by loving, mono-

approve of intramarital coitus that is evoked by gamous mates, of effective, harmless, acceptable

and embellishes love and that will result, how- contraceptive methods. These would have to

ever often love calls it forth, in only the number conform to the normal pattern of coitus, and be

of children proper to the particular family. used when temporary continence would not

Many informed parents honestly forsee the suffice, when extended continence would be

likelihood that, instead of strengthening the disruptive of loving equanimity, and when

family, the final product of conception will but properly formed untrammelled consciences

weaken the family and thus society. Because of approve. Only by religious adherence to the

the frighteningly precarious condition of natural law pertaining to sex, as our God-given

humanity to-day, it has become quite clear to intellect makes it evident through science applied

most informed and reasoning adults that such to theology, can married mates to-day express

parents, when their properly forned and free their true sex nature, while fully meeting their

consciences approve, are not only permitted but responsibilities as parents.

obliged to do their best to prevent conception. Like the best informed ecologists, demo-

The vast majority of informed and intelligent men and women think it to be the humanitarian duty of such parents to allow the only potentially
human but dangerous egg to give back to the woman, as do the numberless other ova, its molecular borrowings-perhaps even while within the ovary. This is where thousands of
other usually immature eggs do this. When the

graphers and agriculturists, I can see no other
way to avoid the impending hunger and stress which will turn our humanitarianism back to bestiality. Only by the good use of sex, can Man escape stress and insure the survival of his kind, so that healthy, educated descendants may grow in the wisdom that will more surely enable them to know, to love, and to serve God.

body of a disabled female is made aware, by

internal evolutionary mechanisms, that danger
threatens it, even mature eggs are reabsorbed while confined in the ovary. When the internal mechanisms are, by their nature, incapable of

REFERENCES 1. Aquinas, T. Summa Theologica. Part II.
2. Brown, L. R., 1963. Man, Land, and Food. Looking Ahead at World Food Needs. U.S. Department of

sensing danger to mother, family, or society, from an ill-advisable conception, the human
intellect, provided for protection of parent and mankind, must act as best it can.'6
An increasing number of moralists and lay

Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Regional Analysis Division. Foreign Agricultural Economic Report No. 11. 3. Canfield, C., 1963. Circular Letter, November 21. Planned Parenthood/ World Population. 4. D'Arcy, E., 1962. Conscience and its Right to Freedom. Shoed and Ward, New York.

7

THE EUGENICS REVIEW

5. de Bethune, A. J., 1963. Child spacing: the mathematical probabilities, Science, 142, 1629.
6. de Lestapis, S., 1961. Family Planning and Modern Problems. A Catholic Analysis. Herder, New York.
7. Enke, S., 1963. Bonus vasectomy plans and negative value infants: a novel proposal to raise per capita incomes in poor and over populated countries. Paper prepared for the NATO Conference on Operational Research in Economics, Palermo, Italy, May 20-28.
8. Genesis. 1857 Edition (Douay-Rheims Version).
Chapter 1: 27, 28.
9. Hertig, A. T., Rock, J., Adams, E. C., and Menkin, M.F., 1959. Thirty-four fertilized human ova, good,
bad and indifferent, recovered from 210 women of known fertility. A study of biologic wastage in early human pregnancy. Pediatrics, 23, 202. 10. Hoagland, H., 1963. Cybernetics of population control. Human Fertility and Population Problems. Proceedings of the Seminar sponsored by Amer. Acad. Arts, Sciences, p. 5. Ed. R. 0. Greep. Schenkman Publishing Company, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 11. Kessler, A., 1963. Population control among vertebrates. Rockefeller Inst. Rev., 1, 1. 12. Miller, G. S., Jr., 1931. The primate basis of human sexual bahavior. Quart. Rev. Biol., 6, 379.

13. Population Reference Bureau, 1963. Too many people in the world? A look into the future. U.S. News & World Report, p. 60, September 16.
14. Rock, J., 1951. Human sexuality in the light of comparative biology. Paper presented at the 19th Annual Meeting of the Central Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Detroit, Michigan, September 20.
15. Rock, J., 1963. A personal view of human sexuality. Chapter 7, p. 63. The Time Has Come. A Catholic Doctor's Proposals to end the Battle over Birth Control. Knopf, New York.
16. Rock, J., 1963. The pill. Chapter 14, p. 159. Ibid. 17. Rock, J., 1964. The rhythm or periodic continence
method of birth control. Manual of Contraceptive Practice, p. 222. Ed. M. S. Calderone. Williams & Wilkins, Beltimore. 18. Stevens, G., 1961. Is rhythm permissible, advisable, obligatory? Paper presented at a research meeting of the Family Life Bureau of the National Catholic Welfare Conference, Oxley, Ontario, August 21-23. 19. United Nations, 1958. The Future Growth of World Population. Departnent of Economic and Social Affairs. Population Study No. 28. 20. Zimmerman, C. C., 1947. Family and Civilization, p. 122. Harper, New York and London.

76

