THE BIRTH CONTROL MOVEMENT
Its Scientific and Ethical Bases By C. V. DRYSDALE, O.B.E., D.Sc., F.R.S.E.

The Eugenics Society has never accepted birth control as desirable unconditionally, but only as a possible remedy for poverty and dependence arising from here-
ditary weaknesses. Dr. Drysdale's is a powerful argument for its use in negative eugenics; though, of course, his view of Socialism is not that of the Society,
which has no corporate opinion in party politics.-Ed.

Quem vocet Divum populus ruentis imperi by Huxley, that human progress depends

rebus?-Horace. Car. I. 2

both on accepting and fighting the cosmic

F a questionnaire were instituted asking
what has been the greatest obvious ser-
vice of science to humanity, it seems
probable that most thinking people would be inclined to award the palm to preventive medicine, notably as regards the prevention of epidemic and tropical diseases.
The pioneer work of Jenner followed by the scientific bacteriology of Pasteur have resulted in the almost complete elimination of the scourge of smallpox, and the prevention or cure of hydrophobia, diphtheria, enteric fever, and syphilis, etc; while the discovery of the malaria germ and its transmission by mosquitoes by Sir Ronald Ross has led in the hands of the Americans to the con-

process, by studying natural phenomena and setting the useful or beneficent forces to
counteract the maleficent ones.
A century ago such efforts were regarded as impious and as " flying in the face of
Providence." Plagues and epidemics were considered as of Divine origin for the punishment of our sins, and only to be exorcised by humbling ourselves in prayer. The success of the scientific method has, however, been so great that the anathemas have died away, and the majority of people are now eagerly looking forward to the
mastery of the two remaining greatest
scourges of mankind-tuberculosis and can-
cer-on the same lines.

version of the deadly Panama zone into a HUMANITY'S INTERNAL WEAKNESS

healthy locality in which many thousands of But the social diseases of humanity, aris-

men, women, and children are able to live, ing from within, are far more terrible than

and has enabled the immense achievement those arising from external agencies. Of

of the Panama Canal to be carried out. the eighteen or nineteen hundred millions of

Similar methods are now being employed in inhabitants of the world, probably at least a

Africa and other infested regions, and will thousand millions of them are living in a

result in rendering vast areas habitable and state of chronic insufficiency of the neces-

capable of cultivation; while the conquest of saries and simplest comforts of existence,

the silkworm disease, phylloxera, and other resulting in a death rate of something like

parasitic diseases of animals and plants show 30 per thousand-compared with io per

their value for increasing agricultural thousand in a well-nourished community

production.

such as New Zealand or Australia. This

All these great achievements are the re- means that in each year at least twenty mil-

sults of a single method: the discovery of lions of human beings die prematurely as a

(a) the germ or cause of the disease, (b) the result of chronic undernutrition-a figure

manner of its entry into the body, and (c) far surpassing the toll of all the wars,

the means for preventing its entry or for pre- plagues, and epidemics of the worst of

venting or mitigating its effect. They are years.

examples of the general principle enunciated If it be legitimate for science in the hands

I73

174 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of the medical profession to employ the has been or seems likely to be proposed.

means above indicated for the elimination of That it is the only solution yet put forward

these lesser evils, is it not legitimate, nay which is acceptable to humanity, is indicated

incumbent, on the scientific sociologist to by the fact that although Malthus's doctrine

employ it for the elimination of the greater was widely debated and accepted in the early

one? This is precisely what was recognized part of last century, families remained large

and attempted by the Malthusians and neo- in all ranks of society in this and most other

Makthusians from Malthus to George Drys- countries, until the immense advertisement

dale, long before preventive medicine took of contraceptive methods inaugurated by the

scientific form. Malthus scientifically de- Bradlaugh-Besant trial of I877 took place,

monstrated what had been more or less and was immediately followed by a steady

clearly recognized by thinkers from the time fall in the birth rate in the principal coun-

of Plato and Aristotle, that the germs of the tries of Europe, accompanied by a similar

disease of poverty were the human reproduc- fall of the death rate.

tive germs themselves, which, although des- Contraception is therefore the scientific

tined for the maintenance of the race, were sociologist's analogue to the antitoxins of

so excessive in numbers as to cause chronic preventive medicine. It was arrived at by

serious over-population or insufficiency of the same process of correct induction or

subsistence, if their fertilization were un- diagnosis, logical deduction of a remedy,

checked. Malthus's proposal was to pre- and verification of its expected consequences

vent, by delaying marriage, the fertilization in the fall of the death rate and prolongation

of all but a small proportion of the germs, of life; and neo-Malthusianism stands to-day

but he was himself too conscious of the as the one and only sociological doctrine

potency of the sex instinct to be sanguine which has both been formulated by the

of its success; and hence Francis Place and scientific method and been verified by expe-

others advocated methods by which sex rience.

union could be divorced from fertilization- Neo-Malthusianism took its origin from

methods which were the precursors of the the economists who wrote before Darwin had

contraceptive or birth control methods of the demonstrated the importance of quality and

present day.

fieredity, but as soon as the Bradlaugh-

Besant trial enabled an organized movement

FOOD AND SEX HUNGERS

to be established in England, the question

It was Dr. George Drysdale in his " Ele- of quality or what is now termed eugenics

ments of Social Science " (I854), however, was discussed. The two principles enun-

who first put what has since been called the ciated in The Malthusian in i88o were that

neo-Malthusian doctrine into definite form parents should only have as many children

by demonstrating the potency of the sex in- as they,could support and bring up properly

stinct, the terrible evils which inevitably without assistance, and that those who

arose from its attempted suppression, and suffered from hereditary disease or defect

the fundamental disharmony of Nature-the should adopt the advice of Mantegazza in

antagonism between the satisfaction of food his Igiene del Amore, " Amate ma non

and sex hunger-to which the greater generate." These two principles are now

part of human misery was due. The pre- recognized as ' negative eugenics.' The

sent writer has pointed out that as these two neo-Malthusians recognized from the outset

impulses are the primary essentials for race that poverty to the extent of dependence on

survival, all attempts at their suppression charitable or state aid constituted unfitness

must operate for their intensification, owing in the Darwinian sense, and therefore that

to the inherently selective action of such re- those who could not survive unaided should

pressions. Contraceptive methods, there- not propagate their type. They accordingly

fore, offered the only escape from this directed their first efforts to a propaganda

dilemma, and to this day no other solution among the poorest classes.

BIRTH CONTROL MOVEMENT

'SOCIALISM AND MALTHUSIANISM

nomic science, as shown by its slogans

This propaganda was enthusiastically " Equality," " Justice " and " There

welcomed at its outset, but it utterly col- would be plenty for all if it were properly

t1apsed after a few years, owing to the distributed "; and its driving force has been

:opposition of the Socialists with their attrac- class-hatred.

'tive counter-promises of universal comfort Unfortunately, the educated classes have

ithrough the social revolution; and as every allowed these sinister teachings to go

Sother class of the community conspired for on during the last half century, rather

;the suppression of birth control instruction, than oppose them by the scientific teaching

*the neo-Malthusians w-ere forced to remain of neo-Malthusianism; and their own adop-

[passive spectators of a dysgenic adoption of tioni of birth control, which should have

.birth control they had done their best to shown them the great boon it would confer

prevent. For fully thirty years, almost all upon the poor, has enabled them to sustain

that could be done wias to impress the im- the burden of socialistic legislation which

portance of the doctrine on the educated was the inevitable consequence of their neg-

asses through the various neo-Malthusian lect. There can be no doubt that this is the

periodicals and international conferences; chief cause of the alarming revelations of

with such success, however, that the impor- British unfitness by which we were startled

tance of the population question is now during the war; and the very different his-

almost universally admitted; the birth rates tory of Holland, in which wiser counsels

many countries have been halved; and have prevailed, is sufficient disproof of the

average duration of life in these coun- constantly made assertion that unfettered

es has been increased by fifty per cent. or birth control is necessarily dysgenic in

re. It is the fashion and at first sight effect.

sonably to ascribe the decrease of morta-

t and increase of longevity to the great CINDERELLA'S ETHICS

gress of medical science and of public This brings us to a most important ques-

alth and welfare measures; but people tion. What is the aim to which all human

nnot live without food, and it is equally effort should be directed ? It seems strange

r to ask whether this great effort and to have to ask such a question in this sup-

lic and private expenditure would have posedly scientific age, but although, to use

n possible or effective, if the high birth Huxley's metaphor, Cinderella (science)

es of fifty years ago had persisted ?

has at last been allowed to ascend from the

What seems certain, however, is that it kitchen to the parlour, she is still too over-

Socialism and not birth control which is awed by her sisters (theology and conven-

ponsible for the dysgenic type of repro- tion) to assert herself in the domain of

tion from which we are suffering. morality and to propound her own ideal.

ialism is not only responsible for turning Neo-Malthusianism openly took its origin

masses away from birth control at the from the Utilitarian or hedonistic principle

tset, but for the development of those of Socrates, Epicurus, Bentham, and the

blic health and welfare schemes and of Mills, that the true goal of morality is the

employment benefit which preserve the greatest happiness of the majority of human

fit and their progeny at the cost of the beings on earth; and so far as I know it is

-who are thereby forced to restrict their the only doctrine which has kept steadfastly

nilies unduly. Neo-Malthusianism and to the principle of this supposedly defunct

ialism are the two great schemes for im- school. Its votaries have had a perfectly

ving social conditions, but while the definite ideal constantly before their minds;

er, as has been shown, has been formu- the breeding of a human race in which every

d on strictly scientific lines, Socialism individual will be able by his unaided efforts

totally disregarded or denied the Mal- to secure a sufficiency of the necessaries and

Sian and Darwinian principles and eco- simple comforts of life, and a moderate satis-

176 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

faction of all his bodily, mental, and psycho- bines in a single figure the physical, me

logical needs, with sufficient stimulus to in- tal, and moral condition of the people-th

duce him to make further progress, and average duration of life. That it represen

sufficient prescience to regulate his repro- their physical status will probably not

duction for a steady improvement of his race seriously dissented from, but few will see

in health, strength, vitality, benevolence first sight its connection with their men

and intelligence.

and moral status. In the light of the pop

How is this ideal to be achieved ? By a lation doctrine, howNever, the connectio

process which the writer put before the seems clear. Since in order to secure th

Eugenics Society a few years ago under the maximum lolngevity people must be ad

title " A Guiding Principle for Practical quately fed, clothed, and housed, their pr

Eugenic Reform." It is simply to employ ductive efficiency must be high; and as an

the conscious selection made possible by lapse from utilitarian morality either i

birth control to imitate as closely as pos- jures the wrong doer or others, it must a

sible the natural selection of Darwin; i.e., versely affect longevity. For example,

to induce every individual who would have the birth rate were to fall to such an extent

failed to survive either through economic to give a considerable margin, the peop

incapacity or disease without external assis- might either use it in healthy comfort or

tance, to refrain from further propagation. injurious luxury, and in the latter case lo

Whether or not this needs supplementing by gevity would fall. Until any better criterio

appeals to the successful to increase their can be suggested, I therefore urge that lo]

reproduction remains to be seen; but, as- gevity should be taken as the criterion

suming it to be practicable, it solves at one national progress; and this greatly faci

stroke the problems of over-population and tates the discussion of birth control an

race improvement, and of the antagonism other social problems.

between the satisfaction of the food and sex If we accept this criterion, the advantag

hungers. It also reconciles one of the on every hand of the adoption of birth con

most painful of disharmonies-the antago- trol up to the present are too manifest

nism between the great human spirit of require demonstration. Whether or not

benevolence and the quality of the race. At has any injurious physiological effects, as

present individual and social benevolence so constantly asserted, it is impossible

and medical and public aid are seriously dys- dispute that, oln balance, the average lon

genic, by enabling unfavourable variations, gevity has risen so rapidly and greatly sin

which would be eliminated in the unchecked the fall of the birth rate commenced, that i

struggle for existence, to survive and hand net result has been enormously beneficia'

on their defects; and we can have little and as all life is a balance between good an

doubt that this is the cause of the immense evil, we must approve anything which pr

amount of defectiveness and institutional duces a net advantage. As this improv:

care from which we are suffering. The ment has taken place to an even grea

really important function of natural selec- degree among women than among men,

tion is not the elimination of the defective must deny the contention of Mr. Ludovi

individual, but the elimination of his pos- and others that a constantly repeated cyc

terity. We could afford to indulge our of pregnancy, parturition, and lactation

charitable impulses to the full, if those beneficial to women; and when we remem

accepting them would refrain from repro- that maternal mortality still stands at th

duction.

figure of 4 per cent. it is obvious that tl

reduction of the birth rate from 36 to I

LONGEVITY THE CRITERION

implies a reduction of deaths in childbi

How shall we know whether we are ap- of about 3,ooo per year, apart from the r

proaching or receding from this goal? There duction of strain of after-care. Birth c

seems to be a simple criterion which com- trol most certainly did not derive its im

BIRTH CONTROL MOVEMENT

petus from feminism, as has been claimed WAR AND POPULATION

by modern writers unacquainted with its early history, and women of all classes were very slow to take it up; but now it is the working class women (including even a proportion of Roman Catholics), who certainly are not feminists, who are clamouring for it most loudly.
In order to put the scientific basis of neo-
Malthusianism on a definite and concise foundation, so far as I am entitled to speak for it, I repeat the definition of it which I laid before the First National Birth Rate Commission in I913.
Neo-Malthusianism is an ethical doc-
trine, based on the principle of Malthus that poverty, disease, and premature
death can only be eliminated by control
of reproduction, combined with a recognition of the evils inseparable from prolonged abstention from marriage. It therefore advocates nearly universal early marriage together with a selective limitation of offspring to those children to whom the parents can give a satisfactory heredity and environment so that they may become desirable members of the community. It further maintains that a universal knowledge of hygienic contracep-
tion devices among adult men and women
would, in all probability, automatically lead to such a selection through en-
lightened self-interest, and thus to the elimination of destitution and all the more
serious social evils and to the elevation of the race.
In accordance with the above, the Malthusian League immediately after the war initiated the policy of putting pressure on

Lastly comes the enormously important question of international relations and war. Few now-a-days dispute that pressure of population is one of the causes, if not the most important cause, of war; and the repeated utterances of Mussolini in which he claims that Italy is over-populated and that the remedy lies either in birth control or in intense economic expansion or war; his rejection of the former and his sabre-rattling, provocative actions, certainly constitute the greatest menace to European peace at this time; while the high birth rate of Japan has given cause for alarm in the East.
The neo-Malthusians have, of course, always recognized this difficulty, and their remedy is perfectly simple. No one but an extreme Socialist would contend that if two neighbours live side by side in their own houses, and one has a large family while the other has a small one, the former has any right to demand a share of the accommodation of the latter. Nations are only families on the large scale, with their territories as their homes, and it is futile to suppose that any nation will tamely submit to have a portion of its territory transferred from it for the needs of a rapidly increasing neighbour, even at the behest of the League of Nations or any central authority which may arise. The natural retort is " We have limited our birth rate so as to maintain a decent standard of comfort in the country we hold, and we refuse to allow ourselves to be congested and brought down to your level. You should have limited your birth rate to your resources, as we have done."

the Ministry of Health to permit the giving Universal birth control is therefore the

of birth control instruction at the Public only possible means for maintaining inter-

Health Centres, to which the poor and national peace and amity, and until this is

diseased naturally congregate. This appears fully recognized by the League of Nations,

to be by far the most important means for its deliberations and decisions will always

rapidly reducing the proportion of seriously lack reality. The crude casual objection

dysgenic births, now available; and it has has always been that self protection requires

many supporters in the Eugenics Society. I large numbers, but an excessive birth rate

earnestly hope that the Society will use its only results in a greater number of deaths,

most strenuous efforts to secure this per- and a diminution rather than expansion of

mission, which has already been advocated the rate of increase of population. Further,

by a majority of our House of Lords.

any wars of the future will obviously depend

178 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

more and more on scientific skill, in which Such is a brief sketch of the scientific

quality is more important than quantity. It basis of the birth control movement and the

is significant that since the last war, with its results it has achieved. There is much

revelations concerning the high proportion which has perforce been omitted, but it

of our C3 population, militaristic opposition should serve to show that it has been formu-

to birth control has entirely ceased in this lated in a strictly scientific as well as

country. Eugenically applied birth control humanitarian spirit, and it is permissible to

gives the best guarantee of world peace, by ask whether any other proposal has been or

making each country strong for defence but can be formulated which offers anything like

'with no need for offence.

such beneficial prospects.

Eugenics Review, Vol. XX, No. 3.

