GALTON'S VIEWS ON RACE
By C. P. BLACKER, M.A., M.D.

IN the course of the French Revolution weak whom he exulted in exterminating. It

the royal family, the aristocracy and the
previously governing classes were decapitated, massacred or exiled. Ideals of liberty,
equality and fraternity vibrated throughout the world, producinig important reactions in North America. Combining with anti-
authoritarian sentiments derived from ancient Greece and from the Reformation, and sustained in the twentieth century by reactions against British imperialism during the nineteenth, they brought disrepute no less to the doctrine of a hereditary governing class than to that of race superiority. Further discredit

is not surprising that the doctrine of race is .to-day unpopular.
What were Galton's views on the subject ? His book Hereditary Genius (I869) contains a chapter entitled " The Comparative Worth of Different Races." The argument there advanced must be considered in the light of
the general theme of the book and of the ideas current eighty years ago, when Darwin's Origin of Species was but ten years old.
In a prefatory chapter written in I892 (twenty-three years after the rest) Galton
expresses regret for the choice of the book's

has accrued from the egalitarian sentiments of Socialism, from the persecution of Jews in Fascist countries, and from the racial

title. He would, if he could, change it to Hereditary Ability. For the theme of the book had been that ability, as evinced by

tolerance which is advanced as a cornerstone thirteen classes of persons ranging from

of Russian Communism.

judges and statesmen to oarsmen and

The result of these movements of thought wrestlers (whose accomplishments could

has been to bring into strong disfavour the hardly be counted an expression of " genius"

idea that certain families are better qualified, as commonly understood), was hereditary.

whether by innate endowment or by cultural " I propose," said Galton in the first sentence

tradition, than other families to govern; also of the book, " to show that a man's natural

discredited is the belief that innate differences abilities are derived by inheritance, under

exist between races of such a kind that they exactly the same limitations as are the form

can be compared or graded in terms of mnerit. and physical features of the whole organic

An expression of these critical sentiments, world." The idea that mental processes were

which prevail in the U.S.A. no less than in inherited was then new. Man, like the lower

the U.K., is the unpopularity to-day of the animals and plants, had come into existence

word race, which to many has a Fascist through an evolutionary process whereby

ring. Indeed, some anthropologists wish to favourable variants had survived. Human

ban the word.

beings, Galton argued, varied in mental

These hostile reactions have been much abilities no less than in physical endow-

intensified by the plhilosoplhy an(d behaviour nments; and such abilities were inherited.

of the Nazis and by their condluct in the last war. As expounded by Nietzsche and prac-

Hence we would expect, as a corollary of the
eVolution tlheory, that human families would

tised by Hitler, the doctrine of race becamle dliffer fromin one another in hereditary ability.

the negation of Christianity. [lhe sul)ermflan,
the member of the Herrenvolk, was represented as a blond being, fearless, nmasterful

The same principle of variation as applizi to huminan families would hold also of humaii races. Unimistakable (lifferences were obser-

and cruel, for whionm pitv wals a weakness. lie vable between ralces or breeds of horses or

was filled wit! '; noble (contelmll)t " for the (logs; analogous differences might be ex-

p1' te(l bet w et n hinman breedls. Elxperiences

Extract from a forthcomiung )0ook /:,&u nc>:c axd .4Ater (D)oickworth).

Aln

galiie(d b1 Gzalton (luring his travels in SouthWVest Africal, whlere he hlad observed

I 4-)

20 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

pronounced differences between the native peoples trough whlose territories he travelled-the Namaquas, the Damaras and the Ovampo-undoubtedly shaped his ideas.
Offence is sometimes taken over the use of such expressions as higher and lower races. What do we mean by " higher " and
" lower "? Various standards might be
applied. If it is a question of living in a tropicl rain forest, the pygmies of the Belgian Congo would probably be superior to Europeans; if it is a matter of subsisting on an exclusively meat diet, the same could be said for the Eskimo; if on a rice diet, for the Chinese coolie. By the process of natural selection, we would expect a community of human beings to become fitted to its habitat and to the mode of life there imposed. If the
standard of" superiority " arbitrarily chosen is that of sustaining and furthering the
condition described as Western civilization, we could reasonably expect the best performance from those peoples who had produced Western civilization and throughout centuries of history had been moulded by it.
This elementary point is made by Galton
at the beginning of his chapter on the com-
parative worth of different races. " Every
long-established race," he writes, " has neces-
sarily its peculiar fitness for the conditions under which it has lived, owing to the sure
operation of Darwin's law of natural selection. However, I am not much concerned
for the present, with the greater part of those
aptitudes, but only with such as are available
in some form or other of high civilization."
By what process, then, does Galton assess the comparative worth of different races ?
The method-and Galton's description to-day
sounds peculiar-is " the very curious
theoretical law of deviation from an average." The law has become familiar enough since
these words were written. According to it, Galton divides men according to their
abilities into seven classes A to G, eachi class marking a rising order of ability and each class being separated from its neighbours by equal grades. Men in class A hiave an or(ler of ability (or rarity) of i in 4, those in class D, i in 64, those in class F (described by Galton
as " eminent "), I in 4,000, those in class G

(men of very exceptional endowment), I in 79,ooo. By natural ability Galton meant a combination of three attributes-intellectual capacity, eagerness for work or zeal, and power of working. Of men endowed in these ways to the extent of being prodigies of the rarity of one in a million, he says-" I cannot comprehend how such a man could be repressed. The world is always tormented with difficulties waiting to be solvedstruggling with ideas and feelings, to which it can give no adequate expression. If, then, there exists a man capable of solving those difficulties, or of giving a voice to those pentup feelings, he is sure to be welcomed with
universal acclamation."
Galton's standard of judging the comparative worth of different races is the frequency with which they throw up men of natural ability equivalent to classes F and G. The assessment depends on a knowledge of the size of the population concerned and of the
attainments of its most noteworthy individuals. The Negro race is compared with the Anglo-Saxon with respect to those qualities which are capable of producing eminent men such as judges, statesimen, commanders, men of literature and science, poets, artists and divines. " If," writes Galton, "the negro
race in America had been affected by no social disabilities, a comparison of their achieve-
ments with those of the whites in their several branches of intellectual effort, having
regard to the total numbers of their respective populations, would give the necessary
informiation. As matters stand, we must be content witlh much rougher data." The conclusion is reaclhed " that the average standard
of the negro race is two grades below our
own"; that the Australian native is at
least one grade below the African; that the Lowland Scot and the English North-Country nan is "decidedly a fraction of a gra(le superior of the ordinary English"; and that the 135,000 or so free-born males whio
inhabite(d Attica betweenl 53o atnd 430 B.c. were, on the lowest estimia;lte, " very nearlv two gra(les liglher thlan our own, that is about as muchl as our race is above the African
negro.'
Galton's vieWs oii race were also sliaped by

GALTON'S VIEWS ON RACE

21

an awareness of the rapidity with which the bred to its duties, and the primary qualities

human inhabitants of the different parts of of the modern British workman are already

the world have changed throughout history. the very opposite of those of the nomad."

"T e denizens of the world at the present " Much more alien to the genius of an

day form a very different human stock to that enlightened civilization than the nomadic

which inhabited it a dozen generations ago, habit is the impulsive and uncontrolled

and to all appearance a no less difference will nature of the savage. A civilized man must

be found a dozen generations hence." bear and forbear, he must keep before his

Galton regarded this process of human dis- mind the claims of the morrow as clearly as

placement as inevitable; and he conceived those of the passing minute; of the absent

it as susceptible to rational human control. as well as the present. This is the most trying

"There are now some 8,ooo,ooo of negroes of the new conditions imposed on man by

in lands where not one of them existed civilization, and the one which makes it

twelve generations ago, and probably not one hopeless for any but exceptional natures

representative of the race which they dis- among savages to live under them."

placed remains there." But what the white Civilization, the advance of which over the

man calls civilization was destined to spread. earth was held to be inevitable and irresis-

" We may reckon upon the advent of a time tible, was not regarded by Galton as a boon

when civilization, which is now sparse and so much as a scourge to primitive peoples

feeble and far more superficial than it is adapted to simple lives of hunting or agricul-

vaunted to be, shall overspread the globe." ture. " The number of races of mankind that

Two characteristics of the barbarian and of have been entirely destroyed under the

the savage are regarded by Galton as incom- pressure of the requirements of an oncoming

patible with the development of civilization. civilization, reads us a terrible lesson.

They are the nomadic disposition found in Probably in no former period of the world

most barbarians and the impulsive and un- has the destruction of the races of any animal

controlled nature of the savage. " In propor- whatever been effected over such wide areas

tion as the world becomes filled with man- and with such startling rapidity as has been

kind, the relations of society necessarily the case of savage man. In the North

increase in complexity, and the nomadic dis- American continent, in the West Indian

position found in most barbarians becomes islands, in the Cape of Good Hope, in Austra-

unsuitable to the modern conditions." lia, New Zealand, and Van Diemen's land, Writers on those hunting and migratory the human denizens of vast regions have

nations which arc brought into contact with
advancing coloni;ation and perish, " tell us

been entirely swept away in the short space of three centuries, less by the pressure of a

that the labour of such men is neither constant nor steady; that the love of a wandering, independent life prevents their settling anywhere to work except for a short time when urged by want and encouraged by kind
treatment.... Such a spirit is, on the whiole, an heirloom that brings more impatient restlessness and beating of the wings against
cage-bars, than persons of more civilized
characters can read(ily comprehend, and it is directly at war wvith the imore modern part of
our moral natures. As the Bohemianism
in the nature of the nAce is destine(d to perish,
the sooner it goes the happier for mankind. By ttis ri(l(lance ... the artisan part of our population is slowly becoining

stronger race than through the influence of a civilization they were incapable of supporting." The process, Galton felt, would continue; it would result in further human displacements and replacements wlich would answer the question of which race was "superior" or " inferior" bv the biological criterion of which survived. In this inevitable process, man could exercise prudence and foresight; he could perhaps play on a wider but more difficult stage the same construc-
tive andIkindly role ais he could perform for
the individual by the application of eugenics.
How does this aftitude compare with that
of the believers in the superman and the Herrenvolk? It is possible that a casual

22 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

reader, of Galton, who was steeped in the nine. The views about race set forth in

literature of racism, might detect similarities. Hereditary Genius were the expression of

But the essential ideas underlying the two thoughts provoked by the publication of the

systems are far apart. Galton saw the spread Origin of Species ten years before, of efforts

of civilization as a painful though inevitable to think out the bearings of the evolution

process the tribulations of which civilized theory on man's future. From the inability

man, by the studious exercise of enlightened of many native races to withstand the impact

foresight, could do something to alleviate. -of the white man's inevitably spreading civili-

Nietzsche's superman, on the other hand, zation, a simple question emerged. Which

transmuted into their opposites the values in races could best sustain and promote that

the light of which Galton hoped that the civilization ? The spread of the white man's

harshness of a natural process might be culture had destroyed many primitive races

mitigated. The superman was glorified whose instincts were ill-adapted to its require-

because of his fearlessness, his masterfulness ments; and others were imminently doomed

and his cruelty. He was full of contempt for to a similar fate. Some races, on the other

the weak for whom no pity should be felt. hand, possessing resources of intelligence and

The elimination of the weak should cause the adaptability, might survive the ordeal.

same sort of pleasure as the extermination of Could anything be done by foreseeing man to

vermin.

expedite this biological adjustment and to

Galton's assessment of the comparative make it painless and humane ? The question

worth of different races was based on the was asked and (as far as was then possible)

frequency with which they threw up men of answerpd without animus. It is the absence

high natural ability-exceptionally gifted of animus which distinguishes Galton's atti-

individuals whose works enriched civiliza- tude from that of the exponents of racism.

tion. But a high degree of " worth " thus The theories and practices of racism have

judged might be combined with defects opened a veritable Pandlora's box of national

which impair the perpetuation of worth. recriminations and political lhatreds. From

Thus Galton remarked of the Atlhenians: this turmoil has emerged the doctrine of

" We know, and may guess something more, racial egalitarianisii whlich is orthodox to-

of the reason why this marvellously gifted day. The reaction is understandable, but

race declined. Social inorality grew ex- Galton nighlt have thlouiglht that, if con-

ceedingly lax; marriage became unfashion- strued to imiean that all huima.n races lhave an

able, and was avoided; many of the imiore equal power of sustaining an(l )romoting the

ambitious and accomplished women were process known as NVesterii civilization, it

avowed courtesans, and consequently infer- belied some of the lplainest facts of lhuman

tile, and the mothers of the incoinig l)opula- evolution. " T1he frequiency in historv " he

tion were of a heterogeneous q1lass."

wrote, " with whiich (ne race lIas supplanted

The " high Athenian breed " decaye(d anotlher over wide gteog-raphical arleas is one

and disappeared because it lacked certain of the miio-t striking, facts in the evOlUtion of

moral qualities which, by securi-ing its per- mlankind.

petuation, would have added greatly to its Galton's viw- (in r.mct. as expres<sed ill

" worth." The recognition of the imp)ortance Iereditary ( ;;iiis a re thell-rst tenltative

of moral quatlities in a hierarchy of eugenic efforts of a k-indly 1mi t. ;J)jilV to huma.llity

values seems to have coimle to Galton in later tile l1.r!h les',,s o)f hi 'lo)y as ten underl-

life: he was forty-seven when Ilcrcditarv tood(l. Hi' mooitexo
Genius was published, and he lived to eightv- inflict, sulffeXinr

to p1)1revnt, nlot tc

Eugeuics Review, Vol. XI,T31INok 1

