MAN'S FUTURE CHALLENGED

By C. P. BLACKER

R EADERS of this journal will know that, in the course of the last eighteen months, the Society has assisted P.E.P.
in the preparation of a study of the balance of population and resources. Two broadsheets* have already been produced in both English and French versions for distribution to the members of the forthcoming population conference to be held in Rome during the first half of September. A full report, elaborating the broadsheets, will be published next year, in the form of a volume of some hundred thousand words.
A most noteworthy book dealing with the theme of the projected report has recently been published in the United States.t The author is a young man of thirty-eight who has already earned distinctions. We are told on the dust-cover that in I947 he received the annual award of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and in I952 the American Chemical Society's award in Pure Chemistry. For three years he was Assistant Director of Chemistry at the Oak Ridge Plutonium Project; and later he became associate professor at the University of Chicago's Institute for Nuclear Studies. Since I95I he has been professor of Geochemistry at the Califomnia Institute of Technology. Harrison Brown's scientific interests are offset by artistic ones. We are told that he made his way through High School and through the University of California by professionally playing the piano.
In the matter of the world's capacity to sustain a much larger population than at present, Harrison Brown is an optimist; but in assessing the probability of the human race being able to profit from that capacity, he is a pessimist. Indeed, his pessimism has certain affinities with that of Sir Charles
*World Population and Resources (No. 362: April 26th, 1954) and Controlling Human Numbers (No. 367:
July 12th, 1954).
t The Challenge of Man's Future, by Harrison
Brown. New York, 1954. Viking Press. London, Secker & Warburg. Pp. xii + 290. Price 2IS.

Darwin, and in what follows the views of the two men will be compared.
Retrospect
Harrison Brown's book contains seven chapters, which have short and succinct titles. The first, called Emergence, is historical. It contains a vivid description of the course of events in an imaginary river valley of some ten thousand square miles from the time that it was first occupied by a group of ten palaeolithic or mesolithic food gatherers to the time when, after its population had grown to three million, " canals filled with silt. Irrigation systems diminished in extent and effectiveness. Food supplies lessened, and the population of the valley decreased. The civilization that had been spawned by but a handful of people many centuries before ceased to exist." This vividly told allegory, charged with important truths, begins a story which, after major vicissitudes, concludes with accounts of the industrial revolution in Great Britain and of the growth of the United States from a rural agricultural people to an industrial colossus of which the inhabitants have more material possessions than have been enjoyed in any previous or contemporary society.
Gloomy Prospects
The book's seventh and last chapter, called Patterns of the Future, summarizes the conclusions of the intervening five chapters. These conclusions are in the highest degree " optimistic" in their assessment of the possibilities of the world supporting a very much larger population than today.
We have seen that the resources available to man are being rapidly consumed, but that, at the same time, new resources are being
made available by our increased knowledge and improved technology. Given adequate supplies of energy, man can, in principle, extract everything that he needs for his existence at a high standard of living from

'59

i6o THE EUGENICS REVIEW

substances which exist abundantly on the earth's surface-air, seawater, and ordinary rock. We have seen that within the rock itself there is sufficient energy to carry out the processing and also to provide power for the operation of industrial machinery. At the same time, man can extract energy from sunlight and use it to operate his factories. When we look at the situation solely from the point of view of technological and energetic feasibility, we must conclude that the resources available to man permit him, in principle, to provide adequately for a very large population for a very long period of time.
But the author is far from believing that
such a consummation is likely to happen;
nor does he personally want it to happen.
War is the most immediate danger. The next war could so shatter the fabric of
machine civilization that it could not
recover, but it is conceivable that civilization
could survive two or three more wars. " In
any case, the number [of wars] is finite and
each conflict will decrease the probability that industrial civilization will continue
to exist."
But if war can be avoided there are other
grave threats. Existing resources of what
the Americans call fossil fuels (oil, coal and gas) are being rapidly consumed; if they run seriously .short before new energy resources of atomic and solar power are
sufficiently developed, there may be a serious setback. There are also formidable difficulties. in the way of industrializing large, underdeveloped and overpopulated countries
difficulties which were conspicuously absent during the mechanization of the sparsely populated and resource-surfeited New World. Indeed, the dangers and difficulties involved in the needed transition are such that " the most probable pattern for the future of mankind is that sooner or later the entire world will become an agrarian one." There are paths which would lead to a successful transition. But Harrison Brown shares Sir Charles Darwin's unfavourable view of human nature. " The nature of man makes remote the possibility that the steps neces-
sary for complete transition will be taken." Harrison Brown not only regards it as

improbable that the transition from a partly industrial to a wholly industrial world economy will be successfully negotiated; he also regards with distaste the large increases of world population which could thus be brought about. We here enter the sphere of values. " The greater the population density of an industrial society becomes, the more elaborate will be its organizational structure and the more regimented will be its people"; the more rapid, also the " robotization of the individual "; and the more difficult the preservation of individual
liberty.
Is it really axiomatic [he asks] that in the long run industrial civilization and human values are incompatible? Here, in truth, we are confronted with the gravest and most difficult of all human problems, for it is one that cannot be solved by mathematics or by machines, nor can it ever be precisely defined. Solutions, if they exist, can arise only in the hearts and minds of individual men.
Control of Populations
The goal cannot be reached without controlling human numbers. But can control be exercised without intolerable infringements of human liberty? As the author sees it,, a world authority is needed which has the power of making, interpreting and enforcing, within specified spheres, laws which are directly applicable to the individual. . Given a world authority with jurisdiction over population problems, the task of assessing maximum permissible population levels on a regional basis need not be prohibitively difficult." That " individual regions of the world should be self-sufficient both agriculturally and industrially," and that these regions should adjust their populations in such a way that agricultural and industrial activities should deliver maximum yields to the individual, are important features in Harrison Brown's " pattern of the future." A " broad eugenics program " is also needed, together with closer definitions of such terms as " fit " and "unfit."
Precise con1*rol of population can never be made completely compatible with the

MAN'S FUTURE CHALLENGED

i6i

concept of a free society; on the other hand, large measure upon the extent to which we

neither can the automobile, and machine gun, can estimate future trends in culture patterns.

or the atomic bomb. Whenever several persons live together in a small area, rules of behaviour are necessary. Just as we have rules designed to keep us from killing each other with our automobiles, so there must be rules that keep us from killing one another with our
fluctuating breeding habits and with our

The important bearings of increased longevity are clearly outlined and the possibilities of better methods of contraception are discussed in relation to the attitude of the Roman Catholic Church. A discussion of the differential increase which can be

lack of attention to the soundness of our regarded as probable in the population of

individual genetic stock.

the world leads up to a consideration of

eugenics. Some degree of racial degeneration

Industrialization

is regarded as probable, but the movement could be arrested.

I have referred hitherto to the opening

and closing chapters only. The second Food Resources

chapter, entitled Status Quo, describes the problems which today confront our machine civilization. A combination of seemingly

Chapter four, Food, describes the substances and quantities of substances needed in a balanced dietary; the regional consump-

fortuitous events made industrialization pos- tion, throughout the world, of calories and

sible in Europe and the United States; the of protein; the cultivable areas of the world

future holds no promise of a repetition of surface and the types of crop produced in

these auspicious conditions and sequences, different latitudes and climatic conditions;

The difficulties, today somewhat overlooked, of industrializing backward and already

the sources of animal protein; the main commercial (non-food) crops; the possibili-

populous countries are examined. The ties of increasing world food supplies in

demographically transitional status of Japan, terms of potentially depleting and augment-

which now faces redoubtable problems, will ing factors (from existing cultivated lands

be reproduced as machine civilization spreads an increase of I2 per cent is regarded as

to countries with mainly agrarian economies. attainable). The possibilities of hydroponics

The problem of preventing war is linked (soil-less cultivation of 'plants) of algae and

to that of preventing human misery. The third chapter, Vital Statistics, contains
some excellent diagrams. It stresses that we are now in the middle of a population

of yeasts as sources of food are indicated; and the conclusion is reached that a twenty-
fivefold increase of food from all conceivable
sources, including a billion* acres of alga

upsurge which must eventually level off farms, is theoretically possible. This indeed

at a new ceiling"; and that patterns of is " optimism." But " a capital investment

births are linked with patterns of culture. of approximately a hundred billion dollars

In some groups marriage comes early, would be required to double food pro-

in others late. Some groups smile upon duction." And " the rapidity with which

pregnancy out of wedlock, others frown starvation is diminished in the world depends

upon it. Some groups use contraceptives, others don't. Abortion is legal in some areas,
it is criminal in others. Some groups nurse their children for lengthy periods, others

. .. upon the extent to which those nations which are already industrialized help those
who are not."

wean them at an early age. Some groups consider children to be economic assets,

Power Resources

others consider them to be burdens. Some The fifth chapter, Energy, describes present

groups look upon children as symbols of sources and uses of energy; the world's

virility and fertility, others see them as symbols of foolish and imprudent actions.

resources of " fossil fuels "; the future rate

Clearly the extent to which we can estimate * The term billion is used in the American sense to future trends in birth patterns depends in denote a thousand million.

i62 THE EUGENICS REVIEW

of consumption of these fuels (a pessimistic estimate of their duration is seventy-five years, an optimistic is 250 years); and the world's resources of water power (Africa has much the largest resources). The possibilities are examined of harnessing atomic power, as to which a highly optimistic view is taken. "Large-scale utilization of atomic energy would eventually necessitate extraction of vast quantities of uranium and thorium present in extremely dilute concentrations in ordinary rock "; and " at the rates of energy consumption foreseeable during the next century, the reserves in ordinary rock should certainly last- for tens of thousands of years and more probably for millions of years." But the disposal of radioactive waste products will present a continuous major problem. Lastly the author turns to solar energy, the development of which would constitute the fourth and final stage of energy consumption (the first involving the burning of wood, the second of coal and other fossil fuels, and the third of atomic fuels). Solar water-heaters already exist. But to meet world requirements when other sources of energy are exhausted enormous solar installations would be necessary. To provide the mechanical energy equivalent of that obtained from forty-five billion tons of coal, solar-power plants covering a total area of about thirty million acres of desert land would be required.
Mineral Resources
Chapter six, Things, deals with mineral resources. The following are discussed: The consumption per head by Americans of metallic and non-metallic minerals (some i,400 pounds of steel and other metals and some five tons of other materials per head per year are consumed); the world's resources of, and future need for, iron (a need of I00 billion tons of pig iron is envisaged for a wholly industrialized world containing seven billion people-three times as many people as now). Also examined is the probable demand for light metals: of aluminium, apart from bauxite, large resources exist, and half a century hence production may be fifty times greater than today; magnesium

is obtainable from sea water, so that supplies will outlast those of nearly all other metals; and titanium, of which production has as yet barely emerged from the experimental stage. Also considered are the vanishing reserves of copper, of which a lack might
seriously impede the process of industrialization throughout the world; the reserves of manganese (which will last for many
decades); of lead (of which the U.S.A. now imports half what she consumes and of
which world reserves, obtainable through
existing technology, may not last for more than seventy years); of tin, of which known high-grade reserves may last for but thirty years; and of other metals such as zinc, cadmium and bismuth for which increasing demands are producing shortages. The needs are outlined of the chemical industry
for nitrogen, sulphur and phosphorus and for the materials of which plastics are made. Lastly, the U.S.A.'s impending water shortage, caused by the increasing demands of industry and irrigation, is outlined. Lowering water ground-tables have already been noted in the Los Angeles area; problems of disposing of the noxious products of industry and of the pollution of rivers by sewage will increase; an ever-expanding network of aqueducts, dams, reservoirs, sewagetreatment plants and water-purifying plants may consume most of the water that now flows into the sea from rivers; and in time it may prove economical to produce fresh water by removing the salt from sea water in vast multiple-purpose chemical installations near the sea. The chapter ends with a picture of the world's industrial organization when, at some future date, " existing mineral resources will cease to be important factors in world economy."
The time will come when ordinary rocks such as granite will be looked upon as ores ... Granite contains sufficient uranium and thorium to pay, energy-wise, for the processing of the rock and still leave a substantial energy profit. In addition, without unduly increasing the energy expenditure, one can probably extract from the rock a multitude of elements that are essential to industrial society. One hundred tons of average

MAN'S FUTURE CHALLENGED

163

igneous rock contain, in addition to other next five hundred years. By then we should

useful elements, 8 tons of aluminium, 5 tons of iron, I,200 pounds of titanium, i8o pounds of manganese, 70 pounds of chromium, 40 pounds of nickel, 30 pounds of vanadium, 20 pounds of copper, io pounds of tungsten and et pounds of lead. It is doubtful that all these quantities could be conveniently extracted, but it seems likely that a sizeable
fraction could be isolated without undue
difficulty.

know if today's future had been successfully
or unsuccessfully challenged. Darwin, on the other hand, would dismiss
the next thousand years as of little interest;
it would have no bearing on his argument. He regards the challenge as perpetual and almost unescapable; he sees it as inherent in all forms of life much as the thermo-
dynamic laws are inherent in the behaviour

The industries of the future will be far of the molecules of gases. He discerns

more complex and highly integrated than the challenge as essentially residing in

those of today. The "sea industries" will dwarf all existing mining operations. One can visualize vast assemblages of plants in coastal regions where rock is quarried, uranium and other metals are isolated, nitric acid is
manufactured, atomic power is generated, hydrogen is produced, iron ores are reduced to pig iron, aluminium and magnesium metals
are prepared, and vast quantities of liquid

the unavoidable tendency of living things to multiply; humanity will so multiply and a starving minority will persist. This minority which will fluctuate in size, being sometimes large and threatening and at other times so
small as to be almost negligible, he calls the starving margin. " The central question
for humanity," he says, " is the problem

fuels and organic chemicals are manufac- of the starving margin." His context is

tured. As time goes on it is likely that the not one of a few hundred years but of a

single-purpose plant will diminish in impor- million years. (Harrison Brown devotes a

tance, scene.

eventually

to

disappear

from the

section of his last chapter to Darwin's book, which he describes as " stimulating and

highly provocative.")

Mankind's Future Predicament

Yet both writers discern faint rays of hope. Harrison Brown writes:

This book has aims which are sufficiently
similar to those of Sir Charles Darwin's The Next Million Years to make a comparison worth while. Both books are concerned with man's future and both are pessimistic as to

The problems that can be recognized at present are enormous, and great intelligence, vision, and courage are required for their solution. In the light of what we know of the nature of man, the possibilities of solution

the possibility of humanity extricating itself are remote. However, I do not believe that

from predicaments. But the predicaments solution is by any means impossible.

differ. Harrison Brown's predicament is mainly demographic and social; it is caused, by the joint impact of rapidly increasing

Darwin's more fundamental position less room for hope.

allows

numbers, of dwindling natural resources,

I maintain [he writes] that with our present

of current inequalities in living standards, and of sharply differing growth potentials (the least developed and some of the most
overcrowded countries having the largest

knowledge of the world and of things in it, though we cannot at all see the detail, we can foresee the general course its history is almost certain to take. (My italics.)

growth potentials). The most immediate The word " almost " admits a faint ray.

threat of all is that of modern war. By The internal principle of the human molecule

contrast, Darwin's predicament is, in a -that is to say human nature-differs from

more fundamental sense, biological. The that of the gas molecule in being changeable;

two schools of pessimism have different and unsuspected potentialities may just

groundings in time. The reader infers that possibly disclose themselves. But from what

Harrison Brown would regard the next we already know of human nature the

thousand years as decisive; perhaps the prospects are poor.

1I64' THE EUGENICS REVIEW

Conclusions The Challenge of Man's Future is a
notable book which should be widely read. Apart from imaginative gifts reminiscent of Wells-or Winwood Reade, Harrison Brown is well qualified as a writer. His style is lucid and simple, his diagrams (of which
there are thirty-one) are well chosen and sometimes striking, and his quotationseach chapter begins with one-are apposite. The book ends with a quotation from Rabindranath Tagore. The right 'questions are posed and answered. The only suggestion

which struck me as misplaced relates to the method by which a regional authority with
jurisdiction over population problems could
exercise the desired control The method suggested is the regulation, by permissive measures which could be varied, of the; practices of artificial insemination and of abortion. But this is a minor point.
It is to be hoped that this book will be
translated into many languages and that its main arguments will be widely discussed and debated in undeveloped no less than
developed countries.

the review of the
ITALIAN COMMITTEE FOR THE STUDY OF POPULATION PROBLEMS and of the
ITALIAN SOCIETY OF GENETICS AND EUGENICS edited under the auspices of the National Research Council

Summary of Volume IX

Editor: CORRADO GINI

SARC The cultural reform in Turkey

GINI L'assimilazione fisica degli immigrati

L'ELTORE Labilit'a familiare nei malati di tubercolosi

LuVINI

La fecondita matrimoniale in Isvizzera

FEDERICI Eta pubere, eta della menopausa e durata del periodo fecondo CARANTI L'iinfluenza dell 'ultima guerra sulla qualita dei nati

FEDERICI Caratteristiche demografiche dei Caraimi di Polonia

NEUMANN Bev6lkerungsbewegungen in Ost-Mitteleuropa

SOFIA

Lunghezza media delle ossa delle mani e dei piedi

CASTELLANO Sulla teoria della popolazione stabile

ZAVATTI Proverbi meteorologici raccolti nelle Marche

Analytical Reviews

'Reviews of about 200 Italian, English, American, French, German and Spanish books

GENUS
accepts scientific articles, papers, notes and communications written in Italian, English, French, German and Spanish in the field of the different sciences related to population problems (Demography, Sociology,
Economics, General Biology, Genetics, Eugenics, Anthropology, Social Hygiene, Psychology, Geography) Orders should be addressed to: Segreteria del Comitato Italiano per lo Studio dei Problemi della
Popolazione, Via delle Terme, 10, Roma

Eugenics Review, Vol. XLVI, No. 3

